
CORPORATE CRIME

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Conﬂicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly writ-
ten, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, anno-
tated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better under-
standing of the social, political, environmental, and economic
issues facing the world today.


CORPORATE CRIME
A Reference Handbook
Richard D. Hartley
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hartley, Richard D.
Corporate crime : a reference handbook / Richard D. Hartley.
p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-085-8 (hard copy : alk. paper)— 
ISBN 978-1-59884-086-5 (ebook)
1. White collar crimes.
2. Commercial crimes.
3. Corporations—Corrupt practices.
I. Title. 
HV6768.H37 2008
364.16'8—dc22
2007048174
12
11
10
09
08
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

Contents
Preface, xi
1
Background and History, 1
Corporate and White-Collar Crime Deﬁned, 2
Corporate Crime Typologies, 5
History of Corporate Entities and Corporate Offending, 6
The Corporation Today, 12
Laws and Legal Origins of Corporate Crime, 14
Recent Legislation, 20
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 20
Criminal Antitrust Penalty Enhancement and 
Reform Act, 21
Types of Corporate Crime, 21
Fraud, Tax Evasion, and Economic Exploitation, 21
Price Fixing, Price Gouging, and False Advertising, 24
Corporate Theft, Exploitation, and Unfair Labor 
Practices, 25
Violent Corporate Offenses, 27
Unsafe Environmental Practices, 28
Unsafe Consumer Products, 28
Unsafe Working Conditions, 31
Universities and Colleges as Corporate Offenders, 31 
Importance of Studying Corporate and White-Collar 
Crime, 33
Conclusion, 33
References, 35
vii

2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 41
Types of Corporate Crime and Deﬁnitional Problems, 41
Should Corporations Be Held Socially Responsible? 44
Prosecution of Corporations, 46
Problems with Criminal Justice System Control, 51
Government Ofﬁcials and Politicians as Corporate 
Offenders, 54
Punishment of Corporate Crime, 56
Remedies for Harm Done, 58
Determining Fines, 58
Probationary Sentences, 58
Deferred Prosecutions, 60
Measuring Corporate Crime, 62
Sources of Data, 63
Federal Sources, 63
State and Municipal Sources, 66
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime, 67
Improving Current Methods, 71
Conclusion, 75
References, 77
3
Worldwide Perspective, 81
Corporate Offending outside the United States, 81
Globalization and Its Effects on Corporate Offending
Worldwide, 84
The Extent of Corporate Offending in Other Countries, 86
Political Corruption and Corporate Crime, 88
Corporate Offending in Services, Development, and 
Post-Conﬂict Construction, 91
Corporate Crime and Reconstruction in the Wake of 
Conﬂict, 94
Rebuilding Iraq, 95
Access to Health Care Worldwide, 97
Corporate Crime and HIV/AIDS, 99
Corporate Crime in Mexico’s Public Health System, 101
Health Care Reform: Colombia versus Venezuela, 102
Recommendations for the Health Sector, 102
What in the World Can Be Done? 104
Laws and Legislation against Corporate Offending 
around the World, 104
Inter-American Convention against Corruption, 107
viii
Contents

The Global Organization of Parliamentarians against
Corruption (GOPC), 109
United Nations Convention against Corruption, 110
United Nations Global Compact, 111
Other Resources in the Global Fight against 
Corruption, 112
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime Worldwide, 113
Prosecution of Corporations in Other Countries, 114
Punishment of Corporations Worldwide, 116
Conclusion, 118
References, 120
4
Chronology, 127
5
Biographical Sketches, 145
Henry Clayton, 145
Marshall B. Clinard, 145
Bernard Ebbers, 146
Andrew Fastow, 147
Alberto Fujimori, 148
Gilbert Geis, 149
L. Dennis Kozlowski, 149
Kenneth Lay, 150
Patrick Leahy, 151
Ferdinand Marcos, 152
Stephanie A. Martz, 153
Paul J. McNulty, 153
Robert F. Meier, 154
Michael Milken, 154
Slobodan Milosevic, 155
Ralph Nader, 156
Michael Oxley, 157
Henry N. Pontell, 157
John Rigas, 158
Paul Sarbanes, 159
Sally S. Simpson, 159
Jeffrey K. Skilling, 160
Adam Smith, 160
Arlen J. Specter, 161
Eliot Spitzer, 162
Nadine Strossen, 162
Contents
ix

Mohammed Suharto, 163
Edwin H. Sutherland, 164
Larry D. Thompson, 164
Gary Winnick, 165
Peter C. Yeager, 166
6
Data and Documents, 167
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime, 167
Government Documents and Reports, 184
Executive Order 13271, 185
Legislation Pertaining to Corporate Offending, 186
The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, 186
The Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, 187
The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, 188
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 189
Governmental Commentary on Corporate Offending, 190 
Deputy Attorney General Larry D. Thompson, 2002, 190
Deputy Attorney General Paul J. McNulty, 2006, 192
Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales, 2007, 194
Quotes, 195
Other Relevant Documents, 196
References, 197
7
Directory of Organizations, 201
8
Resources, 213
Print Resources, 214
Books, 214
Journal Articles, 222
Dissertations, 225
Magazines and Newsletters, 226
Government Documents and Agency Publications, 228
Nonprint Resources, 232
Videos, 232
Web Sites, 233
Glossary, 235
Index, 241
About the Author, 257
x
Contents

Preface
C
orporate and white-collar crime have gained increased atten-
tion in recent years from both government and law enforce-
ment officials as well as the general public. Corporate
malfeasance and scandal broke in the early part of the 21st cen-
tury with several corporations collapsing in accounting and
fraud scandals, forcing thousands of people to lose their jobs and
thousands more to watch their investments and retirement funds
dwindle to nothing. Prior to these events, most of the public
probably did not think of corporations and businesses—and
their presidents, CEOs, and management—as criminals. After
these events, however, there has been an increased awareness of
the type and extent of white-collar and corporate crime that oc-
curs in the business world. Although corporate offending still
does not receive the attention from the media and law enforce-
ment that conventional street crime does, it is nonetheless as per-
vasive and harmful.
Numerous laws and regulations have been enacted and im-
plemented in attempts to curb incidents of corporate offending,
but with increased globalization and decreased government
funding to combat corporate crime, little progress is being made.
Business experts and scholars alike have suggested that preven-
tion must originate within the corporations themselves and with
the business culture and behaviors that for-profit big business
breeds. Although some corporations caught violating laws are
charged, prosecuted, convicted, and punished, others seem to
have internalized into their business ethos that paying ﬁnes for
violations is simply part of the cost of doing business. Moreover,
critics argue that legislation enacted against corporate offending
is merely symbolic, and that because those with political power
xi

are in bed with corporate America, no concerted effort will ever
be made to control corporate offending.
Indeed, corporations beneﬁt society in many ways. They cre-
ate new technologies, produce better and cheaper products, spur
economic growth, and provide employment opportunities. Con-
servative estimates of the cost of corporate crime to taxpayers,
however, are in the hundreds of billions of dollars annually. Cor-
porations have existed since Roman times and continue to thrive
and ﬂourish today, and corporate wrongdoing has existed for as
long. The question is, however, whether the beneﬁts of corpora-
tions outweigh the costs incurred because of them. If the beneﬁts
do not outweigh the costs, what is the best method for holding
corporations responsible? Can a balance be achieved? Finally,
which types of punishments are necessary to deter corporations
from future offending? This book is an attempt to look into these
queries and provide information about the causes and cures of
corporate crime.
Chapter 1 provides an introduction into the background and
history of corporations and corporate crime. It traces the growth
and development of corporations throughout history. It also out-
lines the different typologies of corporate and white-collar crime,
and looks at the extant research on white-collar crime. Finally, it
discusses some important laws and statutes and the legal origins
of corporations and corporate offending.
Chapter 2 looks at various problems, issues, and controver-
sies concerning corporate crime. It provides a discussion of the
definitional issues surrounding what constitutes corporate and
white-collar offending. It also looks at the consequences of corpo-
rate offending, and at philosophical issues regarding whether
corporations should be held socially and legally responsible for
the actions of their employees. In addition, this chapter outlines
methods of detection, prosecution, and punishment of corporate
offending. Finally, it offers insight into the nature and scope of
the data that exist on corporate offenders and offending, includ-
ing federal-, state-, and local-level data. Some collections are bet-
ter than others, none are absolutely accurate, and no systematic
methods exist for collection and classification of corporate and
white-collar crime.
Chapter 3 offers a worldwide perspective. Corporate crime
is ubiquitous. It reaches every corner of the globe; developed
and developing nations, capitalistic and socialistic societies, no
xii
Preface

place on earth is safe from the reaches of corporate crime. Chap-
ter 3 also discusses multinational corporations, which tend to be
the worst offenders in today’s global economy. It looks at cor-
ruption as a form of white-collar crime. Politicians and govern-
ment leaders and their corrupt practices have bankrupted
countries, caused destruction, and hindered development. Their
actions have even caused countless injuries and loss of human
lives around the globe. War and conflict, reconstruction and de-
velopment, and provisions of health care to the poor and suffer-
ing all provide ample opportunities for corporations and those
in positions of power to embezzle, to commit fraud and bribery,
and to profit at the expense of the underprivileged and power-
less. The chapter finishes with some ideas about what can be
done to curb corporate and white-collar offending on a global
scale.
Chapter 4 is a chronology of key events in the history of cor-
porate and white-collar crime. Chapter 5 provides biographical
sketches of important persons on all sides of corporate crime.
Chapter 6 gives facts, statistics, and important government docu-
ments and data on criminal justice outcomes, as well as excerpts
from speeches, memos, and quotes. Chapter 7 is a selected list of
organizations, associations, and agencies, including a brief de-
scription of each, as well as Web site information if available.
Chapter 8 provides a list of resources and important references
for anyone interested in further investigation of a particular topic
related to corporate and white-collar offending. These include
both print and nonprint resources. A glossary of key terms re-
garding corporate crime is also provided.
Overall, the purpose of this book is to provide an up-to-date
and comprehensive discussion of the nature and extent of corpo-
rate criminality, the laws against corporate criminal offending,
the extant research, and government and law enforcement re-
sponses to corporate crime. It is my hope that this work assists,
informs, and also inﬂuences students, researchers, and practition-
ers alike.
I would like to thank the many people who directly and indi-
rectly helped in the completion of this book. First and foremost, I
am grateful to Criss for her love, patience, and self-sacrificing
support, without which none of my academic aspirations could
be realized. Debts of gratitude are also owed to my family,
friends, and colleagues whose support is a constant source of
Preface
xiii

motivation and determination. Special thanks to Dean Champion
for his academic tutelage, and Roberto Heredia for his scholarly
wisdom. I am also indebted to Dayle Dermatis and Mim Vasan,
who diligently guided this book into fruition.
Only after the last tree has been cut down; 
Only after the last ﬁsh has been caught; 
Only after the last river has been poisoned; 
Only then will you realize that money cannot be eaten.
— Cree Indian Prophecy
xiv
Preface

1
Background and History
T
his chapter provides a historical background for the study of
corporate crime in the United States. Although there are
numerous instances of crime occurring in the course of an
occupation throughout history, the focus on, study of, and pros-
ecution for corporate crime is a relatively new phenomenon—
a phenomenon that has recently gained the public’s interest. For
criminologists, “corporate crime” refers to acts in violation of
the law that are committed by businesses, corporations, or indi-
viduals within those entities. Corporate crime is also closely as-
sociated with white-collar crime, organized crime, and
state-corporate crime. Although most of us do not think of busi-
nesses, corporations, or presidents and CEOs of companies
when we think of criminals, corporate and white-collar offenses
actually cause more deaths, physical injury, and property loss
than the Uniform Crime Report’s eight serious index offenses
together (Kappeler, Blumberg, and Potter 2000).
While the main focus of the criminal justice system is still
toward detection and apprehension of serious street crime and
criminals, corporate wrongdoing and malfeasance by such corpo-
rations as Enron and WorldCom have brought white-collar and
corporate crimes to the attention of justice ofﬁcials. The mass me-
dia has also played an important role in pushing for increased ac-
countability for violators of these types of crimes. The steady
reporting of insider trading, embezzlement, corruption, consumer
fraud, and tax evasion by the media has helped bring to light the
frequency of occurrence, and monetary loss associated with, cor-
porate offending. As a result, concerns about controlling these acts
have moved to the forefront of the American justice system.
1

Corporate and
White-Collar Crime Deﬁned
The ofﬁcial history of corporate or white-collar crime dates back
to 1939. Edwin H. Sutherland ﬁrst coined the term in his address
to the American Sociological Society in Philadelphia in an effort
to distinguish between these types of crime and street crime.
Sutherland sought to spur research on crime in the upper classes.
Before his seminal speech, few studies looked for an empirical
relationship between crime and higher socio-economic classes.
Most research and criminological theories showed that crime
was related to, and had a high incidence within, lower socio-eco-
nomic classes. This speech was also an attempt by Sutherland to
gain support for the idea that both types of criminality could be
explained by his “differential association theory.” Sutherland
(1940) believed that the “white collar criminal” was not much
different from the street criminal. He stated “that a description of
white collar criminality in general terms will also be a descrip-
tion of the criminality of the lower class” (7). Sutherland believed
that the only difference between white-collar and lower-class
criminals was in the “implementation of the criminal law which
segregates white-collar criminals administratively from other
criminals” (1940, 12).
Throughout his works on white-collar criminality, Suther-
land gave several varying deﬁnitions of the term; however, the
most frequently cited is from his book White Collar Crime, in
which he conceptualizes white-collar crime “approximately as a
crime committed by a person of respectability and high social
status in the course of his occupation” (1949, 9). Since this initial
formal definition by Sutherland, there has been much debate
about the meaning, deﬁnition, and application of the term white-
collar crime. With these debates stemming from deﬁnitional and
conceptual concerns, as well as lack of data, white-collar crime
research failed to generate the interest that Sutherland was try-
ing to stimulate. Although today the general public is more con-
cerned than ever before about the quality of life that we live, the
water we drink, the air we breathe, the safety of the products we
use, and even the security of our savings and stock portfolios for
retirement, we remain more fearful of being the victim of a
heinous predatory act. Public outcry, political agendas, and
therefore the thrust of our criminal justice system focuses more
2
Background and History

on detection, apprehension, and correction of those engaged in
“crime on the streets” rather than those engaged in “crime in the
suites.”
A large part of the problem in the progress of the study of
corporate and white-collar crime stems from the real meaning
and appropriate application of the label white-collar criminal.
Many scholars of white-collar and corporate crime have written
on numerous occasions about deﬁnitional and conceptual difﬁ-
culties (see Geis 1974, Geis and Meier 1977, Wheeler 1983, Meier
1986). What constitutes white-collar and corporate offending?
That depends on whom you ask. Part of the problem in deﬁning
white-collar and corporate offending stems from the larger, more
fundamental issue of what constitutes a crime. One could argue,
for instance, that there would be no crime if there was no law.
This may seem at ﬁrst to be a little ridiculous; however, from this
viewpoint, a crime by definition becomes any act that violates
the law. If the powers that be do not decide that a behavior is
morally wrong or hurtful, they will not make a law against that
behavior, and it will not be deﬁned as a crime.
If the law defines what crime is, then it follows that two
things can be inferred about crime in the United States: “No be-
havior is automatically a crime unless it is deﬁned by the govern-
ment as a crime” and “any behavior can be made a crime”
(Robinson 2005, 51). Crimes have been categorized as either mala
in se (inherently wrong or intrinsically evil) or mala prohibita (of-
fenses deﬁned by legislatures as crimes) (Champion 2001). Some
argue that this distinction should not be made—that no act is
wrong in and of itself, but rather acts become wrong when the
government says they are wrong. As proof of this, consider the
fact that “no behavior . . . has been considered wrong in every
society at all times in history” (Robinson 2005, 8). 
Crime, then, is socially constructed and is whatever a soci-
ety says it is. Different societies define crime differently. Simi-
larly, defining white-collar and corporate crime has proved
divisive. Foremost, numerous terms have been employed to de-
scribe corporate crime: commercial crime, elite crime, political
crime, economic crime, governmental crime, white-collar crime,
and occupational crime to name a few. The confusion comes in
the notion that these various terms are often used to describe di-
verse behaviors or, conversely, that they have all been used to de-
scribe the exact same behaviors. Someone studying corporate
crime can ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to determine which behaviors fall
Corporate and White-Collar Crime Deﬁned
3

under corporate crime’s guise, or if they can even refer to the be-
haviors they are studying as corporate crime.
Because of this, there have been some efforts at reaching an
agreement on what constitutes white-collar and corporate crime.
These efforts, however, have not been fruitful. Deﬁnitions of cor-
porate and white-collar offending vary both across and within
disciplines. The struggle has been to form a universal meaning.
Scholars have been unable to find a generally accepted defini-
tion; most attempts to date have proven insufficient (Green
2004). Besides Sutherland’s initial definition, the ideas others
have proffered have tried to delineate the various crimes by type.
The following list provides some of those delineations.
Corporate Crime: “Offenses committed by corporate ofﬁ-
cials for their corporation and the offenses of the corpora-
tion itself” (Clinard and Quinney 1986, 188).
Elite Crime: “A violation of the law committed by a person or
group of persons in the course of an otherwise respected and
legitimate occupation or ﬁnancial activity” (Coleman 1985, 5).
Elite Deviance: “Acts by elites and/or the organizations
that they head that result in . . . physical harms . . . ﬁnancial
harms . . . moral harms” (Simon 2006, 35).
Occupational Crime: “Violation of the law in the course of
activity in a legitimate occupation” (Clinard and Quinney
1986, 188).
Organizational Crime: “Illegal acts of omission or commis-
sion of an individual or a group of individuals in a legiti-
mate formal organization in accordance with the operative
goals of the organization, which have serious physical or
economic impact on employees, consumers or the general
public” (Shrager and Short 1978, 411–12).
Political Crime: “Crimes committed by (or on behalf) of the
government . . . motivated by the desire for ﬁnancial
gain . . . [involving] violation of a public trust” (Friedrichs
1996, 122–23).
In order to bring some clarity and progression to the confusion,
scholars have begun to formulate strategies for consensus on the
conceptual issues. They have stressed using either deductive or
4
Background and History

inductive strategies in order to arrive at deﬁnitions or identify a
conception of white-collar crime (Meier 1996). The deductive ap-
proach would start with a formal deﬁnition and then uncover ac-
tions or behaviors that are in line with that definition. The
inductive method would seek to categorize commonalities in the
meaning of white-collar crime and come up with a definition
from these. These methods may, however, evade conceptualiza-
tion. A third method would get rid of deﬁnitions and seek to con-
ceptualize white-collar crime to incorporate several deﬁnitions.
Scholars of white-collar crime are in contention about
which elements of crime should be included in a definition.
Friedrichs (1996) poses some questions: Should definitions be
narrow and operational or broad and ambiguous? Should deﬁ-
nitions be limited to behaviors that the state says are criminal, or
include behaviors based on harm and misuse or abuse? Should
criminologists pursue these questions for the sake of science, or
awakening political awareness, or in order to focus on the of-
fenses and offenders? Generally, some scholars have proposed
that our deﬁnitions should be developed concurrent to our pur-
pose. If this is done, Friedrichs (1996) believes white-collar
crime becomes a multidimensional phenomenon.
Corporate Crime Typologies
According to Geis (1982), in order to come up with deﬁnitions or
conceptions of corporate and white-collar crime, several things
should be considered. One is the existing law; other factors in-
clude a determination of forms of harm, categories of offender
traits, modus operandi, and types of victims the offenses were
committed against. White-collar crime, therefore, can and does
incorporate many under-arching activities. White-collar of-
fenses are those “socially injurious and blameworthy acts com-
mitted by individuals or groups of individuals who occupy
decision-making positions in corporations and businesses, and
which are committed for their own personal gain against the
business, and corporations that employ them” (Frank and
Lynch 1992, 17). Corporate crimes, on the other hand, are those
“socially injurious and blameworthy acts, legal or illegal, that
cause ﬁnancial, physical, or environmental harm, committed by
corporations and businesses against their workers, the general
Corporate Crime Typologies
5

public, the environment, other corporations and businesses, the
government, or other countries” (Frank and Lynch 1992, 17).
Addressing white-collar crime and its deﬁnitional issues is
beyond the scope of this book. As such, a separation of these def-
initions is important in order to concentrate more fully on the is-
sue of corporate crime. Corporate crime, at least for the purpose
of this book, encompasses those acts that are beneficial not for
the individuals inside the corporation but instead for the corpo-
ration itself. Some overlap with white-collar offenses does exist,
considering that the individuals who engage in these behaviors
and represent the corporations are usually of a high social class.
Likewise, the line between organizational crime and corporate
crime is indistinct, since criminals can often start corporations
with the intention of committing crime or laundering their earn-
ings from crime. This book will maintain a focus on the corpora-
tions themselves, and will provide more limited coverage of the
individuals in the corporations.
History of Corporate Entities
and Corporate Offending
Corporations have been in existence since the time of the Ro-
mans (Geis 1988). During this time, corporations existed in order
to set up and control such legal entities as universities, churches,
and associations. The king, in other words, gave corporate status
to these entities, essentially granting them the ability to have leg-
islative and judicial powers over themselves (Clinard and Yeager
1980). The East India Company is probably the ﬁrst entity with
such recognized corporate powers. Established in 1602, it is said
to have been the first multinational corporation that issued
stocks (Mason 1968). In the four centuries following the genesis
of the East India Company, the development of the corporation
and its characteristics took shape. Legally speaking, a corpora-
tion had the following characteristics: “it was a body chartered
or recognized by the state; it had the right to hold property for a
common purpose; it had the right to sue and be sued in a com-
mon name; and its existence extended beyond the life of its
members” (Clinard and Yeager 1980, 22). Seventeenth- and eigh-
teenth-century corporations engaged in many egregious acts.
Using and trading African Americans as slaves and destroying
6
Background and History

the Native American culture provide glaring examples of this
(Sale 1990).
The Industrial Revolution and expanding enterprise in the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries produced very
wealthy and influential capitalist corporations. These corpora-
tions effectively avoided regulation and control even though
they engaged in such activities as fraud, price gouging, labor ex-
ploitation, manipulation of stocks, and keeping unsafe work en-
vironments (Myers 1907; Clinard and Yeager 1980). The genesis
of corporations in America was similar; such entities as towns,
churches, associations, and universities became trusts with cer-
tain legal powers and authority. Colonial America disliked
many of the British corporations that were ruling the American
colonies. The Revolutionary War was fought in part to rid the
colonies of British monopolistic rule. After the signing of the De-
claration of Independence, Adam Smith ([1776] 1998) stated that
the idea that corporations were needed for the betterment of
government was unfounded. For the next 100 years, corporate
charters, and therefore control over corporations and trusts, was
rigid. Public opposition was ﬁerce, and very few charters were
approved; even when they were approved, legislatures limited
the number of years they could last. At the expiration date, the
corporation would be terminated, and its shareholders would
enjoy the division of assets. The colonists wanted to be free from
the exploitation they suffered under British rule. After the Revo-
lutionary War, the founding fathers were nervous about the
power of corporations. Through various legal means, they lim-
ited the role of corporations in society solely for business pur-
poses. Corporations could not interfere in other aspects of
society. Several conditions were set forth regarding the estab-
lishment and activities of corporations: Corporate charters (li-
censes to exist) were granted for a limited time and could be
revoked promptly for violating laws. Corporations could en-
gage only in activities necessary to fulfill their chartered pur-
pose. Corporations could not own stock in other corporations
nor own any property that was not essential to fulfilling their
chartered purpose. Corporations were often terminated if they
exceeded their authority or caused public harm. Owners and
managers were responsible for criminal acts committed on the
job. Corporations could not make any political or charitable con-
tributions or spend money to inﬂuence lawmaking (Reclaim De-
mocracy 2004).
History of Corporate Entities and Corporate Offending
7

The nature of corporations changed in Britain in 1844 with
the passage of the UK Joint Stock Companies Act, which essen-
tially allowed a corporation to deﬁne itself and its purpose. In-
vestors in a corporation could now collect funds for a speciﬁed
purpose. Control over corporations at this point moved from be-
ing a governmental responsibility to one of the courts. Limited li-
ability was awarded to shareholders in 1855, meaning that the
assets of individuals in the corporation would be protected from
any bad behavior that the corporation engaged in. A landmark
U.S. court decision in 1866 in the case of Santa Clara County v.
Southern Pac. R. Co. (118 U.S. 394 [1886]) granted corporate per-
sonhood, which meant that corporations could now enjoy many
of the rights and responsibilities of individuals. These rights in-
cluded ownership of property, signing of binding contracts, and
payment of taxes. This case used the Fourteenth Amendment in
defense of corporations, citing the same clause that was used to
emancipate slaves in the South:
No state shall make or enforce any law which shall
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal pro-
tection of the laws. (The Constitution of the United
States, Amendment 14, Section 1)
Corporations were not well liked by people living in the
original colonies. The entities remaining after the American Rev-
olution were mostly colleges and nonprofit corporations. The
Constitution of 1788 made no mention of corporations and so left
their existence to the states. Corporations were chartered by
states but not without opposition and objection from the public.
Thomas Jefferson, believing in a decentralized government for
the United States, stated of corporations: “I hope we shall crush
in its birth the aristocracy of our moneyed corporations which
dare already to challenge our government in a trial of strength,
and bid deﬁance to the laws of our country” (Hartmann 2002).
Jefferson is also quoted as having said: “History has informed us
that bodies of men, as well as individuals, are susceptible of the
spirit of tyranny” (Hartmann 2002). Several court cases would
come to shape the idea of the corporation in the early formation
of the republic. In the case of The Rev. John Bracken v. the Visitors of
8
Background and History

William and Mary College, the central issue was whether or not the
charter grant of William and Mary College could be altered. The
court decided that the corporation (the college) could indeed
make changes—in other words, reorganize the curriculum and
faculty—and that this would not violate the original charter.
John Marshall, who was representing the visitors of William and
Mary College, said this of the charter in his arguments during
the case:
The Visitors or Governors have power to make such
laws for the government of the College, from time to
time, according to their various occasion and circum-
stances, as to them should seem most ﬁt and expedient.
The restraining clause annexed, serves to shew the ex-
tent of the grant: Their power of legislation, then, ex-
tended to the modification of the schools, in any
manner they should deem proper, provided they did
not depart from the great outlines marked in the char-
ter; which are divinity, philosophy, and the languages.
It was proper, that this discretion should be given to
the Visitors, because a particular branch of science,
which at one period of time would be deemed all im-
portant, might at another, be thought not worth acquir-
ing. In institutions, therefore, which are to be durable,
only great leading and general principles, ought to be
immutable. If, then, the Visitors have only legislated on
a subject upon which they had a right to legislate, it is
not for this Court to enquire, whether they have legis-
lated wisely, or not, and if the change should even be
considered as not being for the better, still it is a
change; still the grammar school is lawfully put down;
and there can be no mandamus to restore a man to an
ofﬁce, which no longer exists. One of the statutes, en-
acted by the trustees themselves, authorises the Visi-
tors to change even those very statutes, one of which
creates the grammar school. (7 Va. 573; 1790 Supreme
Court of Virginia)
The U.S. Supreme Court heard arguments on a similar mat-
ter in 1818. In the case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward, Supreme
Court Chief Justice John Marshall, the very same man who had
argued in favor of the changes to the charter of William and
History of Corporate Entities and Corporate Offending
9

Mary College, had to decide whether or not the state of New
Hampshire could rewrite the charter of Dartmouth College,
thereby intervening in its academic operations. Chief Justice
Marshall wrote:
This court can be insensible neither to the magnitude
nor delicacy of this question. The validity of a legisla-
tive act is to be examined; and the opinion of the high-
est law tribunal of a State is to be revised—an opinion
which carries with it intrinsic evidence of the dili-
gence, of the ability, and the integrity, with which it
was formed. On more than one occasion, this Court
has expressed the cautious circumspection with which
it approaches the consideration of such questions, and
has declared that in no doubtful case would it pro-
nounce a legislative act to be contrary to the Constitu-
tion. But the American people have said in the
Constitution of the United States that “no State shall
pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law im-
pairing the obligation of contracts.” In the same instru-
ment, they have also said, “that the judicial power
shall extend to all cases in law and equity arising un-
der the Constitution.” On the judges of this Court,
then, is imposed the high and solemn duty of protect-
ing, from even legislative violation, those contracts
which the Constitution of our country has placed be-
yond legislative control; and however irksome the task
may be, this is a duty from which we dare not shrink.
(17 U.S. 518 [1819])
This decision did not please state legislatures. State courts
protested that governments of the state maintain the right to
amend or repeal a corporate charter (Grossman and Adams
1993). Less than 10 years later, the Supreme Court decision in the
case of Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts v.
Town of Pawlet (29 U.S. 480 [1830]) expanded the rights of corpo-
rations to be similar to those of natural persons.
During the Industrial Revolution, the United States was
rapidly expanding both economically and geographically. Pro-
duction and manufacturing swelled, as did international trade.
In order to protect themselves from competition, large manufac-
turing businesses became corporations. These corporations be-
gan to take over not only the business world but U.S. courts,
10
Background and History

politicians, and society (Brown 2003). Corporations soon tried to
unchain the fetters that controlled their business dealings. It
should not come as a surprise that corporations were granted
personhood through the rulings of many of these court cases: the
justices of the Supreme Court had loyalty in the propertied class.
This is apparent in Chief Justice Waite’s opinion in the case of
Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac. R. Co.: “The court does not
wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in
the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which forbids a
State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal pro-
tection of the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of
opinion that it does” (118 U.S. 398 [1886]). Legal status of corpo-
rations therefore is similar to that of persons. United States law
recognizes that under corporate personhood, the corporation is
viewed as a legal person, giving it certain inalienable rights.
Arthur Miller, author of The Modern Corporate State (1976), be-
lieves that because corporations enjoy personhood under the
guise of the Fourteenth Amendment, they should also be willing
to adhere to due process of law:
The corporate community . . . should be held to mini-
mum standards of decent treatment of individuals it di-
rectly affects. . . . The corporate community should take
cognizance of the overall interests of the American
people when making basic decisions, such as those af-
fecting wages and prices; in other words, it should take
public interest into account.
A corporation is a legal entity comprised of persons, but one
that in some ways exists apart from those persons. It is this sepa-
ration that gives corporations distinctive authority and control
over its practices. The most important aspects of incorporation
include the ideas of limited liability and perpetual lifetime. Lim-
ited liability gives members of a corporation limited personal lia-
bility for the debts and actions of the corporation. The key
beneﬁts of limited liability include the following:
1. A corporation has separate legal entity and distinction
from its shareholders and directors, which means that
both the directors and the company have completely
separate rights and existences.
2. The liability of shareholders is limited to the amount
unpaid on any shares issued to them.
History of Corporate Entities and Corporate Offending
11

3. Shareholders cannot be personally liable for the debts of
the company.
4. Creditors can look to the company for payment, which
can only be settled out of the company’s assets; thus gen-
erally, the personal assets of the shareholders and direc-
tors are protected.
5. The company’s name is protected by law; no one else is
allowed to use it in that jurisdiction.
6. Suppliers and customers can have a sense of conﬁdence
in a business. (Beneﬁts of a Limited Company 2006)
Perpetual lifetime is also important to a corporation because
it means that the structure and assets of a corporation are permit-
ted to exist past the lifetime of its members. These features give
corporations tremendous power and ability in the business
world. Individuals who own shares of stock in a corporation are
called shareholders; nonproﬁt organizations do not have share-
holders. Usually, a corporation will have a board of directors
overseeing operations for the shareholders and administering
the interests of the corporation. If a corporation were to dissolve,
the members would share in its assets, but only those assets that
remained after creditors were paid. Again though, through lim-
ited liability, members can only be held responsible for the
amount of shares they had in the corporation.
The Corporation Today
Corporations today are looked at in both a positive and negative
light. They are seen as the heart of capitalist and free-market
economies and an outgrowth of the entrepreneurial nature of
U.S. society. However, they are also seen as the mechanism by
which exploitation of the people in the labor market exists.
David O. Friedrichs (1996) best describes what corporations
mean for society today.
Many people hold corporations in high esteem. Mil-
lions of people are employed by corporations and re-
gard them as their providers. Many young people
aspire to become corporate employees. Corporations
produce the seemingly endless range of products we
purchase and consume, and they sponsor many of the
12
Background and History

forms of entertainment (especially television) we enjoy.
They are also principal sponsors of pioneering research
in many fields and a crucial element in national de-
fense. Corporations are important benefactors of a large
number of charities, public events, institutions of higher
learning, and scientific enterprises. And of course the
major corporations in particular, with their large re-
sources, are quite adept at reminding us of their posi-
tive contributions to our way of life. (67)
Indeed, the corporation of the twenty-ﬁrst century has its in-
terests in proﬁts and growth. The large corporations of today are
vast and have enormous wealth. Yearly proﬁts from U.S. corpo-
rations have been estimated at around $500 billion per year (Kor-
ten 1999). The cost of industry to U.S. taxpayers, however, is over
$2.5 trillion annually (Estes 1996). Corporate exploitation of the
citizenry and the workforce in society is not a shock, given the
fact that proﬁts are the main objective of the corporation. Stock-
holders and managers alike have a general interest in maximiz-
ing proﬁts at the expense of others. Since corporate management
usually holds a hefty share of the company’s stock, managers
tend to proceed with their own interests in mind, thereby aug-
menting their own wealth while common stockholders and
workers consume the costs (Friedrichs 1996).
Corporate America is also well positioned to advance its in-
terests through political corruption. Because of their abundant
resources, corporations can have enormous influence on the
polity and the outlining of public policy. The people at the top of
corporations, the government, and the military all have connec-
tions to one another that allow them to advance common inter-
ests (Simon and Eitzen 1990; Friedrichs 1996). If it is hard to
believe that the American political system could be bought, con-
sider that corporate donations to both political parties account
for over 70 percent of their fundraising contributions (Greidner
1991). Corporations have also been able to hide most of the polit-
ical inﬂuence they enjoy and remain free from liability due to the
fact that the government has deregulated control over many of
the industries these corporations control.
The corporations of today have also been able to gain in-
creasing control over key economic and political institutions be-
cause of mergers. The large corporations are conglomerates,
meaning that they have gobbled up smaller companies and
The Corporation Today
13

multiple industries, becoming producers of a wide array of prod-
ucts. These mergers and takeovers have led to corporations being
able to cross-subsidize, meaning they can sustain one business
with the profits from another (Clinard and Yeager 1980). Con-
glomerates have increased in size, number, and market share due
to multibillion-dollar mergers occurring in the 1980s (Curran and
Renzetti 1999). An outcome of these mergers has been the ability
of these companies to expand their business geographically to the
point where they now compete in the global marketplace and
have widespread foreign and domestic assets. Clinard and Yeager
(1980) report of current corporate activity that “through mergers,
foreign subsidiaries, and other growth, today’s multinational cor-
porations represent the largest accumulation of wealth ever seen
in the world” (38). The increasing globalization of the world mar-
ketplace has allowed corporations to further violate laws in the
name of proﬁt without taking responsibility for their actions. By
becoming multinational, corporations “in the conduct of interna-
tional business, can obey, for example, the antitrust laws of their
own country and yet violate with impunity the antitrust laws of
other countries in which they do business.” (40)
Although Third World countries and the citizens who in-
habit them do enjoy some advantages from globalized economic
business, they too pay a penalty in terms of workforce abuses.
These transnational abuses will be outlined further in chapter 3.
As the global marketplace expands, the wrongdoings of these
multinational corporations are likely to become more pro-
nounced. (Friedrichs 1996)
Laws and Legal Origins
of Corporate Crime
Although images of crime and criminals today have increasingly
included the actions of business executives and members of the
upper class, this has not always been the case. Corporations his-
torically have been able to avoid prosecution because of the lim-
ited liability they have written into their charters. It has also been
difﬁcult to bring charges against an entity because of a lack of a
body to punish, and because the populace finds it difficult to
grasp the idea that corporations, which are not persons, could
offend. Nevertheless, there has been a rapid rise in the criminal
14
Background and History

liability that corporations can be accountable for under various
laws concerning securities, antitrust violations, and the environ-
ment. Charges against corporate offending are normally levied
against individuals in the corporation; however, the corporation
itself could be held responsible and be sanctioned for certain of-
fenses. At both the federal and state level, legislation has been
promulgated against corporate criminal offenses. The U.S. Con-
stitution, under its commerce clause, allows the control of corpo-
rate offenses by the federal government. Numerous federal
agencies also play a part in enforcing this legislation. Such agen-
cies as the Internal Revenue Service, the Environmental Protec-
tion Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Secret
Service, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and others at-
tempt to control and regulate corporate activity.
Early notions of liability held that a corporation could not
have criminal charges applied to it. Holding a corporation liable
was difﬁcult for a number of reasons (Khanna 1996). First, corpo-
rations are fictional entities, not individuals. Second, there are
moral problems in proving that a corporation is capable of formu-
lating criminal intent. Third, courts had trouble making corpora-
tions criminally responsible for acts not listed in their charters.
Finally, difﬁculty stemmed from criminal procedural rules that the
accused be brought into court. In the United States, two doctrines
have been of primary use in holding corporations criminally re-
sponsible: the Model Penal Code, section 2.07, which makes the
corporation responsible for the behaviors of leaders in the organi-
zation, and respondiat superior, which holds the employer responsi-
ble for the criminal acts of its employees. Even though these two
doctrines are in place, many prosecutors fail to act against corpo-
rations because the shareholders, not the corporate elite, will suf-
fer most from any punishment a corporation receives.
The Supreme Court applied the respondiat superior doctrine
initially in the case of New York Central & Hudson River Railroad v.
United States, where the company was not applying mandated
shipping rates to all customers equally. The Supreme Court de-
cided that this action violated the Elkins Act, and the corporation
was subject to penalties under that act. Justice Day, writing for
the court, stated that under the Elkins Act:
anything done or omitted to be done by a corporation
common carrier subject to the act to regulate com-
merce, and the acts amendatory thereof, which, if done
Laws and Legal Origins of Corporate Crime
15

or omitted to be done by any director or ofﬁcer thereof,
or any receiver, trustee, lessee, agent or person acting
for or employed by such corporation, would constitute
a misdemeanor under said acts . . . and upon convic-
tion thereof it shall be subject to like penalties as are
prescribed in said acts, or by this act. . . . In construing
and enforcing the provisions of this section, the act,
omission or failure of any ofﬁcer, agent or other person
acting for or employed by any common carrier, acting
within the scope of his employment shall, in every
case, be also deemed to be the act, omission or failure
of such carrier, as well as that of the person. (212 U.S.
481 [1909]) 
Other courts have also made similar rulings under the re-
spondiat superior doctrine; however, critics have pointed out that
the doctrine is better suited for civil torts than criminal liability.
Section 2.01 of the Model Penal Code ameliorates this criticism
because it enforces liability for the actions of corporate employ-
ees. Today, there are only two instances when corporations can-
not be held liable for criminal actions: if the corporation is
incapable of committing the crime (these would involve such
acts as arson), or where there is no ﬁne attached as punishment
for the action. The Model Penal Code outlines three categories of
corporate offenses. The ﬁrst requires mens rea, or a guilty mind,
and is traditionally individual offenses, including embezzlement
and fraud. Corporations may be charged in these cases if “the of-
fense was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or
recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or by a high man-
agerial agent acting in behalf of the corporation within the scope
of his ofﬁce or employment” (Model Penal Code § 2.07 [1] [c]).
The second category of offenses includes such acts as collusion
that call for mens rea and can be committed by corporations.
Corporations can be punished for these offenses if, during the
scope of employment, an agent acted to beneﬁt the corporation.
Under section 2.07 (5) of the Model Penal Code, however, the
corporation may not be punished if “the defendant proves by a
preponderance of evidence that the high managerial agent hav-
ing supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the of-
fense employed due diligence to prevent its commission.” The
third category covers the strict liability crimes. Under the Model
Penal Code, and on the basis of the respondeat superior rule,
16
Background and History

corporations can be held liable consistent with strict liability
principles; in other words, there is no need to show intent to ben-
eﬁt a corporation.
The case of New York Central & Hudson River Railroad v.
United States provides the framework for the idea that a corpora-
tion can be held liable for the deeds of agents acting in the capac-
ity of their jobs. The notion of agents acting within their
employment capacity is important in charging liability to the cor-
poration. Other components to imputing liability are that em-
ployees have the authority to carry out the behavior in question.
This authority “attaches when a corporation knowingly and in-
tentionally authorizes an employee to act on its behalf” (Viano
and Arnold 2006, 314). The government also has to show that the
individual whose actions are in question does indeed have a re-
lationship to the agency (United States v. Bainbridge Management,
No. 01 CR 469–1, 6 [2002]). The concept of acting within the
scope of an agent’s authority has generally been determined in
different ways with regard to federal and state control. Federally,
corporate criminal liability can be imputed based on the respon-
sibilities of the agent, not his or her rank (In re Hellenic, 252 F.3d
391 [2001]). The goal of the government is to impute liability on
the corporation through an action of an employee. This has been
done via the Model Penal Code, section 2.07, (1–6), which states
the following:
(1) A corporation may be convicted of the commission of an
offense if:
(a) The offense is a violation or the offense is deﬁned by
a statute other than the Code in which a legislative
purpose to impose liability on corporations plainly
appears and the conduct is performed by an agent of
the corporation acting in behalf of the corporation
within the scope of his ofﬁce or employment, except
that if the law deﬁning the offense designates the
agents for whose conduct the corporation is account-
able or the circumstances under which it is account-
able, such provisions shall apply; or
(b) The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
speciﬁc duty of afﬁrmative performance imposed 
on corporations by law; or
(c) The commission of the offense was authorized,
requested, commanded, performed or recklessly
Laws and Legal Origins of Corporate Crime
17

tolerated by the board of directors or by a high man-
agerial agent acting in behalf of the corporation
within the scope of his ofﬁce or employment.
(2) When absolute liability is imposed for the commission of
an offense, a legislative purpose to impose liability on a
corporation shall be assumed, unless the contrary
plainly appears.
(3) An unincorporated association may be convicted of the
commission of an offense if:
(a) The offense is deﬁned by a statute other than the
Code that expressly provides for the liability of such
an association and the conduct is performed by an
agent of the association acting in behalf of the associ-
ation within the scope of his ofﬁce or employment,
except that if the law deﬁning the offense designates
the agents for whose conduct the association is ac-
countable or the circumstances under which it is ac-
countable, such provisions shall apply; or
(b) The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
speciﬁc duty of afﬁrmative performance imposed on
associations by law.
(4) As used in this Section:
(a) “Corporation” does not include an entity organized
as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a
governmental program;
(b) “Agent” means any director, ofﬁcer, servant, em-
ployee or other person authorized to act in behalf of
the corporation or association and, in the case of an
unincorporated association, a member of such associ-
ation;
(c) “High managerial agent” means an ofﬁcer of a corpo-
ration or an unincorporated association, or, in the case
of a partnership, a partner, or any other agent of a cor-
poration or association having duties of such respon-
sibility that his conduct may fairly be assumed to
represent the policy of the corporation or association.
(5) In any prosecution of a corporation or an unincorpo-
rated association for the commission of an offense in-
cluded within the terms of Subsection (1)(a) or
Subsection (3)(a) of this Section, other than an offense for
which absolute liability has been imposed, it shall be a
defense if the defendant proves by a preponderance of
18
Background and History

evidence that the high managerial agent having supervi-
sory responsibility over the subject matter of the offense
employed due diligence to prevent its commission. This
paragraph shall not apply if it is plainly inconsistent
with the legislative purpose in deﬁning the particular
offense.
(6) (a) A person is legally accountable for any conduct he
performs or causes to be performed in the name of
the corporation or an unincorporated association or
in its behalf to the same extent as if it were per-
formed in his own name or behalf.
(b) Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon a
corporation or an unincorporated association, any
agent of the corporation or association having pri-
mary responsibility for the discharge of the duty is
legally accountable for a reckless omission to per-
form the required act to the same extent as if the duty
were imposed by law directly upon himself.
(c) When a person is convicted of an offense by reason 
of his legal accountability for the conduct of a corpo-
ration or an unincorporated association, he is subject
to the sentence authorized by law when a natural
person is convicted of an offense of the grade and the
degree involved.
At the state level, some states have limited assigning crimi-
nal liability only to those in a high managerial position. For in-
stance, 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 307 states that liability may be imputed if
“the commission of the offense was authorized, requested, com-
manded, performed or recklessly tolerated by the board of direc-
tors or by a high managerial agent acting in behalf of the
corporation within the scope of his ofﬁce or employment.” Other
states have applied liability through judicial precedent (North
Dakota v. Smokey’s Steakhouse, Inc. 478 N.W. 2d 361 [1991]). Fur-
ther, others have been able to impute liability in cases even
where high-level management disapproved of the employee’s
actions (New Hampshire v. Zeta Chi Fraternity 696 A.2d 530 [1997];
Ohio v. Black on Black Crime, Inc. 736 N.E. 2d 962 [1999]). How-
ever, corporate criminal liability will not be imposed unless the
actor behaved in a manner deliberate to beneﬁting the corpora-
tion. This can be the case even if, for instance, the corporation did
not actually benefit. The corporation would not be criminally
Laws and Legal Origins of Corporate Crime
19

liable where the employee’s behaviors were counter to the bene-
fit of the corporation (Standard Oil Company of Texas v. United
States 307 F. 2d 120 [1962]).
Recent Legislation
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, also called the Public Com-
pany Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002,
was enacted in response to a number of questionable business
practices by major corporations (Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
Pub. L. No. 107–204, 116 Stat. 804 [2002])—specifically, the En-
ron, WorldCom, and Tyco debacles that caused deterioration in
the trust of the accounting and reporting practices of these com-
panies. Included in this legislation were increases in punish-
ments under the White Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement Act.
The penalty increases included longer prison sentences for
those found guilty of certain Employee Retirement Income Se-
curity Act (ERISA) infractions. In addition, falsely certifying
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reports became
criminal under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. In all, nearly a dozen
sections are included in the act obligating certain accountabili-
ties of corporate officials and mandating penalties for their vio-
lation. The act also set up the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board, whose charge it is to regulate, inspect, and
discipline accounting firms. Major provisions of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act include:
1. Obligation for public companies to assess and give de-
tails of the efﬁciency of their ﬁscal reporting.
2. Requirement that CEOs and CFOs certify their ﬁscal re-
ports.
3. Increased penalties, both civil and criminal, for security
law infringement.
4. Stipulation that no personal loans can be given to any ex-
ecutive ofﬁcer.
5. Requirement of independent auditing committees for
companies registered on stock exchanges.
6. Guarantee of back pay and compensatory damages, and
protection of employees who act as whistleblowers.
20
Background and History

Criminal Antitrust Penalty Enhancement 
and Reform Act
Legislation against antitrust violations is not new. The Sherman
Antitrust Act was promulgated in 1890 to place a limit on mo-
nopolistic practices. Although this act was, for the most part, un-
enforced for the last 100 years, President George W. Bush signed
the Criminal Antitrust Penalty Enhancement and Reform Act in
2004. This act essentially raised the upper limit penalties in cases
of corporate crime to $1 million and 10 years imprisonment for
convicted individuals, and $100 million fines for corporations
found guilty of antitrust violations. Corporations and their
agents may now face severe penalties if convicted.
Types of Corporate Crime
As stated earlier in this chapter, corporate crime involves injuri-
ous acts that result in physical, environmental, and financial
harms, committed by entities for their own benefit (Frank and
Lynch 1992). Although there is overlap with white-collar crime,
occupational crime, and other types of crime, corporate crime en-
compasses those behaviors that are engaged in by a corporation
for its benefit. Corporate crime can result in political and eco-
nomic consequences, as well as physical harm, injury, and death
to persons. Friedrichs (1996) sets forth a comprehensive list of
corporate offenses that includes fraud, tax evasion, price ﬁxing,
price gouging, false advertising, unfair labor practices, theft, mo-
nopolistic practices, toxic waste dumping, pollution, unsafe
working conditions, and death.
Fraud, Tax Evasion, and Economic
Exploitation
Fraud, tax evasion, and economic exploitation have serious con-
sequences for society and the citizenry because they allow cor-
porations to raise their proﬁts, lessen their tax burdens, and at
the same time underpay their employees. Fraud covers viola-
tions of the Internal Revenue Code and involves corporations
defrauding the government and taxpayers, usually through con-
tractual agreements they hold with the government. The U.S.
Types of Corporate Crime
21

government contracts with numerous companies every year to
carry out certain services. The large number of contracts the
government holds with companies sometimes makes it difﬁcult
to track whether the money is being used for the purpose the
government authorized.
The war in Iraq that began in 2003 has provided numerous
instances of companies overcharging the U.S. government—and
ultimately taxpayers—for services rendered in an attempt to
make a larger proﬁt. A recent report by Congress shows that the
Department of Defense has 149 contracts in Iraq with 77 differ-
ent companies that are worth approximately $42 billion; this re-
port also shows that, according to government auditors,
Halliburton, the largest contractor in Iraq, and its subsidiaries,
namely Kellogg, Brown, and Root, have submitted questionable
bills in the amount of $1.4 billion (U.S. Senate Democratic Policy
Committee 2005). Halliburton is reimbursed for the costs it in-
curs in provision of services, and it also receives supplementary
payments based on those costs. Therefore, Halliburton has mon-
etary incentives in billing the U.S. government as much as possi-
ble. The congressional report found that Halliburton greatly
exaggerated its costs, made invoices for unnecessary equip-
ment, and submitted receipts for duplicate costs. Testimony
from former Halliburton employees revealed that the company
charged the U.S. government $45 for cases of soda, $100 to clean
15-pound bags of laundry, and $1,000 for video players, and
torched and abandoned numerous $85,000 trucks instead of
making the minor repairs the trucks needed. The company has
also been accused of overcharging for fuel that it supplied to the
U.S. Army; in one case, they charged the army $27 million to
transport $82,000 worth of fuel from Kuwait to Iraq (Giraldi
2005). So far, one Halliburton ofﬁcial has been indicted for fraud
against the U.S. government. The indictment alleges that the
Halliburton ofﬁcial billed $5.5 million for work that cost approx-
imately $685,000.
Recent efforts to clean up the damage to the Gulf Coast of
the United States caused by Hurricane Katrina have also been
fraught with waste of taxpayer dollars. According to a report to
the U.S. House of Representatives, as of June 30, 2006, roughly
$10.6 billion had been given to private contractors, with only
about 30 percent awarded in an open and competitive bidding
process (U.S. House of Representatives 2006). This report 
also identifies 19 contracts worth about $8.75 billion that have
22
Background and History

overcharged, wasted, or otherwise mismanaged the money they
received from the government.
The health care industry is another one of the biggest de-
frauders of U.S. tax dollars, according to Taxpayers against
Fraud (2006). In July 2006, Tenet Healthcare agreed to pay back
$900 million to the federal government for violations of Medicare
billing, although they are alleged to have stolen $1.9 billion.
Tenet, which is the largest for-proﬁt U.S. hospital chain, pleaded
guilty to criminal charges in 2000 and agreed to pay $840 million
in fines for unlawful billing practices. The same company also
paid $631 million in civil penalties and damages from false
claims submitted to Medicare, and $250 million as an adminis-
trative settlement to Medicare and Medicaid services. Combined,
the government has recovered $1.7 billion from this company for
health care fraud. In October 2005, Serono, a company that man-
ufactures a human growth hormone that helps fight AIDS,
agreed to pay $704 million to settle a fraud case. Serono was
charged with giving kickbacks to doctors who prescribed, and
pharmacies who recommended, their drug, as well as using di-
agnostic equipment that was not approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration in the hopes of stimulating prescription
sales (Taxpayers against Fraud 2006). The list of health care
providers that have committed some type of fraud against the
government goes on and on; as of September 30, 2006, a total of
94 cases were settled in which the accused company had to pay
back monies procured under false claims (Taxpayers against
Fraud 2006).
Religious leaders in the last few decades have also been
prosecuted and convicted of defrauding the citizenry of millions
of dollars. Probably the most well-known case is that of Jim and
Tammy Faye Bakker and their corporation Praise the Lord (PTL)
Club ministries. Jim Bakker had influence over millions of
people in the 1980s with his religious preachings and evangelical
television program. The Bakkers, through their PTL ministries,
were able to raise unprecedented amounts of charity dollars in
the name of religion; however, in the late 1980s, the PTL empire
came crashing down because of Jim Bakker’s extravagant
lifestyle, an extramarital affair, and a money scandal. The
Bakkers were said to be living as lavishly as many of the corpo-
rate CEOs caught up in scandal in the early 2000s. They suppos-
edly had an air-conditioned tree house for their children and
even an air-conditioned dog house (Pfeifer 2000). Bakker was
Types of Corporate Crime
23

eventually charged with 15 counts of wire fraud, eight counts of
mail fraud, and conspiracy (United States v. Bakker, 925 F.2d 728,
740 [4th Cir. 1991]). He allegedly raised $150 million from his
worshipers under the guise of partnerships in a vacation park.
Instead, the monies were used for his family home and to travel
in limousines and on private jets. Bakker was sentenced to 45
years in prison and ﬁned $500,000. On appeal, the sentence was
reduced to eight years, of which he eventually served ﬁve.
Corporations like the ones listed above cost taxpayers billions
of dollars a year by defrauding the government and dodging their
share of the tax burden. Corporate tax rates have been declining
slowly, and many corporations with profits in the hundreds of
millions of dollars pay almost nothing in taxes because their lob-
byists have been able to convince legislators to approve laws that
are helpful to corporations (Friedrichs 1996). Corporations have
also found numerous ways to evade paying taxes owed to the fed-
eral government, which results in augmentation of our national
debt and eventually more taxes to be paid by the citizens.
Price Fixing, Price Gouging, and False
Advertising
At the heart of a capitalistic society is competition. Competition is
good in the sense that it allows consumers to get high quality
products at the lowest price possible. The idea is that if companies
want to stay in business, they will have to improve quality and de-
crease the costs for their products. Consumers lose out, however,
when corporations together fix prices at certain levels, thereby
prohibiting any beneﬁt to the customer. Price ﬁxing is also referred
to as parallel pricing, because companies that are supposed to be
competitors manipulate the cost of items, keeping them artiﬁcially
high, thereby maximizing proﬁts (Friedrichs 1996; Simon 2006).
Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), among other companies, was
convicted of price ﬁxing commodities used in common processed
foods. They paid a $100 million antitrust ﬁne. Similarly, Hoffman-
La Roche, a vitamin company, was ﬁned $500 million for attempt-
ing to ﬁx the price of some vitamins worldwide, and several music
industry firms have been accused of fleecing consumers to the
tune of $480 million in CD overpricing (Simon 2006).
Price gouging involves taking advantage of consumers who
are at risk, raising prices during times of scarcity of products, or
24
Background and History

charging the highest price possible because of monopolies, ma-
nipulating the market, or biases in the law (Simon 2006). U.S.
corporations have long been accused of taking advantage of the
poor. “Many food chains ﬁnd that it costs 2 or 3 percent more to
operate in poor neighborhoods, yet low-income consumers pay
between 5 and 10 percent more for their groceries than those liv-
ing in middle-income areas” (Simon 2006, 12). During times of
scarcity of products, price gouging is frequent. In 2004, the
southeastern coast of the United States was hit by a number of
hurricanes. In the aftermath of the storms, the Florida Depart-
ment of Agriculture and Consumer Services received over 3,000
complaints of price gouging by hotels, gas stations, and other re-
tail service providers (Simon 2006). The oil company Exxon paid
a $2 billion fine in the late 1980s because of charges of price
gouging for oil products between the years of 1973 and 1981;
other oil companies were also levied ﬁnes in excess of $5 billion
(Friedrichs 1996).
False advertising is nothing new, either. Consumers in the
United States have been deceived into purchasing billions of dol-
lars of products or services that never lived up to their claims.
Food products giving false nutritional values and products
claiming certain utility through false demonstrations are exam-
ples of false or deceptive advertising. All advertising in some
sense is deceptive in that it tries to inﬂuence us to purchase the
product. Some examples of charges of false advertising include:
labeling products as cholesterol free or sugar free when they con-
tain saturated fats and ingredients similar to sugar; advertising
products at inﬂated dimensions, such as a quarter-pound ham-
burger that isn’t a quarter of a pound; advertising performance
claims, as in high octane fuel and enhancement effects for your
vehicle when there are none; and advertising low costs in bold
print and hiding additional payments and contradictory infor-
mation in small print, as in calculations of the monthly payments
for an automobile (Simon 2006).
Corporate Theft, Exploitation, and Unfair
Labor Practices
A typical scenario of white-collar offending involves employees
stealing from their employers, but the opposite is sometimes
also true. Examples are companies that bilk employees out of
Types of Corporate Crime
25

proper overtime pay, violate minimum wage laws, fail to make
Social Security payments, or use employee pension funds im-
properly (Friedrichs 1996). Economic exploitation is also preva-
lent in that companies drive down wages by decreasing union
positions, using foreign parts in domestic products, outsourcing
jobs, and hiring more part-time employees. Friedrichs (1996)
notes that in the United States, many proﬁtable manufacturing
plants have been shut down by corporations, leading to eco-
nomic hardships for those employed there. Not allowing labor
to unionize, strike, or collectively bargain are three examples of
unfair labor practices. The result is a loss of millions of dollars
by employees who cannot negotiate or who are passed over for
promotions on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, or age. One of
the largest alleged exploiters of labor in the United States is Wal-
Mart. The allegations of wrongdoing against Wal-Mart are nu-
merous and varied (Buckley and Daniel 2003). Charges of unfair
labor practices make up most of the charges filed against the
company. Wal-Mart’s supposed violations of labor laws range
from illegally ﬁring those attempting to organize unions to ille-
gal surveillance to threatening and intimidating employees who
protest. Many lawsuits that have been ﬁled against the company
have been won or are still in the courts (Lee 2005). These labor
law violations were known by Wal-Mart ofﬁcials, but they did
not take the necessary steps to alleviate the problems. In 2000,
25,000 employees alerted Wal-Mart officials to potential viola-
tions, and an audit found 60,767 missed breaks, 15,705 lost meal
times, and 1,371 instances of minors working too late or during
school hours (Greenhouse 2004).
There have also been reports of violations of health coverage
among Wal-Mart employees. In January 2006, the retailer re-
ported 43 percent of its employees were covered by health insur-
ance, compared to the national average for large companies who
cover about 66 percent of their employees. To get to the average
coverage rate, Wal-Mart would have to cover an additional
318,000 employees (Bernhardt, Chaddha and McGrath 2005).
Studies have also shown that Wal-Mart stores reduce earnings in
counties where they are located by 5 percent per person (U.S.
House of Representatives 2004). Additionally, in an ongoing law-
suit, six female workers sued Wal-Mart in California, claiming
the company discriminates against women by paying them less
than men and denying them promotions. The original lawsuit
(Dukes v. Wal-Mart) has expanded into the largest class action
26
Background and History

lawsuit ever and, as of 2007, included more than 1.6 million cur-
rent and former female employees. The lawsuit claims that al-
though more than two-thirds of Wal-Mart’s hourly employees
are female, women occupied only one-third of managerial posi-
tions and less than 15 percent of store management positions.
These statistics belie the fact that females on average had more
seniority and higher merit ratings than their male counterparts.
Finally, Wal-Mart has been accused of violating child labor laws
and has paid fines in many states for minors working during
school hours, working too late, and working too many hours in a
day. Although much of this wrongdoing has been uncovered and
ﬁnes have been levied, for many companies, Wal-Mart included,
it is more cost-effective to continue to violate the law—and pay
the fines—than it would be to provide health care, to allow
unions to form, to promote and increase the pay for females, and
to follow child labor laws.
Violent Corporate Offenses
Corporate executives are not usually thought to be associated
with violent offenses; however, corporations do engage in acts
with violent outcomes. The belief that corporate crime is less
harmful than street crime is a myth (Kappeler and Potter 2004).
The loss of life and injuries that result from corporate wrongdo-
ing far outweighs those from street crime (Reiman 2007). Reiman
argues that these corporate deaths and injuries are as much out
of the control of the victims as being murdered is beyond the
control of a homicide victim. Just because many of the deaths
and injuries result from the recklessness or negligence of corpo-
rations does not mean they should be ignored (Robinson 2005).
We do not pay as much attention to these acts because they are
perceived as somehow being different. For instance, Friedrichs
(1996) notes that the violence seems indirect, as the victims are
not directly assaulted by a corporate ofﬁcial. The fact that a cor-
poration causes the injury or death means that a collective group
is to blame, not one, or a few, individuals. Corporate violence is
also unintended in the sense that in the pursuit of maximizing
profits, death and injury are consequential rather than inten-
tional. The criminal justice system, in turn, has not responded to
this violence in the same way they have taken action against
street violence. Reiman (2007), however, argues that corporations
Violent Corporate Offenses
27

and their employees are just as responsible as street criminals be-
cause the injuries and deaths are caused either purposely, know-
ingly, recklessly, or negligently, and our laws allow for persons to
be held culpable in these instances.
Unsafe Environmental Practices
The most prevalent form of corporate violence may be pollution.
Corporations account for a large share of environmental viola-
tions. As of 2007, corporations were manufacturing more toxic
waste than ever, about 600 pounds per person annually, and im-
proper disposal of this deadly waste occurs in about 90 percent
of cases (Friedrichs 1996). The detrimental consequences of this
is obvious: about 25 percent of U.S. residents will get cancer in
their lifetime, and a study by Cornell University finds that
roughly 40 percent of deaths worldwide can be attributed to en-
vironmental pollutants (Segelken 2006). Pollution has also been
linked to health problems other than cancer—things like birth
defects, heart and lung disease, and sterility (Brownstein 1981).
The Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989 is probably the worst case of
pollution of the environment in world history. A thorough inves-
tigation of this case revealed that the captain of the ship may
have been intoxicated when the tanker ran aground in Prince
William Sound, Alaska. In 1991, Exxon pleaded guilty to criminal
charges and paid a $100 million ﬁne, followed three years later
by payment of $5 billion in punitive damages (Friedrichs 1996).
Emissions from automobiles also account for a considerable
amount of pollution in the air, and many cities’ air quality is
harmful year-round, yet the automobile industry is still reluctant
to manufacture vehicles with lower carbon monoxide discharges
because of the costs their companies would incur.
Unsafe Consumer Products
Again, corporations may not intend to harm consumers, but
their desires to maximize proﬁts often lead them to cut corners
when it comes to product safety. Everything from the food we
eat, to the medicines we take, to the vehicles we drive, to any of
the products we use on a daily basis can be dangerous to our
health and well-being. According to the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission (2003), whose charge it is to protect the
28
Background and History

public from unreasonable risks of serious injury or death, in-
juries, deaths, and property damage from consumer product in-
cidents cost us more than $700 billion annually. Deaths occurring
from unsafe products or product-related accidents are alleged to
number 70,000 annually (Consumer Product Safety Commission
2003). Although the FDA promulgates the regulation and proper
labeling of food products, corporations seem to lure us into eat-
ing unhealthy and mislabeled foods that may, because of pro-
cessing, lead to many preventable diseases.
Consumer products that are imported into the United States
from foreign companies have fueled recent safety warnings.
With changing economics, foodstuffs have become a commodity
in the global market. In 1998, food imports into the United States
were $32 billion, and imports exceeded exports in that same year
by $2.6 billion (Cohn 2001). This has prompted the Food and
Drug Administration to be involved in issues of foreign trade
now more than ever and has led to better established standards
for food that is being imported from foreign countries; however,
because of the sheer volume of the imports, they cannot be as-
sured that everything that enters the country is safe. According
to Schmidt (2007) roughly 25,000 shipments of food arrive in the
United States each day from over 100 countries; the FDA inspects
about 1 percent of these imported foods, down from 8 percent in
1992. The U.S. Department of Agriculture, on the other hand, in-
spects about 16 percent of imported meats and poultry, but about
80 percent of the U.S. food supply is the responsibility of the
FDA (Schmidt 2007).
Ensuring the health of U.S. citizens is the number one con-
cern when the FDA inspects imported foods from all over the
world, but it is also an enormous task. Currently, most food takes
only minutes to be cleared by FDA inspectors after reviewing the
information that importers have presented with the shipment. In
2003, green onions imported from Mexico and carrying the hep-
atitis A virus caused three deaths and made more than 600 per-
sons sick. But many illnesses caused by food are never reported.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates
that there are 5,000 deaths and 76 million illnesses caused by un-
safe food in the United States annually (Schmidt 2007). Funding
for FDA food safety has increased in recent years, but it is still
not adequate; there are over 126,000 FDA food facilities in the
United States, and inspections have dropped 19 percent since
2004 (Schmidt 2007).
Violent Corporate Offenses
29

Recently, the pharmaceutical industry has been one of the
main culprits in much of the unsafe manufacture and distribu-
tion of products that have a variety of adverse consequences for
users, one of which is death. The pharmaceutical industry had
proﬁts of $35.9 billion in 2002, which accounted for half of the
proﬁts of all the Fortune 500 companies in that same year (Pub-
lic Citizen’s Congress Watch 2003). Despite these proﬁts, and the
exorbitant salaries of the CEOs of these companies, the nation is
less healthy and less wealthy because of the behaviors of some
corporations in this industry. Babies born with defects due to
pregnant women’s use of the drug thalidomide, which is now
being used as an experimental cancer treatment drug, in the
1960s was an early example of the harmful effects that unregu-
lated and untested drugs can have on the body. The company
that manufactured the drug eventually took it off the market,
and criminal charges were dropped after the company agreed to
pay $31 million in fines (Friedrichs 1996). Dow Corning pro-
vides another example of a corporation that did not conduct ad-
equate testing or divulge the potential harmful effects of their
product, silicone breast implants, before putting them on the
market (Friedrichs 1996). The implants caused adverse health
effects and, in some cases, even death to the women who re-
ceived them.
Americans have an obsession with new and improved prod-
ucts, even though unsafe products have been the cause of many
injuries and deaths in the nation. The automobile industry has
always been scrutinized for not doing enough to make its auto-
mobiles safer. The case of the Ford Pinto’s exploding gas tank
and the hundreds of thousands of automobile recalls each year
give credence to the idea that car manufacturers often take short-
cuts to save money. 
The Consumer Product Safety Commission (2003) is respon-
sible for overseeing over 15,000 products for the public’s protec-
tion. More than 800 persons die annually from materials that are
not protected against ﬂammability, and another 800 perish and
18,000 are injured from unsafe equipment (Consumer Product
Safety Commission 2003). The bottom line is that these corpora-
tions are more worried about their profits than the health and
safety of the consumers purchasing their products. Even with
tougher laws, increased prosecution, heftier ﬁnes, and negative
publicity, these companies have been unaffected and continue to
be the most proﬁtable corporations in the nation.
30
Background and History

Unsafe Working Conditions
In 2003, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, a division of the U.S. De-
partment of Labor, reported 4.4 million work-related illnesses
and injuries (Reiman 2007). Indeed, work-related accidents and
illnesses may be the leading cause of death and disability in the
nation. The 1972 President’s Report on Occupational Safety and
Health reported the number of deaths from industrial disease at
around 100,000 annually (Department of Health, Education and
Welfare 1972). Since this report, several pieces of research have
documented the high incidence of death and injury in the work-
place. According to Reiman (2007), these studies also report “that
much or most of this carnage is the consequence of the refusal of
management to pay for safety measures, of government to en-
force safety, and sometimes of management’s willful deﬁance of
existing law” (82). Although accurate statistics are hard to come
by, deaths caused by inhalation of asbestos, and the fatalities
from unsafe conditions in the chemical, mining, and textile in-
dustries throughout our history, speak volumes about the num-
bers of persons who have died prematurely due to unsafe work
environments.
Universities and Colleges
as Corporate Offenders 
The idea that universities and colleges can engage in corporate
wrongdoing may seem absurd; however, many of the nation’s
colleges and universities are run like corporations. Although
many of these institutions are run as nonprofit organizations,
some have been accused of misusing federal research grant
monies and misappropriating funds in general. Many have also
been accused of failing to provide to students the quality educa-
tion that they guarantee, or unnecessarily creating administrative
positions to maintain their bureaucratic structure. Increasingly,
universities are worried about their bottom line, and thus empha-
sizing quantity over quality. Universities have been charged with
price fixing of tuition and faculty salaries, exploiting part-time
faculty, and defrauding the federal government through waste
and loan defaults (Friedrichs 1996).
In the summer of 2007, many internal investigations at
universities around the country uncovered wrongdoing by
Universities and Colleges as Corporate Offenders
31

financial-aid directors and other administration officials. In a
congressional report by Senator Ted Kennedy, who is the chair-
man of the education committee, numerous instances of wrong-
doing by school officials were brought to light. The report
states that illegal payments and improper inducements were
common practices for several educational institutions and loan
lenders both small and large. Kennedy further claims that uni-
versity administrators across the country have accepted gifts
from lenders to steer students toward their loan companies.
Gifts ranged from pens and wine to vacations and stock options
in the companies. The most high-profile case involved the fi-
nancial aid director from the University of Texas at Austin. In-
vestigations showed that the director of financial aid at the
institution used lenders who were generous with personal gifts
more often than those who had the best interest rates and pay-
ment options for students. The UT financial aid director was
eventually fired because he held stock in a parent company of
the student loan agency that was the preferred lender of the
university (Field 2007b). A congressional investigation indi-
cated that the UT administrator regularly accepted gifts of
tequila, wine, and tickets for sporting events. He also accepted
free golf packages and birthday parties for members of his fam-
ily (Basken 2007).
The University of Texas, however, is not the only culprit.
Kennedy’s report names numerous lending institutions and the
universities they served. For example, Citizen’s Bank spent
$43,000 dollars on a three-day golf and spa trip to Arizona for the
administrators of one college, and JP Morgan Chase Bank spent
$45,000 on a three-day trip to San Diego for university adminis-
trators that included $18,000 dollars in drink costs alone (Basken
2007). The attorney general of New York, Andrew Cuomo, has
also investigated many institutions, their administrations, and
their lending practices. Cuomo sent out over 400 letters to col-
leges and universities around the United States detailing the
wrongdoing that his investigation uncovered (Field 2007a). Al-
though the investigation is ongoing, some executives at lending
institutions have been placed on leave, and universities through-
out the country are conducting internal investigations of their
own to ensure that university rules have not been violated.
Meanwhile, students seeking funding for education are on alert
about whether their respective universities indeed have their
best interests in mind when referring them to a lending provider.
32
Background and History

Importance of Studying Corporate and 
White-Collar Crime
Why is it important to study corporate crime? The primary rea-
sons for increasing the study of corporate crime are as follows:
1. There is still debate about whether current research and
theorizing about crime can extend to white-collar and
corporate criminals.
2. There has been a lack of focus on enforcement of these
crimes.
3. With an increase in globalization of companies, there will
be more opportunities to offend unless laws against cor-
porate criminal liability are further formalized.
4. Despite increased pressure to punish corporate criminals,
little funding has been allocated, compared with street
crime, for the control and prevention of white-collar and
corporate offending.
5. Because many large corporations have made headlines
due to engaging in egregious behavior, the public has
showed a renewed interest in the subject of corporate
crime.
6. The impact of corporate offending regarding death and
monetary loss amounts to a far greater detriment on soci-
ety than all eight UCR index offenses added together.
7. If we can increase the view of the seriousness of corpo-
rate offending to the public, the result may be increased
pressure on the legislature and criminal justice system to
give higher priority to the enforcement of laws against
these offenses. 
Conclusion
The history of corporate offending is long and storied. Since their
beginnings in Roman times, corporations have nearly been out-
lawed, have expanded rapidly, have gained and lost legal rights
and responsibilities, and have engaged in behavior both beneﬁ-
cial and harmful to society. Through court decisions and govern-
ment statutes, corporations have grown into the multinational,
enormous conglomerates that we see today. Corporations are
Importance of Studying Corporate and White-Collar Crime
33

viewed as the center of capitalism and the free-market economy
of the United States. Many students aspire to work in the corpo-
rate world. Corporate America provides countless products that
citizens consume daily, as well as grants in sponsorship of many
events, charities, scientiﬁc foundations, and educational institu-
tions. Corporations, however, are also seen increasingly as
greedy, corrupt, and exploitative entities that cost U.S. citizens
huge losses in terms of both lives and taxpayer dollars.
Legally, corporations are comprised of persons but also exist
apart from employees and shareholders. This feature has al-
lowed them to be distinct entities with authority and control
over their own practices. The fact that a corporation is essentially
a distinct and separate legal entity from its shareholders means
that no one is responsible for the wrongdoing of the corporation.
For a time, this allowed some corporations to proceed in increas-
ing proﬁts at any cost without any repercussions for corporate
management or shareholders. Recent legislation and Supreme
Court rulings have attempted to hold management and share-
holders liable and responsible for any wrongdoing by the entity,
and the criminal justice system in the United States has given in-
creasing priority to the detection and apprehension of serious
corporate offenders.
Types of corporate crime include everything from tax eva-
sion and economic exploitation to price ﬁxing and false advertis-
ing to such violent corporate offenses as promoting unsafe
practices and unsafe working environments. Countless lives and
billions of dollars a year are lost because of behaviors that corpo-
rations knowingly engage in. Recent offending by big-name cor-
porations like Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom has increased public
awareness of the malfeasance that is occurring. But the focus of
the criminal justice system on white-collar crimes lags far behind
the attention given to street crimes. Whether this is due to the
ability of corporations to lobby lawmakers, or to the disinterest
in corporate wrongdoing by the people, or to the media’s ability
to concentrate our attention on street crime are questions that re-
main unanswered.
What is known is that scholars and lawmakers continue to
struggle with a universal, all-encompassing, agreed-upon deﬁni-
tion of corporate criminals and corporate criminal offending.
What is settled, however, is that the importance of continuing to
study corporate and white-collar crime is of the utmost impor-
tance. There remains a lack of focus on enforcement of these
34
Background and History

crimes, and little funding has been allocated to apprehend and
punish these offenders. In addition, increasing globalization of
the economy provides more opportunities for offending while at
the same time increases the difﬁculty of detecting these behav-
iors. For these reasons, the debate and debacle that currently sur-
round corporations and corporate behavior and offending will
continue.
References
Basken, Paul. 2007. “Abuses in Lenders’ Relationships with Colleges
Were Widespread, Senator’s Report Finds.” Chronicle of Higher
Education, June 15. Benefits of a Limited Company Web site. 2006.
ﬂetcherkennedy.com/beneﬁts_of_a_limited_company.html.
Bernhardt, Annette, Anmol Chaddha, and Siobhán McGrath. 2005.
“What Do We Know About Wal-Mart? An Overview of Facts and Stud-
ies for New Yorkers.” Brennan Center for Justice, August.
Brown, Bruce. 2003. The History of the Corporation. Sumas, WA: BF Com-
munications.
Brownstein, R. 1981. “The Toxic Tragedy.” In Who’s Poisoning America—
Corporate Polluters and Their Victims in the Chemical Age, edited by R. Nader,
R. Brownstein, and J. Richard, 1–59. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books.
Buckley, Neil, and Caroline Daniel. 2003. “Wal-Mart vs. the Workers:
Labour Grievances Are Stacking Up Against the World’s Biggest Com-
pany.” Financial Times, November 20.
Champion, Dean J. 2001. The American Dictionary of Criminal Justice. Los
Angeles: Roxbury.
Clinard, Marshall B., and Peter Yeager. 1980. Corporate Crime. New York:
Free Press.
Clinard, Marshall B., and Richard Quinney. 1986. Criminal Behavior
Systems: A Typology. Cincinnati: Anderson.
Cohn, Jeffrey. 2001. “The International Flow of Food: FDA Takes on
Growing Responsibilities for Imported Food Safety.” FDA Magazine,
January/February.
Coleman, James. 1985. The Criminal Elite. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
The Constitution of the United States, Amendment 14, Section 1.
Consumer Product Safety Commission. 2003 Annual Report.
www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/reports/2003rpt.pdf.
Curran, Daniel J., and Claire Renzetti. 1999. Social Problems: Society in
Crisis. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
References
35

Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 17 U.S. 518 (1819).
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 1972. The President’s Report
on Occupational Safety and Health. Department of Labor, Washington, DC.
Dukes et al. v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., No. C 01-02252 (N.D. Cal. June 21,
2004).
Estes, Ralph. 1996. Tyranny of the Bottom Line. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler.
Field, Kelly. 2007a. “New York Attorney General Cites ‘Deceptive Prac-
tices’ Uncovered in Inquiry into Student-Loan Industry.” Chronicle of
Higher Education, March 16.
Field, Kelly. 2007b. “U. of Texas at Austin Fires Financial-Aid Director Im-
plicated in Student-Loan Scandal.” Chronicle of Higher Education, May 15.
Frank, Nancy K., and Michael J. Lynch. 1992. Corporate Crime, Corporate
Violence: A Primer. Albany, NY: Harrow and Heston.
Friedrichs, David O. 1996. Trusted Criminals: White Collar Crime in Con-
temporary Society. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Geis, Gilbert. 1974. “Avocational Crime.” In Handbook of Criminology, ed.
D. Glaser, 272. New York: Rand McNally.
Geis, Gilbert. 1988. “From Deuteronomy to Deniability: A Historical Per-
lustration on White-Collar Crime.” Justice Quarterly 5: 7–32.
Geis, Gilbert. 1982. “A Research and Action Agenda with Respect to
White-Collar Crime.” In White Collar Crime: An Agenda for Research, ed.
Herbert Edelhertz and Thomas D. Overcast. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Geis, Gilbert, and Robert F. Meier. 1977. White-Collar Crime. New York:
Free Press.
Giraldi, Philip. 2005. “Money for Nothing.” The American Conservative,
October.
Green, Stuart P. 2004. “The Concept of White-Collar Crime in Law and
Legal Theory.” Buffalo Criminal Law Review 8: 1–34.
Greenhouse, Steven. 2004. “In-House Audit Says Wal-Mart Violated La-
bor Laws.” New York Times, January 13.
Greidner, William. 1991. “Who Will Tell the People: Betrayal of Ameri-
can Democracy.” Washington Post, September 30.
Grossman, Richard L., and Frank T. Adams. 1993. Taking Care of Business:
Citizenship and the Charter of Incorporation. Cambridge: Charter Ink.
Hartmann, Thom. 2002. Unequal Protection: The Rise of Corporate Domi-
nance and the Theft of Human Rights. New York: Rodale Press.
In re Hellenic, 252 F.3d 391 (2001).
36
Background and History

Kappeler, V., M. Blumberg, and G. Potter. 2000. The Mythology of Crime
and Criminal Justice. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Kappeler, Victor, and Gary Potter. 2004. The Mythology of Crime and Crim-
inal Justice. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Khanna, V. S. 1996. “Corporate Criminal Liability: What Purpose Does It
Serve?” Harvard Law Review 109: 1479.
Korten, David. 1999. The Post-Corporate World. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler.
Lee, Henry. 2005. “Wal-Mart Loses Suit over Lunch Breaks: Oakland
Jury Orders Giant Retailer to Pay Workers $172 Million.” San Francisco
Chronicle, December 23.
Mason, Edward S. 1968. “Corporation.” In Vol. 3 of International Encyclo-
pedia of the Social Sciences, ed. David L. Sills and Robert K. Merton. New
York: Macmillan and Free Press.
Meier, Robert. 1986. “Review Essay: White Collar Crime Books.” Crimi-
nology 24: 415.
Meier, Robert F. 1996. “Understanding the Context of White-Collar
Crime: A Sutherland Approbation.” In Definitional Dilemma: Can and
Should There Be a Universal Deﬁnition of White Collar Crime? Proceedings of
the Academic Workshop, ed. James Helmkamp, Richard Ball, and Kitty
Townsend, 205. Morgantown, WV: National White Collar Crime Center.
Miller, Arthur. 1976. The Modern Corporate State. Westport, CT: Green-
wood.
Model Penal Code § 2.07 (1–6).
Myers, Gustavus. 1907. History of the Great American Fortunes. New York:
Modern Library.
New Hampshire v. Zeta Chi Fraternity, 696 A.2d 530 (1997).
New York Central & Hudson River Railroad v. United States, 212 U.S. 481
(1909).
North Dakota v. Smokey’s Steakhouse, Inc., 478 N.W. 2d 361 (1991).
Ohio v. Black on Black Crime, Inc., 736 N.E. 2d 962 (1999).
Pfeifer, Paul E. 2000. “Jim Bakker’s Federal Court Appeal.” www.sconet
.state.oh.us/Justices/pfeifer/column/2000/jp041200.htm.
Public Citizen’s Congress Watch. 2003. “2002 Drug Industry Profits.”
www.citizen.org/documents/Pharma_Report.pdf.
Reclaim Democracy. 2004. Our Hidden History of Corporations in the
United States. www.reclaimdemocracy.org/.
Reiman, Jeffrey. 2007. The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison: Ideology,
Class, and Criminal Justice. 8th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
References
37

The Rev. John Bracken v. the Visitors of William and Mary College, 7 Va. 573
(1790 Supreme Court of Virginia).
Robinson, Matthew B. 2005. Justice Blind? Ideals and Realities of American
Criminal Justice. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sale, Kirkpatrick. 1990. The Conquest of Paradise. New York: Knopf.
Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac. R. Co., 118 U.S. 394 (1886).
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Public Law 107–204, 116 Stat. 804.
Schmidt, Julie. 2007. “U.S. Food Imports Outrun FDA Resources.” USA
Today, March 18.
Segelken, Roger. 1998. “Environmental Pollution and Degradation
Causes 40 Percent of Deaths Worldwide, Cornell Study Finds.” Cornell
News, September 30, www.news.cornell.edu/releases/Sept98/ecodis-
ease.hrs.html (accessed September 19, 2007).
Shrager, Laura S., and James F. Short, Jr. 1978. “Toward a Sociology of
Organizational Crime.” Social Problems 25: 411–12.
Smith, Adam. [1776] 1998. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations. New York: Oxford University Press.
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts v. Town of
Pawlet, 29 U.S. 480 (1830).
Standard Oil Company of Texas v. United States, 307 F. 2d 120 (1962).
Sutherland, Edwin H. 1940. “White-Collar Criminality.” American Socio-
logical Review 5: 12.
Sutherland, Edwin H. 1949. White Collar Crime. New York: Dryden Press.
Simon, David R. 1996. Elite Deviance. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Simon, David R. 2006. Elite Deviance. Boston: Pearson/Allyn and Bacon.
Simon, David R., and D. Stanley Eitzen. 1990. Elite Deviance. Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Taxpayers against Fraud. “FY 2006 False Claims Act Settlements.”
www.taf.org.
United States v. Bainbridge Management, No. 01 CR 469–1, 6 (2002).
United States v. Bakker, 925 F.2d 728, 740 [4th Cir. 1991]).
U.S. House of Representatives. 2004. “Everyday Low Wages: The Hid-
den Price We All Pay for Wal-Mart.” Committee on Education and the
Workforce, Democratic Staff, February 16.
U.S. House of Representatives. 2006. Waste, Fraud, and Abuse in Hurricane
Katrina Contracts. United States House of Representatives Committee on
Government Reform.
38
Background and History

U.S. Senate Democratic Policy Committee. 2005. Halliburton’s Questioned
and Unsupported Costs in Iraq Exceed $1.4 Billion. United States House of
Representatives Committee on Government Reform.
Viano, Michael, and Jenny Arnold. “Corporate Criminal Liability.”
American Criminal Law Review, March 22, 2006.
Wheeler, Stanton. 1983. “White-Collar Crime: History of an Idea.” In En-
cyclopedia of Crime and Justice, ed. S. Kadish, 1652–56. New York: Macmil-
lan and Free Press.
References
39


2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Types of Corporate Crime
and Deﬁnitional Problems
Many typologies for characterizing corporate crime have been
proffered by a number of scholars. What is the preferred method
of labeling behaviors that encompass corporate crime? One
method focuses on the principal victims. For example, victims
may be the employees of the offending corporation, other corpo-
rations, consumers, or the general public. Another method cen-
ters on the dimension of the corporation. Crimes are committed
by small local companies as well as by nationally based corpora-
tions and even transnational companies. A third method catego-
rizes corporate crime based on the industry to which the
corporation belongs, such as the oil and gas industry, pharma-
ceutical companies, the automotive industry, banking and ac-
counting institutions, and providers of health care. Yet another
method looks at the type of crime in which the corporation is en-
gaging. Is the corporation involved in deceit, fraud, corruption,
or violence? None of these methods has been accepted as ideal.
One could even look at the types of personnel involved and the
means by which they enter into criminal activity, although most
corporate criminal activity involves employees at all levels and
stems from existing circumstances in the corporation. This chap-
ter will explain the various types of corporate crimes and pro-
vide examples of each one. It will also discuss measurement
41

issues as well as the debate about the detection and apprehen-
sion of corporate crime and criminals.
Due to recent well-publicized scandals, the general public
has an increased awareness of the amount of corporate malfea-
sance that occurs in the conduct of doing business. Managers
and those in upper-level positions, as well as shareholders, are
now giving added attention to the business practices in which
their companies engage. They are also paying attention to the
diligence with which the records of all things ﬁscal in the organi-
zation are completed and kept.
Since the beginning of the 21st century, we have observed
unparalleled levels of corporate malfeasance and financial
wrongdoing. The bankruptcies of WorldCom and Enron have
raised public ire about the legitimacy of reported corporate
profits. Recent examples include such companies as Xerox,
which doctored its books to show $1.4 billion more in profits
than was actually true, and WorldCom, which overstated its
profits to the tune of $3.8 billion (“Corporate America’s Woes,
Continued” 2002). The top-level officers in these companies
have also been accused and convicted of wrongdoing. Some top
executives have enjoyed the rewards of the sales of their com-
panies’ stocks prior to filing for bankruptcy and have been
charged with fraud in the process. Scott Sullivan of WorldCom
made $35 million this way; Kenny Harrison and Kenneth Lay
of Enron made $75 million and $220 million, respectively, from
the sales of company shares; and Gary Winnik of Global Cross-
ing made $500 million in the two years before his company
went bankrupt (“Corporate America’s Woes, Continued” 2002).
The accounting firms that were in charge of these companies’
books were also implicated in many of the scandals. Three ac-
counting firms—Arthur Andersen LLP, KPMG, and Ernst and
Young—were all charged with violations, and Andersen was
forced out of business because of it. Andersen’s fall was partly
due to its practice of providing consulting services and audit-
ing services for the same company. In 2000, Andersen charged
Enron $25 million to audit their books and in the same year
billed them $27 million for providing consulting services. In
2002, approximately 250 American companies were ordered by
the U.S. government to conduct further investigations and
check their accounting methods again, compared with the 92
companies asked to do this in 1997 and only 3 companies in
1983 (“Corporate America’s Woes, Continued” 2002).
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Companies and their employees have traditionally been able
to safeguard themselves from government inquiries, the media,
and shareholders because of the authority and influence they
have over the information they release about company transac-
tions. These companies are complex organizations to the extent
that they can engage in shady business dealings while at the same
time keep some employees inside the corporation, and many
shareholders outside of the corporation, blind to this devious cor-
porate conduct (Simon 2006). Criminal actions of this nature con-
tinue because of the benefits the corporations enjoy and the
minimal risks of being caught and punished for wrongdoing
(Gray, Frieder, and Clark 2005). Others, however, have suffered
some punishment; former Tyco CEO Dennis Kozlowski was sen-
tenced to 8 to 25 years for misappropriating $400 million of the
company’s money. John and Tim Rigas are currently serving 15
and 20 years respectively for fraud and conspiracy related to their
company Adelphia. Ex-Enron CFO Andrew Fastow received a
6–year prison term for his role in the company’s wrongdoing.
Even Martha Stewart served 5 months in prison for obstructing
justice in the investigation of her selling ImClone stock. 
The costs of corporate crime are beyond compare, totaling
more than the combined price of all other crime plus the cost of
operating the criminal justice system (Simon 2006). Actual costs
are hard to gauge; however, research undertaken by Congress
estimates the price of corporate crime at roughly $200 billion an-
nually (Coleman 1985). Couple this with the fact that penalties
are rarely imposed (or, if they are imposed, are not severe
enough to guarantee compliance in the future), and it becomes
obvious why corporate malfeasance continues. David R. Simon
(2006, 39) has articulated some of the consequences of corporate
crime:
1. Estimates are that roughly ﬁve times as many persons
are killed annually from job-related injuries and illnesses
than are murdered by street criminals.
2. Public conﬁdence in corporate management and political
leaders in the United States has dropped, and researchers
believe that corporate and political offending may actu-
ally cause others (nonelites) to engage in monetary
crimes.
3. The role played by political leaders and corporate Amer-
ica in constructing and implementing criminal law leaves
Types of Corporate Crime and Deﬁnitional Problems
43

us questioning the belief that crimes are typically associ-
ated with poverty and minority status.
4. The rate of inﬂation is said to be affected by the mone-
tary costs of corporate offending.
5. Corporate criminal offending perpetuates the continua-
tion of organized crime in the United States.
Should Corporations Be Held
Socially Responsible?
In general, the past notion that corporations cannot and should
not be responsible for the actions of their employees has disap-
peared. Critics maintain that prosecutors today are still gun-
shy when it comes to holding corporations criminally liable,
but some attorneys have successfully secured severe fines and
lengthy prison terms for those convicted of wrongdoing. This is
a welcome change for those in charge of regulating the activi-
ties of these corporations, as well as for the public. In the 1980s,
corporate malfeasance resulted in punishments that could be
measured in months, not years. So, what is the best way to go
about punishing corporations? If the corporation itself is pun-
ished, and hefty fines are imposed, innocent shareholders will
be punished alongside those in high-level positions. Punishing
corporate executives could result in the same fate for the com-
pany and shareholders. If nothing is done, however, what will
deter corporations from continuing to engage in criminal be-
havior? Also, consider that other entities in society—political
bodies and armies, for instance, who may be more powerful
than corporations—are not subject to sanctions (Geis and Di-
Mento 1995). Who should be punished—the corporation or the
employees who engaged in the illegal behaviors? Is it easier to
place blame and impose fines on the corporation and its share-
holders than it is to prove the culpability of individual employ-
ees? Should punishing corporations remain the realm of civil
law and courts? What is the utility of holding corporations
criminally responsible? What does the conviction and punish-
ment of corporations do to the larger American economy?
These are all questions that arise in the debate about whether or
not corporations should be held criminally liable for the actions
of their employees.
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Gilbert Geis and Joseph DiMento (1995) offer some impor-
tant arguments in favor of holding corporations criminally liable:
1. A corporate body is distinctive from the sum of those
persons who make up the organization: therefore, it is
more reasonable to pursue the collectivity rather than the
individuals who separately fall short of satisfactorily rep-
resenting the culpable entity.
2. Punishing individuals rather than the corporate body is
not an effective strategy, since the risks associated with
potential criminal liability for employees will generally
be less compelling than those related to failure to meet
organizational demands.
3. The shame associated with criminal conviction will be a
stronger deterrent to a corporation than to individual
malefactors within it.
4. Corporations can be redesigned by court sanctions more
readily than individuals.
5. It is much easier for prosecutors to establish corporate
criminal guilt than it is to discover and prosecute guilty
individuals.
6. Since the corporation almost invariably possesses far
greater assets than the individuals who work for it, the
opportunity for satisfactory redress of the harm inﬂicted
will be enhanced if the corporate resources can be at-
tacked instead of those of its employees. (76–77)
Indeed, there have been rules and regulations in place since
the time of the Industrial Revolution to keep corporations in
check and to protect the public from the harms involved in cor-
porate wrongdoing. As noted earlier, however, corporations in
the past were rarely held liable, and in the cases where they
were, the punishments were paltry. This may have had more to
do with society’s general view, prior to recent scandals, that cor-
porations beneﬁted society rather than with a lack of legislation
in place for them to be held responsible. The aforementioned ar-
guments are inﬂuential in recognizing that holding corporations
criminally liable may have some beneﬁts for increased regulation
and prevention.
However, some arguments can also be made against holding
corporations criminally liable, the most prominent one being
that holding corporations responsible conﬂicts with the doctrine
Should Corporations Be Held Socially Responsible?
45

of criminal law. Imputing liability onto a corporation is contrary
to the criminal law ideal that an agent is responsible only for its
own actions and intentions. In other words, ﬁctional entities (cor-
porations) do not have intent and are therefore not appropriate
for criminal prosecution. Furthermore, corporations cannot be
imprisoned, and imprisonment is an essential element of the
criminal law. Another argument against criminal liability for cor-
porations rests on the belief that the process harms the entity.
This line of thought holds that corporate malfeasance should be
the realm of administrative regulatory agencies and not criminal
prosecution; the amount of money corporations now spend to in-
ternally monitor their behaviors greatly diminishes their compet-
itiveness in a global economy. Another argument offered is
whether or not corporate liability is a true deterrent to these be-
haviors. Some observers have argued that the threat of criminal
prosecution may actually induce corporations to cover up any il-
legal actions they are engaged in. Finally, holding corporations
criminally responsible harms the innocent (shareholders and em-
ployees who are not responsible) more than it punishes the ac-
tual corporation. Shares will lose value, some employees may
lose their jobs despite not being a part of, or even privy to, the
wrongdoing of the corporation, and even the community served
by the corporation may suffer consequences. It is because of
these arguments against criminal liability that we must now turn
to the prosecution of corporations. How do prosecutors know
when to hold corporations criminally liable, and which, if any, 
of the employees are to be included in holding the corporation
liable?
Prosecution of Corporations
As stated in chapter 1, prosecutors have at their disposal legisla-
tion that supports charging corporations and holding them crim-
inally liable for wrongdoings.
The federal government has the authority to police white-
collar and corporate offenses through the commerce clause of the
U.S. Constitution. Indeed, Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution
states that the legislative branch of government has the power to
“regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several
states, and with the Indian tribes.” Several agencies of the federal
government are an integral part of the enforcement of federal
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

laws pertaining to corporate and white-collar offending. State
agencies are also involved in policing these types of offenses, but
only at the state level. Federal agencies such as the Internal Rev-
enue Service (IRS), U.S. Customs, the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Se-
curities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Secret Service
all have agents employed to combat white-collar crime.
Most federal statutes in place for use against white-collar
and corporate offending are part of the United States Code. Titles
15 and 18 of the U.S. Code contain the laws regulating trade and
ﬁnancial transactions. The laws most widely used to charge indi-
viduals and corporations with corporate offenses are contained
in Title 18 and include: §201 Bribery, §371 Conspiracy, §470–514
Counterfeiting and Forgery, §641–649 Embezzlement and Theft,
§1001–1036 Fraud and False Statements, §1334 Bank Fraud,
§1341 Mail Fraud, §1343 Wire Fraud, §1347 Health Care Fraud,
§1501–1518 Obstruction of Justice, §1831–1839 Economic Espi-
onage, §1956 Money Laundering, §1961–1964 Racketeering, and
§2325–2327 Telemarketing Fraud. Among the most frequently
used laws under Title 15 of the U.S. Code are: §1 Antitrust Viola-
tions, §45 Making False Statements in Commercial Trade, §77 Se-
curities Fraud, and §78 Foreign Corrupt Practices. In recent
years, many government ofﬁcials have stressed the importance
of prosecution of these offenses under these statutes.
The following is an excerpt from a memorandum sent by
former deputy attorney general of the United States, Eric Holder,
to component heads and U.S. attorneys on June 16, 1999:
Corporations should not be treated leniently because of
their artificial nature nor should they be subject to
harsher treatment. Vigorous enforcement of the crimi-
nal laws against corporate wrongdoers, where appro-
priate, results in great beneﬁts for law enforcement and
the public, particularly in the area of white collar crime.
Indicting corporations for wrongdoing enables the gov-
ernment to address and be a force for positive change of
corporate culture, alter corporate behavior, and pre-
vent, discover, and punish white collar crime. . . .
Generally, prosecutors should apply the same factors
in determining whether to charge a corporation as they
do with respect to individuals. . . . Thus, the prosecutor
should weigh all of the factors normally considered in
Prosecution of Corporations
47

the sound exercise of prosecutorial judgment: the sufﬁ-
ciency of the evidence; the likelihood of success at trial;
the probable deterrent, rehabilitative, and other conse-
quences of conviction; and the adequacy of non-crimi-
nal approaches. . . . However, due to the nature of the
corporate “person,” some additional factors are pres-
ent. In conducting an investigation, determining
whether to bring charges, and negotiating plea agree-
ments, prosecutors should consider the following fac-
tors in reaching a decision as to the proper treatment of
a corporate target:
1. The nature and seriousness of the offense, includ-
ing the risk of harm to the public, and applicable
policies and priorities, if any, governing the prose-
cution of corporations for particular categories of
crime.
2. The pervasiveness of wrongdoing within the cor-
poration, including the complicity in, or condona-
tion of, the wrongdoing by corporate management.
3. The corporation’s history of similar conduct, in-
cluding prior criminal, civil, and regulatory en-
forcement actions against it.
4. The corporation’s timely and voluntary disclosure
of wrongdoing and its willingness to cooperate in
the investigation of its agents, including, if neces-
sary, the waiver of the corporate attorney-client
and work product privileges.
5. The existence and adequacy of the corporation’s
compliance program.
6. The corporation’s remedial actions, including any
efforts to implement an effective corporate compli-
ance program or to improve an existing one, to re-
place responsible management, to discipline or
terminate wrongdoers, to pay restitution, and to
cooperate with the relevant government agencies.
7. Collateral consequences, including disproportion-
ate harm to shareholders and employees not
proven personally culpable.
8. The adequacy of non-criminal remedies, such as
civil or regulatory enforcement actions. (Holder
1999)
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Corporate criminal cases present prosecutors with many
complex factors to consider and weigh when deciding to go
ahead with charges against a corporation. Prosecutors do have a
number of options at their disposal, including indictment of the
corporation, plea agreements, deferred prosecution, civil resolu-
tions, or simply refusing to prosecute (Christie and Hanna 2006).
Using the Holder memorandum in a decision of how best to pro-
ceed gives some uniformity and a systematic method for prose-
cutors to follow in these investigations. This memo assists
prosecutors in estimating the extent of wrongdoing by the corpo-
ration, its directors, and its employees.
Some options available to prosecutors are to hold corpora-
tions criminally liable if the senior management of the corpora-
tion has created an atmosphere of criminal wrongdoing.
However, if employees other than senior ofﬁcials have engaged
in conduct that the upper management has not condoned, prose-
cuting only those individuals responsible may be the best
method. Finally, if unable to prove criminal conduct, a prosecu-
tor could proceed with civil action against the corporation. Pros-
ecutors must consider all options available to them and conduct
thorough investigations to uncover the facts. Obviously the more
egregious the actions by the corporation, the more harsh the
penalties against the corporation should be. Another avenue is a
deferred prosecution agreement, which allows the corporation to
work with authorities to ﬁx the issues and begin a life of compli-
ance. According to Christopher J. Christie and Robert M. Hanna
(2006), deferred prosecution also allows the government “to
achieve more than we could through court imposed fines or
restitution alone,” including the realization of the goals of “gen-
eral and specific deterrence . . . , carefully targeted reform of a
corrupted criminal culture, and restitution to victim sharehold-
ers” (1043–44).
The Holder memorandum (1999) also outlines several gen-
eral guidelines for charging a corporation. A wide range of possi-
ble offenses exist, so commonsense discretion must be used in
any evaluation of a corporation’s actions. For instance, a corpora-
tion may be charged for minor misconduct if it appears that
many employees within the corporation, or all employees in one
department, have engaged in the activity. On the other hand, a
prosecutor may not want to impose liability on a corporation for
the behavior of only one employee, especially if the corporation
has safeguarded against the activity, but the employee acted
Prosecution of Corporations
49

independently. The role of management in the corporation is an
important factor to consider as well; a corporation’s manage-
ment is responsible for generating an atmosphere where crimi-
nality is either promoted or frowned upon.
Prosecutors should also consider a corporation’s past his-
tory. Like individuals, corporations are supposed to be deterred
from wrongdoing, especially if they have been reprimanded in
the past. Prosecution of those already subjected to sanctions and
warnings should be seriously considered. There are other princi-
ples used in determining whether or not to press charges against
a corporation: one is an assessment of the willingness of the cor-
poration to divulge the nature of its actions and work together
with an investigation; another is whether corporate management
is trying to protect culpable employees or trying to hinder the
government’s investigation (Holder 1999). However, coopera-
tion by a corporation should not mean an entitlement of leniency
or exemption from prosecution.
The consequences of a conviction for a corporation must be
considered as well. There are alternatives such as regulatory
sanctions that are not criminal in nature. Sanctions, however,
may punish employees who played no part in the wrongdoing
or had no knowledge of it; therefore, such action should be given
serious thought before being pursued. There also may be nonpe-
nal sanctions that are attached to a criminal conviction that
should be explored. In some cases, the corporation, if convicted,
will be ineligible for government contracts and federal funding.
In considering noncriminal alternatives, though, a prosecutor
must balance such issues with the ability of the less severe sanc-
tions to be a deterrent to further wrongdoing (Holder 1999). As
the primary goals of prosecuting and punishing a corporation
are deterrence, retribution, and rehabilitation, a noncriminal al-
ternative may not be the proper course of action.
Prosecutors can also, where appropriate, enter into plea
agreements with corporations. The Holder memorandum sets
forth some principles for negotiating plea agreements with cor-
porations. Prosecutors should try to get the corporation to plead
to the most serious offense charged. The agreement should be
drawn up with the goals of deterrence, rehabilitation, and com-
pliance in mind, and prosecutors should not accept a plea of
guilty from a corporation in exchange for dismissal of the
charges or nonprosecution. Certain factors should be used in ne-
gotiating a plea—the guideline sentencing range for the speciﬁc
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

charge, whether the penalty is proportional to the harm caused
by the corporation’s actions, and whether the corporation under-
stands that entering into the plea agreement is an admission of
guilt.
Problems with Criminal Justice
System Control
At the outset, one must recognize that the criminal justice system
as a whole is not very effective at deterring any type of crime.
Since the late 1990s, the United States has become increasingly
more crime control oriented. The implementation of harsher
punishments, mandatory minimum punishments, habitual of-
fender statutes, and increased law enforcement presence has not
done much to prevent criminal activity. The indisputable result is
that more and more persons are going to prison for longer peri-
ods. In mid-2007, the FBI revealed in its preliminary Uniform
Crime Reports (UCR) for 2006 that violent crime was again in-
creasing throughout the nation (FBI 2007). These statistics offer
compelling evidence that increasing law enforcement does not
necessarily decrease or prevent crime. In fact, having more police
may increase arrest rates and thus inﬂate crime rates. It is also er-
roneous to equate increases in incarceration with decreases in
crime; research shows that there are numerous factors that are re-
lated to engaging in crime, and citing that one factor (increased
incarceration) can result in large reductions in crime is ﬂawed. 
The UCR statistics represent arrest rates and therefore must
be viewed with caution. The reports vastly underestimate the
amount of crime occurring in the country; experts believe that
only 40 to 50 percent of crimes are reported to the police (Bach-
man and Schutt 2007). The UCR are probably more a measure of
police behavior than offender behavior. Not all criminal behavior
comes to the attention of police, citizens are reluctant to report
criminal activity to authorities, and the political climate of the
time often influences these measures (Mosher, Miethe, and
Philips 2002).
The formal institutions of social control (law enforcement)
rely heavily on informal institutions to regulate behavior. Early
in life, people learn the difference between right and wrong
from their families, schools, churches, and peer groups. The less
Problems with Criminal Justice System Control
51

successful these informal social controls are, the more the au-
thoritative and formal social control institutions will need to be
invoked. Peter Grabowsky (2001) believes controlling corporate
behavior is no different. He contends that without informal so-
cial controls on corporate behavior, attempts by governmental
law enforcement agencies to control corporate offending are fu-
tile: “Just as the effective control of conventional street crime re-
quires something more than increased risk of arrest, conviction,
and imprisonment, so too does control of corporate crime re-
quire a more comprehensive approach, based on a wider array
of institutions” (137).
Even before the passage of so-called harsher legislation
against corporate offending, there were over 300,000 criminal of-
fenses with which a corporation could be convicted federally
(Khanna 2004). New legislation has been called purely sym-
bolic—an attempt by politicians to make it look like they are get-
ting tough on corporate crime (Geis 2007; Khanna 2004). The gap
between the richest and poorest in the United States continues to
grow every year. Most citizens doubt that government ofﬁcials
will ever really punish corporate wrongdoers the way they do
street offenders. Throughout U.S. history this has been the case.
Marshall B. Clinard and Peter Yeager (1980) believe this is the na-
ture of capitalistic societies like the United States. They state:
Radical or Marxist criminologists believe that govern-
ment regulatory agencies are virtually powerless to
control the illegal actions of corporations because cor-
porate power in a capitalistic society is so great. Since
the economic elite, they argue, controls lawmaking as
well as enforcement, the nature and application of crim-
inal laws will coincide with their interests. (1980, 75)
Gilbert Geis (2007) used the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 to
illustrate Clinard and Yeager’s point. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act is
designed to protect investors by requiring corporations to make
important financial disclosures. The act called for the creation
of a board to oversee corporate accounting standards. The first
appointee to chair this new oversight board had to resign be-
fore he was confirmed due to his connections with corporate
America. In addition, at the first meeting of the board, its mem-
bers voted an annual salary of $500,000 to its chair and, to
themselves, an annual salary of $432,000. If the public wasn’t
cynical enough about this new legislation, these exorbitant
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

salaries seemed to assure them that the new board was not in
place as a service to the public (Geis 2007). As an aside, the first
person prosecuted under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act was acquitted
of all 36 counts against him, including charges of $2.7 billion in
fraudulent accounting.
Jeffrey Reiman, in his book The Rich Get Richer and the Poor
Get Prison: Ideology, Class, and Criminal Justice (2007), outlines
what he calls a Pyrrhic Defeat Theory, which states that the fail-
ure of the criminal justice system to reduce and prevent crime
amounts to a victory for the wealthy and powerful in the coun-
try. A brief look at the demographics of the current prison popu-
lation shows that our prisons are ﬁlled with the poorest and most
undereducated persons in our society as well as a disproportion-
ate number of ethnic and racial minorities. Reiman attributes the
overall crime reduction failure to three synergistic criminal jus-
tice system failures: the criminal justice system not putting into
practice policies that will result in crime reduction, the criminal
justice system not categorizing damaging acts of the wealthy as
crimes, and the socio-economic prejudice of the criminal justice
system (Reiman 2007). The beneﬁts to the rich and powerful are
that the public often believes members of the lowest socio-eco-
nomic statuses pose the greatest criminal threat—not those in the
upper class—and that poverty is not society’s fault but the result
of a moral defect in the lower classes. This failure then “leads
Americans to ignore the ways in which they are injured and
robbed by the acts of the afﬂuent . . . and leads them to demand
harsher doses of ‘law and order’ aimed mainly at the lower
classes” (Reiman 2007, 170).
Consider the following examples:
Millionaire American businessman Ken Lay (1942–2006)
claimed that he had no idea of the accounting or wire fraud that
was occurring at Enron, and his assets were not frozen by the
government; meanwhile, he cashed out $103 million in personal
Enron stock and borrowed $19 million from the company, which
he paid back in Enron shares (Reiman and Leighton 2005). Yet,
routinely in the war on drugs, officials seize houses of those
charged with narcotics offenses even if one of the parties (say, the
wife of the accused) is not aware of the criminal activity but also
owns the house. Likewise, in prostitution stings, if a man is
caught soliciting a prostitute and is driving his girlfriend’s car,
the car can be seized even if the girlfriend has no knowledge of
his actions (Reiman and Leighton 2005).
Problems with Criminal Justice System Control
53

In California, “three strikes” laws have sent many persons
convicted of multiple felonies to prison for lengthy periods. Two
examples are Gary Ewing, who stole $1,200 golf clubs and was
sentenced to 25 years in prison, and Leandro Andrade, who stole
$153 of videotapes and was sentenced to 50 years in prison
(Drutman 2003). These two minor criminals are now costing Cal-
ifornia taxpayers roughly $25,000 dollars a year in incarceration
expenses. Yet, in 2000 and 2001, a number of energy companies
in California cost taxpayers $9 billion by conspiring to manipu-
late energy prices. Many of the persons involved in the conspir-
acy were never indicted, even though they stole millions of
dollars, and of those who were arrested, prosecuted, and sent to
prison, none received the 25 and 50 years that Ewing and An-
drade received. California wants the energy companies to pay
back the $9 billion they stole, but the U.S. Federal Energy Regula-
tory Commission has only seen around $85 million returned. It is
doubtful that California taxpayers will ever recoup the money
stolen from them. The larger point here is that shoplifters, for ex-
ample, do not enjoy the luxury of simply paying back the dollar
amount of what they stole, even though the monies lost pale in
comparison to the losses by corporate offending. In fact, the $9
billion lost in the California energy scandal is over twice as much
as the $3.8 billion that the FBI estimates street crime costs the en-
tire country each year (Drutman 2003).
Grabowsky (2001) has proffered that what is needed is a
wider conception of corporate crime control. Other institutions
need to be involved in the same informal preventative efforts
that families, schools, and churches perform for traditional crim-
inal offending. These suggestions for increased control will be
discussed in a later section on improving current methods of
crime control. The U.S. government also needs to play an impor-
tant role, by setting examples of transparent and fair awarding of
contracts and impartial and objective decision making.
Government Ofﬁcials and Politicians
as Corporate Offenders
Corporations that violate federal or regulatory standards often
continue to do so because the fear of getting caught and the
severity of punishment are relatively low compared with the
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

high stakes and potential for proﬁtability of getting a competi-
tive edge. In essence, corporations have created a business cul-
ture that rationalizes violation in the name of profit and sees
paying criminal ﬁnes for violations as simply part of the cost of
doing business. Critics of federal enforcement efforts argue that
legislation passed to thwart corporate offending is merely sym-
bolic, because political power is inextricably linked with corpo-
rate power. Large, powerful corporations continue to lobby
government to make decisions in their best interests. Numerous
politicians have been caught accepting bribes and kickbacks for
enacting laws and making decisions in the best interest of corpo-
rate America. Many political leaders and even ex-military offi-
cials have some connections with private corporations. They
may have sat on boards before coming into ofﬁce, or they may
secure positions in the private sector after retiring from public of-
ﬁce. U.S. vice president Dick Cheney used to be the CEO of Hal-
liburton. Cheney has spent most of his life in public ofﬁce, but
after he took the helm of Halliburton, its contracts with the gov-
ernment doubled. Now that he is back in public office as vice
president, Halliburton continues to receive billion-dollar non-
competitive government contracts. Critics believe that because
corporate and political America are so intertwined, no real at-
tempts will ever be made to control corporate offending.
Furthermore, George Bush in July 2007 commuted the sen-
tence of former White House aide I. Lewis Libby, Jr. (better
known as “Scooter” Libby). Libby was convicted of perjury and
obstruction of justice in the leak of a CIA agent’s identity. This
commutation sends a message to the country that government
officials are above the law, and that obstruction of justice, per-
jury, and other offenses are not enforced against those in posi-
tions of power or those with close ties to the government.
Consider who contributed to George W. Bush’s presidential
campaign, and it becomes easy to see why this president is so
supportive of big business. Julian Borger (2001) reported on
some of the business corporations that donated to the presi-
dent’s campaign and the favorable decisions Bush made in re-
turn. Tobacco giant Philip Morris, for instance, donated $2.8
million to the Republican Party and Bush’s inauguration. In fact,
the tobacco industry donated a total of $7 million to Bush and
other Republican candidates. In return, some of the federal law-
suits against the company have gone away. Although a federal
judge found the industry guilty of deceiving the public about
Government Ofﬁcials and Politicians as Corporate Offenders
55

the dangers of smoking as well as marketing their products to
children, she did not impose the millions in damages but in-
stead issued a ruling requiring stricter labeling of cigarette pack-
ages. The logging industry gave $3.2 million, and in return
restrictions on the use of logging roads were lifted. The oil and
gas industry gave over $25 million in return for favorable deci-
sions on carbon dioxide emissions, the Kyoto treaty, and drilling
in places where it was before restricted. Enron also gave gener-
ously to the Bush campaign. Finally, the pharmaceutical indus-
try donated over $17 million to Republican campaigns in hopes
that caps would not be put on the prices of prescription medi-
cine. Incidentally, Bush’s appointee to head the White House Of-
fice of Management and Budget was the former senior vice
president of drugmaker Eli Lilly. Borger (2001) says the list of
business alumni that Bush has appointed to government posi-
tions is quite long. Indeed, Bush’s election campaign was one of
the most expensive in history, and Borger believes that with the
big donations from big business, “corporate America bought it-
self a president” (2001, 1).
Other presidents have been accused of similar wrongdoing,
and numerous state senators and government representatives
have been caught accepting bribes and kickbacks for govern-
ment appointments or contracts. But the United States is not the
only country where political contributions will buy favors and
where politicians are often accused of these types of corrupt
practices. Chapter 3 further discusses worldwide corruption in
government. Whether in procurement of contracts or in individ-
ual kickbacks, corrupt government ofﬁcials and political leaders
account for most of the corporate and white-collar offending in
other parts of the world.
Punishment of Corporate Crime
Punishment for corporations convicted of criminal offenses can
be harsh and is established under the sentencing of organizations
section of the United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual. The
manual deﬁnes an organization as “a person other than an indi-
vidual” and “includes corporations, partnerships, associations,
joint-stock companies, unions, trusts, pension funds, unincorpo-
rated organizations, governments and political subdivisions
thereof, and non-profit organizations” (United States Sentencing
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Guidelines Manual §8A1.1 [2005]). Although the recent case of
United States v. Booker has made the guidelines only advisory in
nature, judges are to consult them when meting out sentences
(543 U.S. 220 [2005]). Sentences are directed by four general prin-
ciples found in chapter 8 of the United States Sentencing Guidelines
Manual (2005). First, a court must order an organization to rem-
edy any harm caused by its actions. Second, organizations run
with a primarily criminal purpose should have ﬁnes levied that
serve to deplete all the assets of the business. Third, organizations
not run with a criminal purpose should have ﬁnes levied that are
proportional to the seriousness of the offense and the culpability
of the organization. Last, an organization may receive probation if
this will accomplish conformity with sanctions and deter future
offending. This ﬁnal guideline is used regularly in sentencing cor-
porations. In 2005, for instance, roughly 65 percent of organiza-
tions sentenced had some sort of probation ordered as part of
their sentence (U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Sourcebook of Federal
Sentencing Statistics 2005, Table 53).
The goals of federal sentencing guidelines—enhanced
penalties for organizations and newly enacted legislation against
corporations—are to deter corporations from offending, make it
easier to prosecute corporations, and ensure proportionality in
their punishment. In other words, corporations that cause harm
and a great deal of monetary loss are supposed to be levied with
hefty fines, and the individuals involved are to suffer severe
punishment for their behavior. The statistics from the U.S. Sen-
tencing Commission’s (USSC) Sourcebook of Federal Sentencing
Statistics from 2005 break the data into pre- and post-Booker con-
victions. Out of the 45 corporations sentenced in the pre-Booker
era (October 1, 2004, to January 11, 2005), only 5 did not have any
fines or restitution attached as part of their sentence (USSC
Sourcebook 2005, Table 51). Of those that received ﬁnes and resti-
tution, the mean fine was $8,980,039 and the mean amount of
restitution was $3,371,659 (2005, Table 52). In the post-Booker era
(January 12, 2005, to September 30, 2005), only 12 of the 142 orga-
nizations convicted did not have any ﬁnes or restitution attached
as part of their sentence (2005, Table 51); the mean fine was
$3,870,330, while the mean restitution ordered was $569,042
(Table 52). These statistics show that the mean amount of mone-
tary damages ordered for corporations has declined dramatically
since the Booker decision. It should also be noted that in 48 per-
cent of the pre-Booker cases and 31 percent of the post-Booker
Punishment of Corporate Crime
57

cases, the ﬁnes imposed were reduced because of the organiza-
tions’ inability to pay all or part of the ﬁne (2005, Table 53).
Remedies for Harm Done
The United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual provides methods
for organizations to remedy the harms they have caused. These
include restitution, community service, notifying victims, and re-
medial measures (2005, §8A1.2 [a]). Restitution is required where
there is an identiﬁable victim (§8B1.1 [a]). Community service is
essentially an indirect monetary sanction where the service pro-
vided is intended to ﬁx the harm caused by the offense (§8B1.3).
Notification of victims under the guidelines is an attempt to
comply with §5F1.4 of title 18 U.S.C. §3555 (§8B1.4). Remedial
measures—for instance, product recalls or environmental spill
cleanups—are actions that are intended to eliminate risk of fu-
ture harm (§8B1.2 [a–b]).
Determining Fines
The organizational guidelines state that fines are imposed pri-
marily “to deter and punish illegal conduct; require full payment
of remedial costs to compensate victims for any harm and the dis-
gorgement of illegal gains; regulate probationary sentences; and
implement other statutory penalties such as forfeiture and the as-
sessment of prosecution costs” (USSC’s 2005 Annual Report 2006,
35). These guidelines apply to federal felonies and Class A misde-
meanors, but the conditions for ﬁning organizations are directed
for offenses: where economic loss can be quantiﬁed (tax offenses,
fraud, theft); where there are instances of other offenses (antitrust
violations, bribery); and where speciﬁc formulas exist to calculate
fine amounts. There are, however, no directives for imposing
ﬁnes for offenses involving matters of food, drugs, environment,
consumer and agricultural products, civil rights violations, or is-
sues of national defense (USSC’s 2005 Annual Report 2006).
Probationary Sentences
Under the organizational guidelines, a sentence of probation
may be given to convicted entities (United States Sentencing
Guidelines Manual 2005, §8D1.1). Probationary sentences may be
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

imposed for purposes of securing payment of restitution, ensur-
ing an organization will maintain the ability to make payments,
prevention and detection of future violations, ensuring that an
organization makes essential modiﬁcations to be in compliance
with the law, and achieving the objective of sentencing (§8D1.1
[a 1–8]). When probation is imposed for a felony, judges must
ensure that the probationary term is at least one year but no
more than five years (§8D1.2). Finally, conditions attached to
probationary sentences include that the organization not engage
in any other criminal wrongdoing during the probationary
period, and that the organization make restitution, notify vic-
tims, and maintain residence in a specified place (§8D1.3).
Judges can also attach other conditions to the terms of probation
(§8D1.4). These include ordering the corporation to publicize
the offense that brought its conviction, to provide details of the
punishment received, and to offer a plan to prevent future
wrongdoing. Conditions may also include that periodic finan-
cial statements be submitted to the court; that the corporation
submit to random examinations of its records; and that the cor-
poration notify the court of any change in its ﬁnancial condition,
the start of any bankruptcy proceedings, major civil litigation or
other criminal or administrative proceedings against it, and/or
periodic payments for restitution, ﬁnes, or other monetary sanc-
tions (§8D1.4).
As the information above shows, there are several mandates
from government ofﬁcials and numerous laws in place for detec-
tion, apprehension, prosecution, and punishment of corporate
offenders, but for those corporations and individual agents
within organizations who are charged, prosecuted, and con-
victed, the mandated punishments are rarely imposed. However,
the number of corporate prosecutions and punishments has in-
creased, probably due to the fact that consumer rights activists
and other environmental and citizen rights groups are demand-
ing them, rather than due to increased legislation. Still, corporate
criminals are not prosecuted with the vigor or punished with the
severity that traditional criminals are. This may have to do with
the idea that punishing corporations harms innocent persons
(shareholders) or with Marxist views that the rich and powerful
in society use the law to maintain the status quo. Indeed, a few
lengthy sentences have been handed out to select CEOs and
CFOs of large corporations, but individuals charged with corpo-
rate offenses more often than not receive sentences drastically
Punishment of Corporate Crime
59

below that which is mandated and nowhere near as lengthy as
those convicted of other federal offenses.
Deferred Prosecutions
Increasingly—despite added legislation in place to punish corpo-
rations more harshly—both federal and state prosecutors are en-
tering into special agreements with corporations charged with
wrongdoing instead of enforcing the law. In research prepared
by the Corporate Crime Reporter (2005), statistics reveal that since
2003, the U.S. Department of Justice has put into practice a policy
of not convicting or sentencing corporations charged with seri-
ous offenses. The report states that no major corporation charged
with accounting or securities fraud has been convicted since
Arthur Andersen’s conviction in 2002. These agreements result
in deferred prosecution and even nonprosecution in exchange
for promises that the corporation will pay fines and increase
monitoring of business activities. Again, we see a contradiction
between what those charged with enforcing the law promise
they are going to do and what they actually do. These deferred
prosecutions are the very reason skeptics consider tougher legis-
lation against corporations and sentencing guidelines for organi-
zations merely symbolic. Clearly, there is a difference between
the ideals and the realities of the criminal justice system.
Consider an excerpt from former Deputy Attorney General
Larry D. Thompson’s remarks to the American Bar Association’s
Criminal Justice Section in Washington, D.C., on August 10, 2002:
Corporations are economic and cultural facts in our so-
ciety. Employees act on the corporation’s behalf and
take on the corporation’s identity. Large corporations,
develop their own methods and culture that guide em-
ployees’ thoughts and actions. That culture is a web of
attitudes and practices that tend to replicate and perpet-
uate itself beyond the tenure of any individual man-
ager. That culture may instill respect for the law or
breed contempt and malfeasance. The organization it-
self must be held accountable for the culture and the
conduct it promotes. Without this tool, the public
would have no adequate deterrent to corporate criminal
conduct because the culture that condoned, or at least
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

acquiesced in, that behavior would be beyond the crim-
inal law’s power to correct. Only by clearly preserving
the possibility of prosecuting the corporation itself can
we ensure systemic reform. . . .
Without corporate criminal liability, there would be
no effective deterrent to a corporate culture that—ex-
pressly or tacitly—condones criminal conduct. Instead,
corporations could merely appoint a “vice president in
charge of going to jail” who would serve as a whipping
boy for the collective acts of the organization. It should
go without saying that the criminal law seeks to punish
individuals who commit crimes. But the criminal law
wisely seeks to punish and reform the corporation that
fosters or condones its employees’ criminal behavior.
When asked why he robbed banks, Willie Sutton fa-
mously responded, “Because that’s where the money
is.” So, too, is the money in the corporation. In order to
change corporate cultures that foster criminal conduct,
it is sometimes necessary to punish the corporation it-
self through substantial ﬁnes and the associated collat-
eral consequences of criminal convictions that not only
have a direct impact on the bottom line, but also spur
reforms in the way the business makes money.
I believe we are on the right track at the Department
of Justice. But we will not be complacent. As Will
Rogers, the famous American philosopher, once said,
“Even if you are on the right track, if you just sit there
and do nothing, you will eventually get run over.”
(Thompson 2002)
This excerpt makes it clear that, under current laws, criminal
liability can be imputed on corporations, and that corporations
need to be prosecuted for serious violations. Yet, since Thomp-
son’s remarks (2002) and the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, both
mandating harsher punishment for corporations, prosecutors
have negotiated twice as many nonprosecution and deferred
prosecution agreements as they did in the previous 10 years:
there were 23 agreements between 2002 and 2005, but only 11
agreements of this type between 1992 and 2001 (Corporate Crime
Reporter 2005). It appears as if the U.S. Department of Justice, in
the words of Will Rogers, is “get[ting] run over” by corporate
America.
Deferred Prosecutions
61

Even in cases where a corporation confesses to violating fed-
eral law, the result may not be a criminal conviction. A perfect ex-
ample of this is the 2005 case against the professional services
ﬁrm KPMG. KPMG confessed to accounting fraud in which they
falsely reported $11 billion in tax losses, resulting in evasion of
taxes to the U.S. government to the tune of roughly $2.5 billion.
Even the former attorney general of the United States, Alberto
Gonzales, stated that the case involving KPMG was the largest
case of tax fraud in U.S. history. David Kelley, then the U.S. attor-
ney general in New York, tried to convene a grand jury and indict
KPMG for fraud and obstruction of justice but was advised by the
deputy attorney general at the time, James Comey, to enter into a
deferred prosecution with the company. Unnamed sources say
that KPMG itself contacted Comey and struck a deal, much to the
objection of Kelley (Corporate Crime Reporter 2005). Many have
questioned whether the U.S. Department of Justice can have any
authority and deterrent effect over corporate criminal offending if
the corporation that confesses to the largest-ever case of criminal
fraud and tax evasion does not get convicted and punished.
Measuring Corporate Crime
Although to date it appears that the detection, reporting, and
prosecution of corporate criminality is greater than ever, we are
still not certain if corporate participation in criminal activity is
decreasing. Obviously, the citizenry, and as a result the polity, is
making corporate crime one of the main concerns of society to-
day. It seems, however, that the changing nature of the economy
and the increasing globalization of the marketplace may be pro-
viding more opportunity for corporations to engage in illegal ac-
tivity. Consider the fact that the U.S. government in 2007 was
appropriating more money to health care, defense, and antiter-
rorist agencies. More federal funding to these areas means more
contracts with more agencies, which makes it more likely that
these monies are at risk of being misappropriated.
Corporate crime measurement is a very difﬁcult matter be-
cause it involves organizations, individuals, and the associations
between them (Simpson, Harris, and Mattson 1995). Ofﬁcial sta-
tistics on corporate offending are not well kept. The traditional
summary reporting format makes only a limited amount of
information available (Barnett 2006). Police statistics do include
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

information on negligent homicide, some regulatory violations,
forgery, bribery, and fraud, but the problem becomes investigat-
ing whether in fact a corporation—or an employee of the corpo-
ration—was the offender, and who benefited most from the
illegal behavior (Simpson, Harris, and Mattson 1995). For these
reasons, data at the state and local level are not adequate for get-
ting information on corporate offending.
The public’s knowledge of corporate offending has risen
considerably. It remains unclear whether this is because corpora-
tions are increasingly engaging in corporate wrongdoing, espe-
cially because of today’s global marketplace, or because we are
getting better at detecting and formally charging these organiza-
tions for criminal behaviors. What is clear, however, is that we
need to devise better methods for obtaining and maintaining
data on corporate offending.
Sources of Data
Federal Sources
Various sources of data exist for measuring the extent of corpo-
rate offending; some are better than others, but none is ab-
solutely accurate. Even the U.S. Department of Justice in its
strategic plan for ﬁscal years 2003 to 2008 reports that “precise ﬁ-
nancial losses resulting from white collar crime for consumers,
government, and business are unknown since no systematic data
collection exists” (U.S. Department of the Treasury 2003). Sources
include those collected at the federal, state, and city level. The
FBI measures some incidents of white-collar offending with its
Uniform Crime Reports (UCRs), which include offenses such as
embezzlement, fraud, and forgery/counterfeiting. The problem
is that the UCR program underestimates crime in general—and
vastly underestimates corporate crime because their statistics do
not measure all types of corporate offenses. Through these ofﬁ-
cial statistics then, it appears as if arrest rates for corporate of-
fending are lower than those for property offenses and for crime
in general. Again, however, UCR statistics may be misleading
due to the fact that not all offenses are included in their report.
Other problems with using UCR data involve a lack of offender
characteristics for each type of crime. No occupational or socio-
economic variables about the offender are available in the data
Sources of Data
63

(Barnett 2006), and no characteristics of corporate structure are
included either. As such, using these characteristics as deﬁnitions
of corporate crime is meaningless.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, a division of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, also collects information on corporate offending.
Offenses in their database include tax law violations, food and
drug offenses, bribery, antitrust cases, environmental violations,
fraud, obstruction of justice, and perjury. The National White
Collar Crime Center (NW3C) is another organization that gath-
ers statistics on white-collar crime. The center is a federally
funded nonprofit organization that provides support for agen-
cies in prevention, investigation, and prosecution of economic
and high-tech crimes. The NW3C conducted a survey in 2005 to
measure public perceptions and past-year experiences with
white-collar and corporate crime victimization. The 1,605 adult
respondents reported their opinions about the seriousness of
these offenses and their individual experiences with account
fraud, credit card fraud, product pricing, unnecessary repairs to
property, as well as any losses because of false stock information,
national corporate scandals or fraudulent business ventures, and
fraud involving the Internet (Kane and Wall 2005).
Results of the study revealed that 46.5 percent of house-
holds and 36 percent of the individuals surveyed reported at
least one form of victimization within the 12-month period. This
rose to 62.5 percent when respondents were asked about any
victimizations in their lifetime. The most prevalent forms of vic-
timization were the result of credit card fraud, unnecessary re-
pairs, product pricing fraud, and national corporate scandals.
The survey results also showed that the two most common fac-
tors for being victimized were use of the Internet and residing in
an urban area. When asked about reporting behavior, 67 percent
of respondents said they reported the victimization to at least
one source, whether it was the credit card company, the busi-
ness itself, or law enforcement; only 30.1 percent reported the
victimization to a law enforcement or crime control agency
(Kane and Wall 2005).
Regarding the public’s perception of the seriousness of
white-collar offenses, the results revealed that respondents con-
sider them to be as serious as street crime; however, crimes that
involve physical harm are seen as more serious than those with
monetary losses. Furthermore, those offenses committed by or-
ganizations are seen as more harmful than individual offenders,
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and persons with high status are seen as more culpable than
those with lower status in the organization (Kane and Wall 2005).
The results of the survey by the NW3C are interesting in that
they show that corporate offending is more prevalent than ofﬁ-
cial statistics suggest. The public evidently views these offenses
as serious and in need of increased control, yet there is apathy
among individuals in reporting these offenses to the appropriate
crime control agencies. A similar survey was done by Pricewater-
houseCoopers (PwC) in 2005, in which they interviewed 3,634
senior executives in 34 companies around the world, soliciting
information on corporate fraud. The results of this survey show
an increase in the number of companies worldwide that have
fallen victim to economic crime—an increase from 37 percent of
companies in 2003 to 45 percent of companies in 2005 (Bussmann
2005). Results also show that the larger the company, the more
likely it is to be victimized by fraud. Of the companies victim-
ized, 40 percent report they have endured signiﬁcant “collateral
damage” because of fraud. It also appears from the survey that
no industry is safe—it did not matter whether these were indus-
tries that were regulated or not—and 38 to 60 percent of the com-
panies in various industries reported serious frauds (Bussmann
2005). Probably the most interesting and disturbing ﬁnding from
this survey on global economic crime was that despite all the re-
cent efforts by governments to crack down on these offenses
with new legislation and detection efforts (the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act, for example), companies typically report that the fraud
came to their attention by chance, with someone tipping them off
that they had been victimized.
At the federal level, data and statistics are also collected and
compiled by the USSC. Again, however, these would only reﬂect
statistics on those offenses that have been reported and are in
various stages of prosecution, conviction, or sentencing. Federal-
level data collection methods differ in their reported incidence
rates for corporate crime. There is also some confusion in using
the terms corporate crime and white-collar crime. Corporate crime
usually involves organizations, and most crime control agencies
that collect crime statistics only gather information on individual
offenses because of the idea that violations of the law can only be
committed by individuals, who can then be punished for these
violations. Further definitional issues stem from conceptual
problems with what encompasses corporate crimes; these were
discussed extensively in chapter 1.
Sources of Data
65

The U.S. attorney general is responsible for prosecuting fed-
eral corporate violations. Within the Department of Justice, there
are several regional ofﬁces of the attorney general. Because cases
of wrongdoing appear in the various districts upon referral from
the FBI or other crime control agencies, Simpson, Harris, and
Mattson (1995) report that federal court records only show cases
that have been adjudicated. Cases that were dismissed, or cases
that were closed citing actions other than adjudication, are only
available through Freedom of Information Act requests. Some
regulatory agencies may keep information about corporate of-
fending for their records, but usually these data are only avail-
able after a corporation has had charges brought against it
(Clinard and Yeager 1980). Probably the best source of informa-
tion on corporate crime data—at least on those corporations that
have been prosecuted—comes from the USSC. Again, these data
only include information on those corporations that were con-
victed and sentenced in federal district court. Simpson, Harris,
and Mattson (1995) state that even if a case is properly “brought
into the system, there is no guarantee that formal adjudication
will result” (119).
State and Municipal Sources
The ofﬁce of the state attorney general collects data on state cor-
porate crime. Similar to federal-level statistics, most states do not
report separate statistics for corporate criminal offending, nor do
they have specialized units to apprehend and detect these kinds
of offenses. And, as with federal-level record keeping, deﬁnitions
and measurement of corporate and white-collar crime at the
state level are ambiguous (Wellford and Ingraham 1994). City
and municipal law enforcement authorities, if they report corpo-
rate offenses, would do so as part of the information they regu-
larly give to the FBI for the UCR. These are official police
statistics and for offenses such as fraud, forgery, embezzlement,
and bribery. The data suffer from many problems, the chief one
being that they are compiled together with conventional crime
statistics (Simpson, Harris, and Mattson 1995).
Overall, the sources of data on corporate offending have
several limitations with regard to measurement and accuracy.
First, they vastly underestimate the amount of offending occur-
ring in the United States. Second, there are various methodologi-
cal issues in the measurement of these data as well as biases in
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the recording and reporting of the statistics. Third, and related to
the ﬁrst two, is that availability and public access to these data
are limited. These data reveal that criminal penalties against cor-
porations are not imposed as often, or as severely, as needed to
effectively deter them from future offending.
Detecting and Controlling
Corporate Crime
The idea behind the deterrent value of the sentencing structure
in the United States relies on two things: retribution and the
severity of a penal sanction. In order for retribution and deter-
rence to work, offenders have to fear being caught in the first
place, and then the sentence has to be proportionately severe.
The risk of a corporation getting caught for engaging in illegal
activity seems to be low (Simpson 2002). As stated earlier, corpo-
rate crimes are often complex acts that involve multiple offend-
ers; the indirectness of intention, as well as the inability to single
out a victim, makes detection difficult. Another problem sur-
rounding detection has to do with actual policing of these behav-
iors. In some cases, oversight of these actors has been transferred
to regulatory agencies and out of the realm of law enforcement.
“Traditional policing techniques . . . are unsuited for or unable to
penetrate the corporate setting. . . . Police are trained for conven-
tional crime investigation and generally lack many of the investi-
gatory skills necessary to follow the paper trail left by corporate
criminals” (Simpson 2002, 46). Moreover, federal agencies re-
sponsible for enforcement of these activities have been reluctant
to work together in uncovering these types of offenses.
Traditionally—even after detection, investigation, prosecu-
tion, and conviction of corporations and their employees for
criminal wrongdoing—the sanctions meted out are rarely severe
enough to act as deterrents. The truth is that these cases are usu-
ally dismissed, settled through plea negotiations, or result in
what amounts to a “slap on the wrist” ﬁne (Simpson 2002). Due
to the unlikelihood of discovery, corporate offenders are not
caught as often as their street-offending counterparts. And when
they are caught, corporations know many powerful people who
can help them through their ordeal. Unlike the average criminal
defendant who will more than likely end up in prison, corporate
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime
67

criminals and their attorneys make certain that if they serve any
time at all, it will be under relatively acceptable conditions.
The U.S. Department of Justice has a Corporate Fraud Task
Force (CFTF) that was created by President George W. Bush on
July 9, 2002. Its mandate is to oversee and coordinate all corpo-
rate fraud matters under investigation by the department, as
well as to enhance inter-agency cooperation on any investiga-
tions. The CFTF is also authorized to “provide direction for the
investigation and prosecutions of cases, . . . provide recommen-
dations to the Attorney General for allocation and reallocation of
resources, . . . and make recommendations to the president”
(Corporate Fraud Task Force, 2003). In March 2002, four months
before the task force was created, the president outlined his 10-
point plan to improve corporate responsibility and protect
America’s shareholders. The points contained in this plan are as
follows:
1. Each investor should have quarterly access to the infor-
mation needed to judge a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial performance,
condition, and risks.
2. Each investor should have prompt access to critical 
information.
3. Chief Executive Ofﬁcers (CEOs) should personally 
vouch for the veracity, timeliness, and fairness of their
companies’ public disclosures, including their ﬁnancial
statements.
4. CEOs or other ofﬁcers should not be allowed to proﬁt
from erroneous ﬁnancial statements.
5. CEOs or other ofﬁcers who clearly abuse their power
should lose their right to serve in any corporate leader-
ship positions.
6. Corporate leaders should be required to tell the public
promptly whenever they buy or sell company stock for
personal gain.
7. Investors should have complete conﬁdence in the inde-
pendence and integrity of companies’ auditors.
8. An independent regulatory board should ensure that 
the accounting profession is held to the highest ethical
standards.
9. The authors of accounting standards must be responsive
to the needs of investors.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

10. Firms’ accounting systems should be compared with
best practices, not simply against minimum standards.
(Corporate Fraud Task Force 2003)
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) took action
to implement these directives by adopting rules and policies in
line with the president’s 10 reforms. In its ﬁrst yearly report to
the president, the CFTF summarized their efforts: task force
members had obtained over 250 corporate fraud convictions,
and as of May 31, 2003, prosecutors and law enforcement agents
were working on 320 investigations involving over 500 defen-
dants. The report also revealed that from July 1, 2002, to March
31, 2003, prosecutors won over $2.5 billion in ﬁnes, forfeitures,
and restitution; however, of that sum, they actually recovered
only $85 million, or about 30 percent of the monies owed. Re-
garding sentences for convicted defendants, the reports list infor-
mation in only 64 of the 250 cases: 75 percent of the defendants in
those 64 cases received a sentence of imprisonment, with 25 per-
cent being in excess of 5 years in length (Corporate Fraud Task
Force 2003).
The second annual report of the CFTF showed improve-
ments from the previous year in combating fraud, punishing cor-
porate wrongdoing, and adding inter-agency cooperation in
investigation of cases. From the task force’s inception up to May
31, 2004, prosecutors netted over 500 corporate fraud convictions
or guilty pleas and had charged over 900 defendants and 60
CEOs and presidents (Corporate Fraud Task Force 2004). In the
Enron case alone, according to the report, the task force had
seized over $161 million to compensate the victims in that case.
Indeed, efforts to detect, punish, and control corporate
crime do seem to be improving; however, these efforts are more
likely the result of increased public scrutiny of political officials
than a legitimate concern that these cases are increasing, that
they result in numerous losses to the victims, and that the of-
fenders need to be punished severely for their wrongdoing. Ex-
emplifying the public’s desire to expose corporate wrongdoing
is the fact that a new ranking, the globe’s worst corporations, is
as highly anticipated as Forbes magazine’s annual list of best
businesses. One “worst” list is compiled by Russell Mokhiber
and Robert Weissman of the Multinational Monitor; to be named 
to their list of the ten worst corporations of the year requires a
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime
69

less-than-distinguished business record rife with corporate
fraud, scandal, and even violence (Mokhiber and Weissman
2005).
If we look at the various reports by the U.S. government on
detecting and controlling corporate crime, the consensus is that
we are doing better. More cases are being forwarded to the ap-
propriate crime control agencies, and more corporations and
their employee offenders are being charged, prosecuted, and
punished for their actions. These statistics are probably accurate.
If the government creates a special task force to detect and prose-
cute these crimes and encourages agencies in charge of these of-
fenses to cooperate and work together on these cases, we will
undoubtedly see an increase in the number of successful prose-
cutions. But the question remains, is this increased effort, detec-
tion, apprehension, prosecution, and punishment acting as a
deterrent to future criminal offending by corporations and their
employees?
Kane and Wall (2005) and Bussmann (2005) analyzed the re-
sults of the National White Collar Crime Center Survey and the
PricewaterhouseCoopers Global Economic Crime Survey, re-
spectively, and found that corporate offending and other types
of fraud are on the increase. Furthermore, these agencies and
others like them report that a majority of the offenses are de-
tected by accident by the ﬁrms themselves, giving little credence
to the idea that the federal government and crime control agen-
cies are having an effect on the incidence of these crimes. Ac-
cording to Geis (2007), the likelihood of a corporation being
audited is very minimal. As of 2007, it took 38 months for the
IRS to audit the tax return of a corporation. In 2003, corporations
paid about $133 billion in taxes—the second lowest amount col-
lected by the government since 1983. In 1970, 17 percent of the
nation’s budget came from corporate taxes; today, it makes up
only 7 percent (Geis 2007).
What can be done to further detect, apprehend, and deter
corporate criminal offending? If we look deeper into the govern-
ment reports, we find that most of the money (70 percent)
awarded in the form of ﬁnes, forfeitures, and restitution is never
recovered (Corporate Fraud Task Force 2003). Additionally, those
defendants who do get convicted and sentenced to prison do not
serve the time that the average defendant in federal criminal
court serves; only about 25 percent of defendants received ﬁve or
more years in jail (Corporate Fraud Task Force 2003). This pales
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in comparison to sentences for narcotics offenders; in fact, the
mandatory minimums for ﬁrst-time drug offenders convicted in
federal court of possession of certain amounts of narcotics can be
ﬁve or ten years depending on the amounts of drugs involved.
Improving Current Methods
Some observers have suggested that an annual report on corpo-
rate offending should be compiled each year and made avail-
able to interested parties, or for public consumption, similar to
the way in which information for the UCR database is collected
and made public. Other critics have proposed more severe sanc-
tions for convicted individuals and corporations as a way to de-
ter and control corporate offending. Coleman (1998) believes
that corporate crime is perpetuated by the sense of mystery that
corporations maintain around their business practices. This has
helped to insulate them from scrutiny because their actions and
practices seem very complex to the average observer. Indeed,
the inner workings of organizations and their business practices
are complex and therefore not well understood. For an investi-
gator, then, it becomes difﬁcult to determine which actions were
deliberately undertaken and which were simply bad business
decisions.
The Center for Corporate Policy (2006) has offered some
suggestions for deterring corporate crime:
Strengthen criminal liability standards for corporations, execu-
tives, and directors. As discussed in chapter 1, because corpora-
tions are legal fictions, they are unable to have intent imputed
upon them. Guilt under criminal law requires both the actus reus,
guilty act, and the mens rea, guilty mind. If we could recognize
that corporations, not just the individuals within the corpora-
tions, are to blame for harm, it would be much easier to hold
them criminally liable, to prosecute them, and to punish them
with the hope of also deterring them from future criminal acts.
Strengthen sanctions for corporations. As we have seen from
some of the federal statistics, although more cases against corpo-
rations and their executives are making their way into U.S. fed-
eral courtrooms, the punishments given to those convicted are
still not in line with the seriousness of harm done, the culpability
of the offender, or the typical outcomes of other cases in federal
court. Most corporate offenders avoid criminal prosecution in
the ﬁrst place by signing an agreement with the government that
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime
71

they, as a corporation, will reform and will continue to monitor
their corporate activities. Some sanctions for corporations have
been included in the USSC’s organizational sentencing guide-
lines, but rarely are harsh sentences meted out; in fact, sentences
may actually be shortened, not elongated, in light of the
Supreme Court decision in U.S. v. Booker that rendered the guide-
lines only advisory and not mandatory. Essentially, judges can
now more easily reduce the sentences of convicted corporate ex-
ecutives. The Center for Corporate Policy suggests adding a re-
quirement that companies must announce to the public their
crimes, as well as their plans for reform, in an effort to shame
them into compliance. They also recommend that the govern-
ment put a corporate probation ofﬁcer in place to ensure that the
organization adopts and follows through with speciﬁc reforms.
The corporate death penalty. This method of deterrence could
be used for corporations that continue to violate the law. Death
in this instance means that corporate licenses would be revoked,
forcing the affected corporations to go out of business. Most
states have the power to revoke corporate charters but rarely
threaten this form of sanction. Obviously, this option would pun-
ish more than just the executives of the corporation—law-abid-
ing employees and shareholders would also suffer. The Center
for Corporate Policy offers other options that would attempt to
reincorporate the organization under public ownership or com-
pensate innocent parties in the cases where corporate death was
imposed.
Ban corporations that violate the law from receiving federal con-
tracts. The federal government contracts with more organizations
than any other entity. The contracts they enter into amount to
roughly $350 billion a year. The government has a list of people
with whom they will not do business. This list could be expanded
to include those corporations convicted of criminal offenses.
Make corporate crime a law enforcement priority. U.S. attorneys
do not have the time or the ﬁnancial or labor resources necessary
to enforce the full power of the law. Most divisions are under-
funded, have high employee turnover, and therefore cannot keep
up with their caseloads. Passing tougher laws does little in the
way of deterrence if the funding is not in place to enforce those
laws and punish violators. The Center for Corporate Policy pro-
poses that the Department of Justice not only increase its budget
for enforcement of these laws but further establish a corporate
crime division that would be a permanent part of the agency.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Grabowsky (2001) suggests that a more expansive system of
corporate crime control needs to be implemented in an attempt
to deter and prevent corporate criminal offending. “It is a combi-
nation of complementary institutions and instruments which
will provide the best solution” (Grabowsky 2001, 138). Among
Grabowsky’s suggestions for implementation are mandatory
third-party vigilance and disclosure, voluntary public interest
organizations becoming active, private regulatory enforcement,
self-regulation programs, and inducements for compliance.
Third-party vigilance—what Grabowsky (2001) refers to as
conscription—would involve third-party actors aiding and over-
seeing the corporation’s compliance process. Banks, for instance,
could be required to alert authorities of anything out of the ordi-
nary or any monetary transactions above a certain dollar
amount. This would make it harder for corporations and indi-
viduals within them to siphon funds or cover up taxable income.
Banks are already legally obligated to make such reports on their
individual account holders.
Public interest groups are ubiquitous in every domain of so-
ciety. It is often from these groups—not from government au-
thorities—that we ﬁrst hear about corporate malfeasance. These
groups are inﬂuential in getting the media involved in reporting
high-proﬁle cases that may not otherwise come to the public’s at-
tention. Sometimes, public interest groups are the only recorders
of annual facts and statistics on corporations and their activities.
From health, labor, and environmental organizations to Nader’s
Raiders, young activists inspired by the work of Ralph Nader,
and now some of the corporate watchdogs, these groups have
been very successful in helping to set agendas for policy
(Grabowsky 2001).
Private regulatory enforcement can also help to enforce cur-
rent legislation. Grabowsky (2001) believes this is especially fea-
sible where criminal justice authorities have budget restraints.
Regulatory agencies make the job of law enforcement officers
easier by taking over the responsibility for enforcement of regu-
lations guidelines; politicians can also escape making unpopular
decisions by relegating decision-making duties to regulatory
agencies (Coleman 1998). Private entities can be endowed with
certain rights that give them the ability to enforce rules and reg-
ulations, or they can be given the power to enforce the rules on
behalf of the state. For some environmental laws, private
enforcement already exists. Also, the False Claims Act allows
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime
73

private interests to bring suit against those who violate the law
(Grabowsky 2001). Once a suit is ﬁled and the facts discovered,
the government can decide to prosecute as well. If the civil ac-
tion is successful, the private party who brought the suit is enti-
tled to a portion of damages awarded.
Self-regulation by a corporation is another method that can
be implemented in an attempt to curb corporate wrongdoing.
Many companies have quality control operations in place and
have hired management to instill an atmosphere and reputation
of excellence without having another entity impose these con-
trols on them (Grabowsky 2001). Many corporations have set up
compliance divisions or have, at the least, a compliance ofﬁcer
whose role is to ensure that the actions of the organization and
its employees are law-abiding (Coleman 1998). This type of cor-
porate governance requires the board of directors to oversee
business operations, to guarantee that the safeguarding of share-
holder interests is of principal concern, and to ensure that the
law is not being violated (Geis 2007). Warren Buffett, the CEO of
Berkshire Hathaway and one of the world’s most successful in-
vestors, has been outspoken on this issue, calling for corpora-
tions to pay more attention to business practices, to be quicker to
ﬁre corrupt employees, and to allow corporate boards of direc-
tors more independence, which includes holding meetings with-
out corporate executives present. In this way, according to
Buffett, members of the board will be less reserved in discussing
operations and more likely to have the interests of the sharehold-
ers in mind when making important decisions. 
The government, however, can also impose self-regulatory
controls as part of conditions attached to probation for past vio-
lations. This should be a requirement in every case where evi-
dence exists that a corporation has violated the law; the
corporation should be made to implement a program of self-
compliance, and they should have to foot the bill for it.
Finally, Grabowsky (2001) says that inducements to corpora-
tions by the government can elicit lawful behavior from them.
Making regulatory compliance and quality control costs tax-
deductible can be an incentive for corporations to implement them
as part of their business practices. If simply having a compliance
program in place makes a corporation less likely to be audited or
investigated by the government, this can induce compliance.
These suggestions, along with others that attempt to remedy
definitional issues and alleviate some of the current problems
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

with measurement, would do much to help make corporate of-
fending more easily detectable and therefore punishable, but
they might also help deter corporations from engaging in any il-
legal or harmful activities.
Conclusion
Whether stemming from definitional or conceptual issues of
what constitutes corporate and white-collar crime, or from issues
with detection, apprehension, and subsequent punishment of
corporate wrongdoing, myriad problems continue to plague re-
searchers, scholars, law enforcement officials, and even corpo-
rate executives themselves.
The increased awareness of corporate offending due to re-
cent debacles involving Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, and their ac-
counting ﬁrms such as Arthur Andersen has spurred the public
to pressure the government and crime control agencies toward
increased enforcement and prosecution of those involved with
corporate malfeasance. We know from very conservative esti-
mates (numbers on absolute costs of harms and losses are not
known) that corporate crime costs the United States more annu-
ally than all other crime taken together. Estimates range from
$200 billion to $600 billion each year. We also know that there are
further consequences beyond monetary loss that result from cor-
porate crime: countless injuries, job-related illnesses, and deaths
occur every year due to negligence, false advertising, unsafe
working conditions, poor product safety, unsafe food, and med-
ical malpractice, among others.
However, a downside exists to holding corporations crimi-
nally liable for their actions. If hefty fines are levied and enor-
mous amounts of monetary restitution must be paid, innocent
employees and shareholders will be unduly punished. Indeed,
there are other philosophical and theoretical reasons for not
holding corporations liable: Imputing liability onto a corpora-
tion, for instance, is counter to our doctrine of criminal law,
which requires that intent be established. Furthermore, corpora-
tions cannot be imprisoned, which is also an important element
in deterrence against criminal offending. The government has,
however, responded somewhat to the public outcry for increased
corporate punishment. There is legislation in place supporting
prosecutorial efforts in charging and punishing corporations.
Conclusion
75

The president has outlined a plan to improve corporate responsi-
bility, the SEC has taken steps to implement the president’s di-
rectives, the Department of Justice has initiated a Corporate
Fraud Task Force designed to oversee all matters of fraud as well
as enhance inter-agency cooperation in investigations, and the
USSC has included a section on the sentencing of organizations
in its federal guidelines manual. All of these efforts have greatly
enhanced the government’s ability to prosecute and punish cor-
porations and their executives. Indeed, the numbers of those
prosecuted have increased substantially, according to the CFTF.
Other observers, however, are more skeptical and believe
the government is still not doing enough. They say that more
legislation and increased punishment is not what is needed:
there are already enough laws in place. For these critics, adding
more laws is merely seen as a symbolic gesture that politicians
are doing something to curb corporate offending. People sup-
porting this point of view believe that the government is too
closely tied to corporate America and that governmental author-
ities should do a better job of enforcing the laws that are already
in place. Exemplifying this symbolic perspective is the fact that
authorities are entering into more nonprosecution and deferred
prosecution agreements with corporations than ever before. Also
cited is the fact that there have not been any major convictions of
corporations using recently added legislation.
These issues become especially problematic because, accord-
ing to survey research, corporate offending is on the rise, and the
agencies in charge of detection, apprehension, and punishment
are sorely understaffed and underfunded to the point of lagging
behind in clearing their caseloads. Even when corporations are
found guilty of malfeasance, sentences handed out in court are
paltry when compared with other federal crime convictions. Re-
duction in the rate of corporate criminal offending can only be
accomplished with deterrence. The philosophy of deterrence re-
lies on two things; retribution, or punishment for wrongdoing,
and severity of penal sanction. For deterrence to work, offenders
have to fear being caught, and if caught, the sentence must be
proportionately severe. At the current time, the likelihood of be-
ing caught for engaging in illegal corporate activity is very low,
and even if caught, prosecuted, and convicted, the sanctions
given as punishment are insufficient to act as a deterrent. It
should also be noted that deterrence theory has its critics as well,
who cite that often those accused of wrongdoing are not rational
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

or do not know what they are doing is wrong. Deterrence would
not work in these cases.
Although we, as a nation and as a crime control community,
are making strides, there is still a long way to go—especially con-
sidering the exponential increase of the global marketplace,
which is making it easier for organizations to offend and harder
for those in charge to detect these offenses. Current methods of
corporate crime control have been overwhelmingly scrutinized
and suggestions for improvement abound. There is no shortage
of legislation or lack of mandates in place to apprehend, prose-
cute, and punish corporate and white-collar offenders: rather,
some believe the problem is that the federal government and the
powers that be are in bed with corporate America. In a capitalist
society, the almighty dollar has power over the ordinary citizen.
Corporate crime will continue to plague the United States—and
the rest of the world—as long as the harmful acts of the power
elite are not deﬁned as crimes, nonprosecution or deferred prose-
cution deals with corporations and their agents who have vio-
lated the law continue to be negotiated, and self-regulation and
informal social control by other institutions are not encouraged.
As you will see in chapter 3, in other parts of the world, corpo-
rate offending and corruption by political and government lead-
ers occur more frequently and are less often detected and
punished. In most developing countries, a majority of govern-
ment contracts are procured through bribery of government ofﬁ-
cials. The consequences for ordinary people around the world
can be devastating.
References
Bachman, Ronet, and Russell K. Schutt. 2007. The Practice of Research in
Criminology and Criminal Justice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Barnett, Cynthia. n.d. “The Measurement of White-Collar Crime Using
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Data.” Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. www.fbi.gov/ucr/
whitecollarforweb.pdf.
Borger, Julian. 2001. “All the President’s Businessmen.” The Guardian,
April 27. www.guardian.co.uk/bush/story/0,,479212,00.html.
Bussmann, Kai-D. 2005. “PricewaterhouseCoopers: Global Economic
Crime Survey 2005.” www.pwc.com/gx/eng/cfr/gecs/PwC_2005_
global_crimesurvey.pdf.
References
77

Center for Corporate Policy. 2006. “Corporate Crime and Abuse: Crack-
ing Down on Corporate Crime.” www.corporatepolicy.org/issues/
crime.htm.
Christie, Christopher J., and Robert M. Hanna. 2006. “A Push Down
the Road of Good Corporate Citizenship: The Deferred Prosecution
Agreement between the U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey
and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.” The American Criminal Law Review 43:
1043–61.
Clinard, Marshall B., and Peter Yeager. 1980. Corporate Crime. New York:
Free Press.
Coleman, James. 1985. The Criminal Elite. New York: St. Martin’s.
Coleman, James. 1998. The Criminal Elite: Understanding White-Collar
Crime. New York: St. Martin’s.
“Corporate America’s Woes, Continued.” 2002. The Economist, Novem-
ber 28.
Corporate Crime Reporter. 2005. “Crime without Conviction: The 
Rise of Deferred and Non-Prosecution Agreements.” Corporate 
Crime Reporter,
December 28. www.corporatecrimereporter.com/
deferredreport.htm.
Corporate Fraud Task Force. 2003. “First Year Report to the President.”
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
Corporate Fraud Task Force. 2004. “Second Year Report to the Presi-
dent.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
Drutman, Lee. 2003. “What about Three-Strikes-and-You’re-Out for Cor-
porate Criminals?” Common Dreams News Center. www.common-
dreams.org/views03/0307-02.htm.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2007. “2006 Preliminary Annual Uni-
form Crime Report.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Crim-
inal Justice Information Services Division. www.fbi.gov/ucr/06prelim/
index.html.
Geis, Gilbert. 2007. White-Collar and Corporate Crime. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Geis, Gilbert, and Joseph DiMento. 1995. “Should We Prosecute Corpo-
rations and/or Individuals?” In Corporate Crime: Contemporary Debates,
ed. Frank Pearce and Laureen Snider. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
Grabowsky, Peter. 2001. “The System of Corporate Crime Control.” In
Contemporary Issues in Criminal Justice: Essays in Honor of Gilbert Geis, ed.
Henry N. Pontell and David Shichor. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Gray, Kenneth R., Larry A. Frieder, and George W. Clark. 2005. Corporate
Scandals: The Many Faces of Greed. St. Paul, MN: Paragon House.
Holder, Eric. 1999. Memorandum from Eric Holder, Deputy Attorney
General, Department of Justice, to Component Heads and United States
Attorneys: Bringing Criminal Charges against Corporations. June 16.
www.abanet.org/poladv/priorities/privilegewaiver/1999jun16_privw
aiv_dojholder.pdf.
Kane, John, and April D. Wall. 2006. The 2005 National Public Survey on
White Collar Crime. Fairmont, WV: National White Collar Crime Center.
Khanna, Vikramaditya S. 2004. “Politics and Corporate Crime Legisla-
tion.” Regulation 27 (Spring): 30–35.
Mokhiber, Russell, and Robert Weissman. 2005. “The 10 Worst Corpora-
tions of 2005.” Multinational Monitor 26 (November–December). multi-
nationalmonitor.org/mm2005/112005/mokhiber.html.
Mosher, Clayton J., Terance D. Miethe, and Dretha M. Phillips. 2002. The
Mismeasure of Crime. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reiman, Jeffrey. 2007. The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison: Ideology,
Class, and Criminal Justice. 8th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Reiman, Jeffrey, and Paul Leighton. 2004. A Tale of Two Criminals: We’re
Tougher on Corporate Criminals, but They Still Don’t Get What They Deserve.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Simon, David R. 1996. Elite Deviance. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Simon, David R. 2006. Elite Deviance. Boston: Pearson/Allyn and Bacon.
Simpson, Sally S. 2002. Corporate Crime, Law, and Social Control. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Simpson, Sally S., Anthony Harris, and Brian A. Mattson. 1995. “Mea-
suring Corporate Crime.” In Understanding Corporate Criminality, ed.
Michael B. Blankenship. New York: Garland.
Thompson, Larry D. 2002. Remarks by Larry D. Thompson, Deputy At-
torney General, Department of Justice, to the American Bar Association
Criminal Justice Section, Washington, DC: Corporate Fraud. August 10.
www.usdoj.gov/archive/dag/speeches/2002/081002abacriminal
justice.htm.
United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual.
2005. Chapter 8.
www.ussc.gov/
United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual. 2005. §8A1.1–§8A1.2.
www.ussc.gov/
United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual. 2005. §8B1.1–§8B1.4.
www.ussc.gov/
United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual. 2005. §8D1.1–§8D1.4.
www.ussc.gov/
References
79

United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005).
U.S. Code. Title 15.
U.S. Code. Title 18.
U.S. Constitution. Commerce Clause, Article I, §8.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2003. Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years
2003–2008. Financial Management Service, September 30.
U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC). 2005. Sourcebook of Federal Sentenc-
ing Statistics. Tables 51–53.
U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC). 2006. 2005 Annual Report.
www.ussc.gov/ANNRPT/2005/ar05toc.htm.
Wellford, Charles F., and B.L. Ingraham. 1994. “Towards a National
White Collar Crime Reporting System.” In Critical Issues in Crime and
Justice, ed. Albert R. Roberts. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
Corporate Offending outside
the United States
Corporate crime is not something unique to the United States. As
noted in the history of corporations (see chapter 1), many of the
ﬁrst big businesses sprang up in European countries. Any coun-
try in the world that has industrialized production of labor, or
that favors free-market economies, is likely to have numerous
corporations and therefore many incidents of corporate offend-
ing. Wherever people are in positions of power and have author-
ity over resources or other individuals, the opportunity and
temptation for embezzlement and bribery will exist. Countries
like Japan, Australia, and Canada all report corporate wrongdo-
ing, and in Europe, scandal and offending occur on a scale simi-
lar to that in the United States. No country is secure against
corporate malfeasance, just as no country in the world is com-
pletely free of other types of criminal offending; some countries
just experience more corporate crime than others. The southern
half of the Western Hemisphere, for instance, deals with numer-
ous incidents of criminal practices daily in both business and
government, and no sector of South American society is exempt;
recent reports have revealed that South America is one of the
most corrupt regions in the world (Hodess 2004). In some South
American countries, for instance, half of state contracts are
awarded because of bribery. These revelations were exempliﬁed
in 2000, when the world watched the Peruvian government fall
in the wake of presidential scandal. Alberto Fujimori was caught
81

in a web of political corruption after being accused of embez-
zling upwards of $600 million from the Peruvian people.
Similar cases regarding political leaders have occurred else-
where; in fact, political corruption is widespread in many coun-
tries around the globe. Mohammed Suharto, the former
president of Indonesia, purportedly embezzled nearly US$35 bil-
lion throughout his years in ofﬁce (1968–1998), making him one
of the world’s most corrupt leaders. Reports of corruption
among such leaders as Suharto and Fujimori have been the im-
petus behind the lowering of public confidence in the polity
around the globe. Hodess (2004) reports that “trust in political
parties is lower than in any other public institution” (3).
For-proﬁt corporations around the world attempt to misuse
dominant market positions, and attempts by individuals and
organizations to defraud governments and evade taxes are
ubiquitous. Clinard and Yeager (1980) report that in France, cor-
porations ﬁnd numerous ways to violate the law—one of which
includes cooking their books to evade the large commercial and
industrial taxes that are levied by the French government. Mi-
noru Yokoyama (2007) notes that throughout Japan’s history,
serious environmental crimes have been committed by the na-
tion’s leading corporations. He states that most of these were
related to pollution and occurred because of “overzealous
pursuit of profits, with little actual oversight by the govern-
ment” (339). The Multinational Monitor’s 2006 list of the world’s
worst corporations includes several multinational companies
(Mokhiber and Weissman 2006). The British weapons manufac-
turer BAE Systems is one of the world’s largest military con-
tractors, and it has been accused on numerous occasions of
bribing governmental ofﬁcials in many countries in order to se-
cure large weapons contracts. The British government recently
dropped an investigation of BAE Systems’ practices in a Saudi
Arabian weapons deal, citing that relations with the Saudi gov-
ernment were more important. Also on the list is Abbott, a U.S.
manufacturer of infant formula that is used around the world.
Abbott made the list for overpricing its formula in poor and de-
veloping countries, leading to thousands of infant deaths world-
wide. When the Philippine government tried to implement new
rules banning the use of the formula for infants under two years
old in an attempt to encourage breast-feeding of infants in the
country, Abbott sued them and tried to block the new rules. The
Philippine Supreme Court decided in favor of the Philippine
82
Worldwide Perspective

government; however, it reversed its own ruling after the head
of the United States Chamber of Commerce wrote a letter to the
Philippine president threatening decreased U.S. investment in
the country (Mokhiber and Weissman 2006). U.S. drugmaker
Pﬁzer also makes the list for its ruthless defense of patents and
monopolistic practices in the availability of much-needed medi-
cine in poor and developing countries. Pﬁzer has pressured the
World Trade Organization to adopt worldwide rules related to
intellectual property similar to patent law in the United States.
This move would secure mega proﬁts for the drugmaker at the
expense of patients in countries that cannot afford the drugs.
The Multinational Monitor’s list for the previous year in-
cluded a French water company, a Swiss drugmaker, and a
British oil company (Mokhiber and Weissman 2005). To earn a
spot on Mokhiber and Weissman’s “worst” list, companies typi-
cally engage in bribery, fraud, racketeering, corruption, or other
corporate criminal offenses without repercussion. Because these
companies are so big and inﬂuential and have so much money to
throw around, they seem to be able to buy their way out of pros-
ecution. The results are very destructive for people throughout
the world. Corruption around the globe increases the burden of
debt that poor countries have to carry. Most world projects are ﬁ-
nanced by loans from the World Bank or other institutions in
Western countries (Chatterjee 2003). If these projects go bust,
Third World countries are the biggest losers; these poor countries
ultimately pay the price for development.
This chapter outlines some of the effects of globalization and
the impact the new global economy will have on corporate crime
in the future. It also offers a global view of reports from various
governmental and public watch groups on corporate criminal ac-
tivity and summarizes some of the different types of interna-
tional corporate offending. Corruption in government and the
corrupt practices of government officials around the world—
whether in the form of bribery and kickbacks for contract pro-
curement, or extortion and embezzlement of monies from
government coffers—seem to be the most widespread forms of
corporate malfeasance. This type of criminal activity by political
and government leaders exists in conjunction with big multina-
tional corporations and small local businesses alike, causing dev-
astating consequences for the least privileged people and the
poorest countries on the planet. The legislation that various gov-
ernments have implemented in an attempt to curb corporate
Corporate Offending outside the United States
83

offending and corruption is also discussed. Finally, this chapter
takes a look at detection, prosecution, and punishment of corpo-
rate wrongdoers in other parts of the world.
Globalization and Its Effects on
Corporate Offending Worldwide
Since the 1990s, a new buzzword has been used to describe the
changing world economy: globalization. What is globalization?
Although globalization can mean many things and can be tied to
many different aspects of societies, it generally refers to the pro-
cess of increased unity of societies around the world. The conver-
gence of social, cultural, and economic practices, as well as
increases in trade, technology, and business cooperation, is glob-
alization. A more simpliﬁed deﬁnition would describe globaliza-
tion as the mechanism by which life experiences are becoming
standardized around the globe. Globalization has been occurring
since World War II, but Theodore Levitt (1983) popularized the
term in an economic context in his article “The Globalization of
Markets.” It was through this publication in the Harvard Business
Review that Levitt brought forth his idea of globalization and the
idea that when entities interact, things change. In other words,
this idea of a global economic marketplace is not something that
businesses discovered; rather it is the interacting of businesses
that formed the globalized marketplace (Levitt 1983). 
Charles Andrews (2000) simplifies the idea by saying that
globalization is what is taking place with regard to economies on
a world scale. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the advent of
the Internet, there has been a rapid expansion in globalization of
economies and world markets. The result has been increased
movement of money, commodities, information, and people on
an international scale. Friedman (2005) has spurred an increased
awareness of this phenomenon with his bestseller The World Is
Flat. Friedman’s tome recounts the ways in which technology
has reshaped the world. The author maintains that the world is
flat in terms of politics, culture, and economics because of the
enormous amount of information that can now be shared be-
tween ordinary people around the world. This phenomenon has
also produced new multinational companies that do business on
a global scale and with less resistance from governmental rules
84
Worldwide Perspective

and regulations. Friedman (2005) believes global connectedness
is inevitable, and, in order to survive, countries, companies, and
individuals are going to have to adopt approaches that conform
with global reality. The problem is that those who are unable to
enter the market get left behind, and therefore become very sus-
ceptible to being influenced and taken advantage of by huge
multinational corporations.
Andrews (2000) paints the ugly side of globalization. Some
countries in the world have developed economies, and other
countries’ economies are still developing. Globalization means
that multinational corporations in the developed world will dom-
inate developing countries’ economies. These First World corpo-
rations are exploiting the workforce and labor in developing
countries. With globalization, world economic activity is more in-
terconnected, but the production of labor in developing countries
is now controlled and operated by multinational corporations.
These corporations demand low wages as well as restraint of
organized unions and collective bargaining power. What results
is a lessening of already low standards of living for a large num-
ber of people in the developing world (Andrews 2000).
The appropriation of monies by developed nations to help
Third World countries advance can also lead to corrupt practices
and corporate wrongdoing. Hawley (2005) believes that interna-
tional public ﬁnancial institutions have further aggravated cor-
ruption. For the year 2002, 39 percent of the budget of the World
Bank and regional development banks—roughly $16 billion—
was spent on infrastructure worldwide. The Foreign Relations
Committee of the U.S. Senate has reported that of the US$525 bil-
lion that the World Bank has lent since 1946, anywhere from 5 to
25 percent (or US$26 billion to US$130 billion) has gone missing
due to corruption or misuse (Lugar 2006). Also, according to the
U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce (2000), the World Bank does not
adequately audit the projects for which it gives money; speciﬁ-
cally, in the years 1998 and 1999, of the 1,500 projects it funded,
only 54 were reviewed.
Obviously, the World Bank disputes the claims that these re-
ports make. Lugar (2006) reported that the World Bank and its
former chairman, Paul Wolfowitz, helped to enhance the anti-
corruption policies of the World Bank and suspended loans in
several countries because of concerns of corruption. In an ironic
twist, however, under pressure from the G8 nations, who are the
largest funders and shareholders of the World Bank, Wolfowitz
Globalization and Its Effects on Corporate Offending Worldwide
85

was forced to resign his post at the World Bank after being ac-
cused in a corruption scandal of his own. Wolfowitz admitted
that he personally helped a bank ofﬁcial with whom he was ro-
mantically involved get a promotion, a large increase in salary,
and a contract that would give her extraordinary annual raises
(Guha and Callan 2007). Wolfowitz resigned on June 30, 2007, be-
cause he violated several rules for promotion and salary increase
at the bank (Wroughton 2007).
The Extent of Corporate Offending
in Other Countries
No country in the world is free from corporate offending and
corruption by corporate business organizations, public institu-
tions, and governmental entities at the highest and even most
local levels. Throughout the world, developed countries with
capitalistic and free-market economies suffer from the same
types of corporate offending as the United States. Countries
that are less developed seem to be most susceptible to govern-
mental and political corruption. As in the United States, money,
business, and politics in other nations are also interconnected.
Whether through bribery, kickbacks, extortion, or other forms
of criminal offending, political leaders and corporations around
the globe have been involved in corporate malfeasance. Gov-
ernments are responsible for many of the actions that a society
undertakes. For instance, the granting of government contracts,
using land, assessing taxes, and using public funds are all
prone to corruption (Simon 2006). Often, these activities are
conducted in conjunction with businesses and corporations
within the country or with foreign business subsidiaries. In
essence, corrupt practices by governmental officials and politi-
cal leaders is corporate criminal offending because businesses
are involved. Taking advantage of a political position of power
for personal gain is defined as a political crime, but political
crimes can also be corporate crimes. For example, a corporation
could bribe a public official in exchange for favorable conces-
sions, or a government official could demand money in ex-
change for a favor, which would be extortion (Simon 2006).
Regardless of the type of offense committed, or whether it was
86
Worldwide Perspective

the government official or the corporate employee who com-
mitted the act, such deals fall under the categories of political
corruption and corporate crime.
The Global Corruption Barometer, a survey conducted by
Gallup International for Transparency International (2006), re-
ports that political parties and governments are seen around the
world as the most corrupt sector. The report states: “While there
are differences between countries in the extent to which people
experience corruption in their everyday lives, there is a wide-
spread perception that the authority vested in the institutions
that ought to represent public interest is, in fact, being abused for
private gain” (2006, 15). This statement seems to solidify the idea
that corporations around the world are so entangled that the sep-
aration of corporate crime from political corruption is impossi-
ble. In fact, the very entities that are supposed to protect the
people from being victimized are themselves offenders. The 2006
Global Corruption Barometer reveals that bribes are most com-
monly paid to the police, followed by bribes to obtain public ser-
vices, bribes to the legal system and the judiciary, and finally
bribes for medical and educational services. Bribery of this type
greatly affects people’s quality of life. The report also reveals that
the average cost of bribes varies by country. For instance, in
African countries, average bribes are US$100 to the legal system
and judiciary, US$70 to the police and educational system, and
US$40 for other public services. In Latin America, however, aver-
age bribes are the highest for medical services at over US$600,
followed by those to the legal system, judiciary, and tax revenue
at over US$300, and ﬁnally bribes to the police at an average of
around US$200.
Transparency International (TI) also conducts an annual
Global Corruption Report (GCR) that includes important studies
on corruption around the world. These yearly reports cover a
wide range of activity and include ﬁndings from 30–45 countries.
TI is a global organization consisting of more than 90 locally es-
tablished national chapters whose mission is to ﬁght corruption
on a global scale and to work toward a world free of corrupt and
criminal practices. TI defines corruption as “the misuse of en-
trusted power for private gain,” a deﬁnition similar to the one
for political crime listed earlier. If this corruption involves any
type of business, and it usually does, it can also be considered
corporate crime. Corporate offending can occur in many sectors
The Extent of Corporate Offending in Other Countries
87

of society, but the most prevalent areas seem to be in the political
arena, public service contracting, development and reconstruc-
tion, and access to health care.
Political Corruption and Corporate Crime
Whether we know it or not, political corruption concerns every-
one. Politicians in the United States are elected by the people,
and we expect that they will govern in our best interest. Demo-
cratically elected government officials are given the power to
make decisions that affect citizens’ lives and are given control of
the use of national resources. It is often because of this power
that corruption and corporate offending occur; whether to fur-
nish favors to those who contributed to their campaign, or sim-
ply out of personal greed, corporate criminal activity in politics
is ever present. According to the definition used by Hodess
(2004), political corruption occurs when political leaders abuse
their entrusted positions for personal gain. There are many facets
of political corruption; these vary from buying votes to abusing
state resources. The problem with corporate offending by politi-
cians is not only that political leaders line their pockets with cor-
porate monies in return for policy inﬂuence, which is ethically
wrong, but they misuse or embezzle public funds to the point
that services to the public suffer. Corporate offending by politi-
cians means compromised access to health care, housing, sanita-
tion, clean drinking water, and lifesaving services. Lack of these
services, for many areas of the world, means loss of life. But the
link between corporate offending and politics is not just about
money; it can be about favors as well. 
Politicians are very inﬂuential, and trading favors and abus-
ing their inﬂuence threatens the very democratic process that the
public believes in. Hodess (2004) reports that corruption in poli-
tics covers a wide range of illegal behavior, and politicians can
engage in these behaviors before, during, and even after vacating
their positions. Offending by politicians and government offi-
cials is rarely prosecuted, much to the public’s dismay. Leaders
are often out of ofﬁce before any of their wrongdoing is uncov-
ered. When asked if they could eliminate offending from one in-
stitution, most of the general public stated that they would like
to see a crackdown on political parties more than any other insti-
tution (Transparency International 2003). Business leaders also
88
Worldwide Perspective

believe that these types of offenses have an impact on policy. Ac-
cording to the Global Competitiveness Report 2002–2003 issued by
the World Economic Forum (2003), in about 20 percent of coun-
tries surveyed, bribery is the usual method by which policy goals
are achieved. Furthermore, 50 percent of participating countries
reported that illegal political contributions occur regularly. Of-
fending in the political arena goes against the very notions of
equality and justice; it keeps human needs from being met.
The Global Corruption Report for 2004 outlines large-scale of-
fending by political leaders and government ofﬁcials. The report
gives information on the dollar estimates alleged to have been
embezzled by some of the most corrupt political leaders in the
last 20 years. They include Mohamed Suharto, president of In-
donesia from 1967 to 1998, who is estimated to have embezzled
anywhere from $15 billion to $35 billion; Ferdinand Marcos,
president of the Philippines from 1972 to 1986, believed to have
stolen $5 billion to $10 billion; Mobutu Sese Seko, president of
Zaire from 1965 to 1997, who reportedly stole $5 billion; Sani
Abacha, president of Nigeria, said to have embezzled $2 billion
to $5 billion; Yugoslavian president Slobodan Milosevic, who si-
phoned an estimated $1 billion from his government; Jean-
Claude “Baby Doc” Duvalier, president of Haiti, accused of
pillaging between $300 million to $800 million from his country;
and Alberto Fujimori, president of Peru, is said by the Global
Corruption Report to have looted over $600 million. And the list
goes on. When compared to the gross domestic product of the
victimized countries, these figures make it obvious that many
people have suffered unnecessarily at the hands of their corrupt
leaders. Some of these individuals have been tried for interna-
tional criminal offenses and human rights violations, but not all
have been brought to justice.
Hodess (2004) also states that the legal system overseeing
the political behavior of national leaders is insufficient. Many
countries have set rules governing public contributions to can-
didates, with regulations stipulating that the candidate release
the names of campaign donors. But these rules are not in place
everywhere. According to Hodess, one in four countries lacks
disclosure requirements for political officials, and one in three
has no system in place to govern the financial practices of the
countries’ political parties. Enforcement and oversight in this
realm need to be conducted by autonomous agencies. Many
governments, however, are reluctant to take the steps needed to
Political Corruption and Corporate Crime
89

make this happen. Efforts to bring corrupt leaders to justice
have been hampered in the past. Laws giving them immunity
from prosecution and holes in extradition treaties continue to al-
low these individuals to avoid punishment. Although some of
these offenders have been forced to pay back millions to the
countries from which they stole, many corrupt political leaders
have their pilfered fortunes tucked away in Swiss bank ac-
counts, making it virtually impossible to recover any of the
monies stolen. The GCR for 2004 puts forth some key recom-
mendations for curbing political offending. These include the
following requirements:
• Governments must enhance legislation on political fund-
ing and disclosure. Public oversight bodies and indepen-
dent courts must be endowed with adequate resources
and skills and the power to review, investigate, and hold
offenders accountable.
• Governments must implement adequate conﬂict of inter-
est legislation, including laws that regulate the circum-
stances under which an elected ofﬁcial may hold a
position in the private sector or a state-owned company.
• Candidates and parties should have fair access to the me-
dia. Standards for achieving balanced media coverage of
elections must be established, applied, and maintained.
• Political parties, candidates, and politicians should dis-
close assets, income, and expenditures to an independent
agency. Such information should be presented in a timely
fashion, on an annual basis, as well as before and after
elections.
• International ﬁnancial institutions and bilateral donors
must take political corruption into account when deciding
to lend or grant money to governments. They should es-
tablish sensitive criteria to evaluate corruption levels.
• The United Nations (UN) Convention against Corruption
must be swiftly ratiﬁed and enforced.
• The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment (OECD) Anti-Bribery Convention must be
strengthened and properly monitored and enforced. Sig-
natory governments should launch an educational cam-
paign to ensure that businesses know the law and the
penalties for breaching it. (2004, 5)
90
Worldwide Perspective

Corporate Offending in Services,
Development, and Post-Conﬂict Construction
Directly related to corporate crime by political and government
ofﬁcials are offenses in the granting of government contracts in
countries around the world. Especially vulnerable to this type of
offending are those countries that need development or recon-
struction. The United Nations has stated that “the negative im-
pact of corruption on development is no longer questioned”
(Pilapitiya 2004, 9). When development and reconstruction con-
tracts are not awarded in a fair and legal manner, the developing
countries are the ones that lose out. They become further bur-
dened with debt and, to make matters worse, are left with
shoddy infrastructure. According to Peter Eigen (2005), roughly
US$4 trillion is spent annually around the globe on government
projects. From the construction of schools and public buildings
to providing clean water and waste disposal, provision of these
services is prone to corruption. Corporate criminal offending in
construction is especially devastating because second-rate work
puts lives at risk. Lewis (2005) reports that since 1990, approxi-
mately 156,000 persons have died in earthquakes. Although
earthquakes are not preventable, substandard building construc-
tion is. “Earthquakes don’t kill people,” notes Lewis; “collapsing
buildings do” (23). Although it is hard to ascertain blame for loss
of life in an earthquake situation, two such disasters in Turkey
and Italy illustrate the consequences of criminal activity in the
construction of public buildings. Inspectors often turn a blind
eye to regulations and safety codes if given sufﬁcient bribes by
the company contracted to construct the building. Not having to
build the infrastructure to specified minimum standards saves
the construction company a great deal of money.
In Italy, a 1980 earthquake brought devastation to the town
of Avellino, located east of Naples. Many buildings, including
the maternity wing of a six-story hospital, collapsed, crushing all
the occupants inside. An investigation of this collapse revealed
that the materials used to build the structure were not up to stan-
dards, and that the necessary inspections and controls were not
done in order to cut costs (Alexander 2005). It was alleged that
the Italian mafia siphoned funds from these construction proj-
ects, and costs were cut by violating building regulations.
Corporate Offending
91

Turkey has also been ravaged by earthquakes. The people of
Turkey experienced two earthquakes in 1999 alone that killed
more than 15,000 people (Mitchell and Page 2005). Should the
Turkish people assume that these deaths were not preventable
and that earthquake deaths are something beyond a govern-
ment’s ability to prevent? To the contrary, Mitchell and Page
(2005) believe that corporate criminal offending in the “construc-
tion industry and in the enforcement of building codes” is to
blame, and the government should be held accountable (28).
The stories above are just two examples of what can occur
when bribery leads to second-rate construction. Obviously, loss
of life is the worst result of this type of corporate offending, but
bribery in development and reconstruction can also have serious
economic costs. In order to gauge the actual economic loss from
these crimes, we need to understand the reasons why construc-
tion is so prone to bribery. Paul Collier and Anke Hoefﬂer (2005)
point out two reasons: “First it is intensive in ‘idiosyncratic’
capital, meaning that its capital has to be designed specifically
for installation. Second, it is a ‘network’ activity, requiring gov-
ernment regulation” (12–13). Since calculating the cost of a new
building or structure is very complex, the builders and the sup-
pliers know more about actual costs than the customers. This
gives the builder the chance to cut actual costs by using cheaper
materials or to drag out the project longer than needed, thereby
charging more for construction time and ensuring extra funds to
bribe those in charge of inspection. The corollary effects of shady
business practices are that governments pay more in capital costs
for infrastructure, leaving less money available for services
needed by the people. These practices also allow government of-
ﬁcials to allocate more monies in areas where pilfering can occur.
Placing a larger percentage of budgets on infrastructure than on
education or health care results in “more being spent but less be-
ing delivered” (Collier and Hoefﬂer 2005, 13). This, in turn, raises
the costs of building and providing services in the future.
Attempts have been made to judge what the outcome of a
corruption-free public sector would look like. Kaufmann, Leau-
tier, and Mastruzzi (2004) studied 412 cities from 134 countries.
Their study measured city level performance with regard to ac-
cess to a number of services. The authors used various controls to
gauge whether government wrongdoing influences access and
delivery of services above and beyond other city level factors.
Findings reveal that bribery has signiﬁcant effects on all of the
92
Worldwide Perspective

service-related variables. Furthermore, the level of globalization
of a country has effects on city-level performance. The authors re-
port that “city performance for network infrastructure (electricity
grid, sewerage, telephone lines) is impacted by two aspects of
governance (bribery in utility at the city level, control of corrup-
tion at the country level) and per capita income” (26). The bottom
line is that controlling bribery at both the city and country level
would help cities improve provision of access to services.
Antonio Estache and Eugene Kouassi (2002) conducted a
study of water utility companies in Africa using a 16-point scale
for measuring corruption and controlling for many variables.
Their results reveal that corruption signiﬁcantly affects operat-
ing efﬁciency; a one-level reduction in corruption led to an in-
crease of 6.3 percent in operating efficiency. The authors also
report that if this type of corporate offending among water util-
ity companies in Africa was zero, operating efﬁciency would in-
crease 64 percent. In other words, almost two-thirds of the cost
of providing this service is attributable to offending by 
the company that provides it. Think of the reduced costs to the
consumers of this service if this offending could be halted. 
Dal Bo and Rossi (2007) conducted a similar study of electrical
utility companies in Latin America (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela) using two measures
of offending. Their research controlled for various effects on
electrical efficiency and looked at two outcome measures: labor
productivity, and operational and maintenance costs. The au-
thors found offending at the country level to be negatively as-
sociated with labor productivity and efficiency; in other words,
an increase in offending by these corporations decreases pro-
ductivity and efﬁciency. They also found that “public ﬁrms are
substantially less efficient in their use of labor than private
firms” (959). Both anecdotal and empirical evidence show that
criminal offending by corporations around the world signifi-
cantly hurts infrastructure as well as access to, and efﬁciency of,
public services. But the costs are far greater than wasted con-
struction expenses and costs of providing services. Collier and
Hoefﬂer (2005) report that this type of offending causes sched-
ule delays, reduces expenditures, raises operating costs, and re-
duces growth; furthermore, “it amounts to lower current living
standards, with the poorest hit hardest” (18). The United Na-
tions Development Programme has declared that “large-scale
Corporate Offending
93

corruption should be designated a crime against humanity, as
for many around the world it falls into the same category as tor-
ture, genocide, and other crimes against humanity that rob hu-
mans of human dignity” (Pilapitiya 2004, 9).
Corporate Crime and Reconstruction
in the Wake of Conﬂict
The cost of corporate offenses is especially detrimental to people
in countries that are rebuilding infrastructure in the wake of con-
ﬂict. According to Philippe Le Billion (2005), countries in the af-
termath of conflict tend to be some of the most prone to these
offenses. He states that often the malfeasance was occurring
prior to conflict and may even be the reason the conflict esca-
lated. Part of the problem lies in the breakdown of government
that comes with conﬂict. Those seeking power in times of gov-
ernmental weakness resort to wrongdoing to gain inﬂuence and
control. Post-conflict, however, wrongdoing also flourishes as
the road to peace, democracy, and a free-market economy facili-
tates many opportunities to engage in criminal activity and
abuse new positions of power. Laws, legal authority, and the
manpower to enforce and deter these kinds of violations are also
very unstable in times of rebuilding. Post-conﬂict areas, because
of new regimes or modes of political power, are often character-
ized by informal procedures. With inadequate numbers of troops
or police forces, or ones that lack training, criminal activity is
more likely to occur. Le Billion also notes that even foreign
troops and the inﬂux of outside aid can “inﬂate local prices and
salaries, thereby contributing to an economic context favorable
to corruption” (74).
Numerous reports have surfaced of the offenses that are tol-
erated in post-conflict countries. The long-standing view has
been that as long as the governments in these countries remain
allies to the developed world, a blind eye will be turned to cor-
porate criminal and other criminal practices, and the continued
ﬂow of aid to these regions will be given under the guise of sup-
port for the displaced and disturbed populace. Alberto Alesina
and Beatrice Weder (2002) report that the United States in partic-
ular has continued to give aid to the most criminal of administra-
tions in the world. The U.S. government cites reasons such as
94
Worldwide Perspective

backlash from local governments, political instability, and the
potential undermining of a new administration’s credibility as
reasons for continuing aid in these regions.
Rebuilding Iraq
Reconstruction and democracy building in Iraq provide a recent
and alarming example of how conﬂict presents an abundant op-
portunity for corporate offending and corruption by ofﬁcials to
thrive and undermine the stability and prosperity of a devas-
tated region. Reinoud Leenders and Justin Alexander (2005) re-
port that when the regime of Saddam Hussein was demolished
in 2003, many Iraqis celebrated; many others, however, watched
with horror as a new era of offending, conﬂict, and pilfering of
state assets began. The political void that was created when Sad-
dam was dethroned encouraged many politicians to take over
state property, buildings, and areas of cities in attempts to seize
power over the country. The Iraqi people, who were oppressed
and not able to participate in any political processes under Hus-
sein, felt largely left out again as many factions tried to usurp
power. This seizing of power and pilfering of state assets is not
conducive to building stability or attempting to thwart violence
in the building of a new government. Indeed, numerous reports
have cited corruption as one of the major problems in the recon-
struction of Iraq.
Although reconstruction efforts in Iraq are getting better,
the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction (SIGIR) in
its October 2007 Report explains that information is still not being
disseminated on the cost of projects and whether or not they are
fully completed. SIGIR, in its reports, has made several recom-
mendations to agencies with reconstruction contracts in Iraq
“designed to achieve management improvements and correc-
tive actions needed in reconstruction and relief activities” (153).
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) (2007) also re-
leased testimony on the rebuilding of Iraq. Their report states
that “U.S. efforts lack an overall strategy, no lead agency pro-
vides overall direction, and U.S. priorities have been subject to
numerous changes” (9). The U.S. Congress is demanding better
oversight and success in the reconstruction of Iraq, and on Au-
gust 29, 2007, the army set up a committee to review all army
contracts in Iraq in order to “achieve greater effectiveness, efﬁ-
ciency, and transparency in future operations” (12). Dominic
Corporate Crime and Reconstruction in the Wake of Conﬂict
95

Nutt and John Davison (2003) exemplify concerns when they
note that despite the inﬂux of large sums of money, effective re-
construction in Iraq has not occurred: “Hospitals still lack medi-
cines and basic equipment, clean drinking water is not available
in many areas, and raw sewage can be seen on the streets of
many towns” (3). Leenders and Alexander (2003), in interviews
with Iraqi businessmen, report that almost all tell accounts of
how criminal offending is inﬂuencing the government’s ability
to function. The authors say that although these businessmen
may not be telling the whole truth, high-ranking government of-
ﬁcers have admitted that criminal wrongdoing is a real problem.
Saddam’s regime left malfeasance at every level because of the
control he had over the economy. Trying to undo and correct
these practices in government will bring even more chances for
corporate criminal offending to thrive.
The other issue in Iraq is its inability to keep track of where
its oil revenue goes. Leenders and Alexander (2005) report that
there has been no attempt to devise a more effective method to
manage Iraq’s oil revenues. Shortly after the takeover of Iraq by
allied forces, its oil profits were put into a development fund
for Iraq, authorized by the United Nations. In 2004, the man-
agement of this fund was handed over to the Iraqi ministry of
finance and managed by the International Advisory and Moni-
toring Board (IAMB). IAMB (2006) cites in its reports numerous
problems with fraud-related activity. Pre- and post-war oil sales
and assets seized from Saddam Hussein were estimated at
around US$5 billion, yet somehow, US$4 billion of these profits
remain unaccounted for (Nutt and Davison 2003). Part of the
Iraqi oil revenue fraud and embezzlement is the fault of the
U.S. handling of contracts in Iraq. Estimates for the reconstruc-
tion of Iraq range anywhere from US$56 billion (UN and World
Bank estimates), up to US$100 billion (U.S. Congressional Bud-
get Office estimate). Criticisms are that most contracts thus far
have gone to large companies that either donated huge sums of
money to the Republican party or have had Republican party
officials on their boards in the past (Leenders and Alexander
2005). The U.S. government under the Bush administration has
allowed “Indefinite Delivery” and “Indefinite Quantity” con-
tracts that permit companies to continue to receive contracts
without opening them up for bidding (Leenders and Alexander
2005, 85). A lot of money has been wasted in cost-plus contracts
and subcontracting, as well. (Some examples of this type of
96
Worldwide Perspective

waste were provided in chapter 1 in the section on types of cor-
porate crime.)
Since early reconstruction problems have surfaced, there
have been some improvements in Iraq. The Coalition Provisional
Authority (CPA) has set up an independent ofﬁce of inspectors
to oversee the Iraqi government’s affairs. A new law has also
been developed called the National Integrity Law that requires
Iraqi ofﬁcials and politicians to disclose their assets prior to tak-
ing ofﬁce (Leenders and Alexander 2005). In addition, the CPA
has ensured that contractors are providing training in ethics and
management to subcontractors. These subcontractors, however,
have complained that the CPA itself is untrustworthy because it
fails to reveal why some companies are awarded contracts and
others are not. In its ﬁrst quarterly report to the U.S. Congress,
the CPA (2004) noted that 1,500 contracts had been awarded at a
value of $9.7 billion. The report revealed that 32 percent of the
contracts were awarded on a noncompetitive basis, and 68 per-
cent were awarded in a competitive process—but 48 percent of
those used limited competition. Criminal wrongdoing in the re-
construction of Iraq is likely to continue considering that much
of the process of rebuilding remains to be done. Tougher legisla-
tion needs to be passed and proper systems of accountability put
in place if it is to be stopped. Some of this burden rightly falls on
the Iraqi government, which must demand accountability for the
rebuilding of its country; the rest must fall on the countries that
are in charge of and involved in its reconstruction. Leenders and
Alexander (2005) state that foreign governments should create
corporate-offending legislation that covers the companies work-
ing in Iraq and make the management of oil revenues of utmost
priority in order to safeguard against further fraudulent activity.
Nutt and Davison (2003) add that members of the international
community, taking the lead from the U.S. and British govern-
ments, need to use their authority to make certain that appropri-
ated monies and oil revenues are applied to the development of
Iraq and to the beneﬁt of its citizens.
Access to Health Care Worldwide
Access to adequate health care is an issue for most persons around
the globe. Even in the United States, 2005 data, which are the latest
statistics available, estimate that roughly 47 million people do not
Access to Health Care Worldwide
97

have health insurance and, consequently, do not have access to ad-
equate health care resources (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Lee
2006). This statistic exists despite the fact that the United States
spends more on health care per capita than any other industrial-
ized nation (Anderson, Hussey, Frogner, and Walters 2005; Orga-
nisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 2007). But
the large amount of money spent by the U.S. government does not
necessarily mean that more or better services are delivered to the
citizens who need them most (Bureau of Labor Education 2001).
Obviously then, the amount of money spent by governments is
not equated with the level of services. One reason for this is that
health care systems are often susceptible to embezzlement, theft,
bribes, kickbacks, and illegal billing. The problem is even worse
for many countries that are less developed than the United States.
As stated earlier, one of the biggest problems worldwide is access
to adequate health resources. Limited access to needed medicine
stems from pharmaceutical supply distribution.
Pharmaceutical companies make up one of the biggest
proﬁt-making businesses in the world. In recent years, while the
proﬁts of most other Fortune 500 companies have dropped, the
top 10 U.S. drugmakers had increases in proﬁts (Public Citizen’s
Congress Watch 2002). Pharmaceutical companies are also some
of the biggest violators of human rights. Corporate offending in
health care causes is responsible for loss of numerous lives each
year. Nussbaum (2006) reports that the consequences of corrup-
tion in health care are serious and that often “corruption might
mean the difference between life and death.” According to the
World Health Organization (WHO) in 2002, roughly 30 million
children worldwide lack access to routine immunization. In their
report on key trends in health, they cite that “more than two mil-
lion children under ﬁve continue to die each year from diseases
that can be prevented by currently available vaccines” (Schirnd-
ing and Mulholland 2002, 8). Malfeasance in one country’s health
care industry can have severe consequences for the rest of the
world as well. Depravity of essential health care anywhere 
increases the spread of communicable diseases and allows drug-
resistant strains of disease to become more prevalent.
Other factors unique to the health care industry make it es-
pecially difﬁcult to detect and curb corporate offending: Health
care systems worldwide are very diverse and involve numerous
entities for payment and provision of services. Each system is
administered in a distinct way; therefore, it is difﬁcult to oversee
98
Worldwide Perspective

management and detect instances of mismanagement. Resources
in the health care sector are very valuable because the stakes are
so high. Every year more than US$3 trillion is spent on health
care worldwide; Europe spends $1 trillion, the United States
spends about $1.6 trillion, and Latin America spends approxi-
mately $136 billion (Savedoff and Hussman 2006). This is an
enormous sum of money, and because most of it consists of pub-
lic ﬁnds, it is an easy target for misuse. Corporate crime in the
health care sector is so upsetting because the monies embezzled
or abused could have been used to purchase much-needed med-
icines, repair badly maintained hospitals, acquire lifesaving
equipment, or hire and train desperately needed health care
workers. According to the World Health Organization (2006), “It
is now accepted that the dire shortage of health care workers in
many places is among the most signiﬁcant constraints to achiev-
ing the three health related Millennium Development Goals: to
reduce child mortality, improve maternal health, and combat
HIV/AIDS and other diseases” (19). Because of the amount of
money involved in the administration of health care, both rich
and poor countries alike are affected by corporate crime in this
sector. Poor persons, however, are definitely worse off due to
lack of access. Offending by corporations and government ofﬁ-
cials “affects the poor disproportionately, due to their powerless-
ness to change the status quo and inability to pay bribes, creating
inequalities that violate their human rights” (Pilapitiya 2004, 5).
The cost of offending in the health care sector is difﬁcult to
estimate. Sales of counterfeit drugs alone have been estimated at
$30 billion annually. Losses are said to be in the tens of billions of
dollars. The following examples provide a small glimpse of the
types of offending that plague health care on a global scale.
Corporate Crime and HIV/AIDS
Corporate criminal activity limits efforts to control many diseases
around the world. One of the biggest disease epidemics facing the
world today is HIV/AIDS. According to the international AIDS
charity AVERT (2007), over 25 million people from around the
world have lost their lives to AIDS; in 2006 alone, almost 3 million
persons died and over 4 million new cases were diagnosed. Cur-
rent estimates are that almost 40 million people across the globe
are living with AIDS. The number of persons contracting and dy-
ing of AIDS continues to climb despite the number of prevention
Access to Health Care Worldwide
99

programs that have been put in place. Part of the reason is that
corporate crime hinders the efforts of these prevention programs
to control the spread of the disease (Tayler 2006). Africa and Asia
are disproportionately affected by the AIDS epidemic: 85 percent
of those infected are living on these two continents (AVERT 2007).
Since AIDS was ﬁrst identiﬁed in 1981, a great deal of time and
money (billions of dollars) has been directed toward treatment of
the disease. In the West, effective drug treatments have been cre-
ated, and their use has resulted in a decline in death rates.
As of 2007, AIDS patients who received proper treatment
could expect to live two to three times longer than those who did
not receive treatment. Pharmaceutical companies have been
blamed for keeping the costs of AIDS drugs too high to be acces-
sible to those around the world who need them the most. The
World Trade Organization (WTO), with pharmaceutical compa-
nies backing them, was also criticized for the adoption of an
agreement called Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS). Under this agreement, member states had to
adopt patents for pharmaceutical products for a minimum 20-
year period (Velásquez and Boulet 1999). This meant that for at
least two decades, any newly formulated drug effective in the
treatment of AIDS could not be made generically and sold at a
substantially reduced cost. In essence, pharmaceutical compa-
nies producing drugs for AIDS treatment were raking in billions
of dollars at the expense of Third World governments and chari-
table organizations; meanwhile, millions of people were dying
because the drugs were not affordable.
Although the WTO has since amended some portions of
TRIPS to exclude countries facing national health crises (mostly
under pressure from citizen advocacy groups), and more afford-
able, generic brands of effective AIDS drugs are reaching those in
the developing countries who need them, demands for the drugs
still exceed the supplies. Further problems exist in delivery of the
drugs, mainly due to criminal activity. Because of shortages, ad-
ministrators and doctors in charge of controlling the distribution
of the drugs “have a valuable commodity that can be traded for
ﬁnancial, political or other inducements” (Tayler 2006, 2). The re-
sult has been the emergence of a black market in many countries,
especially in Africa, Asia, and South America; some of the AIDS
drugs are sold on the black market by health ofﬁcials, some by
patients themselves, but most are counterfeit. Liz Tayler notes
that certain officials in charge of procurement of these drugs
100
Worldwide Perspective

receive incentives for obtaining the drugs from suppliers who
are less than trustworthy (2006). This leads to a reduced effec-
tiveness in controlling the disease. Despite some progress, the
HIV/AIDS epidemic continues to be a critical health problem for
the world. Large amounts of money will continue to flow to
countries whose health systems are burdened with control and
prevention. Corporate crime will continue to ﬂourish in these ar-
eas where demand for treatment is high, oversight is minimal,
and the potential for proﬁt—illegal and otherwise—is ripe.
Corporate Crime in Mexico’s Public 
Health System
In 2002, the Mexican congress announced it was appropriating
600 million pesos (US$56.5 million) for promotion of women’s
health issues, 30 million (US$2.8 million) of which would go to a
private health care company called Provida. Originally the
money had been allocated for HIV/AIDS prevention. Hofbauer
(2006) recounts the story of how several civil society organiza-
tions in Mexico investigated the change in the budget and uncov-
ered large-scale corporate offending involving ministry of health
ofﬁcials and employees of Provida. The organizations were able
to uncover the wrongdoing because of access to a public informa-
tion law that was passed in Mexico in 2002. They discovered a
6,000-page file detailing how the re-appropriated money was
spent. Eighty percent of the money went to hire a public relations
firm for a campaign against emergency contraception; money
was also spent on “importing overpriced medical equipment . . .
the rent of a ballroom . . . luxury pens, clothing and groceries”
(Hofbauer 2006, 44). A campaign was initiated in 2004 demanding
the government explain how the 30 million pesos had been spent,
why a private organization with health policies contradictory to
the Mexican government was given money, and how the money
would be returned to the budget. In 2005, the auditor general of
Mexico, in a separate investigation, stated that 90 percent of the
30 million pesos given to Provida had been misused, and that
three ofﬁcials from the health ministry were ﬁred as a result (Hof-
bauer 2006). This case offers a prime example of how legislation
allowing citizen access to public information and the initiatives
by civil society organizations can uncover corruption and maybe
even help prevent it in the future.
Access to Health Care Worldwide
101

Health Care Reform: Colombia versus
Venezuela
Colombia and Venezuela are similar in many ways: they share a
border in South America, and they have similar histories and cul-
tures. Both countries have also been plagued by embezzlement
and bribery in the delivery of public services, and their health
care systems are fraught with corporate crime (Di Tella and
Savedoff 2001). In the early 1990s, however, Colombia undertook
major reforms in its health care system, making it more equitable
by creating a national fund that subsidized lower income indi-
viduals with payments from higher income persons (Savedoff
2006). In surveys conducted by Di Tella and Savedoff (2001) 59
percent of Colombian health care workers reported that criminal
offenses in the health system had declined since new reforms
were in place. In the same study, “staff in Venezuelan hospitals
reported that doctors were absent from work about 37 percent of
the time while absenteeism in Colombia’s public hospitals ap-
parently accounted for less than 6 percent of doctors’ time” (14).
Although still not perfect—some of the new monies have be-
come targets of abuse—it appears that countries making a con-
certed effort at sweeping reforms can effect change. Colombia is
a good example of attempts to curb corporate crime in the health
care sector. In fact, in The World Health Report 2000, Colombia
ranked number one in affordability of health care (World Health
Organization [WHO] 2000).
Recommendations for the Health Sector
World health is one of the greatest issues facing the world today.
Health care systems worldwide are vast, varied, complex, and
costly, and as such they are especially susceptible to corporate
crime. Occurrences of offending in the health care sector are
some of the most egregious because of what is at stake: human
life. Typical examples of corporate crime in the health care sector
include fraud and embezzlement as well as bribery in procure-
ment, payment, and delivery of services. Many organizations
have made recommendations to curb corporate offending in
health care and thereby improve these services worldwide. Man-
aging offending means that, first and foremost, the problem
must be dealt with openly. A government that accepts that there
is a crisis and then implements strategies to address and reduce
102
Worldwide Perspective

incidence rates will have far greater success and also see tangible
improvements over those that attempt to sweep the problems
under the rug. Transparency International (2006) offers a number
of recommendations in thwarting criminal practices in health
care; some of these include that governments regularly publish
information on their systems’ budgets and performance, that
codes of conduct be introduced with training for all workers,
that public oversight be introduced so that there is more account-
ability and transparency in delivery of services, that govern-
ments monitor payment methods in order to reduce incentive,
that rules for conﬂict of interest be adopted, that pharmaceutical
and other biotech and equipment companies implement policies
for counterbribery, and that those caught engaging in these of-
fenses are rigorously prosecuted. The WHO (2000) states that
“poorly structured, badly led, inefﬁciently organized and inade-
quately funded health systems do more harm than good” (xiv).
The WHO (2000) also states that health care workers in
many nations are paid poorly, lack training, lack equipment,
and work in facilities that are archaic. Governments need to set
their priorities, and “clinical protocols, registration, training, li-
censing, and accreditation processes need to be brought up to
date and used” (WHO 2000, xvi). Tayler (2006) states that the
conditions and terms under which health care personnel work
need to be improved worldwide; consequently, the motivation
to accept bribes or embezzle monies will be lowered. She offers
a couple of suggestions for improvement, especially regarding
corporate crime in the treatment and prevention of disease:
First, monitoring of pharmaceutical sales needs to be improved,
so that drugs are not stolen and re-imported. Second, the WTO,
WHO, and other international development organizations also
need to end corporate crime by putting the health of the world
before the proﬁts of pharmaceutical companies. The poor of the
world are disproportionately affected by not having access to
health care. “In trying to buy health from their own pockets,
sometimes they only succeed in lining the pockets of others”
(WHO 2000, xiv). Recent adoptions of agreements restricting the
import and export of generic drugs have hindered the treatment
and prevention of disease and helped pharmaceutical compa-
nies secure billions in proﬁts for years to come. Some exposure
of this wrongdoing has helped. “In response to allegations of
smuggling, and to minimise the risk of drugs for developing
countries being re-imported, GlaxoSmithKline are re-branding
Access to Health Care Worldwide
103

and changing the colour of all their anti retroviral [anti-HIV]
drugs that are sold in developing countries” (Tayler 2006, 6).
Ultimately, the responsibility for health care systems world-
wide falls to individual national governments. Every country
must facilitate and maintain the best and fairest system possible.
Simply dumping more money into a system can actually be the
impetus for increased embezzlement and fraudulent activities.
Effective monitoring and oversight of where each dollar goes are
crucial to deterring health care crimes.
What in the World Can Be Done?
Some of the examples above show that globalization and global
conﬂict increase the opportunities for criminal practices to go on
and that the consequences are not only monies wasted but also in-
adequate health services, lack of access to reparations, and prema-
ture and preventable death. What can be done in today’s
globalized economy to safeguard funds for infrastructure and ba-
sic human services from corporate malfeasance? What can be
done to ensure that the developing countries do not fall further be-
hind because of government embezzlement and bribery in build-
ing contracts? Le Billion (2005) believes that for corporate
offending to be minimized in post-conﬂict areas, three needs must
be met. These include guaranteeing public support, providing ad-
equate economic and regulatory rules to eliminate opportunities
for offending, and ﬁnally, paying adequate salaries to overseers of
political ﬁnancing and reconstruction. He also states that govern-
ments need to begin “securing a legal framework for transparency
and accountability” in order to set rules and regulations for, and
punishment against, corporate criminal activity (77).
Laws and Legislation against
Corporate Offending around the World
In many industrialized nations—Canada, Australia, England,
and Japan to name a few—there are in place laws against corpo-
rate crime similar to those present in the United States. Industri-
alized nations are powerful entities in the global marketplace; as
such, corporations in these countries have engaged in unlawful
104
Worldwide Perspective

practices in the name of proﬁt. In response, most industrialized
nations’ governments have enacted legislation in attempts to de-
ter criminal wrongdoing. Japan has passed numerous laws, espe-
cially regarding the environment and practices that affect the
health and well-being of its citizens (Clinard and Yeager 1980;
Yokoyama 2007). Canada, Australia, and most countries in Eu-
rope all have enacted new laws with stiffer penalties for those in-
volved in corporate offending, including laws for offenses where
death occurs. Australia, for instance, adopted the Australian
Capital Territory Crimes Amendment Act in 2004 that enacted a
law against industrial manslaughter (Sarre 2007). Furthermore,
these countries have created ofﬁcial sectors of government simi-
lar to the Corporate Fraud Task Force (CFTF) in the United States
to deal with these offenses. In Germany, a corporate governance
code that is legally binding has been established, and the Euro-
pean Union has adopted the stance that country leaders and pri-
vate companies need to be held more accountable for their
ﬁnancial practices (Shirreff 2002).
As in the United States, many countries have citizens’ rights
groups and nonprofit oversight organizations that investigate
and disseminate to the public reports of corporate wrongdoing.
Groups like Australians against Corruption, the Council of Eu-
rope’s Anti-Corruption Monitoring Group, and Canada’s Global
Organization of Parliamentarians against Corruption were all es-
tablished to help the ﬁght against corporate criminal activities at
home as well as abroad. Indeed, the message is out that corpo-
rate crime is something that affects everyone, and it should not,
and will not, be tolerated. Corporate crime as an international
endeavor has garnered more attention as well. Both national and
international efforts have been strengthened by added legislation
and resources; however, efforts are hampered by their ineffective
use. In many nations, people still do not trust their governments
to act in the best interest of its citizens. They believe that the
polity in their country is involved in much of the corporate of-
fending that lingers. Reports from the media and various public
organizations reveal a degree of skepticism about the dogged-
ness of current cleanup efforts: 
The very existence of anti-corruption campaigns and in-
stitutions in so many countries is an encouraging sign
that the battle against corruption has become en-
trenched. If these anti-corruption initiatives are poorly
Laws and Legislation against Corporate Offending around the World
105

implemented, however, their existence is of little bene-
ﬁt. In continuing the ﬁght against corruption, it is im-
portant therefore to continue assessing progress, not
just to identify needs for new anti-corruption laws and
institutions but to evaluate whether those already in
place are being effectively employed to curb corruption.
(Hodess 2007, 295)
The United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
has urged the leadership of many countries to take what they call
“practical action,” querying governments as to whether they are
freezing assets of individuals involved in corporate crime and
enforcing codes of conduct for public officials; the UNODC
maintains that the public has a right to hold the leadership of na-
tions accountable for the enforcement of laws against corporate
offending (2006). The executive director of the UNODC since
2002, Antonio Costa, speaking at the ﬁrst session of the Confer-
ence of the States’ Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, stated that it is the responsibility of the indi-
vidual countries to do more. Over 150 countries have signed the
UN Convention against Corruption, and 80 of those have ratiﬁed
it. The remaining 70 have cited a need to overhaul poor domestic
legislation against this type of offending before ratiﬁcation can
take place. In his speech, Costa declared that the people of the
world have done their part by bringing corporate criminal of-
fending to the fore, and now it is up to the world law enforce-
ment community and the governments of individual countries to
do their part. He stated:
As recently as ten, ﬁfteen years ago, the “C” word was
only whispered—almost as if it were bad to talk about
it. Dishonest people were often considered clever for
beating the system. Few corruption cases were brought
to trial, even fewer the convictions. For multi-national
companies, bribery was part of the cost of doing busi-
ness—even tax deductible, in some cases. Many coun-
tries were ruled by strong men who looted the entire
state treasury, hiding billions of dollars in financial
sanctuaries where the stolen assets were protected by
banking secrecy. Entire financial communities pros-
pered from dirty money while the victims of corruption
were left to drink dirty water, without electricity,
schools or hospitals. . . . Ladies and Gentlemen, at one
106
Worldwide Perspective

point in the future I would like to give you a report on
the state of corruption in the world, and the advances
we are making thanks to the Convention. After all, I do
such a thing once a year in relation to drug cultivation,
trafﬁcking and abuse, through the evidence submitted
at the Commission of Narcotic Drugs (CND) and with
the World Drug Report. Unfortunately, at the United Na-
tions, the “C” word is still not fully appreciated: we
simply do not have any way to unveil its shape, form
and movements. . . . The UN Convention against Cor-
ruption was negotiated, signed and ratiﬁed by govern-
ments. But it belongs to all people. With corruption,
everybody pays. Therefore we have to ﬁght it together.
(Costa 2006)
Indeed, many international laws against corporate crime
have been enacted. These initiatives continue to be strengthened
by many organizations around the world that are devoted to de-
veloping international laws, disseminating international recom-
mendations for best practices, and encouraging cooperation and
information sharing among world nations. Some of the organiza-
tions involved in this international effort include the United Na-
tions, the Council of Europe, the Organization of the American
States, the Global Organization of Parliamentarians against Cor-
ruption, the World Customs Organization, the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, the Latin American
Centre for Development Administration, the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank, ANCORAGE-NET, and the Asia-Paciﬁc Economic
Cooperation.
Recommendations from some of these organizations have
been made available to the public, to corporations, and to gov-
ernments regarding deterrence of corruption.
Inter-American Convention against
Corruption
This document, which is over 10 years old, contains 28 articles. A
multilateral treaty by the Ofﬁce of American States set forth by
its member states, it recognizes that “corruption undermines the
legitimacy of public institutions and strikes at society, moral or-
der and justice, as well as at the comprehensive development of
Laws and Legislation against Corporate Offending around the World
107

peoples” (Ofﬁce of American States 1996). Article II lays out the
convention’s purposes:
1. To promote and strengthen the development by each
of the States Parties of the mechanisms needed to
prevent, detect, punish and eradicate corruption; and
2. To promote, facilitate and regulate cooperation
among the States Parties to ensure the effectiveness
of measures and actions to prevent, detect, punish
and eradicate corruption in the performance of pub-
lic functions and acts of corruption specifically re-
lated to such performance. (Ofﬁce of American States
1996)
Some of the preventive measures of this convention include
the creation, maintenance, and support of standards of conduct
for public function; mechanisms to enforce these standards of
conduct; instruction to government personnel for understanding
of responsibility; mechanisms for recording income, assets, and li-
abilities of those in public positions; laws that disallow special tax
treatment for those violating anti-corruption laws of the conven-
tion; methods for the protection of those who report corruptive
practices; boards to oversee execution of systems to prevent, dis-
cover, and punish corrupt acts; and systems to promote citizen
and nongovernmental bodies in endeavors in prevention of cor-
ruption (Office of American States 1996). This convention does
not stop the member states from using their own domestic laws
against acts of corruption. The signatory countries of this conven-
tion include Argentina, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Bar-
bados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia,
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago,
the United States, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
The convention encompasses the following acts of corporate
offending:
The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, by
a government ofﬁcial or a person who performs public
functions, of any article of monetary value, or other
beneﬁt, such as a gift, favor, promise or advantage for
himself or for another person or entity, in exchange for
108
Worldwide Perspective

any act or omission in the performance of his public
functions;
The offering or granting, directly or indirectly, to a
government official or a person who performs public
functions, of any article of monetary value, or other
beneﬁt, such as a gift, favor, promise or advantage for
himself or for another person or entity, in exchange for
any act or omission in the performance of his public
functions;
Any act or omission in the discharge of his duties by
a government ofﬁcial or a person who performs public
functions for the purpose of illicitly obtaining beneﬁts
for himself or for a third party;
The fraudulent use or concealment of property de-
rived from any of the acts referred to in this article; and
Participation as a principal, coprincipal, instigator,
accomplice or accessory after the fact, or in any other
manner, in the commission or attempted commission
of, or in any collaboration or conspiracy to commit, any
of the acts referred to in this article.
This Convention shall also be applicable by mutual
agreement between or among two or more States Par-
ties with respect to any other act of corruption not de-
scribed herein. (Ofﬁce of American States 1996)
The Global Organization of Parliamentarians
against Corruption (GOPC)
This organization is an international group of parliamentarians
devoted to fighting corporate crime and supporting superior
governance throughout the world. The group has over 400 mem-
bers worldwide and was established in 2002 at a conference
hosted by the Canadian House of Commons and Senate (Parlia-
mentary Centre 2005). The GOPC, a nonproﬁt organization un-
der Canadian law, has several regional chapters and provides a
number of resources for combating and controlling corporate of-
fending and wrongdoing by public officials. According to its
Web site, the organization has compiled a downloadable hand-
book with information on detection and control of criminal acts,
as well as a training package on budget and ﬁnance oversight for
governments, a code of conduct for governments to abide by,
Laws and Legislation against Corporate Offending around the World
109

and a database on performance indicators for governmental ad-
ministration. The GOPC encourages implementation of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption (GOPC 2007). 
United Nations Convention against
Corruption
In 2000, the General Assembly of the United Nations recognized
the need for an international legal instrument that was indepen-
dent of the existing United Nations Convention against Transna-
tional Organized Crime. In October 2003, the General Assembly
adopted the United Nations Convention against Corruption. This
convention is a 71-article instrument that contains numerous mea-
sures against corrupt and criminal activities and aims to increase
international cooperation of criminal prevention and enforcement
(UNODC 2003). Article I of the convention lists its three state-
ments of purpose: “To promote and strengthen measures to pre-
vent and combat corruption more efﬁciently and effectively; to
promote, facilitate and support international cooperation and
technical assistance in the prevention of and ﬁght against corrup-
tion, including in asset recovery; [and] to promote integrity, ac-
countability and proper management of public affairs and public
property” (UNODC 2003, Article I). Those advocating for this con-
vention wanted it to be an instrument that would be “binding, ef-
fective, efﬁcient and universal, and . . . a ﬂexible and balanced
instrument taking into account the legal, social, cultural, economic
and political differences between countries, as well as their differ-
ent levels of development” (Rooke 2004).
Signiﬁcant issues addressed by the UNODC relating to cor-
porate crime include prevention, criminalization, international
cooperation, asset recovery, and implementation mechanisms
(UNODC 2005). The Convention against Corruption believes that
wrongdoing by ofﬁcials and corporations can be stemmed with
adequate prevention; indeed, offending can be prosecuted after
the fact, but the convention devotes a lot of attention to deter-
rence measures for both the private and public sector. The con-
vention mandates that states criminalize acts of corporate and
government wrongdoing if, under domestic laws, they are not al-
ready considered criminal. It also requires cooperation in efforts
against offending, especially regarding legal assistance, gathering
110
Worldwide Perspective

of evidence, extradition, and seizing of assets (UNODC 2005). In-
deed, asset recovery is one of the greatest tools in the ﬁght against
corporate and political crime, particularly in developing coun-
tries where vast amounts of embezzled national resources need to
be returned to the country for the sake of the public. The Conven-
tion against Corruption established a Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention that will meet regularly to review and
discuss the implementation of the mechanisms mandated by the
convention.
United Nations Global Compact
The UN Global Compact is an international initiative that seeks
to bring together corporations, UN agencies, and civil and labor
associations to work on universal social and environmental prin-
ciples. The goal of the collective is to “promote responsible cor-
porate citizenship so that business can be part of the solution to
the challenges of globalization” (United Nations Global Compact
Ofﬁce [UNGCO] 2000). This compact is voluntary and has two
key objectives: to conventionalize the ten principles for business
activities around the world, and to bring about actions that are
supportive of UN goals (UNGCO 2000). This compact involves
six UN agencies: the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner for Hu-
man Rights, the United Nations Environment Programme, the
International Labour Organization, the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
The Global Compact is designed to cultivate favorable rela-
tionships between business and society. It gives attention to the
world’s poorest people and looks to involve them in the global
economy by promoting sustainable and inclusive global markets. 
The Global Compact asks companies to embrace, support, and
enact, within their sphere of inﬂuence, the following principles:
Human Rights
Principle 1: Businesses should support and respect the pro-
tection of internationally proclaimed human rights; and
Principle 2: make sure that they are not complicit in human
rights abuses.
Laws and Legislation against Corporate Offending around the World
111

Labour
Principle 3: Businesses should uphold the freedom of asso-
ciation and the effective recognition of the right to collective
bargaining;
Principle 4: the elimination of all forms of forced and com-
pulsory labour;
Principle 5: the effective abolition of child labour; and
Principle 6: the elimination of discrimination in respect of
employment and occupation.
Environment
Principle 7: Businesses should support a precautionary ap-
proach to environmental challenges;
Principle 8: undertake initiatives to promote greater envi-
ronmental responsibility;
Principle 9: encourage the development and diffusion of
environmentally friendly technologies.
Anti-Corruption
Principle 10: Businesses should work against all forms of
corruption, including extortion and bribery. (UNGCO 2005)
Many of those voluntarily undertaking the Global Compact
have modiﬁed their business practices and codes of conduct, and
looked for methods to put into action the principles set forth by
the compact. Through an impact assessment, the UN reports that
50 percent of companies taking part in the compact made changes
to business policies as they related to the compact’s principles.
Other Resources in the Global Fight against
Corruption
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has a multitude
of resources available on its Web site for prosecutors, govern-
ment officials, and researchers alike. Some of these include The
United Nations Handbook on Practical Anti-Corruption Measures
for Prosecutors and Investigators, which provides information 
on the development and implementation of anti-corruption
approaches for countries interested in fighting against corpo-
112
Worldwide Perspective

rate and political crime; The United Nations Manual on Anti-Cor-
ruption Policies, which is geared toward politicians and policy
makers and outlines the nature and scope of offending and the
critical components to policy making; and The United Nations
Anti-Corruption Toolkit, which includes the tools necessary for
officials to develop and implement an agenda for fighting cor-
porate and political offending. In addition, the United Nations
publishes a Compendium of International Legal Instruments on
Corruption, listing all key international and regional treaties,
agreements, and resolutions.
Detecting and Controlling
Corporate Crime Worldwide
The aforementioned organizations involved in the global fight
against corporate crime—and others like the World Trade Organi-
zation (WTO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the
World Bank—have a tough job. The business world is so multifac-
eted and vast that detection and prosecution of international cor-
porate violations are easier said than done. Couple this with the
fact that many nations do not have legislation in place that en-
courages transparency and accountability, and control becomes
almost impossible. These organizations set forth many treaties,
agreements, and tools in the ﬁght against corporate crime. They
have proffered many recommendations for those involved in this
ﬁght; however, it is up to individual governments to implement
the necessary tools and make them a priority, and for multina-
tional corporations to take charge in self-regulation of business
activities. Andrews (2000) states that the financial cops of the
world—the WTO, the IMF, and the World Bank—as well as na-
tional governments have given in to big business and accepted
the idea that the global economy and opportunity for proﬁt must
not be impeded. Governments and organizations are making
progress, but much is left to be done. Technological advances like
the Internet have helped organizations to disseminate informa-
tion and make the bidding process for contracts available in the
public arena, thereby creating a fair process that is less subject to
bribes and poor construction. This effort needs to be maintained.
The UNODC (2004) set forth some minimum requirements
for the world to make an impact in the fight against corporate
Detecting and Controlling Corporate Crime Worldwide
113

criminal offending at the signatory meetings of the Convention
against Corruption in Merida, Mexico:
1. Civil society has to play a central role in oversight of busi-
ness and government but also act as a vehicle for reform.
2. The media must continue to uncover and report on abuse,
misuse, and corruption in the public and business sector,
thereby holding those responsible accountable.
3. Countries need to establish a helpful system of checks
and balances and adopt speciﬁc codes of conduct. This is
needed for an increased effort at prevention, not just pros-
ecuting and punishing wrongdoing after the fact, but
seeking out the sources of corruption as targets of reform.
4. Governments need to create a framework to facilitate the
implementations of legislation, including the establish-
ment of independent anti-corruption agencies with exten-
sive mandates to recognize, investigate, prosecute, and
prevent corruption. This has proved to work in many
jurisdictions thus far.
5. The ﬁnancial system of a nation also needs to be on
board. There needs to be a system for governing and su-
pervising ﬁnancial institutions within the institution itself
as well as by outside agencies. Such a system would
make it possible to track transactions and record suspi-
cious activity.
6. Professional associations and working professionals also
need to be involved. Legal systems and lawyers and ac-
counting associations and accountants have to play a role
in oversight and monitoring and upholding compliance
standards.
7. States must participate in quick and helpful international
cooperation to address issues of corruption by providing
legal assistance, information sharing, and extradition
treaties. 
Prosecution of Corporations in Other Countries
In order to make an attempt at controlling corporate crime, the
necessary laws must be enacted and law enforcement agencies
must be created. As of the writing of this book, while some nations
are still struggling to pass effective measures, most countries have
114
Worldwide Perspective

these laws in place. Since the late 1990s, the international commu-
nity has fought hard for the implementation of stricter and more
effective controls. In the next decade, the challenge will be to en-
sure that these laws are actually put to use in the global fight
against corporate crime, both domestically and on an international
level. Houssain states that the biggest challenge for deterring cor-
porate crime is to make certain that “laws are enforced and that le-
gal redress for injustice can be secured through a functioning
judicial system. The failure of judges and the broader judiciary to
meet these legitimate expectations provides a fertile breeding
ground” (2007, xix). He further notes that for countries with legal
systems and judiciaries that are themselves offenders, even the
best laws are useless. 
Eigen (2003) reports that international cooperation has in-
creased, the European Union has adopted new directives, and
there have been many stories of success, especially in the case of
money laundering and the returning of pilfered funds to the
countries from which they were stolen. Nigerians saw US$1.2
billion returned from the accounts of their deceased dictator Sani
Abacha; however, this occurred only after charges were dropped
against his son. The Peruvian government has also taken steps
by freezing assets of some of the associates of ex-president Albert
Fujimori. Furthermore, after accusations of criminal offending, a
vice president in South Africa was removed from ofﬁce; Ecuado-
rian and Bolivian presidents were forced to resign; trials have be-
gun in Venezuela, Nepal, and France; and investigations
commenced against past politicians in Israel and Costa Rica (de
Swardt 2007). Still, inconsistencies in extradition laws and reluc-
tance by governments to prosecute make it difficult to bring
criminal leaders to justice or to recoup lost funds. For instance, it
took almost seven years for the Peruvian government to extra-
dite Fujimori to answer for his crimes because Chilean court ofﬁ-
cials made several rulings against extradition until September
2007, when Chile’s supreme court ﬁnally ruled that he be extra-
dited back to Peru (McCarthy 2007). After being arrested on a re-
turn trip to Chile, Fujimori took up residence in an upscale
apartment in Santiago, Chile, close to the Japanese embassy
(Witte 2007). He continued to live freely in this apartment until
his extradition. Progress is also slow in getting the Swiss banking
system to release funds that were embezzled and deposited in
Swiss accounts. For instance, international prosecutors spent ﬁve
years trying to get back some of the millions that Benazir Bhutto
Prosecution of Corporations in Other Countries
115

stole from Pakistan, eventually recovering only US$250,000
(Transparency International 2004).
Punishment of Corporations Worldwide
Mennen, Frye, and Messick (2007) believe that the success of de-
terring corporate criminal activity relies on prosecution of these
acts. They report that “courts must expeditiously, but fairly, ad-
judicate the resulting cases, and the penalties imposed on those
convicted must be sufficient to dissuade others from similar
acts” (310). Enforcement data by governments also need to be
collected and maintained. This means that governments need to
create agencies whose sole purpose is combating corporate
crime. The United Nations and the Council of Europe recom-
mend that countries employ agencies as an important part of the
fight against corporate criminal activity. The European Union
has also stipulated that these types of agencies be present in a
nation’s statutes as a prerequisite for EU membership (de Sousa
and Triães 2007). Many countries have created these agencies,
and data are now slowly being collected on their activities and
progress. An online research network of anti-corruption agen-
cies called ANCORAGE-NET was founded in 2006. The goal of
this network is to supply practitioners and researchers with ex-
tensive and accessible information on the control of corporate
crime (de Sousa and Triães 2007). Although still in its infancy,
this network hopes to increase the ability of agencies to make
progress in the punishment and deterrence of corporate crimi-
nal offending.
Criminal law, however, is not the only avenue for punish-
ment. Governments also need to employ noncriminal actions;
the loss of positions and pension funds can be equally effective
in deterring individuals from engaging in criminal behaviors
(Mennen, Frye, and Messick 2007). Citizen rights groups and the
media also play an important role. In Kuwait, Morocco, and
Uganda, the media has been integral in exposing corporate and
governmental scandals, and South Korea has adopted strategies
to combat offending that involve civil groups, the private sector,
and the government (de Swardt 2007).
At the individual country level many reforms have been
implemented:
116
Worldwide Perspective

• Cameroon, Finland, France, Guatemala, Malaysia, South
Korea, and the United States have increased transparency
in public procurement.
• Croatia and Slovakia have reduced political corruption.
• Slovakia, Switzerland, and Panama have all increased
public access to all types of information.
• Brazil, Georgia, Greece, Poland, and Romania are ensur-
ing that the independence and transparency of the judi-
ciary remains in place.
• Croatia, New Zealand, and Panama have enhanced in-
tegrity in the public sector by establishing codes of con-
duct and conﬂict of interest rules.
• Japan, Papua New Guinea, and Romania have all enacted
reforms aimed at protecting whistleblowers.
• Ireland, Malaysia, and South Africa are improving trans-
parency in ﬁnancial services (de Swardt 2007, 120).
The United Nations Convention against Corruption is partially
responsible for the increase in reforms at individual country lev-
els. Other international organizations such as the Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Latin
American Centre for Development Administration have been in-
tegral in pressuring countries around the globe to effect reform
as well. Enforcement, however, is still lacking in some countries
and at the international level. The business sector in some na-
tions has little information on or knowledge of many of the pre-
vention strategies already in place at home (de Swardt 2007). 
When prosecuted, punishments tend not to be severe
enough to have a deterrent effect. In July 2007, however, the Chi-
nese government took extreme measures and executed Zheng
Xiaoyu, the head of its State Food and Drug Administration
(SFDA), for accepting bribe money in exchange for approving
untested medicines. Under Zheng, the SFDA approved six bogus
medicines from 1998 to 2005 (NPR 2007). One of those drugs, an
antibiotic, was the cause of at least 10 deaths. Zheng was found
guilty of accepting bribes totaling over $800,000 in the form of
gifts and money during his time as head of the agency (Associ-
ated Press 2007). Even though China executes more persons an-
nually than all of the other nations in the world combined, this
execution was an especially harsh punishment for a bribery con-
viction. Zheng’s death sentence came in the wake of a scandal in-
Punishment of Corporations Worldwide
117

volving the import of numerous unsafe Chinese products. His
execution was most likely a message from the Chinese govern-
ment that offenses such as these will not be tolerated because the
reputation of the Chinese food and drug industry is at stake. The
U.S. Food and Drug Administration refused 253 shipments of
Chinese seafood alone in 2006 due to drug residue or diseases
such as salmonella (Associated Press 2007). Chinese officials
have already admitted this year that they were responsible for
distributing cough syrup that contained deadly chemicals and
tainted pet food that caused the deaths of many cats and dogs in
the United States. U.S. ofﬁcials have also found deadly chemicals
used in antifreeze in some toothpaste that was shipped from
China, as well as toys containing lead paint (Webley 2007).
In October 2007, oil giant British Petroleum, which is Eu-
rope’s second largest company, agreed to pay ﬁnes totaling $373
million related to a reﬁnery explosion in Texas where 15 workers
were killed and 170 others were injured (PBS 2007). Part of the ﬁne
is related to criminal penalties, part of it is for environmental vio-
lations, and some is for artificially manipulating propane gas
prices.
Conclusion
Corporate crime around the globe is ever present; the industri-
alized production of labor, free-market economies, and the
globalization of the world marketplace have all contributed to
an increase in incidents of corporate offending. The message is
clear: no country is fully protected against corporate crime. In
some countries, however, the outlook is bleaker than in others.
Latin America, Africa, and some parts of Asia are especially
susceptible to corporate offending in both business and govern-
ment. The poor around the world pay an especially high price
for corporate offenses, whether in development, access to basic
services like sanitation and clean water, or necessary and af-
fordable health care; those less fortunate are always the most
severely affected. In the globalized, shrinking world of the
early 21st century, the effects can also be widespread. Corpo-
rate criminal activity anywhere costs the whole world. Depriv-
ing persons of essential health care can facilitate the spread of
disease and create drug-resistant strains of diseases. Criminal
118
Worldwide Perspective

behavior by corporations around the globe causes daily loss of
human life.
Some see globalization as progress; others say the faster
and the more reckless we proceed with the idea of a global econ-
omy without taking precautionary steps to ensure the health
and well being of all, the more widespread and deadly corpo-
rate offending will become. Developed countries have the re-
sponsibility to ensure that multinational corporations are not
dominating developing nations’ economies in the name of
proﬁt. Giving monies to help those in the Third World can lead
to more offending—and, consequently, more human suffering—
if not monitored properly. Corporate crime plagues every sector
of society: business, politics, services, development, construc-
tion and reconstruction, health care, disease prevention, and the
military, to name a few.
Many laws, treaties, compacts, and recommendations for
combating corporate offending are in place, both domestically
and in the international arena. It is now time for all involved to
work hard to see that these laws are enforced. The United Nations
is calling for governments and other entities to take “practical ac-
tion” to ensure that no criminal act goes unnoticed, uncharged,
unprosecuted, and unpunished. Numerous countries have made
many strides in uncovering, prosecuting, and punishing those in-
volved in corporate crime. Governments and other agencies have
been involved in freezing, conﬁscating, and returning assets and
monies stolen, but obstacles remain. Some governments are still
reluctant to prosecute corporate criminals; some countries’ judi-
cial systems are still susceptible to bribery; Swiss and other off-
shore banking institutions are still surrounded by secrecy.
Research suggests that international public ﬁnancial institutions
in charge of development may, in some cases, be further aggra-
vating corporate crime. The World Bank, the IMF, the WTO, and
other international organizations need to be effectual, too. The
World Bank alone has awarded nearly 40,000 contracts for devel-
opment and reconstruction in recent years; obviously, oversight
and monitoring by these agencies is imperative in the global ﬁght
against corporate crime. The public and private sectors, the busi-
ness community, governments, citizen rights organizations, the
media, and various other agencies all have the responsibility to
undertake this cause as well. The global ﬁght against corporate
crime will no doubt require a global effort.
Conclusion
119

References
Alesina, Alberto, and Beatrice Weder. 2002. “Do Corrupt Governments
Receive Less Foreign Aid?” American Economic Review 92 (September):
1126–37.
Alexander, David. 2005. “The Italian Maﬁa’s Legacy of High-Rise Death
Traps.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Transparency International 
Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/
download_gcr_2005.
Anderson, Gerard F., Peter S. Hussey, Bianca K. Frogner, and Hugh R.
Walters. 2005. “Health Spending in the United States and the Rest of the
Industrialized World.” Health Affairs 24 (July–August): 903.
Andrews, Charles. 2000. “Globalization: What Is This Monster, 
and What Do We Do About It?” www. mail-archive.com/pen-l@
galaxy.scu.chico.edu/msg48969.html.
Associated Press. 2007. “China Executes Former Watchdog Chief.” USA
Today.
www.usatoday.com/news/world/2007-07-10-china-tainted-
goods_N.htm.
AVERT. 2007. “Aids around the World.” www.avert.org/around
world.htm.
Bureau of Labor Education. 2001. “The U.S. Healthcare System: Best in
the World, or Just the Most Expensive?” Orono: University of Maine.
Summer.
Chatterjee, Pratap. 2003. “Megacrime Scenes.” New Internationalist, July.
Clinard, Marshall B., and Peter Yeager. 1980. Corporate Crime. New York:
Free Press.
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA). 2004. “First Quarterly Report to
Congress.” www.sigir.mil/reports/quarterlyreports/Mar04/cpaig_
march_30_report.pdf.
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoefﬂer. 2005. “The Economic Costs of Corrup-
tion in Infrastructure.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Transparency
International Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/
download_gcr/download_gcr_2005.
Costa, Antonio Maria. 2006. “Let’s Make History at the Dead Sea: Imple-
menting the UN Convention against Corruption.” Speech of the Execu-
tive Director of the United Nations Office on Crime and Drugs at the
First Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. www.unodc.org/unodc/
speech_2006_12_10.html.
120
Worldwide Perspective

Dal Bo, Ernesto, and Martin A. Rossi. 2007. “Corruption and Efﬁciency:
Theory and Evidence from Electric Utilities.” Journal of Public Economics
91: 939–962.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette Proctor, and Cheryl Hill Lee. 2006.
“Income, Poverty and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States:
United States Census Bureau.” Washington, DC: United States Govern-
ment Printing Ofﬁce.
de Sousa, Luís, and João Triães. 2007. “ANCORAGE-NET: Sharing
Knowledge-Based Solutions to Corruption Control.” Global Corruption
Report 2007. Transparency International Web site. www.transparency
.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr.
de Swardt, Cobus. 2006. “Lessons Learned from Anti-Corruption Cam-
paigns around the World.” Global Corruption Report 2006. Transparency
International Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/down-
load_gcr/download_gcr_2006.
Di Tella, Rafael, and William D. Savedoff, eds. 2001. Diagnosis Corrup-
tion: Fraud in Latin America’s Public Hospitals. Washington, DC: Inter-
American Development Bank.
Eigen, Peter. 2003. “Introducing the Global Corruption Report 2003.”
Global Corruption Report 2003. Transparency International Web site.
www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/download_
gcr_2003.
Eigen, Peter. 2005. “Introduction.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Trans-
parency International Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/
gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2005.
Estache, Antonio, and Eugene Kouassi. 2002. “Sector Organization,
Governance, and the Inefficiency of African Water Utilities.” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2890. ssrn.com/abstract=636253.
Friedman, Thomas L. The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-ﬁrst
Century. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.
Global Organization of Parliamentarians against Corruption. 2007.
www.parlcent.ca/gopac/index_e.php.
Government Accountability Ofﬁce. 2007. Stabilizing and Rebuilding Iraq:
Serious Challenges Confront U.S. Efforts to Build the Capacity of Iraqi Min-
istries. Testimony of David M. Walker before the Committee on Over-
sight and Government Reform, House of Representatives. Washington,
DC: GAO.
Guha, Krishna, and Eoin Callan. 2007. “Pressure Grows on Wolfowitz to
Resign.” Financial Times, April 12.
References
121

Hawley, Susan. 2005. “Financing Corruption? The Role of Multilateral
Development Banks and Export Creedit Agencies.” Global Corruption
Report 2005. Transparency International Web site. www.transparency
.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2005.
Hodess, Robin. 2004. “Introduction.” Global Corruption Report 2004.
Transparency International Web site. www.transparency.org/publica-
tions/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2004.
Hofbauer, Helena. 2006. “Citizens’ Audit in Mexico Reveals Paper Trail
of Corruption.” Global Corruption Report 2006. Transparency Interna-
tional Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_
gcr/download_gcr_2006.
Houssain, Kamal. 2007. “Foreword.” Global Corruption Report 2007.
Transparency 
International 
Web 
site. 
www.transparency.org/
publications/gcr/download_gcr.
International Advisory and Monitoring Board. 2006. Development Fund
for Iraq (DFI) Audit Reports. www.iamb.info/dﬁaudit.htm.
Kaufmann, D., F. Leautier, and M. Mastruzzi. 2004. “Governance and
the City: An Empirical Investigation into the Global Determinants of Ur-
ban Performance.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
Le Billion, Philippe. 2005. “Overcoming Corruption in the Wake of
Conflict.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Transparency International 
Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/
download_gcr_2005.
Leenders, Reinoud, and Justin Alexander. “Case Study: Corrupting the
New Iraq.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Transparency International
Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/
download_gcr_2005.
Levitt, Theodore. 1983. “The Globalization of Markets.” Harvard Busi-
ness Review 61: 92–102.
Lewis, James. 2005. “Earthquake Destruction: Corruption on the Fault
Line.” Global Corruption Report 2005. Transparency International Web
site. www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/down-
load_gcr_2005.
Lugar, Richard. 2006. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Chairman
Richard G. Lugar’s Opening Statement for Hearing on “Multilateral De-
velopment Banks: Promoting Effectiveness and Fighting Corruption.”
Washington, DC: United States Senate. March 28. www.senate.gov/
~foreign/testimony/2006/LugarStatement060328.pdf.
McCarthy, Julie. 2007. “Former Peru President Fujimori Faces Extradi-
tion.” Washington, DC: National Public Radio. September 22.
www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=14620504.
122
Worldwide Perspective

Mennen, Tiernan, Eric Frye, and Richard E. Messick. 2007. “Enforcement
of Anti-Corruption Laws: The Need for Performance Monitoring.”
Global Corruption Report 2007. Transparency International Web site.
www.transparency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr.
Mitchell, William A., and Justin Page. 2005. “Turkish Homeowners De-
mand an End to Earthquake Devastation.” Global Corruption Report 2005.
Transparency International Web site. www.transparency.org/publica-
tions/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2005.
Mokhiber, Russell, and Robert Weissman. 2006. “J’Accuse: The Ten Worst
Corporations of 2006.” Multinational Monitor 27 (November–December).
www.multinationalmonitor.org/mm2006/112006/mokhiber.html.
Mokhiber, Russell, and Robert Weissman. 2005. “The 10 Worst Corpora-
tions of 2005.” Multinational Monitor 26 (November–December). multi-
nationalmonitor.org/mm2005/112005/mokhiber.html.
National Public Radio (NPR). 2007. “China Executes Ex-Food and Drug
Chief.” July 10. www.npr.org/.
Nussbaum, David. 2006. “Preface.” Global Corruption Report 2006. Trans-
parency International Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/
gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2006.
Nutt, Dominic, and John Davison. 2003. “Iraq: The Missing Billions;
Transition and Transparency in Post-War Iraq.” Briefing Paper for the
Madrid Donors’ Conference on Iraq. October 23–24.
Office of American States. 1996. “Inter-American Convention against
Corruption.” www.oas.org/.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2007. OECD
in Figures: 2006–2007 Edition. Paris: OECD Observer.
Parliamentary Centre. 2005. Thirty-seventh Annual Report of the Parlia-
mentary Centre. Ottawa, ON: Parliamentary Centre.
Pilapitiya, Thusitha. 2004. The Impact of Corruption on the Human Rights
Based Approach to Development. Oslo: United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, Oslo Governance Centre. September.
Public Broadcasting System (PBS). 2007. “Oil and Gas Giant BP to Pay
Fines Totaling $373M.” October 25. www.pbs.org/.
Public Citizen’s Congress Watch. 2002. “Pharmaceuticals Rank as Most
Proﬁtable Industry, Again.” April 16. www.citizen.org/.
Rooke, Peter. 2004. “The UN Convention against Corruption.” Global
Corruption Report 2004. Transparency International Web site. www.trans-
parency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2004.
Sarre, Rick. 2007. “White-Collar Crime and Prosecution for ‘Industrial
Manslaughter’ as a Means to Reduce Workplace Deaths.” In Interna-
References
123

tional Handbook of White-Collar and Corporate Crime, ed. Henry N. Pontell
and Gilbert Geis. New York: Springer.
Savedoff, William D. 2006. “A Tale of Two Health Systems.” Global Cor-
ruption Report 2006. Transparency International Web site. www.trans-
parency.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2006.
Savedoff, William D., and Karen Hussmann. 2006. “Why Are Health
Systems Prone to Corruption?” Global Corruption Report 2006. Trans-
parency International Web site. www.transparency.org/publications/
gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2006.
Schirnding, Y., and C. Mulholland. 2002. “Health and Sustainable Devel-
opment: Key Health Trends.” Geneva: World Health Organization.
Shirreff, David. 2002. “After the Chaos.” Economist, September 14.
Simon, David R. 2006. Elite Deviance. Boston: Pearson/Allyn and Bacon.
Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction. 2007. October 2007
Quarterly Report to Congress. Special Inspector General for Iraq Recon-
struction Web site. 
Tayler, Liz. 2006. “Corruption and AIDS—An Overview of the Issues.”
London: HLSP Institute. February.
Transparency International. 2004. Executive Summary. Global Corruption
Report 2004. Transparency International Web site. www.transparency
.org/publications/gcr/download_gcr/download_gcr_2004.
Transparency International. “Frequently Asked Questions About Cor-
ruption.” www.transparency.org/news_room/faq/corruption_faq#
faqcorr1.
Transparency International. 2006. “Report on the TI Global Corruption
Barometer 2006.” Berlin: Transparency International Policy and Re-
search Department. December 7.
Transparency International. 2003. “The TI Global Corruption Barometer:
A 2002 Pilot Survey of International Attitudes, Expectations and Priori-
ties on Corruption.” London: TI Centre for Innovation and Research.
July 3.
United Nations Global Compact Ofﬁce. 2000. “About the Global Com-
pact.” New York: UNGCO. www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/
index.html.
United Nations Global Compact Office. 2005. “The United Nations
Global Compact: Advancing Corporate Citizenship.” New York:
UNGCO www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/about_the_gc/2.0.2.pdf.
United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. 2005. Compendium of Interna-
tional Legal Instruments on Corruption. 2nd ed. New York: UNODC.
124
Worldwide Perspective

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2004. “Global Action
against Corruption.” Vienna: UNODC.
United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. 2003. “United Nations Con-
vention against Corruption.” Vienna: UNODC.
United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. 2006. “UNODC Chief Says
Tangible Progress Needed in Fighting Global Corruption to Overcome
Public Skepticism.” Vienna: UNODC. December 10.
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce. 2000. “World Bank: Manage-
ment Controls Stronger, But Challenges in Fighting Corruption Re-
main.” Washington, DC: GAO. April. www.gao.gov/new.items/
ns00073.pdf.
Velásquez, Germán, and Pascale Boulet. 1999. “Globalization and Access
to Drugs: Implications of the WTO/TRIPS Agreement.” Geneva: World
Health Organization.
Webley, Kayla. 2007. “List of Problem Chinese Imports Grows.” Wash-
ington, DC: National Public Radio. July 10. www.npr.org/templates/
story/story.php?storyId=11656278.
Witte, Benjamin. 2007. “Prosecutor Backs Fujimori’s Extradition to
Peru.” The Santiago Times. June 10. www.worldpress.org/Ameri-
cas/2821.cfm.
World Economic Forum. 2003. Global Competitiveness Report: 2002–2003.
New York: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization. 2006. Working Together for Health: The World
Health Report 2006. Geneva: WHO Press.
World Health Organization. 2000. The World Health Report 2000: Health
Systems: Improving Performance. Geneva: WHO Press.
Wroughton, Lesley. 2007. “Wolfowitz to Resign June 30 as World Bank
President.” 
Reuters. 
www.reuters.com/article/topNews/idUSN
2444199220070517?feedType=RSS.
Yokoyama, Minoru. 2007. “Environmental Pollution by Corporations in
Japan.” In International Handbook of White-Collar and Corporate Crime, ed.
Henry N. Pontell and Gilbert Geis. New York: Springer.
References
125


4
Chronology
T
his chapter provides a timeline of corporations from their in-
ception through 2007. Included are some of the important
legislation and court cases that have given corporations more
rights, but that have also made it easier for the government and
law enforcement officials to hold them liable for their actions.
Major prosecutions against corporate offenders are also listed. As
a whole, this chronology attempts to outline important events,
crucial court cases, signiﬁcant pieces of legislation, organizations
formed to control corporate wrongdoing, as well as other histori-
cal events that have shaped and reshaped corporations into the
conglomerates they are today.
1443
Inventors Bylaws is passed, which grants patents for
inventions and is the oldest patent law in the world.
1553
The English Joint Stock Company is formed to pay
for a journey to the East by Sir Hugh Willoughby and
Richard Chancellor. Willoughby would lose his life
on the journey, but Chancellor would make it back to
England. 
1600
The East India Company is established, which is said
to be the first multinational corporation to issue
stocks. The East India Company was founded by the
Royal Charter of Queen Elizabeth I. This charter be-
stowed upon the company a monopoly on trade in
the East Indies. The company’s power reached across
all continents and had inﬂuence over half the world’s
127

trade. It internationalized the systems of weights and
measures, built entire industries, and created its own
currency.
1624
The Monopoly Act is passed in England, which pro-
tects patents.
1661
The London Board of Trade is founded.
1661
The Corporation Act is passed, which expressly for-
bids members of the Church of England from hold-
ing municipal office; it is enacted to restrain the
power of the church.
1711
The South Sea Company in London is incorporated.
1720
The French Mississippi Company collapses when its
head, John Law, decides its shares are too high and
begins devaluing them. Intense protest and subse-
quent selling pressure cause the stock to drop ten-
fold; fortunes are lost by many investors, and the
collapse causes an economic depression in France
and parts of Europe. In the same year, the English
South Sea Company experiences a similar fate. 
1776
Adam Smith pens The Wealth of Nations, which is a
seminal work for contemporary economics. In it, he
maligns companies and corporations, stating that
they are useless and, if anything, have harmed trade.
1790
In the case of The Rev John Bracken v. the Visitors of
William and Mary College, the Court of Appeals of Vir-
ginia decides that William and Mary College can
change its curriculum and its faculty, and that this will
not violate its original charter. Corporations can now
make decisions about themselves and changes to their
structure without reorganizing their charters.
Patent law develops in Colonial America based on
the constitutional provisions set forth in Article I,
Section 8. The act federalizes patent power; states can
no longer grant patents.
128
Chronology
1600
(cont.)

1819
In the case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward, the
United States Supreme Court rules that states cannot
interfere with the operations of a corporation and do
not have the right to amend or repeal a corporation’s
charter.
1827
The Mechanics’ Union of Trade Associations forms in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and the American trade
union movement begins.
1830
In the case of Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts v. Town of Pawlet, the U.S. Supreme
Court expands the rights of corporations to be similar
to those of natural persons.
1833
The Factory Act in Britain is promulgated to establish
a normal working day. It states that the working day
is to begin at 5:30 a.m. and will end by 8:30 p.m. Also,
those ranging in age from 13 to 18 cannot work
longer than 12 hours in a day, and children ranging in
age from 9 to 13 cannot work longer than 9 hours in a
day. Thus, children and young adults can no longer
be put to work at night.
1842
Massachusetts is the ﬁrst state in the United States to
enact child labor laws.
1844
The UK Joint Stock Companies Act is passed by the
British parliament, expanding the access of a com-
pany to incorporate. Prior to this act, incorporation
was only granted by Royal Charter. The act also
establishes that joint stock companies need to be
registered.
1855
The UK Limited Liability Act is passed to make in-
vestors less liable for company losses. Shareholders in
a company are now not personally responsible for the
company’s debts if it goes bankrupt; they are liable
only up to the amount of their shares in the company.
1858
The East India Company is dissolved. India is now
ruled by the British Crown.
Chronology
129

1870
The Standard Oil Company is incorporated in Ohio
by John D. Rockefeller.
1886
The U.S. Supreme Court grants corporate person-
hood in the case of Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac.
R. Co. (118 U.S. 394 [1886]). Corporations now have
many of the same rights and responsibilities as indi-
viduals, such as the right to own property, sign con-
tracts, and pay taxes.
1890
The United States passes the Sherman Antitrust Act,
the ﬁrst legislation against monopolistic practices. It
makes monopolizing any trade or commerce a felony.
1892
England passes the Shop Hours Act, which limits the
number of hours that those under 18 can work in a
week to 74 hours.
1909
The U.S. Supreme Court holds in the case of New York
Central & Hudson River Railroad Co. v. United States
that corporations can be held liable and receive pun-
ishment for the actions of their agents.
1911
The U.S. Supreme Court orders that the Standard Oil
Company be broken up. Chief Justice Edward Doug-
lass White writes that conglomerations of capital in
the hands of a few are analogous to slavery.
1913
The Trade Union Act in Britain establishes a union’s
right to use its fund for political purposes.
1914
Congress amends the Sherman Antitrust Act with the
Clayton Antitrust Act, which bolsters and clarifies
the previous act. The Clayton Act legalizes striking,
picketing, and boycotting by employees. It states that
human labor is not a commodity and acts as the
foundation for many lawsuits against corporations.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Act is passed
by the U.S. Congress in order to protect consumers
from unfair competition or deceptive actions and to
prevent restraints on competition. The act, which is
130
Chronology

enforced by the FTC, guards against business prac-
tices that cause harm and protects the market of free
enterprise from large mergers and conspiracies to ﬁx
prices. A business, under this act, could be liable for
any of the above actions committed by its employees,
agents, or representatives. The FTC has ﬁve commis-
sioners and the power to examine both interstate and
foreign commerce.
1929
Wall Street stock market crashes. From 1921 to 1929,
the Dow Jones rose from 60 to 400 points. Many mil-
lionaires are made and stock trading seems like a
sure thing. Fraudulent companies spring up, aiming
to bilk investors out of money. This overinﬂated bub-
ble cannot hold, and the Federal Reserve raises inter-
est rates. The resultant panic forces large-scale
selling, which leads the market to crash.
1934
The Securities Exchange Act creates the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) in an attempt to re-
store confidence in the stock market. The SEC has
broad power over the securities industry, including
the registration and regulation of brokerage firms
and the authority to punish violators of the act’s
terms. In addition, the Securities Exchange Act re-
quires companies with publicly traded securities to
report reliable information to investors.
1939
Edwin H. Sutherland coins the term “white-collar
crime” in his presidential address to the American
Sociological Society in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
1945
The United Nations is established. Its charter is rati-
ﬁed by the ﬁve permanent members of the Security
Council: China, France, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom, and the United States.
1946
The Hobbs Act is enacted. It criminalizes any attempt
at robbery or extortion and in doing so it affects both
commerce interstate or foreign. The Hobbs Act was
enacted for the main purpose of combating racke-
teering and labor disputes, but it has been used on
Chronology
131

several occasions against extortion and public cor-
ruption. It stipulates fines and imprisonment not
more than 20 years, or both.
1947
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) begins its
operations at its headquarters in Washington, DC.
According to the IMF Web site, the organization con-
sists of “185 countries, working to foster global mon-
etary cooperation, secure ﬁnancial stability, facilitate
international trade, promote high employment and
sustainable economic growth, and reduce poverty.” 
1948
The Organization of American States (OAS) is
founded in Bogota, Colombia, consisting of 21 nations
who together conﬁrm their commitment to common
goals and regard for each nation’s sovereignty.
1949
Sutherland publishes his seminal book White Collar
Crime, which details criminal offending by many U.S.
corporations.
1956
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act is passed, cre-
ating new standards for water quality in the country.
1959
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is es-
tablished as an international finance institution for
the development of Latin American countries. It will
help ﬁnance sustainable economic and social devel-
opment, and support projects to decrease poverty
and increase trade, investment, and modernization.
1961
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment is formed in Paris, bringing together the
governments of countries committed to the ideals of
democracy and the market economy.
1962
The ruling in the case of Standard Oil Company of
Texas v. United States establishes limits on corporate
criminal liability: it states that liability cannot be im-
puted on a corporation if an employee’s behaviors
were counter to the beneﬁt of that corporation.
132
Chronology
1946
(cont.)

1966
The National Trafﬁc and Motor Vehicle Safety Act is
passed, which establishes the National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration. Subsequently, auto ac-
cidents decline.
1970
Environmental groups Greenpeace and Friends of
the Earth begin campaigning against toxic waste and
pollution by corporate America.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) is
passed by the U.S. Congress in an attempt to ensure
workplace safety for American workers.
The Bank Secrecy Act, passed by U.S. Congress, is
the first law enacted to battle money laundering in
the United States. The act requires banks to report
cash transactions over $10,000; keep records and ﬁle
reports that may be used in tax and regulatory mat-
ters; file Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) when
they identify any violations of federal law or suspi-
cious activity related to monetary transactions; es-
tablish programs to ensure compliance with the act;
maintain internal controls and independent compli-
ance testing; and delegate an officer to coordinate
the program. 
Congress passes the Racketeer Influenced and Cor-
rupt Organizations Act (RICO) as part of the Orga-
nized Crime Control Act of 1970, which is designed
to punish organized criminal activity. RICO pro-
hibits criminal activity committed through the use
of enterprise (any individual, partnership, corpora-
tion, association, or other legal entity, and any
union or group of individuals associated in fact al-
though not a legal entity). Racketeering includes
such offenses as gambling, extortion, bribery, mail
or securities fraud, prostitution, and narcotics traf-
ficking. The punishments under the act are harsh,
with penalties of up to 20 years in prison for each
violation.
Chronology
133

1972
The Consumer Product Safety Act is promulgated. It
creates the Consumer Product Safety Commission
(CPSC) to make sure that laws are in place to protect
consumers from unsafe products.
A governmental report entitled the President’s Report
on Occupational Safety and Health cites the number of
deaths from industrial disease at 100,000 annually.
The Latin American Centre for Development Admin-
istration is founded to provide international coopera-
tion for development in Latin America and the
Caribbean.
1977
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act is enacted, pro-
hibiting individuals and corporations in the United
States from bribing or paying foreign officials with
the intention of obtaining business contracts. It also
mandates that publicly held companies maintain
records showing company assets and ensure internal
accounting controls, including that ﬁnancial transac-
tions have been authorized, recorded, and reviewed.
1984
The world’s largest corporation, AT&T, is broken up
because it is monopolizing telecommunications in
the United States.
1988
Ronald Reagan signs the Major Fraud Act, which
increases penalties for those who defraud the
government.
1991
Exxon Corporation and Exxon Shipping Company
agree to pay a record $1 billion to settle all federal
and state civil claims stemming from the Exxon
Valdez oil spill in 1989.
1992
Tom Harkin, the senator from Iowa, introduces the
Child Labor Deterrence Act, which would prohibit the
importation of products that were produced with child
labor and sets penalties, both civil and criminal, for vi-
olators. This bill has yet to be passed into legislation.
134
Chronology

The European Union (EU) is formed.
1994
A jury in Anchorage, Alaska, awards $5 billion in
punitive damages against Exxon for the 1989 Valdez
oil spill.
1995
The World Trade Organization (WTO) is born and be-
comes an organization for liberalizing trade. It is a fo-
rum for negotiation of trade agreements between
governments as well as a place for the settlement of
trade disputes. It also sets forth a system of rules of
trade.
1996
The Office of American States adopts the Inter-
American Convention against Corruption, which is
one of the first international legal instruments
adopted in the fight on corruption. The convention
identifies acts of corruption and sets forth obliga-
tions for member states under international law. It
lists specific actions that need to be criminalized,
and gives information on extradition, asset forfei-
ture, legal assistance, and technical assistance. This
convention was adopted to acknowledge the impor-
tance of an international instrument in the fight
against corruption as well as the need to foster and
assist in multination cooperation to combat it. The
convention set forth two goals: To promote and
toughen each of the member states’ development
methods to prevent, detect, punish, and eliminate
corruption, and to promote and assist cooperation
among the member states.
The False Statements Accountability Act is passed,
making it a crime to knowingly and willfully make
false statements, or to cover up any facts or make
fraudulent statements or representations, or to
make or use fraudulent documents in any matter
involving the three branches of government. If
found guilty under this act, the offender is subject
to fines or imprisonment of not more than five
years, or both.
Chronology
135

1997
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment (OECD) adopts the Convention on Com-
bating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions, recognizing that
bribery is a universal phenomenon in international
business practices and has severe consequences. This
convention seeks to foster good governance and eco-
nomic development and aid countries in the fight
against bribery. It maintains that all countries have a
duty to combat bribery in international business
transactions.
The European Union (EU) adopts the Convention on
the Fight against Corruption. The purpose of the con-
vention is to strengthen judicial cooperation between
the EU member states in an attempt to combat cor-
ruption among European ofﬁcials.
Archer Daniels Midland Company, a leader in
agribusiness, is ﬁned $100 million by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice for price ﬁxing commodities used in
common processed foods.
1998
Exxon and Mobil merge to form the largest oil com-
pany in the world; these two companies were off-
shoots of the original Standard Oil Company
breakup in 1911.
President Bill Clinton signs the International Anti-
Bribery and Fair Competition Act, which implements
the OECD’s previous Convention on Combating
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International
Business Transactions and amends the Foreign Cor-
rupt Practices Act. It gives the Department of Justice
the power to subpoena documents and witnesses in
the investigation of certain civil cases.
1999
The Council of Europe adopts the Criminal Law Con-
vention on Corruption, designed to strengthen the
bonds that unite its members and promote coopera-
tion among them. Members will work together to for-
mulate a general criminal policy—including the
136
Chronology

adoption of legislation and preventive measures—
aimed at protecting society against corruption. In
conjunction with this convention, the council creates
the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) to
monitor compliance with the convention’s anti-cor-
ruption strategies. At the same time, the Council of
Europe, also recognizing the undesirable conse-
quences of corruption financially, adopts the Civil
Law Convention on Corruption to aid civil law in the
ﬁght against corruption and to compensate for dam-
ages those who have been victimized.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) summit in
Seattle sees tens of thousands of protesters and riot-
ers who believe that the organization encourages cor-
porate dominance around the globe.
Hoffman-La Roche, a Swiss vitamin company, is hit
with a $500 million ﬁne by the Antitrust Division of
the U.S. Department of Justice for price ﬁxing viola-
tions. This is the largest ﬁne ever imposed in a crimi-
nal prosecution.
Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder sends memo-
randums to United States Attorneys outlining meth-
ods for the prosecution of corporations.
2000
Hospital Corporation of America (HCA) pleads
guilty to criminal charges and agrees to pay $840 mil-
lion in ﬁnes, civil penalties, and damages from false
claims.
The Peruvian government falls in the wake of Alberto
Fujimori’s presidential scandal of political corruption,
which accuses him of stealing more than $180 million.
The United Nations Convention against Transna-
tional Organized Crime is opened for signature in
Palermo, Italy, in December 2000, and enters into
force in September 2003. This convention has three
supplemental protocols, which are aimed at spe-
cific acts of organized crime: trafficking in persons,
Chronology
137

especially women and children; smuggling of mi-
grants; and illicit manufacturing and trafficking in
firearms. It becomes a key tool in fighting transna-
tional organized crime. States that ratify this con-
vention must take action against organized crime
by creating domestic criminal laws, adopting ex-
tradition treaties, collaborating with legal and law
enforcement cooperation assistance, and promot-
ing training and technical assistance for national
authorities. For the first time, official definitions of
trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants are
developed and agreed upon. The protocol against
illicit firearm manufacturing and trafficking enters
into force in July 2005, making it the first instru-
ment on small arms at the global level that is
legally binding.
Congress passes the International Anticorruption and
Good Governance Act, which mandates the State De-
partment to disseminate annual reports on all anti-
corruption practices. The act’s purpose is to ensure
the promotion of good governance at all levels of gov-
ernment and the private sector. The act also speciﬁes
that the secretary of state, the secretary of commerce,
and the administrator of the Agency for International
Development provide reports to Congress that out-
line the U.S. government’s anticorruption efforts.
Arthur Andersen LLP bills Enron $25 million in audit-
ing fees and $27 million in consultation service fees.
2001
A Republican administration (the administration of
George W. Bush) wins the presidency in the United
States, with more than 70 percent of presidential
campaign contributions coming from corporations.
In the case of In re Hellenic, the Fifth Circuit Court of
Appeals rules that corporate criminal liability may be
charged on a corporation without regard to the of-
fending employee’s hierarchical position. Liability
can be imputed based on the responsibilities of the
agent, not his/her rank. This is a signiﬁcant shift from
138
Chronology
2000
(cont.)

the traditional belief that, to be guilty of a corporate
offense, the acting agent must be in a high-ranking
position in the company.
The world witnesses the collapse of Enron, Global
Crossing, WorldCom, and Tyco, revealing widespread
fraud and deception among major corporations.
2002
Twelve major countries in Europe begin using the
Euro as their national form of currency. The UK opts
out and the Euro begins trading at 0.625 British
pounds.
The Global Organization of Parliamentarians against
Corruption is founded at a conference hosted by the
Canadian House of Commons and Senate. The group
is made up of over 400 members dedicated to good
governance and combating corruption around the
world.
A U.S. District Court in the case of United States v.
Bainbridge Management rules that in order to impute
liability to a corporation for the actions of an individ-
ual, the government must show that the individual
did indeed have a relationship to the corporation.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act is passed in response to the
fallout from Enron, WorldCom, and others. It is legis-
lation aimed at punishing fraud and corruption while
protecting shareholders and investor interests. The act
focuses on improving ﬁnancial reporting and audit-
ing of publicly held companies. It also creates the
Public Accounting Oversight Board to oversee the
accuracy of corporate disclosure of ﬁnancial and ac-
counting practices. George W. Bush creates the Cor-
porate Fraud Task Force, whose chief mandate is to
oversee and coordinate all corporate fraud matters for
the Department of Justice.
George W. Bush outlines his 10-point plan to improve
corporate responsibility and protect the shareholders
of America.
Chronology
139

Wal-Mart is hit with a record 43 lawsuits charging
unfair labor practices.
A 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals orders a judge in
Anchorage to reduce the punitive damages against
Exxon from $5 million to $4 million in the Valdez oil
spill case.
WorldCom ﬁles for bankruptcy protection, cataloging
$107 billion in assets and $41 billion in debt, the
largest bankruptcy protection ﬁling in U.S. history.
2003
AOL Time Warner reports losses for the fiscal year
2002 at $98.7 billion, which is one of the largest cor-
porate collapses in history.
Hospital Corporation of America (HCA) again pays
ﬁnes for civil penalties and damages related to false
claims, this time in the amount of $631 million.
The Corporate Fraud Task Force ﬁles a report to the
president on its first-year efforts. The report details
over 250 corporate fraud convictions and 320 ongo-
ing investigations involving roughly 500 defendants.
Also, in its ﬁrst year, prosecutors secure over $2.5 bil-
lion in ﬁnes but recover only about 30 percent of the
monies.
2004
Former chairman and CEO of Enron Kenneth Lay is
charged with 11 counts of bank fraud, share trading
fraud, and making false statements. If convicted, he
faces up to 175 years in prison and almost $6 million
in fines. The SEC also charges Lay with securities
fraud and insider trading, seeking $90 million in
damages.
George W. Bush signs the Antitrust Criminal Penalty
Enhancement and Reform Act, which raises the up-
per-limit penalties in cases where corporations are
found guilty of antitrust violations to ﬁnes of $1 mil-
lion and 10 years in prison for individuals, and ﬁnes
of $100 million for corporations.
140
Chronology
2002
(cont.)

Dukes v. Wal-Mart becomes the largest class action
lawsuit in U.S. history, representing over 1.6 million
current and past female employees of Wal-Mart and
seeking $11 billion in damages.
Sam Waksal is sentenced to seven years in prison and
made to pay $4 million for insider trading and securi-
ties fraud. Martha Stewart is convicted of lying to in-
vestigators during the investigation and spends a
few months in federal prison.
Adelphia founder John Rigas and his son are con-
victed of conspiracy and bank and securities fraud.
The Corporate Fraud Task Force’s second-year report
to the president details over 500 corporate fraud con-
victions, charges against over 900 defendants and 60
CEOs and presidents of corporations, and a seizure
of $161 million from Enron.
2005
The U.S. Supreme Court overturns a 2002 conviction
against Arthur Andersen, the auditor for Enron’s
books, citing that vague jury instructions allowed
conviction without proof of criminal intent. Prosecu-
tors decide not to retry the ﬁrm, as it has now been
reduced from 28,000 employees to 200 employees
who primarily handle pending lawsuits.
Serono, a company that manufactures a human
growth hormone to combat AIDS, pays a $704 mil-
lion settlement in a fraud case involving kickbacks to
doctors and pharmacies who prescribed and recom-
mended their drug.
John Rigas, founder of Adelphia Communications, is
sentenced to 15 years in prison for fraud and conspir-
acy. His son gets 20 years.
The National White Collar Crime Center conducts a
survey of public perceptions related to white-collar
and corporate victimization. Results reveal that
Chronology
141

46.5 percent of households and 36 percent of indi-
viduals surveyed report at least one victimization
within the last year.
A survey by PricewaterhouseCoopers of 3,634 execu-
tive in 34 companies around the world reveals that 45
percent of companies report being victimized by eco-
nomic crimes. Of these, 40 percent report signiﬁcant
collateral damage, and most claim they discovered
the fraud by accident.
Tyco CEO Dennis Kozlowski and CFO Mark Swartz
are convicted. Later in the year they are each sen-
tenced to 8 to 25 years in prison.
2006
Enron founder Kenneth Lay and former Enron CEO
Jeffrey Skilling are convicted of conspiracy to commit
securities and wire fraud. Skilling is sentenced to 24
years in federal prison. Lay dies of an apparent heart
attack before his sentencing hearing.
Tenet Healthcare agrees to pay back to the federal
government and those who ﬁled lawsuits $900 mil-
lion for violations of Medicare billing. They allegedly
stole $1.9 billion.
A 9th Circuit Appellate Court reduces the punitive
damages against Exxon to $2.5 billion for the Valdez
oil spill.
The International Advisory and Monitoring Board,
the manager of Iraq’s oil proceeds, reports numerous
fraud-related problems with the rebuilding and de-
velopment of Iraq.
2007
The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals denies Exxon Mo-
bil’s request for another hearing, upholding the
award of $2.5 billion in punitive damages. Exxon
says it will appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
142
Chronology
2005
(cont.)

World Bank president Paul Wolfowitz is forced to re-
sign over a corruption scandal at the bank that in-
volves his securing a promotion and a pay increase
for himself and large annual raises for his girlfriend.
Former Peruvian president Alberto Fujimori is extra-
dited to Peru from Chile to face charges of embezzle-
ment and human rights abuses.
British Petroleum agrees to pay fines totaling $373
million for violations related to a Texas reﬁnery ex-
plosion as well as for price ﬁxing propane gas.
Drugmaker Merck agrees to pay $4.85 billion to set-
tle thousands of lawsuits stemming from its pain-
relieving drug Vioxx. This will be the largest ever
settlement by a drug company.
Chronology
143


5
Biographical Sketches
Henry Clayton (1857–1929)
Henry Clayton was a Democrat in the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives from 1879 to 1914. He later served as an Alabama federal
judge. Clayton was born in Alabama in 1857. He obtained a lit-
erary arts degree in 1877 and a law degree in 1878, both from
the University of Alabama. He served as the Democratic Na-
tional Convention chairman in 1908. He is the namesake behind
the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which was promulgated in
an attempt to overcome some of the deficiencies of the earlier
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890. The Clayton Antitrust Act pro-
vided continued support of laws against monopolies. The act
has been widely used in many publicized lawsuits against large
corporations. Henry Clayton died in 1929 in Montgomery,
Alabama.
Marshall B. Clinard (b. 1911)
Marshall B. Clinard is professor emeritus of sociology at the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin–Madison. He received his BA and MA from
Stanford University and his PhD from the University of Chicago.
An accomplished criminology scholar, Clinard has authored or
co-authored more than 10 books, 40 articles, and 25 book chap-
ters. He is best known for his work on the sociology of deviant
behavior and corporate crime, and he is considered one of the
top researchers on deviance and deviant behavior. Some of his
145

books include Cities with Little Crime: The Case of Switzerland; Cor-
porate Crime (with Peter C. Yeager); and The Sociology of Deviant
Behavior (with Robert F. Meier).
Bernard Ebbers (b. 1941)
Canadian businessman Bernard Ebbers was born in Edmonton,
Alberta, in 1941. He made headlines in an accounting scandal as
CEO of the telecommunications giant WorldCom. It is estimated
that the accounting fraud at WorldCom cost investors $180 billion.
Ebbers attended Mississippi College on a basketball schol-
arship and graduated in 1967 with a degree in physical educa-
tion. He later received honorary doctoral degrees from
Mississippi College and Tougaloo College. Having started in the
telephone business in 1983 at Long Distance Discount Services
(LDDS) in Jackson, Mississippi, he became CEO of the company
after only two years, then began buying up other telephone
companies in an attempt to develop LDDS. By 1995, Ebbers had
changed the name of the company to WorldCom. The next year,
he secured one of the largest corporate buyouts in U.S. history,
acquiring the company MFS Communications for roughly $12
billion. In 1998, WorldCom took over MCI, then the second-
largest long distance telephone service provider, for about $40
billion. Ebbers also tried to take over Sprint Communications in
1999 for a reported $100 billion; however, the deal was quashed
by antitrust regulators. 
The price of WorldCom’s stock fell because of the failed deal
with Sprint, and Ebbers’s image as a savvy businessman also be-
gan to decline. His troubles stemmed mostly from the fact that
his deals and acquisitions had all been bought with loans held
up by his shares in WorldCom stock. The board of directors of
WorldCom continued to give loan guarantees to creditors de-
spite the decline in WorldCom’s stock prices. By 2002, the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC) requested that WorldCom
hand over accounting information relating to the company’s
business transactions as well as to loans to its executive ofﬁcers.
The Department of Justice also began an investigation of its own
and requested that Ebbers give testimony before the House Fi-
nancial Services Committee. In his testimony, Ebbers claimed
146
Biographical Sketches

that there was no wrongdoing on the part of his company,
WorldCom. The SEC levied civil charges against WorldCom and
ordered that the company not destroy any of its accounting and
ﬁnancial documents. In July 2002, however, WorldCom ﬁled for
Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Its ﬁnancial reports revealed $11 billion
in fraud, and shares in WorldCom stock were selling for 9 cents.
Ebbers was ultimately charged criminally, tried, and convicted of
nine counts of conspiracy and securities fraud. He was sentenced
to 25 years in prison and is currently serving out his sentence at a
federal facility in Louisiana. His earliest parole date is 2028.
Andrew Fastow (b. 1961)
Andrew Fastow was born in 1961 in Washington, D.C. He was a
business executive with Enron when the company collapsed in
the wake of accounting and fraud scandals. Fastow is well
known because he garnered a deal with the government, plead-
ing guilty to charges of tax fraud in exchange for his testimony
against other Enron executives. Fastow earned a BA in econom-
ics from Tufts University as well as an MBA from Northwestern
University. He ﬁrst started working in Chicago for Continental
Illinois National Bank and Trust. His career at Enron began in
1990, and by 1998, he was Enron’s chief ﬁnancial ofﬁcer. Fastow
has been singled out as the mastermind behind Enron’s fraudu-
lent activities, including the debt that was not listed anywhere in
accounting documents. 
He was forced to resign in 2001 and later gained notoriety
for testifying against other key Enron ofﬁcials, implicating them
in the accounting fraud as well. His testimony confirmed that
both Kenneth Lay and other members of the board of directors
had knowledge of—and approved of—each of Enron’s ﬁnancial
decisions and that the accounting fraud was deliberate. Indict-
ments against Fastow included 78 counts of fraud, conspiracy,
and money laundering, and in 2004, he came to an agreement
with the federal government to plead guilty to 2 counts of fraud.
He was given a 10-year prison sentence. Fastow’s wife, Lea, was
also implicated in the scandal because she was an assistant to the
treasurer of Enron. Lea also pleaded guilty, was charged with tax
fraud, and was given one year in prison to be followed by one
Biographical Sketches
147

year of probation. A judge recently reduced Andrew Fastow’s
sentence to six years in prison to be followed by two years’ pro-
bation. He is currently being held at the Federal Detention Cen-
ter in Oakdale, Louisiana. His projected release date is 2011.
Alberto Fujimori (b. 1938)
The birthplace of Alberto Fujimori is uncertain. Some have ar-
gued that he was born in Japan and emigrated with his parents
to Peru. Fujimori himself claims to have been born in Peru in
1938. His true birthplace matters because if he were born in Ja-
pan, he would have been ineligible to become the president of
Peru. Nevertheless, Fujimori was the ﬁrst person of Japanese ori-
gin to become the head of a foreign country. He became the pres-
ident of Peru in 1990. To most observers, Fujimori was seen as an
outstanding leader who put the Peruvian economy back on its
feet. Fujimori was an ardent ﬁghter of terrorism, forged a peace-
making process with the Ecuadorian people, and aided in the de-
struction of the coca crops used for the production of cocaine.
But, as it turns out, Fujimori was not the unselfish leader that
some thought he was. His leadership style was very authoritar-
ian, and his presidency was not without controversy. 
In 2000, on a visit to Japan, Fujimori resigned as president
via the Peruvian embassy in Tokyo. The pressure against Fuji-
mori began mounting after footage of his second-in-command
bribing a congressman was released to the public. Subsequent
investigations revealed that upwards of $800 million in assets
had been pilfered from the Peruvian government. The govern-
ment refused to accept Fujimori’s resignation and instead re-
moved him from office, levied criminal charges against him,
and banned him from government. Fujimori decided in 2006 to
ignore the ban and attempt another run at the Peruvian presi-
dency. He traveled to Chile to start his campaign but was sub-
sequently arrested by Chilean officials. Fujimori was released
on bail but ordered to remain in Chile. The government of Peru
has since issued new charges against Fujimori, some of which
include human rights violations and embezzlement. Fujimori
remained in Chile, living in a very wealthy Santiago neighbor-
hood near the Japanese Embassy. Finally, in September 2007, af-
ter several years of appellate review in Chilean courts, the
148
Biographical Sketches

Chilean Supreme Court granted Peru’s request to have Fuji-
mori extradited back to Peru to face embezzlement and human
rights abuse charges.
Gilbert Geis (unknown)
Gilbert Geis is currently professor emeritus at the University of
California at Irvine. Geis obtained a bachelor’s degree from Col-
gate University and a doctorate from the University of Wisconsin
at Madison. Prior to joining the Department of Criminology,
Law, and Society at UC–Irvine in 1972, he served as a professor
at the University of Oklahoma and California State University.
His foremost research interest has been the study of white-collar
crime. Geis has published over 350 articles relating to crime and
criminal justice, held the post of president of the American Soci-
ety of Criminology (ASC), and won the Edwin H. Sutherland
Award from the ASC for outstanding research. Some of his publi-
cations include “Scrutiny on the Bounty: Business Rewards for
Crime Tips,” Prescription for Proﬁt: How Doctors Defraud Medicaid
(with Paul Jesilow and Henry N. Pontell), “The Evolution of the
Study of Corporate Crime,” International Handbook of White-Collar
and Corporate Crime (with Henry N. Pontell), and White-Collar and
Corporate Crime.
L. Dennis Kozlowski (b. 1946)
L. Dennis Kozlowski was born in 1946 in Newark, New Jersey.
Kozlowski graduated from Seton Hall University in 1968, has
given generously to his alma mater, and was even named to its
board of regents. He began working at the Tyco Corporation in
1976 as an accountant. Kozlowski eventually became CEO of the
company and turned it from a $40 million company to a $40 bil-
lion corporation. While at Tyco, Kozlowski was one of the high-
est paid CEOs in the United States, reportedly earning over $100
million a year. With his jumbo salary, Kozlowski purchased mil-
lion-dollar yachts, mansions, and priceless art. Ultimately, it was
his art purchases that led to his demise. The New York district at-
torney in Manhattan conducted an investigation of several art
galleries that were helping their customers evade New York
Biographical Sketches
149

taxes on high-end art purchases and stumbled upon Kozlowski’s
name. He owed about $1 million in taxes on art he had pur-
chased for Tyco. Kozlowski resigned as CEO because of the
charges against him. However, when the Tyco board took up
their own investigation, they uncovered numerous excesses Ko-
zlowski was enjoying at the expense of the shareholders. Some of
the luxuries shareholders funded included a $19 million apart-
ment in New York, with $11 million in furnishings, a $2 million
birthday party for his wife, and a now-infamous $6,000 shower
curtain. Kozlowski was accused of falsifying the company’s ﬁ-
nancial documents and charged with theft of $170 million and
the illegal selling of $430 million in Tyco stock. His first trial
ended in a mistrial, reportedly due to threats the jury had re-
ceived and fear on the part of jurors to convict. In the second
trial, however, Kozlowski was convicted of 22 counts of grand
larceny, conspiracy, and falsifying business records. He was sen-
tenced to eight and one-third to twenty-ﬁve years and ordered to
pay $200 million in restitution. Kozlowski is serving his sentence
at Mid-State Correctional Facility in upstate New York. His earli-
est release date is 2014.
Kenneth Lay (1952–2006)
Kenneth Lay was born in Missouri in 1952 and died in Colorado
in 2006. He is remembered for his role as CEO of Enron and its
widely publicized corruption scandal. The collapse of Enron
caused thousands of employees and investors to lose their retire-
ment savings plans.
Lay received his BA and MA in economics from the Univer-
sity of Missouri in 1964 and 1965, respectively. He went on to ob-
tain a PhD in economics from the University of Houston in 1970.
He began working for Humble Oil as an economist in 1965. Lay
also worked for the U.S. Navy and the Federal Power Commis-
sion and served as the deputy secretary of energy for the U.S.
Department of the Interior. In 1974, Lay joined Florida Gas Com-
pany and served as vice president of corporate development. He
left that company in 1981 and joined Transco Energy in Houston.
Three years later, Lay left Transco to become chairman of Hous-
ton Natural Gas Company, which later became Enron. His an-
nual salary and beneﬁts package from Enron is believed to have
been $40 million.
150
Biographical Sketches

Lay claimed that he knew nothing of the impending col-
lapse of Enron, but records show that he was selling large
amounts of stock while encouraging other employees at Enron to
continue to buy more. When Enron went bankrupt in December
2001, roughly 20,000 employees lost their jobs and their retire-
ment funds. The company had been committing accounting
fraud with the help of its accountant ﬁrm, Arthur Andersen. En-
ron’s financial reports were cooked to overstate sales and rev-
enue that would help to inﬂate its stock prices. Arthur Andersen
also collapsed in the wake of the Enron scandal, having been
charged with obstructing justice by shredding important ﬁnan-
cial documents. Lay stepped down as CEO of Enron after the
company ﬁled for bankruptcy. Investigations in 2004 led to the
indictment of Lay by a grand jury. They charged him with sev-
eral counts of securities fraud and wire fraud. Lay was found
guilty on six counts of fraud and conspiracy. Before his sentenc-
ing date, however, he died of a heart attack at his Aspen, Col-
orado, vacation home. His conviction was vacated in October
2006, but civil suits are still pending against his estate from the
thousands of former employees of Enron who lost their jobs and
their retirement funds.
Patrick Leahy (b. 1940)
Patrick Leahy is a Democratic senator from Vermont and chair-
man of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Leahy was born March
31, 1940, in Montpelier, Vermont, graduated from Saint Michael’s
College in 1961, and obtained a J.D. from Georgetown University
in 1964. He then practiced law until 1974, when he was elected to
the U.S. Senate. Leahy has been re-elected for all ﬁve terms since
1974. He served as chairman of the Senate Committee on Agri-
culture, Nutrition and Forestry from 1987 to 1995. He chaired the
Senate Judiciary Committee from 2001 to 2003 and became chair-
man of the Judiciary again in 2007. He is the third-highest-rank-
ing Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee. Leahy
authored the criminal provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002, which enhanced criminal penalties for corporate crime. He
has repeatedly supported stronger criminal penalties and ac-
countability for war proﬁteering and contractor fraud. Leahy has
been critical of the Bush administration’s alleged use of the Na-
tional Security Agency to spy on U.S. citizens without first
Biographical Sketches
151

obtaining a warrant. In 2004, Leahy and Orrin Hatch introduced
the Pirate Act, backed by the Recording Industry Association of
America (RIAA), as part of an ongoing crusade against Internet
ﬁle sharing, as well as the INDUCE Act, which focuses on com-
bating copyright infringement.
Ferdinand Marcos (1917–1989)
Ferdinand Marcos was the president of the Philippines from 1965
to 1986. He is remembered for his corruptive practices, embez-
zlement, and luxurious lifestyle—vividly illustrated by the thou-
sands of pairs of shoes owned by his wife, Imelda—despite the
fact that many Filipinos barely had enough to eat. Marcos stud-
ied law at the University of Philippines; however, his studies
were interrupted by accusations that he murdered one of his fa-
ther’s political opponents. Despite being detained, he finished
law school in prison. Marcos was found guilty of the murder, but
the conviction was overturned on appeal. After getting out of
prison, he served as a trial attorney in the city of Manila. He also
served in the Philippine army during World War II. In 1947, Mar-
cos became the assistant to the president of the Philippines and
was eventually elected a representative in parliament. Marcos
married Imelda in 1954, and they had four children. 
Ferdinand Marcos was affiliated with the Liberal Party of
the Philippines and was elected president in 1965. He promised
great things for the Filipino people, including an enhanced econ-
omy, new infrastructure, and trade with the free world. In the
late 1960s, the vision of a better Philippines was crushed: crime
was on the rise and the quality of life for the Filipinos began to
decline. Marcos suspended habeas corpus in 1971 and declared
martial law in 1972. Doing so nulliﬁed the Philippine constitu-
tion and essentially turned the presidency into a dictatorship.
During this time, however, Marcos remained friendly with the
United States. The U.S. government did nothing about his ac-
tions because he was a strong critic of communism.
Eventually the world came to know about the corruption
of the Marcos administration. Marcos fled to Hawaii in 1986.
Customs officials in Hawaii reported suitcases full of gold
bricks, jewelry, and gold certificates worth billions. The Marcos
family was estimated to have stolen somewhere between $3 bil-
lion and $35 billion from the Philippines. Most of the money
152
Biographical Sketches

was supposedly held in Swiss bank accounts. When Marcos
fled, the Philippines had a debt load of around $28 billion, most
of which was incurred under the Marcos regime; as of 2007, it
was about 54 billion. Marcos was eventually indicted by a New
York grand jury for obstruction of justice and mail fraud. He
died in 1989 before a trial could begin. Five years after his
death, a Hawaiian district court found Marcos guilty of the tor-
ture and execution of thousands of Filipino people and
awarded damages of $2 billion to the surviving victims. The
Philippine government stopped the payment, citing that they
are owed roughly $700 million from the Marcos family. As of
the writing of this book, there is still a battle between the
Philippine government and the Marcos family over the Marcos
fortune.
Stephanie A. Martz (b. ca. 1970)
Stephanie A. Martz is the current director of the White Collar
Crime Project for the National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers. As director, her main goal is to defend the rights of
people charged with corporate malfeasance. Speciﬁcally, the di-
rector’s duties include monitoring legislative and judicial poli-
cies that may infringe upon justice and due process for
white-collar defendants. Before becoming director of the White
Collar Crime Project, Martz wrote for The New York Times and The
Charleston Gazette. She graduated from Stanford Law School in
1997 and served as law clerk for the Hon. James Robertson of the
United States District Court in Washington, D.C., and the Hon.
Patricia Wald of the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C.
Circuit. Martz also worked as staff counsel of the National Liti-
gation Center of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States
and was an associate at the law ﬁrms of Mayer, Brown, Rowe &
Maw and Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin.
Paul J. McNulty (b. 1958)
Paul J. McNulty was sworn in as deputy attorney general of the
United States on March 17, 2006, and resigned in the summer of
2007. He was the most senior official from the Justice Depart-
ment to resign over the scandal involving the ﬁring of nine U.S.
Biographical Sketches
153

attorneys. McNulty obtained a bachelor’s degree from Grove
City College in Grove City, Pennsylvania, and a juris doctor from
Capital University School of Law in Columbus, Ohio. He has
two decades of experience in federal and state government. He
has served as the United States Attorney for the Eastern District
of Virginia, where he made prosecuting terrorism, drug trafﬁck-
ing, gun violence, and corporate fraud his main concerns. Mc-
Nulty has also served under President George W. Bush as
principal associate deputy attorney general and as the Justice
Department’s director of policy. During his years in Congress,
McNulty served as chief counsel and director of Legislative Op-
erations for the majority leader of the U.S. House of Representa-
tives and as chief counsel to the House Subcommittee on Crime.
In Virginia, he played an important role in the state’s criminal
justice policy, serving on the board of the Department of Crimi-
nal Justice Services and the advisory committee of the Ofﬁce of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Robert F. Meier (b. 1944)
Robert F. Meier is a professor and past chair of the School of
Criminology and Criminal Justice at the University of Nebraska
at Omaha. He has also held professorships at Iowa State Univer-
sity, Washington State University, and the University of Califor-
nia at Irvine. Meier has written 15 books and over 50 articles for
sociological and criminological journals. His research interests
center on deviance and social control. Speciﬁcally, Meier has con-
ducted research on crime etiology, victimization, white-collar
crime, deterrence, and legal processes. Some of his publications
include The Process and Structure of Crime: Criminal Events and
Crime Analysis (edited with Leslie Kennedy and Vincent Sacco),
White-Collar Crime: Classic and Contemporary Views (edited with
Gil Geis and Lawrence Salinger), and Sociology of Deviant Behav-
ior (with Marshall B. Clinard).
Michael Milken (b. 1946)
Michael Milken was a financier who earned the title of “junk
bond king” for his heavy investments in high-risk bonds. He in-
vested a great deal of money in the stock market in the 1970s and
154
Biographical Sketches

1980s and was indicted in the late 1980s on almost 100 counts of
racketeering and fraud. Milken’s investments in industry facili-
tated growth and also created an abundance of wealth for U.S.
investors. Milken graduated from the University of California at
Berkeley and obtained an MBA from the University of Pennsyl-
vania’s Wharton School of Business. He was initially employed
by Drexel Harriman Ripley, an investment bank, and through
mergers, he became head of the investment bond department.
During his tenure at Drexel, the company went from $1.2 million
in profit to $4 billion. These successes earned Milken huge
salaries and bonuses. He is said to have earned $500 million in
1987. Two years later, however, a federal grand jury indicted him
on 98 counts of fraud and racketeering. Milken pleaded guilty to
charges of securities fraud in exchange for dropping of the racke-
teering charges. Milken was given a ten-year-long prison sen-
tence that was later reduced to just two years, followed by three
years of probation. He actually spent only 22 months in prison
before being released. Upon his release, he was still worth an al-
leged $1 billion. As part of his punishment, Milken was barred
from future trading in securities. He found himself in trouble
again, however, after violating his parole by working as a busi-
ness consultant. Subsequently, he was ordered to pay back to the
government the $42 million that he earned as a consultant.
Milken has remained clean since his probation violation and has
recently given extensively to charities and to medical research.
As of 2007, his estimated net worth was almost $2 billion.
Slobodan Milosevic (1941–2006)
Slobodan Milosevic was born in Yugoslavia (now Serbia) in 1941.
He died in his prison cell at The Hague in the Netherlands in
2006. Milosevic obtained a law degree from the University of Bel-
grade in 1964. After his graduation, he was employed as an eco-
nomic advisor to the mayor of Belgrade. A great deal of
Milosevic’s life was spent in the economic and banking sector.
He eventually worked his way up to president of the biggest
bank in the former Yugoslavia. This position helped him gain po-
litical prominence and the posts of leader of the Belgrade Com-
munist Party and the League of Communists of Serbia. Milosevic
became president of Serbia in 1989. Considerable tension arose
between Serbia and the countries around it during his tenure.
Biographical Sketches
155

Many countries in the region became fearful of Milosevic, believ-
ing he would attempt to overtake smaller countries in the region
to form a more powerful Serbian empire. In 1991, Croatia and
Slovenia declared independence from Serbia. Milosevic sent in
troops and tanks to regain the areas. In the aftermath, Slovenia
agreed to a deal with Milosevic: the Slovenes promised to help
take over Croatia in exchange for their independence. The war
against Croatia that followed resulted in the deaths of 20,000
people and the recapturing of about a third of Croatian territory.
A year later, Bosnia-Herzegovina attempted to gain inde-
pendence from Serbia. In response, Milosevic’s Serbian forces
seized most of the Bosnian land and then crossed over into Croa-
tia. The human suffering and loss of life that resulted eventually
evoked a response in 1995 from the North Atlantic Treaty Orga-
nization (NATO), which attempted to force a cease-ﬁre and the
withdrawal of the Serbian army. These attempts failed, prompt-
ing NATO to launch air strikes against Serbian forces. Later that
year, Milosevic signed a peace accord with the Bosnian and
Croatian presidents. During the war, though, problems arose
back in Serbia. Many of Milosevic’s opponents won local elec-
tions, and he was eventually barred from the Serbian presidency.
This did not stop him, however; he became the president of Yu-
goslavia, where his troubles continued. Albanians living in
Kosovo attempted to gain independence from Yugoslavia, and
again Milosevic quelled the succession attempt with military
force. The outcome of the ﬁghting was catastrophic; over 10,000
people were dead and 700,000 more were forced to ﬂee the re-
gion. In 2001, the United Nations sent peacekeepers to the re-
gion, and the Serbian government arrested Milosevic. He was
charged with corruption, embezzlement, and war crimes, includ-
ing genocide, and was extradited to The Hague to be tried at the
International Court. His trial started in 2002 and ended 467 days
later when he was found dead in his prison cell.
Ralph Nader (b. 1934)
Ralph Nader is well known as a consumer advocate, lawyer, and
presidential candidate in three different elections, but he first
gained national attention in 1965, when he authored a book on
car safety titled Unsafe at Any Speed, which criticized the automo-
bile industry. Nader earned a bachelor’s degree from Princeton
156
Biographical Sketches

University in 1955 and went on to study law at Harvard, gradu-
ating with distinction in 1958. Through his publications and
other endeavors, Nader has established himself as a renowned
activist, a ﬁerce consumer-interest watchdog, and an outspoken
critic of corporate America. Through this political and corporate
activism, he has attracted many followers. These fans and fol-
lowers have been labeled “Nader’s Raiders.” Nader’s political
aspirations began when he ran for president in 1996 as the Green
Party’s candidate. (He ran a second time in 2000 as a Green Party
candidate and again in 2004 as an independent.) However, his
political campaigns failed to generate the success of his role as
consumer advocate.  Nader is the founder of such organizations
as the Center for Auto Safety, Clean Water Action Project, and
Public Interest Research Groups (PIRGs). In recent years, he has
criticized American foreign policy decisions. 
Michael Oxley (b. 1944)
Michael Oxley was a Republican representative from the Fourth
Congressional District of Ohio from 1980 to 2007. He was born in
Ohio in 1944, graduated from Miami University of Ohio, and ob-
tained his law degree from Ohio State University. An FBI agent
from 1969 to 1972, Oxley was then elected to the Ohio House of
Representatives, where he served until 1981. He cosponsored the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which was promulgated in 2002 to provide
protection to shareholders and investors in the wake of account-
ing scandals at Enron and WorldCom. The act set forth new rules
for the recording and reporting of corporate ﬁnancial informa-
tion. It also enhanced the penalties for noncompliance. Oxley an-
nounced his retirement from the U.S. House of Representatives
at the end of the 2007 term.
Henry N. Pontell (b. 1950)
Henry N. Pontell is a professor of criminology, law and society,
and sociology at the University of California, Irvine. Pontell re-
ceived his BA, MA, and PhD, all in sociology, from the State Uni-
versity of New York at Stony Brook. An award-winning
researcher and lecturer, he has written about criminology, crimi-
nal justice, and sociology. Pontell received the Donald R. Cressey
Biographical Sketches
157

Award for major lifetime contributions to research on white-col-
lar crime from the Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners in
2001 and the Albert J. Reiss, Jr. Distinguished Scholarship Award
from the American Sociological Association that same year. He
has served as vice president of the American Society of Criminol-
ogy and president of the Western Society of Criminology. His re-
search and teaching interests include white-collar and corporate
crime, deviance and social control, punishment and criminal jus-
tice system capacity issues, identity theft, ﬁnancial crime, and cy-
bercrime. Some of his publications include Social Deviance,
Prescription for Proﬁt: How Doctors Defraud Medicaid, Proﬁt without
Honor: White Collar Crime and the Looting of America, Big Money
Crime: Fraud and Politics in the Savings and Loan Crisis, and Con-
temporary Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice.
John Rigas (b. 1924)
John Rigas was born in Wellsville, New York, in 1924. He
founded Adelphia Communications Corporation, which would
become one of the largest cable organizations in the United
States. Rigas enlisted in the U.S. Army right after high school and
saw combat in France during WWII. After the war, Rigas en-
rolled in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York,
where he received a degree in management engineering. His
business career started in 1952, when he purchased a cable televi-
sion franchise in Pennsylvania. He then built up Adelphia by
buying out other franchises. Rigas made Adelphia into one of the
biggest providers of cable services in the United States, with
more than 5 million customers prior to its demise in 2002. Until
then, the Rigas family led a very lavish lifestyle, highlighted by
the purchase of an NHL hockey team, 17 company cars, and $1
million per month in fun money. However, like many other
CEOs of the post-Enron era, Rigas was forced to resign from
Adelphia after being indicted for conspiracy, bank fraud, and se-
curities fraud. Rigas, his sons, Timothy and Michael, and two of
his sons-in-law were accused of embezzling nearly $100 million
and of hiding $2 billion in liabilities from investors. Rigas and
Timothy were both convicted on numerous charges and required
to pay restitution. Both John and Timothy were out on bail pend-
ing appeals of their convictions of 20 and 15 years, respectively.
158
Biographical Sketches

That appeal was rejected in May 2007 and they are currently
serving their sentences at a federal facility in North Carolina. The
Rigases plan to appeal their case to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Paul Sarbanes (b. 1933)
Paul Sarbanes was a member of the Democratic Party and served
as a senator from Maryland from 1977 until his retirement in
2007. Sarbanes, along with Congressman Michael Oxley, cospon-
sored the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This act was passed in the
aftermath of the Enron and WorldCom accounting scandals with
a goal of raising corporate ethics. A former Rhodes Scholar
known for his sharp mind and simple ways, Sarbanes obtained
degrees from Princeton University, the University of Oxford, and
Harvard Law School. Prior to his years in the U.S. Senate, Sar-
banes served in the House of Representatives. He was a ranking
member of the Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee
and a senior member of the Foreign Relations and Budget com-
mittees. Sarbanes did not seek reelection in 2006.
Sally S. Simpson (b. 1954)
Sally S. Simpson is professor and chair of criminology and
criminal justice at the University of Maryland, College Park.
She received her PhD in sociology from the University of Mass-
achusetts, her MA from Washington State University, and her
BS from Oregon State University. A recipient of the Herbert
Bloch Award from the American Society of Criminology, Simp-
son is past president of the White-Collar Crime Research Con-
sortium and past chair of the Crime, Law, and Deviance Section
of the American Sociological Association. Her research interests
include corporate crime, criminological theory, and the connec-
tions between gender, race, class, and crime. Her writings in-
clude Corporate Crime (edited with Carole Gibbs); Corporate
Crime, Law, and Social Control; Of Crime & Criminality: The Use of
Theory in Everyday Life (editor); and “Integrating the Desire for
Control and Rational Choice: Examining the Causality of Cor-
porate Crime” (with Nicole Leeper Piquero and M. Lyn Exum).
Biographical Sketches
159

Jeffrey K. Skilling (b. 1953)
Jeffrey Skilling was CEO of Enron when it collapsed following a
corruption scandal. He was convicted in 2006 on numerous fed-
eral charges related to Enron’s collapse. As of 2007, Skilling was
serving a 24-year prison sentence at a Federal Correctional Insti-
tution in Waseca, Minnesota.
Skilling obtained a BS from Southern Methodist University
in 1975 and an MBA from Harvard University in 1979, after
which he became an energy consultant at McKinsey & Com-
pany. Perceived as harsh and arrogant by the press, he is re-
membered for a particularly foul reply to a Wall Street analyst
who asked him why Enron was the only company that did not
disseminate a balance sheet with its earning statements. Skilling
also made jokes about the California energy crisis, remarking
that the difference between California and the Titanic was that
“at least when the Titanic went down, the lights were on.”
Skilling resigned from Enron in 2001, citing personal reasons,
then began selling large amounts of his shares in Enron—almost
$60 million worth. Kenneth Lay took over for Skilling as CEO
until Enron declared bankruptcy later the same year. In testi-
mony before Congress, Skilling denied any knowledge of the
wrongdoing and practices that led to Enron’s fall. He was even-
tually indicted on over 30 counts of fraud, conspiracy, and in-
sider trading. Skilling pleaded not guilty and surrendered to the
FBI in 2004. His trial began in 2006 in Houston, despite change
of venue requests from his attorneys. Skilling was found guilty
on 28 of the counts, sentenced to 24 years and four months in
prison, and ordered to pay $45 million in ﬁnes. His release date
is set for February 2028.
Adam Smith (1723–1790)
Adam Smith was born in Scotland in 1723, in a town north of Ed-
inburgh. He became known as one of the greatest political econo-
mists and philosophers in the world. Smith attended the
University of Glasgow and Oxford University; after graduation,
he served as chair of logic and moral philosophy at Glasgow. In
1762, he received an honorary doctorate and shortly thereafter
left university life to tutor a young duke. During this time, Smith
160
Biographical Sketches

met many inﬂuential intellectuals who would have a great im-
pact on his life. After tutoring, he retired to Scotland, where he
was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. He devoted
much of his retired life to the writing of his famous multivolume
work An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
(1776). The Wealth of Nations initiated the idea of free enterprise.
In the book, Smith uses the idea of the “invisible hand” to ex-
plain that most business is guided by self-interest, but that com-
petition is beneﬁcial for society as a whole. Smith also advanced
the notion that market forces are far more powerful than efforts
by individuals or the state to effect change. The Wealth of Nations
has been called the most inﬂuential economics book ever written.
Smith died in 1790.
Arlen J. Specter (b. 1930)
Arlen Specter, a Republican senator from Pennsylvania, was ﬁrst
elected to office in 1980. He is the longest-serving senator in
Pennsylvania’s history, having been elected to five terms. In
1951, Specter graduated from the University of Pennsylvania
with a major in international relations. He served in the U.S. Air
Force from 1951 to 1953 and three years later graduated with a
law degree from Yale Law School. As a lawyer in Philadelphia,
Specter was very active in politics. He worked on the investiga-
tion of the John F. Kennedy assassination for the Warren Com-
mission. Specter was a democrat at this time, but he changed
parties and won the 1965 race for district attorney in Philadel-
phia by running on an anti-corruption platform. Specter has
been referred to as a RINO (Republican in Name Only) by more
conservative senators. A past chairman of the Senate Select Com-
mittee on Intelligence and the Committee on Veteran Affairs, he
has been ranking member of the Senate Judiciary Committee and
a senior member of the Appropriations and Veterans Affairs
committees. Specter announced that he will seek a sixth term in
the U.S. Senate in 2010. The senator has worked to reauthorize
key provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act and has proposed legis-
lation to better protect consumers and the privacy of their per-
sonal information. He authored the Armed Career Criminal Act
of 1984, which mandates long prison terms for repeat offenders,
and the Terrorist Tracking, Identiﬁcation, and Prosecution Act of
2006, which permits prosecution in U.S. courts for assaults and
Biographical Sketches
161

murders of U.S. citizens anywhere in the world. Specter has been
critical of the Bush administration’s wiretapping of persons
without warrants, and he is a resolute proponent of bettering the
national security of the United States. He also drafted the legisla-
tion that would establish the Department of Homeland Security.
In December 2006, Specter introduced a bill that would prohibit
federal prosecutors from seeking attorney-client privilege
waivers in cases against corporations. However, this legislation
was not expected to pass.
Eliot Spitzer (b. 1959)
Eliot Spitzer was sworn in as New York’s 54th governor on Janu-
ary 1, 2007. He campaigned on the idea that his administration
would promote ethical government while rebuilding New York’s
economy. Spitzer graduated from Princeton University in 1981
with a BA and received a law degree in 1984 from Harvard Law
School, where he edited the Harvard Law Review. After serving as
a law clerk for Robert W. Sweet and working as an assistant dis-
trict attorney in Manhattan, he became attorney general of New
York, a position he held from 1999 until he became governor in
2007. Spitzer has been a steadfast investigator and prosecutor of
white-collar and corporate offending. In the 1990s, his work
brought down the Gambino Crime Family and gave him na-
tional recognition as he continued to prosecute landmark cases
protecting consumers, the environment, investors, and low wage
workers. Aside from organized crime bosses, Spitzer has success-
fully prosecuted Merrill Lynch, the mutual-fund industry, and
insurance brokers, forcing many companies to get rid of their
CEOs and pay millions of dollars in restitution. As of 2007, he
was investigating companies—including 50 power plants—sus-
pected of polluting the environment.
Nadine Strossen (b. 1950)
Nadine Strossen is professor of law at New York Law School and
the ﬁrst female president of the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU). Strossen earned her juris doctor from Harvard Law
School in 1975 and practiced law in Minneapolis and New York
City before becoming a law professor. In addition to receiving six
162
Biographical Sketches

honorary doctoral degrees, she was twice named one of the 100
most inﬂuential lawyers in America by the National Law Journal.
As president of ACLU, Strossen annually makes over 200 public
presentations to college campuses. Strossen’s publications in-
clude Defending Pornography: Free Speech, Sex, and the Fight for
Women’s Rights and Speaking of Race, Speaking of Sex: Hate Speech,
Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties.
Mohammed Suharto (b. 1921)
Mohamed Suharto was the president of Indonesia from 1967 to
1998. His rise to political power stemmed from his advancement
in Indonesia’s military. Suharto was a sergeant during the Japa-
nese invasion of Indonesia in World War II. After the Japanese
surrendered, Indonesia gained its independence. Suharto was
also successful in leading a ﬁght against an attempt by the Dutch
to take over Indonesia. As a veteran of war, he eventually earned
the rank of chief of staff of the army. After a 1965 coup attempt,
he convinced the then-president of Indonesia to give him execu-
tive authority. Suharto was ﬁnally appointed president in 1967
by the Indonesian parliament. During his six terms as president,
Indonesia achieved economic and political stability. Indonesia
rekindled relationships with many Western nations.
Suharto, however, was an authoritative ruler. He punished
dissidents severely and used his position of power to make his
family and friends wealthy. He was also accused of crimes
against humanity including genocide in the Indonesian occupa-
tion of East Timor. Finally, in 1998 he was forced to resign under
mounting pressure of corruption. Authorities later arrested
Suharto on charges of corruption; the charges were ultimately
dropped because of his ill health. Despite never being convicted,
Suharto has been dubbed one of the most corrupt world leaders
of the past 20 years. Investigations revealed that he and his fam-
ily stole anywhere from $15 billion to $35 billion during his pres-
idency. He regularly handed out government contracts to family
and friends in exchange for large kickbacks. Indonesian compa-
nies and businesses were also forced to give some of their proﬁts
to the Suharto family. Anyone wanting to do business with In-
donesia had to go through one of Suharto’s companies. His fam-
ily has denied all charges of corruption; as of 2007, Suharto was
living in virtual isolation.
Biographical Sketches
163

Edwin H. Sutherland (1883–1950)
Edwin H. Sutherland was one of the most prominent criminolo-
gists in the world. Sutherland was born in Nebraska in 1883 and
earned a doctorate in sociology from the University of Chicago.
He was an adherent of the Chicago School of crime etiology,
which emphasizes that people’s social and physical environ-
ments exert great influences on their behavior. Sutherland’s
writings include The Professional Thief (1937) and White Collar
Crime (1949).
Sutherland is most widely known as the architect of the dif-
ferential association theory, which states that crime is a behavior
that is learned through interactions with others. Sutherland also
coined the term “white collar crime.” He ﬁrst referred to crime
by members of the upper class as “white collar crime” in his
presidential address to the American Sociological Society in
Philadelphia in 1939. In his address, he postulated that white-
collar and corporate offending should be thought of as distinct
from street crime, and he urged researchers to focus their efforts
on the causes of white-collar crime. Prior to this time, researchers
concentrated on criminal behavior in lower socio-economic
classes. It is thought by some that Sutherland used this presiden-
tial address to show that  both types of criminality (white-collar
and street crime) could be explained by his differential associa-
tion theory. Sutherland believed that the only difference between
white-collar and lower-class criminals was in the application of
the law. Sutherland’s concept of white-collar crime referred to
crimes committed ”on the job” by a respected person of high so-
cial status. 
Larry D. Thompson (b. 1946)
Larry D. Thompson served as deputy attorney general of the
United States from 2001 until August 2003. He obtained a bache-
lor’s degree from Culver-Stockton College, a master’s degree
from Michigan State University, and a law degree from the Uni-
versity of Michigan. Prior to becoming deputy attorney general,
he was the director of Providian Financial Corporation. In this
position, he came under fire because he sold $4.7 million of
164
Biographical Sketches

stock just before the company was charged with consumer and
securities fraud—allegations for which they paid over $400 mil-
lion to settle. Thompson also served as district attorney for the
Northern District of Georgia from 1982 to 1986.
John Ashcroft (who was then attorney general) put Deputy
Attorney General Thompson in charge of the National Security
Coordination Council, and President George W. Bush named
him the head of the Corporate Fraud Task Force. Thompson led
counterterrorism efforts and efforts to punish white-collar crime.
He also headed up the prosecutions against ofﬁcials at Enron, as
well as other corporate fraud investigations, and issued a memo-
randum to U.S. attorneys outlining methods and procedures in
prosecution of corporations. Thompson left the deputy attorney
general’s ofﬁce to assume the role of senior vice president and
general counsel for the PepsiCo Corporation. He also serves as a
visiting professor of law at the University of Georgia and a se-
nior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
Gary Winnick (b. 1948)
Telecommunications billionaire Gary Winnick grew up on Long
Island, New York. In 1997, he invested $15 million of his own
money to create a company called Global Crossing, so named be-
cause it laid ﬁber optic cable under the Atlantic Ocean. Winnick
was the chairman of Global Crossing from 1997 until 2002. When
Global Crossing went public, it started making billions of dollars,
and like many other executives, Winnick spared no expense on
corporate headquarter purchases, which included a Picasso
painting worth $15 million and ﬁve corporate jets. Winnick spent
to excess, and his ﬁnancial waste incurred criticism from other
employees of the company. Global Crossing ultimately collapsed,
its stock dropping from a high of $61 to mere pennies, costing in-
vestors roughly $49 billion. Winnick sold over $700 million of his
own Global Crossing stock—a portion of it just weeks prior to the
company’s collapse. After the company ﬁled for bankruptcy in
2002, two Asian ﬁrms purchased a majority stake and Winnick
stepped down as CEO. It was later revealed that Winnick was
aware of Global Crossing’s precarious ﬁnancial situation back in
mid-2000. The Securities and Exchange Commission investigated
Biographical Sketches
165

Global Crossing’s accounting and business practices and issued
ﬁnes to some executives, but its investigation found no wrongdo-
ing by Winnick. Winnick has since set up a fund of $25 million to
compensate former employees who lost retirement money in the
bankruptcy.
Peter C. Yeager (unknown)
Peter C. Yeager is an associate professor of sociology at Boston
University. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Wiscon-
sin at Madison in 1981. Yeager has served on the advisory com-
mittee of the Office of Research Integrity since 1999, has
reviewed grants for the National Institutes of Health, and has
acted as a consultant to the Institute of Medicine of the National
Academies. Yeager’s research interests include the limitations of
legal requirements to control wrongdoing in powerful organiza-
tions, the social construction of ethical and legal requirements
among professionals and management of organizations, and the-
ories of organizational morality and rule-breaking. Some of his
publications include Corporate Crime (with M.B. Clinard), The
Limits of Law: The Public Regulation of Private Pollution, and “Un-
derstanding Corporate Lawbreaking: Progress and Prospects” 
(a chapter in International Handbook of White-Collar Crime). 
166
Biographical Sketches

6
Data and Documents
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
Facts and statistics on white-collar and corporate offending are
not as widely available as those on traditional offending and
not systematically kept by any one organization. One of the rea-
sons for this lack of record keeping is the debate that exists
about what constitutes white-collar and corporate criminal of-
fenses. The controversy over precise definitions of white-collar
and corporate offending hinges on whether classification
should be based on the type of offense, the type of offender, or
the type of organization involved. The Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation (FBI) and the information it collects on crime through
the Uniform Crime Reports (UCRs) categorizes these crimes by
the type of offense committed. There are no measures of occu-
pation, socio-economic status, or an organization’s structure
listed in the UCR data, as such statistics can only be looked at
in terms of offense (Barnett 2002). The UCR, therefore, is an im-
perfect measure of white-collar and corporate offending; fraud,
forgery, counterfeiting, and embezzlement are the only offenses
that the UCR collects information on. Furthermore, statistics in
the UCR often include offenses that many critics would not
group as white-collar or corporate offenses, but are nonetheless
mixed in with the aggregate. Table 6.1 lists arrests for forgery
and counterfeiting, fraud, and embezzlement according to the
UCR in 2005.
These statistics include petty offenses, those committed by
corporations or business executives, as well as local, city, and
167

168
Data and Documents
state violations. As such, it is impossible to disaggregate which
ones are true white-collar or corporate offenses; therefore, the
true picture of the extent of white-collar and corporate crime re-
mains blurry.
The National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) is
also collected by the FBI and part of the UCR. NIBRS gives us a
better idea of what proportion of these statistics constitutes
white-collar and corporate offending; however, even these statis-
tics leave much to be desired. A complete list of white-collar of-
fenses included in the NIBRS database can be obtained from the
FBI’s Web site under UCR statistics at www.fbi.gov/hq/
cjisd/ucr.htm. But Barnett (2002) notes that a number of white-
collar offenses are recorded in NIBRS data under the category
“all other offenses.” This makes it difﬁcult to get accurate mea-
sures of white-collar offenses because they cannot be differenti-
ated from other types of offenses in this category. Furthermore,
the NIBRS data are from state and local agencies, whereas most
white-collar and corporate offenses fall under the jurisdiction of
the federal government; federal offenses do not show up in these
data. Therefore, the NIBRS data, although better than that of the
UCR, are also of limited use in the measurement of white-collar
and corporate offending.
Table 6.2 reveals that a majority of white-collar offenses fall
under the categories of counterfeiting and false pretenses. False
pretenses are offenses involving swindling and confidence
games. Embezzlement accounts for almost 20,000 cases, and wel-
fare fraud, wire fraud, bribery, and extortion make up only a
little over two percent of cases. The total number of so-called
white-collar cases in the NIBRS data is roughly 230,000. When
we compare this to the overall absolute number of offenses
measured with NIBRS data, these cases make up a very small
TABLE 6.1 
Number of Arrests for UCR White-collar Offenses in 2005 
Offense 
Arrests 
Forgery and Counterfeiting 
118,455 
Fraud 
321,521 
Embezzlement 
18,970 
Source: Compiled by the author from 2005 UCR data.

percentage. The NIBRS data set includes information on over 5
million cases for 2005 alone, making white-collar offenses just
under 5 percent of the cases for that year. Obviously, the NIBRS
data set underestimates the amount of white-collar offending
that actually occurs. We can, however, get some demographic in-
formation from these data that the UCR ﬁgures do not provide.
Table 6.3 displays the type of offense by sex, and Table 6.4 dis-
plays the type of offense by race. For most of the offense types,
males are represented at almost three times the rate of females.
Female offenders make up 34,694 of the cases, whereas males
make up 98,211 cases. Notice that in just over 30,000 of the cases,
the sex of the offender is not known. It is not known whether this
is because of a recording error or due to the fact that police have
not cleared these cases by an arrest yet. Consequently, conclu-
sions about this table must be considered with caution, as we do
not know the sex of the offender in over 30,000 of the cases.
Other data sets, however, do conﬁrm that males are represented
in white-collar crime statistics at higher rates than females.
Table 6.4 reveals that Caucasians make up the largest cate-
gory of offenders in overall statistics on white-collar offenses;
however, there are a few offenses, namely welfare fraud and
wire fraud, where the number of African Americans arrested ex-
ceeded the number of Caucasians. Asians, Paciﬁc Islanders, and
Native Americans make up a small proportion of offenders. As
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
169
TABLE 6.2 
Frequency and Percentage of White-collar Offenses 
Crime 
Frequency 
Percent 
False Pretenses 
98,816 
43 
Welfare Fraud 
682 
0.3 
Wire Fraud 
3,032 
1.3 
Bribery 
163 
0.1 
Extortion 
906 
0.4 
Counterfeiting 
106,945 
46.5 
Embezzlement 
19,281 
8.4 
Total 
229,825 
100 
Source: Compiled by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for Political  
and Social Research, Study No. 4720. 

in the data on gender, there are around 33,000 cases where the
offender’s race is unknown. Again, whether this is because the
offender has not been arrested is not known. Figure 6.1 displays
the mean age of offenders by offense type. The mean age for all
offenders—regardless of the type—is under 25 years old; for
170
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3 
White-collar Offenses by Gender 
Sex of Offender 
Offender 
Female 
Male 
Unknown 
False Pretenses 
16,041 
43,552 
13,153 
Welfare Fraud 
107 
283 
57 
Wire Fraud 
540 
1,200 
320 
Bribery 
24 
88 
32 
Extortion 
149 
423 
195 
Counterfeiting 
15,598 
45,499 
14,159 
Embezzlement
2,235 
7,166 
2,126 
Total 
34,694 
98,211 
30,042 
Source: Constructed by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for  
Political and Social Research, Study No. 4720.
TABLE 6.4 
White-collar Offenses by Race 
Race of Offender 
Offense 
Asian/Pacific 
Islander 
African 
American 
Native 
American 
Caucasian 
Unknown 
False 
Pretenses 
98 
21,386 
53 
37,047 
14,162 
Welfare Fraud 
0 
248 
0
138
61
Wire Fraud 
2 
875 
0
844
339
Bribery 
0 
21 
0
88
35
Extortion 
3 
198 
1
344
221
Counterfeiting
719 
14,656 
213
43,872
15,796
Total 
956 
38,460 
296
90,030
33,205
Source: Constructed by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for  
Political and Social Research, Study No. 4720. 

embezzlement the mean age appears a little lower, and for ex-
tortion, the mean age is under 20. These ages seem low com-
pared to stereotypical images of white-collar offenders. Most
people probably think of someone older and higher up in a cor-
poration as the main offenders. Keep in mind these data do not
reflect federal white-collar cases. Most CEOs, presidents, and
vice presidents of corporations who have violated the law are
prosecuted in federal court.
Figure 6.2 shows the percentage of offenders above the age
of 50 for each type of offense. This chart reveals that very low
percentages (less than 5 percent) of white-collar offenders at the
state and local level are above the age of 50.
As part of the NIBRS data, information is also collected on
the amount of property taken in each case (see Figure 6.3).
These data, however, are not as revealing as they may seem at
first glance. Some property is considered to have no value—for
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
171
25
20
15
10
5
0
Welfare Fraud      Wire Fraud            Bribery              Extortion       Counterfeiting  Embezzlement
     Mean age of offender
Source: Constructed by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for Political 
and Social Research, Study No. 4720.
 White-collar offense
False
Pretenses
FIGURE 6.1
Mean Ages of Offenders by Offense Type

example, stolen credit cards. Therefore, regardless of whether
the stolen card was used or not, it is considered to have no
value. Furthermore, if the value of the property or amount of
loss is unknown in the case, the value is set at $1. These statis-
tics clearly underestimate the loss to victims in some cases.
For most offense types, the mean amount of loss is not great.
The highest mean loss is for extortion, at around $1,400, and the
lowest mean loss is for bribery, at about $700. The mean loss for
all other offenses is somewhere in between $1,000 and $1,200.
Again, we have to keep in mind that cases with an undetermined
amount of loss are represented in these statistics with a value of
$1. Indeed, there were just over 23,000 cases where the mean loss
was $1. Even with these cases omitted from the data set, the aver-
age mean loss only increases by about $500 for each offense. All
told, in less than 3 percent of cases for all offense types is the loss
more than $10,000.
172
Data and Documents
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Welfare Fraud      Wire Fraud            Bribery              Extortion       Counterfeiting  Embezzlement
     Percent of offenders over age 50
White-collar offense
False
Pretenses
Source: Constructed by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for Political 
and Social Research, Study No. 4720.
FIGURE 6.2
Percentage of Offenders above Age 50

Consulting another source yields yet another snapshot of
white-collar and corporate offending. The Sourcebook of Criminal
Justice Statistics 2003 (Pastore and Maguire 2003) lists information
on a wider variety of offenses, but it only includes arrests for fed-
eral violations. Table 6.5 shows the number of persons arrested
for federal white-collar offenses, according to the Sourcebook.
These numbers reflect individuals arrested on federal
charges. There are fewer cases in federal court than in state
courts. These may reflect more serious cases where larger
amounts of money are involved and where federal statutes have
been violated. The largest proportion of federal arrests fall into
the offense category of fraud. The next highest arrest rate is for
counterfeiting. Arrests for all other offenses number only in the
hundreds. In 2003, there were only 6 arrests on antitrust viola-
tions. The numbers for white-collar arrests in the UCR and
NIBRS data sets are much higher. Overall, however, arrest rates
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
173
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Welfare Fraud      Wire Fraud            Bribery              Extortion       Counterfeiting  Embezzlement
Mean value of property loss in dollars
White-collar offense
False
Pretenses
Source: Constructed by the author from 2005 NIBRS data. Downloaded from the Inter-university Consortium for Political 
and Social Research, Study No. 4720.
FIGURE 6.3
Mean Property Value Loss for White-collar Offenses, NIBRS

for white-collar offenses are much lower than they are for con-
ventional crimes. For example, for the year 2005, the UCR re-
ported 449,297 aggravated assaults and 1,146,696 thefts. Federal
arrest statistics from the Sourcebook (2003) also show higher num-
bers of arrests for drug and immigration offenses at 33,066 and
27,347, respectively.
As can be seen from the data above, corporate criminal of-
fense records are not kept with any consistency, and researching
the true numbers of offenses, arrests, and prosecutions is very
difficult. Another source that compiles records on white-collar
offenses is the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse
(TRAC) at New York’s Syracuse University. The purpose of this
clearinghouse is to give information to the American people
174
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.5 
Persons Arrested for Federal White-collar Offenses 
Offense 
Number of Arrests 
Property Offenses 
Embezzlement 
845 
Fraud 
11,225 
Forgery 
358 
Counterfeiting 
1,304 
Public-order Offenses
Antitrust 
6
Food and Drug 
120 
Civil Rights
72 
Other Regulatory 
22 
Tax Law Violations 
868 
Bribery 
175 
Perjury/Contempt
284 
National Defense 
12 
Racketeering and Extortion 
582 
Obstruction of Justice 
485 
Conspiracy 
105 
Environmental 
126 
Source: Compiled by the author from the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics 2003. 

about the federal government’s law enforcement activities.
TRAC’s most recent reports at the time this book was being writ-
ten were for March 2007. According to these records, the federal
government reported 663 prosecutions of white-collar criminals.
What TRAC also reported, however, is that this ﬁgure represents
a slight decrease in the number of prosecutions from 2006 and a
decrease of roughly 10 percent from the same month ﬁve years
ago (TRAC 2007c). TRAC (2007b) noted that in March 2007, the
government secured 674 convictions for white-collar crime (there
are more convictions than prosecutions because these are
monthly data, and the convictions represent cases that are car-
ried over from month to month). According to Alexandra Marks
(2006), recent decreases in convictions for white-collar and cor-
porate offending reﬂect the government’s move to shift resources
away from the ﬁght against corporate crime and toward home-
land security. In other words, the drop in convictions is not a re-
ﬂection of a decrease in corporate offending, but rather a change
in the priorities of the federal government. In fact, the number of
federal investigators who focused solely on white-collar crimes
decreased by 500 persons from 2000 to 2004. Figure 6.4 shows the
number of federal criminal prosecutions from 2000 to 2005. As
the ﬁgure illustrates, the focus of federal prosecutions from 2002
to 2005 has been on cases involving immigration offenses. Both
drug prosecutions and white-collar prosecutions have decreased
during the same time period, while prosecutions for weapons in-
creased slightly. Drug and immigration cases, however, make up
the majority of federal prosecutions.
TRAC data also reveal which agencies charged what per-
centage of cases. These data report that 30 percent of cases origi-
nate with the FBI, 19 percent with the IRS, 15 percent with the
Secret Service, 9 percent with the Postal Service, 5 percent with
Health and Human Services, and 23 percent with other agencies
(TRAC 2007c). For convictions, 42 percent are secured by the FBI,
15 percent by the Secret Service, 10 percent by the IRS, 8 percent
by the Postal Service, 5 percent by the Department of Homeland
Security, and 20 percent by other agencies (TRAC 2007b).
Table 6.6 is a list of the number of counts and the top statutes
under which white-collar and corruption charges were prose-
cuted in March 2007. Table 6.7 is a list of the number of counts
and the top statutes under which white-collar and corruption
charges were convicted for March 2007. Note that this is not an
exhaustive list.
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
175

Former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales spoke to the
Corporate Fraud Task Force (CFTF) on its ﬁfth anniversary, July
17, 2007. In his speech, he outlined the accomplishments of the
task force in its ﬁrst ﬁve years. Since its inception, the CFTF has
obtained 1, 236 convictions for corporate fraud alone. Those con-
victed of this offense include over 200 CEOs and presidents of
corporations, 53 CFOs, 23 corporate attorneys, and 129 vice pres-
idents of corporations. Assets seized by the task force in its ﬁrst
five years amount to more than $1 billion, much of which has
been given back to the victims in those cases (Gonzales 2007).
The U.S. Sentencing Commission also keeps records of indi-
viduals prosecuted in federal court for white-collar and corpo-
rate offenses, as well as organizations that are convicted and
sentenced under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines set forth in
the United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual (2005, chap. 8).
Table 6.8 is a list of offenses for which individuals were con-
victed in federal court in 2005 (October 1, 2004, to September 30,
2005), as well as the percentage of all federal cases those repre-
sent. There were 72,462 convictions in all federal districts in
2005. The cases in Table 6.8 make up approximately 15 percent
176
Data and Documents
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
        2001            2002            2003             2004               2005
Number of cases
Year
2000
Source: Constructed by the author from information obtained from the Transactional Records 
Access Clearinghouse, Syracuse University (2007a).
FIGURE 6.4
Federal Criminal Prosecutions, 2000  2005
Drugs
2000
Immigration
White Collar
Weapons

of that number. The most frequent violations were fraud, fol-
lowed by forgery and money laundering.
Table 6.9 reﬂects information on the percentage of persons
incarcerated by offense type, as well as the range, mean, and me-
dian of their sentence length in months. The offenses with the
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
177
TABLE 6.6 
Statutes and Number of Counts of White-collar Prosecutions 
Charge 
Counts
18 USC 1344: Bank Fraud 
65 
18 USC 1341: Mail Fraud 
60 
18 USC 371: Conspiracy to Commit Offense or Defraud 
the United States 
44 
18 USC 1343: Wire Fraud 
35 
26 USC 7206: Fraud and False Statements
29 
18 USC 287: False or Fraudulent Claims
24 
18 USC 641: Public Money, Property, or Records
22 
18 USC 1001 and 7206: Fraud and False Statements or 
Entries 
21 
18 USC 513: Securities of the States and Private Entities 
16 
Source: List compiled by the author from TRAC (2007c).
TABLE 6.7 
Statutes and Number of Counts of White-collar Convictions 
Conviction
Counts 
18 USC 1344: Bank Fraud 
100 
18 USC 1341: Mail Fraud 
92 
18 USC 1028 and 1029: Fraud and Related Activity
79 
18 USC 1343: Wire Fraud 
48 
18 USC 371: Conspiracy to Defraud the Government
34 
18 USC 1001: Fraud and False Statements
26 
18 USC 641: Public Money, Property, or Records
24 
18 USC 1347: Health Care Fraud  
23 
26 USC 7201: Attempt to Evade Tax 
21 
Source: List compiled by the author from TRAC (2007b).

highest incarceration rates were racketeering, antitrust viola-
tions, and money laundering. Those least likely to be incarcer-
ated were individuals who committed food and drug violations
and embezzlement. In looking at the range of sentences, the
longest sentence was given for racketeering/extortion at 720
months, or 60 years, followed by money laundering at 564
months, or 47 years. For fraud, the longest sentence was 480
months, or 40 years, and the longest sentence for forgery was 10
years. The minimum sentence length given for a majority of of-
fenses was just one month.
Table 6.9 also reveals that the average sentence lengths were
highest for individuals convicted of racketeering/extortion at
80.5 months, followed by money laundering and fraud at 47 and
26 months, respectively. The lowest mean sentences were given
for those convicted of antitrust violations and embezzlement.
Keep in mind that these statistics refer to outcomes for individu-
als convicted of white-collar offenses; organizations themselves,
however, can also wind up in federal district court.
Table 6.10 gives information for organizations that are con-
victed in federal district court. These data reﬂect information on
organizations only, not individuals within the organization.
178
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.8 
Convictions in Federal District Court for 2005* by Offense Type 
Offense 
Frequency 
Percent of all Federal Cases 
Fraud 
6,809 
9.4 
Embezzlement 
577 
0.8 
Forgery 
1,083 
1.5 
Bribery 
199 
0.3 
Tax Violation 
604 
0.8 
Money Laundering 
934 
0.3 
Racketeering/Extortion 
715 
1.0 
Antitrust Violations
18
Less than 0.1
Food and Drug Violations 
78 
0.1 
* 2005 = October 1, 2004, to September 30, 2005 
Source: Compiled by the author from 2005 U.S. Sentencing Commission data. Downloaded from the Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research, Study No. 4630.

According to the U.S. Sentencing Commission (2005), an organi-
zation is “a person other than an individual” (18 U.S.C. §18).
Corporations, associations, partnerships, unions, joint-stock
companies, pension funds, unincorporated organizations, trusts,
governments, and nonproﬁt organizations all qualify under this
deﬁnition. In 2005, there were 187 organizations sentenced under
chapter 8 of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines. According to this
data set, sentenced organizations had an average of 3.6 convic-
tion counts and received an average of 26 months of probation as
punishment. Organizations cannot be incarcerated, so punish-
ments mainly include probation and ﬁnes. 
As shown in Table 6.10, organizations can be involved in
non-white-collar offenses. In fact, 52 of the 187 organizations
convicted were charged with gambling offenses. Others include
firearms violations, immigration offenses, pornography and
prostitution, as well as obstruction of justice. Fifty-three organi-
zations were also convicted on environmental offenses, includ-
ing air, water, wildlife, and hazardous material violations. These
187 cases represent a very small percentage of cases in federal
district courts for the year 2005. Table 6.11 gives information on
how the organizational cases were disposed of. More than 90
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
179
TABLE 6.9 
Incarceration Rates and Sentences in Months by Offense, 2005*
Offense 
Percent 
Incarcerated 
Sentence Range 
in Months 
Mean Sentence 
Length
Median
Sentence 
Fraud 
57 
1 to 480 
26 
18 
Embezzlement
37 
1 to 120 
15.8 
  12 
Forgery 
61 
1 to 240 
21 
17 
Bribery 
55 
1 to 112 
22 
15 
Tax Violation 
55 
1 to 156 
19.5 
14 
Money Laundering 
70 
1 to 564 
47 
33 
Racketeering/Extortion 
84 
4 to 720 
80.5 
60 
Antitrust Violations 
72 
4 to 30 
8.7 
6 
Food and Drug 
Violations 
24 
1 to 71 
25 
16 
* 2005 = October 1, 2004, to September 30, 2005 
Source: Compiled by the author from 2005 U.S. Sentencing Commission data. Downloaded from the Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research, Study No. 4630.

percent of the time, a plea of guilt was given. Roughly 6 percent
were convicted by jury trial, and only two organizations decided
to have their case decided by a judge.
Other information about the organizations convicted in fed-
eral court in 2005 reveals that 51 percent of them had a prior his-
tory of misconduct that was known to federal ofﬁcials. Likewise,
roughly 52 percent also had civil cases either pending or in
progress. Only 35 organizations had some type of compliance
program implemented, and only 13 had community service or-
dered as part of their conviction and sentence. Almost 75 per-
cent, however, had some type of fine ordered as part of their
sentence. Table 6.12 gives information on the dollar amount of
180
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.10 
Primary Offense Type, Organizations 
Offense 
Frequency 
Percent 
Antitrust 
15 
8.0 
Bribery 
5 
2.7 
Environmental Waste–Water 
6 
3.2 
Environmental Waste–Air 
30 
16.5 
Environmental Waste–Hazardous Materials 
4 
2.1 
Environmental–Wildlife 
13 
7.0 
Equity
5 
2.7 
Firearm
14 
7.5 
Food and Drug Violation
8 
4.3 
Gambling 
52 
28.3 
Immigration 
3 
1.6 
Embezzlement 
4 
2.1 
Trafficking Automobile Parts 
3 
1.6 
Obstruction of Justice 
12 
6.4 
Pornography/Prostitution
4
2.1
Tax 
1 
0.7 
Other 
6 
3.2 
Total 
187 
100 
Source: Compiled by the author from U.S. Sentencing Commission data, 2005.

the ﬁnes ordered in these organizational cases. Approximately 15
percent of organizations had ﬁnes over $500,000, another 15 per-
cent had ﬁnes less than $10,000. Roughly 20 percent of the ﬁnes
were in the $100,000 to $499,000 range. In two cases, however,
ﬁnes were ordered against the organization in excess of $100 mil-
lion. It should be noted, however, that almost 25 percent of the
organizations that had ﬁnes imposed were unable to pay any of
the ﬁne imposed against them, and another 3 percent were un-
able to pay a portion of the ﬁne imposed. Most cases (90 percent)
did not have any assets forfeited and were not required to per-
form community service or implement a compliance program—
all this despite the fact that over 50 percent had a prior history of
misconduct. Fines, then, are the most frequent punishments for
organizations that violate federal law.
A legal print newsletter called the Corporate Crime Reporter
monitors and highlights corporate crime and corruption. This
publication disseminates information on corporations and their
offending, as well as government ofﬁcials and legislation ﬁght-
ing to prevent corporate violations. Table 6.13 is a list of the top
10 white-collar criminal defense attorneys, according to a survey
conducted by the Corporate Crime Reporter in 2003. Interesting to
note is that six of them have ofﬁces in Washington, D.C.
The Corporate Crime Reporter also compiled a list of the top
10 white-collar and corporate prosecutors who were named for
consistently pursuing prosecution of high-profile corporate
cases. They are listed in Table 6.14.
The Corporate Crime Reporter’s list of the top 10 corporate vi-
olators of the 1990s, their crimes, and the criminal fines they
were required to pay appear in Table 6.15.
Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
181
TABLE 6.11 
Disposition of Case, Organizations 
Type of Case 
Frequency 
Percent
Guilty Plea 
173 
92.5 
Trial by Jury 
12 
6.4 
Trial by Judge 
2 
1.1 
Total 
187 
100 
Source: Compiled by the author from U.S. Sentencing Commission data, 2005.

182
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.12 
Dollar Amount of Fine Ordered in Organizational Cases 
Fine in Dollars 
Frequency 
Percent 
None 
48 
25.7 
Less than 10,000 
27 
14.4 
10,000 to 99,999 
46 
25.0 
100,000 to 499,999 
39 
20.8 
500,000 to 999,999 
5 
2.7 
1,000,000 to 4,999,999 
8 
4.2 
5,000,000 to 9,999,999 
5 
2.7 
10,000,000 to 100,000,000 
7 
3.5 
More than 100,000,000
2 
1.0 
Total 
187 
100 
Source: Compiled by the author from U.S. Sentencing Commission data, 2005. 
TABLE 6.13 
Top 10 White-Collar Criminal Defense Attorneys in the United States 
Attorney
Law Firm 
City 
Dan Webb 
Winston & Strawn 
Chicago, IL 
John Keker 
Keker & Van Nest
San Francisco, CA 
Reid Weingarten 
Steptoe & Johnson 
Washington, DC 
Brendan Sullivan 
Williams & Connolly 
Washington, DC 
Robert Bennett
Skadden, Arps 
Washington, DC 
Thomas Green 
Sifley & Austin 
Washington, DC 
Earl Silbert 
Piper Rudnick 
Washington, DC 
Daniel Reidy 
Jones, Day 
Chicago, IL 
Robert Fiske 
Davis, Polk 
New York City, NY
Theodore Wells 
Paul, Weiss 
New York City, NY
Plato Cacheris 
Baker & McKenzie 
Washington, DC 
Source: Corporate Crime Reporter 2003. 

Facts and Statistics on Corporate Crime
183
TABLE 6.14 
Top 10 White-collar Prosecutors in the United States 
Prosecutor 
Title 
Jurisdiction 
Christopher Christie 
U.S. Attorney 
New Jersey 
James Comey
Deputy Attorney General 
Washington, DC 
Patrick Fitzgerald
U.S. Attorney
Chicago 
David Kelley 
U.S. Attorney 
Manhattan 
Alice Martin 
U.S. Attorney 
Birmingham
Patrick Meehan 
U.S. Attorney 
Philadelphia 
Robert Morgenthau 
District Attorney 
Manhattan 
Eliot Spitzer 
Attorney General 
New York 
Michael Sullivan 
U.S. Attorney 
Boston 
Debra Yang 
U.S. Attorney 
Los Angeles 
Source: Corporate Crime Reporter 2004.
TABLE 6.15 
Top 10 Corporate Violators in the 1990s 
Corporation 
Crime Type 
Fine 
F. Hoffmann La Roche Ltd. 
Antitrust 
$500 million 
Daiwa Bank Ltd. 
Financial 
$340 million 
BASF Aktiengesellschaft 
Antitrust 
$225 million 
SGL Carbon Aktiengesellschaft 
Antitrust 
$135 million 
Exxon 
Environmental 
$125 million 
UCAR International, Inc. 
Antitrust 
$110 million 
Archer Daniels Midland 
Antitrust 
$100 million 
Banker's Trust 
Financial 
$60 million 
Sears Bankruptcy Recovery 
Management Services 
Fraud 
$60 million 
Haarman & Reimer Corp. 
Antitrust 
$50 million 
Source: Compiled by the author from www.corporatepredators.org/top100.html.

Government Documents and Reports
The U.S. government has, in recent years, enacted legislation
aimed at holding corporations responsible for their wrongdoing.
Governmental agencies have also begun to publish reports of
corporate offending and require corporations to report informa-
tion about their business practices in order to protect sharehold-
ers and investors from being harmed by corporate wrongdoing.
Statistics reveal that white-collar crime costs the United States
more every year than all of the FBI index crimes combined
(Reiman 2007). Although estimates are hard to obtain, and those
that have been conducted vary considerably, even conservative
estimates place the costs in the hundreds of billions of dollars.
The FBI (2007) has estimated that white-collar and corporate of-
fending cost the United States over $300 billion a year. Reiman
(2007), using U.S. Chamber of Commerce statistics, places the
loss conservatively at $418 billion for 2003. This is roughly 24
times the cost of property crimes for the same year, according to
the FBI’s UCR total of $17 billion in losses. The Association of
Certified Fraud Examiners in 2004 estimated $660 billion in
fraud losses annually. Tax evasion alone has been projected to
cost the United States anywhere from 5 to 7 percent of its gross
national product every year (Reiman 2007). Using numbers from
the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analy-
sis for 2006, the cost of tax evasion is somewhere between $553
billion and $774 billion.
Also, if we look at the pay for corporate executives com-
pared to other workers, we see huge differences. The ratio of
CEO pay to regular worker pay was 431 to 1 in 2004, up from 301
to 1 in 2003, and 107 to 1 in 1990 (Anderson, Cavanagh, Klinger,
and Stanton 2005). Yet, the minimum wage had not increased in
10 years until July 2007, when it went up to $5.85 an hour (Asso-
ciated Press 2007). White-collar and corporate crimes continue to
cost the United States hundreds of billions, and CEO pay contin-
ues to increase. But prosecution of corporate offenders is declin-
ing, not as a result of a decrease in offending but because of shifts
in government priorities (Marks 2006). These statistics lead us to
believe that Reiman (2007) is correct when he states that the rich
get richer and the poor get prison. Despite these prosecutorial
decreases, though, the government has made some attempts to
get tougher on white-collar criminals.
184
Data and Documents

Executive Order 13271
The following is an excerpt from Executive Order 13271, enacted on
July 9, 2002, by George W. Bush. This executive order established the
United States Corporate Fraud Task Force whose director is the Deputy
Attorney General of the United States and whose duties are to improve
enforcement of corporate laws and maximize cooperation of all federal
agencies to this end.
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the
laws of the United States of America, and in order to strengthen the ef-
forts of the Department of Justice and Federal, State, and local agencies
to investigate and prosecute signiﬁcant ﬁnancial crimes, recover the
proceeds of such crimes, and ensure just and effective punishment of
those who perpetrate ﬁnancial crimes, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. The Attorney General shall immediately
establish within the Department of Justice a Corporate Fraud Task
Force (Task Force). Without regard to any other provision of this order,
the Task Force shall be subject to the authority of the Attorney General
under applicable law. 
Sec. 3. Functions. Consistent with the constitutional authority of
the President, the authorities assigned to the Attorney General by law,
and other applicable law, the Task Force shall:
(a) provide direction for the investigation and prosecution of cases
of securities fraud, accounting fraud, mail and wire fraud, money laun-
dering, tax fraud based on such predicate offenses, and other related ﬁ-
nancial crimes committed by commercial entities and directors, ofﬁcers,
professional advisers, and employees thereof (hereinafter ‘‘ﬁnancial
crimes’’), when such cases are determined by the Deputy Attorney
General, for purposes of this order, to be signiﬁcant;
(b) provide recommendations to the Attorney General for alloca-
tion and reallocation of resources of the Department of Justice for
investigation and prosecution of signiﬁcant ﬁnancial crimes, recovery 
of proceeds from such crimes to the extent permitted by law, and other
matters determined by the Task Force from time to time to be of the
highest priority in the investigation and prosecution of such crimes; and
(c) make recommendations to the President, through the Attorney
General, from time to time for:
(i) action to enhance cooperation among departments, agencies,
and entities of the Federal Government in the investigation and prose-
cution of signiﬁcant ﬁnancial crimes;
(ii) action to enhance cooperation among Federal, State, and local
authorities responsible for the investigation and prosecution of signiﬁ-
cant ﬁnancial crimes;
Government Documents and Reports
185

(iii) changes in rules, regulations, or policy to improve the effective
investigation and prosecution of signiﬁcant ﬁnancial crimes; and
(iv) recommendations to the Congress regarding such measures as
the President may judge necessary and expedient relating to signiﬁcant
ﬁnancial crimes, or the investigation or prosecution thereof.
Sec. 5. Internal Management Purpose. This order is intended to im-
prove the internal management of the Federal Government. This order
is not intended to, and does not create any right or beneﬁt, substantive
or procedural, enforceable at law or equity or otherwise against the
United States, its departments, agencies, entities, instrumentalities, ofﬁ-
cers, or employees, or any other person. 
Sec. 6. Termination. The Task Force shall terminate when directed
by the President or, with the approval of the President, by the Attorney
General. (Presidential Documents 2002)
Legislation Pertaining to
Corporate Offending
Some of the key statutes that have been enacted to ﬁght corporate
offending and impose penalties on those corporations that are
found guilty of criminal activity are the Sherman Antitrust Act,
the Clayton Antitrust Act, the Federal Trade Commission Act,
and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. What follows is a brief overview of
each of these acts, as well as an excerpt from each act.
The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890
The Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. 1–7, was legislation enacted to prohibit
the restraint of trade or commerce among the states or with foreign na-
tions. It was also aimed at those who attempt to decrease economic com-
petition. It set forth prohibitions against monopolies, including
attempts or conspiracies. Violations can be prosecuted by the govern-
ment in civil or criminal jurisdictions. The Sherman Act set forth
penalties, including fines of up to $10 million for corporations,
$350,000 for individuals, and imprisonment of up to three years. The
following are excerpts from the act:
15 U.S.C. §1: Trusts, etc., in restraint of trade illegal; penalty
Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or con-
spiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States, or
186
Data and Documents

with foreign nations, is declared to be illegal. Every person who shall
make any contract or engage in any combination or conspiracy hereby
declared to be illegal shall be deemed guilty of a felony, and, on convic-
tion thereof, shall be punished by ﬁne not exceeding $10,000,000 if a
corporation, or, if any other person, $350,000, or by imprisonment not
exceeding three years, or by both said punishments, in the discretion of
the court. (15, U.S.C. §1 1890)
15 U.S.C. §2: Monopolizing trade a felony; penalty
Every person who shall monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or com-
bine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any
part of the trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign
nations, shall be deemed guilty of a felony, and, on conviction thereof,
shall be punished by ﬁne not exceeding $10,000,000 if a corporation, or,
if any other person, $350,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding three
years, or by both said punishments, in the discretion of the court. 
(15, U.S.C. §2 1890)
The Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914
The Clayton Antitrust Act expanded the Sherman Act in an attempt to
remedy some of the deﬁciencies in the previous act relating to monopo-
lies. It also further addressed economic competition regarding the sale,
merger, or acquisition of corporate entities. It prohibits any one person
from being in charge of more than one organization that is in competi-
tion with the others. The following are excerpts from sections 14 and 18:
15 U.S.C. §14: Sale, etc., on agreement not to use goods of competitor
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commerce, in the
course of such commerce, to lease or make a sale or contract for sale
of goods, wares, merchandise, machinery, supplies, or other com-
modities, whether patented or unpatented, for use, consumption, or
resale within the United States or any Territory thereof or the District
of Columbia or any insular possession or other place under the juris-
diction of the United States, or fix a price charged therefore, or dis-
count from, or rebate upon, such price, on the condition, agreement,
or understanding that the lessee or purchaser thereof shall not use or
deal in the goods, wares, merchandise, machinery, supplies, or other
commodities of a competitor or competitors of the lessor or seller,
where the effect of such lease, sale, or contract for sale or such condi-
tion, agreement, or understanding may be to substantially lessen
competition or tend to create a monopoly in any line of commerce.
(15 U.S.C. §14 1914)
Legislation Pertaining to Corporate Offending
187

15 U.S.C. §18: Acquisition by one corporation of stock of another
No person engaged in commerce or in any activity affecting commerce
shall acquire, directly or indirectly, the whole or any part of the stock
or other share capital and no person subject to the jurisdiction of the
Federal Trade Commission shall acquire the whole or any part of the
assets of another person engaged also in commerce or in any activity
affecting commerce, where in any line of commerce or in any activity
affecting commerce in any section of the country, the effect of such
acquisition may be substantially to lessen competition, or to tend to
create a monopoly.
No person shall acquire, directly or indirectly, the whole or any
part of the stock or other share capital and no person subject to the ju-
risdiction of the Federal Trade Commission shall acquire the whole or
any part of the assets of one or more persons engaged in commerce or
in any activity affecting commerce, where in any line of commerce or
in any activity affecting commerce in any section of the country, the ef-
fect of such acquisition, of such stocks or assets, or of the use of such
stock by the voting or granting of proxies or otherwise, may be sub-
stantially to lessen competition, or to tend to create a monopoly . . .
(15 U.S.C. §18 1914)
The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914
The Federal Trade Commission Act set up the Federal Trade Commis-
sion to oversee the activity of large corporations, to control trade, and to
limit unfair trading practices. It made illegal several unfair methods of
trading and competition that affect different areas of commerce. This act
allowed the Federal Trade Commission to take action against any corpo-
ration that violated laws pertaining to the Sherman Act, the Clayton
Act, and other violations not stated in those two acts. The Federal Trade
Commission Act, Section 41:
15 U.S.C. §41: Federal Trade Commission established; membership;
vacancies; seal
A commission is created and established, to be known as the Federal
Trade Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission),
which shall be composed of five Commissioners, who shall be ap-
pointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate. Not more than three of the Commissioners shall be members
of the same political party. The first Commissioners appointed shall
continue in office for terms of three, four, five, six, and seven years,
respectively, from September 26, 1914, the term of each to be desig-
nated by the President, but their successors shall be appointed for
terms of seven years, except that any person chosen to fill a vacancy
188
Data and Documents

shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the Commissioner
whom he shall succeed: Provided, however, That upon the expiration
of his term of office a Commissioner shall continue to serve until his
successor shall have been appointed and shall have qualified. The
President shall choose a chairman from the Commission’s member-
ship. No Commissioner shall engage in any other business, vocation,
or employment. Any Commissioner may be removed by the Presi-
dent for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. A va-
cancy in the Commission shall not impair the right of the remaining
Commissioners to exercise all the powers of the Commission. The
Commission shall have an official seal, which shall be judicially
noticed. (15 U.S.C. §41 1914)
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 was passed in response to major cor-
porate and accounting scandals that resulted in numerous investors
and shareholders losing their investments and retirement funds. The
act established new standards for corporate entities, adding responsibil-
ities to corporate boards for the actions of their companies as well as en-
hancing criminal penalties for violations. Under this act, board
members are now responsible for disseminating their earning reports to
shareholders. The act also established a new agency, the Public Com-
pany Accounting Oversight Board, whose duty is to oversee account-
ing firms’ activities in auditing publicly traded companies. The
following is an excerpt from the act:
15 U.S.C. §101 Establishment; administrative provisions
(a) Establishment of Board. There is established the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board, to oversee the audit of public companies
that are subject to the securities laws, and related matters, in order to
protect the interests of investors and further the public interest in the
preparation of informative, accurate, and independent audit reports for
companies the securities of which are sold to, and held by and for, pub-
lic investors. The Board shall be a body corporate, operate as a non-
proﬁt corporation, and have succession until dissolved by an Act of
Congress.
(b) Status. The Board shall not be an agency or establishment of
the United States Government, and, except as otherwise provided in
this Act, shall be subject to, and have all the powers conferred upon a
nonproﬁt corporation by, the District of Columbia Nonproﬁt Corpora-
tion Act. No member or person employed by, or agent for, the Board
shall be deemed to be an ofﬁcer or employee of or agent for the Federal
Government by reason of such service.
Legislation Pertaining to Corporate Offending
189

15 U.S.C. §103 Auditing, quality control, and independence standards
and rules
(a) Auditing, Quality Control, and Ethics Standards.
(1) In General. The Board shall, by rule, establish, including, to
the extent it determines appropriate, through adoption of standards
proposed by 1 or more professional groups of accountants desig-
nated pursuant to paragraph (3)(A) or advisory groups convened
pursuant to paragraph (4), and amend or otherwise modify or alter,
such auditing and related attestation standards, such quality control
standards, and such ethics standards to be used by registered public
accounting firms in the preparation and issuance of audit reports, as
required by this Act or the rules of the Commission, or as may be
necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the protection
of investors.
(2) Rule Requirements. In carrying out paragraph (1), the Board
(a) shall include in the auditing standards that it adopts, require-
ments that each registered public accounting ﬁrm shall
(i) prepare, and maintain for a period of not less than 7 years, au-
dit work papers, and other information related to any audit report, in
sufﬁcient detail to support the conclusions reached in such report;
(ii) provide a concurring or second partner review and approval of
such audit report (and other related information), and concurring ap-
proval in its issuance, by a qualiﬁed person (as prescribed by the Board)
associated with the public accounting ﬁrm, other than the person in
charge of the audit, or by an independent reviewer (as prescribed by
the Board); and
(iii) describe in each audit report the scope of the auditor’s testing
of the internal control structure and procedures of the issuer, required
by section 404(b).
Governmental Commentary
on Corporate Offending 
Deputy Attorney General Larry D. Thompson,
2002
Several governmental officials have made speeches, composed memo-
randums, or otherwise commented on corporate wrongdoing and law
enforcement actions with regard to prevention, apprehension, and
prosecution of corporate offenders. Critics have charged that most of
these efforts have been largely symbolic in nature, as they have not
190
Data and Documents

greatly affected ofﬁcial application of the laws. The following is an ex-
cerpt from a speech made by then-Deputy Attorney General Larry D.
Thompson in Washington, D.C., on October 28, 2002.
I will say a few words about a subject near to my heart as both a prose-
cutor and a former white-collar defense lawyer of many years: and that
is our efforts to combat the culture of greed and deceit that tolerates
and propagates fraud within some of our corporations—and I would
like to emphasize SOME. This aberrant corporate behavior exists in, I
believe, a tiny minority of American businesses. Nevertheless, the prob-
lem is serious—and is certainly worth bringing to the attention of this
distinguished group of business leaders . . .
Now, as we all are so painfully aware, our ﬁnancial markets have
been shaken by a wave of criminal conduct at the highest levels in some
American corporations. While this conduct is shocking, it is not without
precedent and the administration is taking swift and certain action to
punish the wrongdoers and restore conﬁdence to investors . . .
As noted, in discussing these crimes, it is important not to tar with
too broad a brush the overwhelming majority of corporations that oper-
ate morally and productively in the best and highest interest of their
shareholders and the country. Yet, I believe you will agree the breadth
and extent of these recent scandals do demonstrate intolerable legal and
ethical misdeeds that require a comprehensive response.
While we have focused the brunt of our actions on individual cor-
porate criminals, there is a signiﬁcant category of wrongdoers who can-
not be imprisoned, but are nonetheless crucial targets of our efforts.
Although it should be done sparingly, we will not hesitate to prosecute
corporations themselves when the circumstances warrant it.
In making the decision to seek an indictment against a corpora-
tion, we consider a number of factors:
(1) The company’s history of wrongdoing,
(2) Its response to regulatory actions, 
(3) Its reaction to the criminal conduct committed by its employ-
ees, including the cooperation with the Government’s investigation;
(4) The level within the corporation at which the crimes were com-
mitted or condoned, and
(5) The pervasiveness of the criminal behavior within the
organization.
. . . Civil sanctions simply do not have the power of criminal
penalties to concentrate the corporate mind and change corporate cul-
ture. Large business organizations, particularly public companies that
are already regulated in myriad ways, sometimes have the disappoint-
ing tendency to view civil sanctions as merely the “cost of doing
business”—a cost that can be passed on to customers and shareholders
without lingering effect in the management suite and the board room.
Governmental Commentary on Corporate Offending
191

Indeed, without corporate criminal liability, there would be no
effective deterrent to a corporate culture that—expressly or tacitly—
condones criminal conduct. Instead, corporations could merely appoint
a “vice-president in charge of going to jail” who would serve as a whip-
ping boy for the collective acts of the organization . . .
We will press ahead in these efforts and look forward to your
continued cooperation and support. Our goal is to separate the of-
fenders from law-abiding companies. In many cases, that separation
will be physical and for an extended term of years. My hope is that
comprehensive enforcement efforts will restore investor confidence in
the integrity of the market by demonstrating that financial criminals
will pay—and they will pay with more than financial penalties.
(Thompson 2002)
Deputy Attorney General Paul J. McNulty,
2006
Almost four years later, Deputy Attorney General Paul J. McNulty
tempered the Thompson memo and issued new charging guidelines in
corporate fraud prosecutions. This is an excerpt from those remarks at
the Lawyers for Civil Justice Membership Conference held in New York
on December 12, 2006.
Those who investigate and prosecute corporate fraud should share in
this sense of satisfaction. When we look back to the corporate scandals
of 2000 and 2001, we remember that it was a time of great concern for
the American investor and all those whose hopes and dreams were con-
nected to investments. Public trust in our ﬁnancial markets and corpo-
rate America was at an all-time low with the large-scale bankruptcies of
companies like WorldCom and Enron . . .
Our response to this outcry reﬂected the duty we owe to the
American public. As prosecutors, we are committed to the fair adminis-
tration of justice and equal treatment under the law. Our duty is to en-
force the law—duties not all that different from the duties of a
corporate ofﬁcer or director. Or at least they should not be. Directors
and ofﬁcers owe a ﬁduciary duty to a corporation’s shareholders, the
corporation’s true owners, and they owe duties of honest dealing to the
investing public when releasing regulatory ﬁlings and making public
statements.
The faithful execution of these duties by corporate leadership
serves the same values in promoting public trust and conﬁdence that
our criminal prosecutions are designed to serve.
192
Data and Documents

In fact, the best corporate prosecution is the one that never occurs.
Through successful corporate compliance efforts, investor harm can be
avoided. Corporate ofﬁcials must be encouraged to seek legal advice if
they are in doubt about the requirements of the law. The attorney-client
privilege is an important part of the legal framework supporting this
compliance and accountability. The privilege promotes thorough and
complete disclosure from a corporate employee to his attorney and can-
did advice from legal counsel. It is one of the oldest and most sacro-
sanct privileges in American law. In a government investigation, the
corporation and its employees must have the ability to retain and com-
municate with a lawyer. If that relationship is interfered with, if those
communications are unfairly breached, it makes it harder for compa-
nies to detect and remedy wrongdoing. And the reality is that the use
and preservation of the attorney-client privilege is often not an issue.
Many have argued that the Department’s corporate charging
guidance, also known as the Thompson Memorandum, has discour-
aged seeking legal advice and full and candid communication between
lawyer and client. Counsel have complained that we are demanding
blanket waivers and making waivers a prerequisite for cooperation.
This perception, well founded or not, is said to be discouraging corpo-
rate compliance by chilling attorney-client communications.
First, my policy now makes clear that attorney-client communica-
tions should only be sought in rare cases; that is, that legal advice, men-
tal impressions and conclusions and legal determinations by counsel
are protected. Before they are requested, the United States Attorney
must seek approval directly from me. I must personally approve each
waiver request for attorney-client communications. Both the request for
approval and my authorization will be in writing.
Second, to support the request, prosecutors must show a “legiti-
mate need” for the information. If they cannot meet that test, I will not
authorize their seeking privileged information. To meet this test, prose-
cutors must show:
(1) the likelihood and degree to which the privileged information
will beneﬁt the government’s investigation;
(2) Whether the information sought can be obtained in a timely
and complete fashion by using alternative means that do not require
waiver; 
(3) The completeness of the voluntary disclosure already provided;
and 
(4) The collateral consequences to the corporation in requesting a
waiver.
The American public cannot afford another round of corporate
scandals. We rely on you to help us ensure it does not happen again.
Governmental Commentary on Corporate Offending
193

Sustaining the achievements of the past five years will require devo-
tion to duty by prosecutors, defense lawyers and corporate counsel.
If we are faithful to these duties, America’s financial markets will
continue to support the hopes and dreams of all its citizens.
(McNulty 2006)
Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales, 
2007
Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales made a speech to the Corporate
Fraud Task Force on its ﬁfth anniversary, July 17, 2007, in Washing-
ton, D.C. The following is an excerpt from that speech.
We will never know how many investors were spared thanks to the
work of the Task Force. In just ﬁve years, you’ve cleaned up a lot of
fraud, from New York to New Hampshire to Colorado. And as a result
you’ve helped to create an environment where honest businesses can
compete and thrive . . .
But perhaps the most important accomplishment is the criminal
conduct that never occurred because of the wide-spread deterrent effect
triggered by the tireless and thorough efforts of the Task Force and
everyone in this room . . .
As this is a recognition of your success, I thought that it would be
worthwhile to look back. . . . By May of 2007, we’d obtained more than
1,200 convictions, including 214 corporate chief executives or presi-
dents. And we’ve won hundreds of millions of dollars in ﬁnes and in
restitution to investors, who are the ultimate victims of corporate
fraud . . .
Through criminal trials and other methods—like deferred prose-
cution agreements—the Department of Justice and its partners on the
Task Force have made clear that we expect private industry to help fer-
ret out fraud and to work with us. For example, an important part of
many of the agreements is the company’s commitment to improved in-
ternal, corporate compliance. We are not only looking to punish past
bad behavior, but are also interested in future good conduct. That is
why we encourage corporations to be more responsible for ensuring
that good conduct . . .
The actions we have taken together—and the actions we will
take together in the future—will produce lasting benefits for the
American people and the American economy. Each one of you has
been a part of making our economic system stronger, and each one of
you should feel immense pride at being a part of this historic effort.
(Gonzales 2007)
194
Data and Documents

Quotes
The dull, purblind folly of the very rich men; their greed and arro-
gance . . . and the corruption in business and politics, have tended to
produce a very unhealthy condition of excitement and irritation in the
popular mind, which shows itself in the great increase in the socialistic
propaganda.
—Theodore Roosevelt, 1906
I think we are in a position, after the experience of the last 20 years, to
state two things: in the ﬁrst place, that a corporation may well be too
large to be the most efﬁcient instrument of production and distribution,
and, in the second place, whether it has exceeded the point of greatest
economic efﬁciency or not, it may be too large to be tolerated among the
people who desire to be free.
—Louis Brandeis, 1911
White-collar crime is real crime. It is not ordinarily called crime, and
calling it by this name does not make it worse, just as refraining from
calling it crime does not make it better than it otherwise would be. It is
called crime here in order to bring it within the scope of criminology,
which is justiﬁed because it is in violation of the criminal law.
—Edwin Sutherland, 1939
It is time to reafﬁrm the basic principles and rules that make capitalism
work: truthful books, and honest people, and well-enforced laws
against fraud and corruption.
—President George W. Bush, July 9, 2002
The President’s initiative will bring a new measure of accountability to
American businesses. The President’s proposal will help deter corporate
crimes by making it clear that executives and companies will face tough
penalties including longer jail sentences for individuals. The Department
of Justice has been and will continue to investigate fully the reports of
corporate fraud, and hold the guilty parties accountable for misleading
shareholders and employees. With the added weight of the Corporate
Fraud Task Force, we will continue to hold accountable those individuals
and entities who violate the public trust, undermine our free enterprise
system and put at risk the retirement savings of American workers.
—Attorney General John Ashcroft, July 9, 2002
Quotes
195

By our concentrated efforts, the Department and our colleagues on the
Corporate Fraud Task Force are moving decisively to combat corporate
fraud and restore investor conﬁdence in the marketplace.
—Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson, March 26, 2003
Other Relevant Documents
The following is an excerpt from a November 6, 2003, letter written to
then-Attorney General of the United States John Ashcroft from Ralph
Nader on corporate crime data (Citizen Works 2003).
Recently, your Federal Bureau of Investigations released its annual
“Crime in the United States” report, which pulls together comprehen-
sive data on eight crime indexes: murder and manslaughter; forcible
rape; robbery; aggravated assault; burglary; larceny-theft; motor vehicle
theft; and arson. The report is obviously useful in empowering law en-
forcement professionals and the public; it helps them to better under-
stand and respond to criminal trends.
Conspicuously absent from this report, however, is an assessment
of corporate crime. The report contains no statistics on the accounting,
securities, and ﬁnancial services crimes that have rocked the economy in
the last two years. It does not list details on the litany of food safety vio-
lations, product safety violations, workplace safety violations, environ-
mental pollution and countless other crimes that kill, injure and sicken
millions of Americans each year . . . Because the FBI does not collect data
on corporate crime, both the American public and the law enforcement
community lack good information on what has become a pressing na-
tional problem—a corporate crime wave. Comprehensive data on corpo-
rate crime would help law enforcement ofﬁcials to better analyze
patterns and better direct resources. Information is also a powerful tool
for public support of strong law enforcement, and the lack of it hampers
your efforts to stay true to your tough words on corporate crime . . .
There is now a growing consensus that corporate crime is a mam-
moth problem threatening the stability of our economy and the security
of millions of Americans. But how mammoth, exactly? This is what mil-
lions of Americans would like to know through ofﬁcial and authorita-
tive sources from a government that should be acting to diminish such
public dangers, not ignore them.
Mr. Ashcroft, if you are indeed serious about enforcing the rule of
law fairly and justly in this country, we urge you to direct the FBI to ex-
pand its annual “Crime in the United States Report” to actually de-
scribe all the crime in the United States, not just street-level criminal
activity. Corporate crime is a huge problem, with far more impact on
196
Data and Documents

society than street crime. The major media has recognized this point
more and more in the past three years in headlines and cover stories
and editorials. And with the help of more comprehensive data, we
could gain an even better understanding of the problem, which is es-
sential to solving it.
References
Anderson, Sarah, John Cavanagh, Scott Klinger, and Liz Stanton. 2005.
“Executive Excess 2005: Defense Contractors Get More Bucks for the
Bang.” Washington, DC, and Boston: Institute for Policy Studies and
United for a Fair Economy. August 30.
Associated Press. 2007. “Hard Times for U.S. Workers.” Forbes.
www.forbes.com/business/2007/07/25/labor-wage-bush-biz-cx_
0726oxford.html
Barnett, Cynthia. n.d. “The Measurement of White-Collar Crime Using
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Data.” Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. www.fbi.gov/ucr/
whitecollarforweb.pdf.
Citizen Works. 2003. “A Letter to Attorney General Ashcroft on
Corporate Crime Data.” November 6. www.citizenworks.org/corp/
ashcroft-letter.php.
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, Ch. 323, 38 Stat. 730, codiﬁed at 15 U.S.C.
§12–27, 29 U.S.C. §52–53.
FBI. 2007. “White Collar Crime Program.” www.columbia.fbi.gov/
invest.htm.
The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914. Title 15 U.S.C. §41–51.
Gonzales, Alberto R. 2007. Prepared Remarks of Attorney General Al-
berto R. Gonzales at the Corporate Fraud Task Force Fifth Anniversary
Event. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice. July 17. www
.usdoj.gov/ag/speeches/2007/ag_speech_070717.html.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 2007a.
“Monitoring of Federal Criminal Sentences, 2005: United States Sentenc-
ing Commission.” Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR. Study No. 4630.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 2007b.
National Incident-Based Reporting System, 2005. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR.
Study No. 4720.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 2007c.
“Organizations Convicted in Federal Criminal Courts, 2005.” Ann
Arbor, MI: ICPSR. Study No. 4609.
References
197

Marks, Alexandra. 2006. “Prosecutions Drop for U.S. White-Collar
Crime.” The Christian Science Monitor. August 31.
McNulty, Paul J. 2006. Prepared Remarks of Deputy Attorney General
Paul J. McNulty at the Lawyers for Civil Justice Membership Confer-
ence Regarding the Department’s Charging Guidelines in Corporate
Fraud Prosecutions. December 12. www.usdoj.gov/archive/dag/
speeches/2006/dag_speech_061212.htm.
Mokhiber, Russell. 2004. “Top Ten Corporate and White Collar Crime
Prosecutors List Released.” Corporate Crime Reporter, August 13.
Mokhiber, Russell. 2003. “Webb, Keker, Weingarten, Sullivan, Bennett,
Green Are Top White-Collar Criminal Defense Attorneys, Survey
Shows.” Corporate Crime Reporter, May 27.
Pastore, Ann L., and Kathleen Maguire, eds. Sourcebook of Criminal Jus-
tice Statistics 2003. www.albany.edu/sourcebook/.
Presidential Documents. 2002. Executive Order no. 13271. Federal Regis-
ter 67, no. 133: July 11.
Reiman, Jeffrey. 2007. The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Prison: Ideology,
Class, and Criminal Justice. 8th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Public Law 107–204, 116 Stat. 804.
The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890.Ch. 647, 26 Stat. 209, codiﬁed at 15
U.S.C. §1–7.
Sutherland, Edwin, H. 1940. “White-Collar Criminality.” American Socio-
logical Review 5: 12.
Thompson, Larry D. 2002. “A Day with Justice.” Speech of Deputy At-
torney General Larry D. Thompson. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Justice. October 28. www.usdoj.gov/archive/dag/speeches/2002/
102802daywithjustice.htm.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. 2007a. “Federal Judicial
District: U.S. Number Prosecuted by Selected Major Crime Category.”
trac.syr.edu/tracreports/crim/136/include/table_4.html.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. 2007b. “White Collar
Crime Convictions for March 2007.” trac.syr.edu/tracreports/bulletins/
white_collar_crime/monthlymar07/gui/.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. 2007c. “White Collar
Crime Prosecutions for March 2007.” trac.syr.edu/tracreports/bul-
letins/white_collar_crime/monthlymar07/ﬁl/.
Uniform Crime Reports. 2006. Crime in the United States, 2005. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
198
Data and Documents

United States Sentencing Guidelines Manual.
2005. Chapter 8.
www.ussc.gov/.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2007. “Gross Domestic Product: Fourth
Quarter 2006 (Advance).” Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic Analy-
sis. www.bea.gov/bea/newsrelarchive/2007/gdp406a.pdf.
References
199


7
Directory of Organizations
C
orporate and white-collar offending have become increas-
ingly signiﬁcant in the minds of justice ofﬁcials and the gen-
eral public alike. With investors and shareholders losing life
savings and retirement funds from such corporate scandals as
those involving Enron, WorldCom, and their accounting ﬁrms,
the public has demanded that more attention and resources be
put in place to regulate and govern the economic interests of the
American marketplace. Many nonproﬁt and public watchdog or-
ganizations have sprung up as a result of corporate malfeasance
and government misconduct. The mass media is also backing
this movement and has lobbied for the government to keep bet-
ter records and statistics on offenders and offending in order to
increase violators’ accountability. Many Web sites report daily
news on corruption, consumer fraud, securities fraud, embezzle-
ment, tax evasion, environment-related crimes, and workforce
and product-related safety issues. These online news organiza-
tions help publicize the frequency with which these events occur
as well as the monetary loss associated with the offenses. Height-
ened awareness has, in turn, spurred the creation and implemen-
tation of a number of agencies charged with the apprehension of
corporate wrongdoers and the prosecution of their acts.
This chapter presents descriptions of and contact informa-
tion for a number of public and private organizations that deal
with corporate offending. Some educate the public about the
topic; others are in charge of investigation, apprehension, and
prosecution of corporate offenders. Many of them have similar
goals, objectives, and mission statements, although they are not
likely to be working together or sharing information. An attempt
201

202
Directory of Organizations
has been made here to provide the most recent and up-to-date
information available on these organizations. Some are relatively
new while others have been around for decades. 
American Antitrust Institute (AAI)
www.antitrustinstitute.org
The American Antitrust Institute is a nonprofit research orga-
nization based in Washington, D.C. Its mission is to oversee
competition in the economic sphere, to be sure that corpora-
tions are working with the best interests of consumers in mind,
and to dispute instances of abuse in both the American and
world economies. AAI began in 1998 primarily because there
were no public interest organizations dedicated to the antitrust
arena. The institute believes that—due to ever-growing abuses
of corporate power and the new global economy—there is an
increased need for organizations that support more balanced
and fair competitive economic policies. AAI is a champion of
the competitive economic marketplace and a strong advocate
for increased enforcement of laws relating to antitrust abuses.
Public resources devoted to antitrust issues have diminished
since the mid-1980s. One role of the AAI is to act as a notifica-
tion system for any efforts designed to reduce the role of an-
titrust issues. The AAI Web site provides useful information
about antitrust for professionals with an interest in the field,
whether journalists, researchers, businesspeople, or govern-
ment officials. It also features links to resources available for
the general public and students interested in learning about
anticompetitive practices and a working paper series that con-
tains scholarly papers on antitrust topics. 
Antitrust Modernization Commission (AMC)
www.amc.gov
The Antitrust Modernization Commission no longer exists, but its
Web site serves as an archive for important information on an-
titrust laws. The bipartisan commission was originally created as a
part of the Antitrust Modernization Commission Act of 2002 and
consisted of four appointees each chosen by the president, the Sen-
ate, and the House of Representatives. Its goals were to study cur-
rent antitrust laws with an eye toward modernizing them, to

assess suggestions and planning of issues surrounding antitrust
laws, and to draft and present reports to Congress and the presi-
dent. Reports of the commission are available on its Web site.
Center for Corporate Policy
www.corporatepolicy.org
According to its Web site, the Center for Corporate Policy is “a
non-proﬁt, non-partisan public interest organization working to
curb corporate abuses and make corporations publicly account-
able.” The center’s Web site provides ample information on cur-
rent corporate crime issues, stories in the news regarding
corporate crime, as well as information on how the public can
become involved in the ﬁght against corporate crime and politi-
cal corruption. Links to related stories and papers are also in-
cluded, and the site has a virtual library containing lists of
recommended readings.
Corporate Fraud Task Force (CFTF)
www.usdoj.gov/dag/cftf
The Corporate Fraud Task Force is led by the deputy attorney
general of the United States and is made up of U.S. attorneys, FBI
agents, and representatives of the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC). It focuses its efforts on investigating and prose-
cuting corporate criminal activity. The task force was established
by President George W. Bush on July 9, 2002, in the wake of nu-
merous corporate fraud and accounting scandals in which in-
vestors and shareholders lost billions. It is made up of two
groups: one from the U.S. Department of Justice, which concen-
trates its efforts on enhancing criminal enforcement and preven-
tion activities regarding corporate wrongdoing, and the other
from representatives of many agencies to maximize cooperation
among enforcement and regulatory agencies working on cases of
corporate crime. The task force has issued annual reports to the
president and to Congress each year since its inception; results
indicate that there has been increased prosecution and punish-
ment of corporate offenders. The Corporate Fraud Task Force
Web page, a part of the U.S. Department of Justice’s Web site,
provides information on any legislation, speeches, testimony, or
documents related to corporate offending. The site also provides
Directory of Organizations
203

links to internship opportunities, information about the Freedom
of Information Act, and background on the No FEAR Act, a fed-
eral antidiscrimination and whistleblower law. 
The Council of Europe
www.coe.int
The Council of Europe was founded in 1949 as an organization of
European states, and a few nations outside of Europe, seeking to
develop universal and democratic principles throughout Europe.
The council aims to protect human rights, pluralist democracies
and the rule of law, as well as advance awareness, and encour-
agement, of cultural identity and diversity in Europe. Its member
states work together to ﬁnd solutions to the problems plaguing
European society. Some of the issues worked on thus far include:
intolerance of difference, discrimination against minorities, hu-
man trafficking, terrorism, bioethics, violence against children,
and organized crime and corruption. The council also supports
political, legislative, and constitutional reform. The Council of
Europe’s current political mandate was deﬁned in 2005, in War-
saw, Poland. The Council of Europe is made up of the Committee
of Ministers (the decision-making body), the Parliamentary As-
sembly (a group of 636 members facilitating European co-opera-
tion), and the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities (the
voice of the regions and municipalities). In 2007, the budget of
the Council of Europe was 197,214,000 euros. The Council of Eu-
rope makes many of its publications available on its Web site,
which also contains a list of the council’s newsletters.  Recent
work by the Council of Europe includes overseeing the Euro-
pean Court of Human Rights’ judgments concerning rights to
fair trial, fair treatment, self-expression, and religion in countries
throughout Europe. 
Department of Justice Antitrust Division
www.usdoj.gov/atr
The Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice is a gov-
ernmental agency whose mission is to advance the American
economy and safeguard competition in a free market by enforc-
ing the nation’s antitrust laws. The division is responsible for the
prosecution of those who violate antitrust laws, some of which
include: conspiracy, price ﬁxing, monopolistic practices, and any
other acts that restrain trade or competition. Antitrust laws apply
204
Directory of Organizations

to most sectors of business in the United States, and as trade and
business mergers increase, the Antitrust Division sees an in-
creased number of cases for investigation. The division works
closely with other agencies like the Federal Trade Commission
and foreign antitrust agencies in both investigative and prosecu-
torial efforts. Its Web site includes links to press releases regard-
ing antitrust offenses, alerts for the public of any fraudulent or
deceptive practices by organizations, resources on the rights of
businesses and victims, and a citizen complaint center where the
public can report possible antitrust violations or ﬁle complaints
against businesses.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
www.ftc.gov
The Federal Trade Commission is the federal agency responsible
for upholding competition and consumer protection in the
United States. The FTC was created in 1914 as an agency charged
with maintenance of a fair and competitive marketplace for busi-
nesses and consumers. Labels on everything we buy—from
washing instructions on items of clothing to energy consumption
rates on new household appliances—are regulated by the FTC.
The commission’s duties range from guarding against price ﬁx-
ing to ensuring equal credit opportunity to enforcing telemarket-
ing rules. The FTC is the only federal agency responsible for both
effective law enforcement and the advancement of the interests
of consumers. The commission cooperates and shares knowl-
edge with many federal, state, and international government
agencies; it also develops policy and tools for research. In 1975,
the FTC was given authority by Congress to adopt trade regula-
tion rules for industry. The FTC reports to Congress about its
work and is headed by ﬁve commissioners who serve for terms
of seven years. These commissioners are nominated by the presi-
dent and conﬁrmed by the Senate. The FTC is divided into three
key bureaus: the Bureau of Competition, the Bureau of Econom-
ics, and the Bureau of Consumer Protection. The Bureau of Con-
sumer Protection’s mandate is to educate and protect consumers
against unfair, deceptive, or fraudulent practices, including false
advertising claims. It investigates individual companies as well
as entire industries and is responsible for administrative rule en-
forcement and federal court litigation. The FTC has produced
award-winning print and online publications and maintains the
Directory of Organizations
205

Web site www.consumer.gov. This site provides consumer infor-
mation on electronic banking, online shopping, identity theft,
and dozens of other topics with the help of four other agencies:
the Food and Drug Administration, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
www.imf.org
The International Monetary Fund is a multinational organization
headquartered in Washington, D.C., consisting of 185 member
countries. It supports monetary cooperation on a global scale to
facilitate economic growth and increase employment around the
world. The IMF has three main duties that include: (1) surveil-
lance of economic and financial development, (2) lending of
money to countries to help relieve debt and reduce poverty, and
(3) providing technical assistance and training to those countries
needing advice and expertise in the areas of ﬁnance and devel-
opment. The IMF has also set forth standards and codes of con-
duct for prevention of financial crises and for strengthening
world ﬁnancial systems. As such, the IMF supports the compila-
tion of research and statistics concerning world ﬁnancial prob-
lems. The organization issues annual reports on its projects and
publishes the World Economic Outlook and the Global Financial Sta-
bility Report. Additionally, the IMF Web site is a warehouse that
maintains data and statistics about lending and development ac-
tivities throughout the world.
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
www.ic3.gov
The Internet Crime Complaint Center, formerly called the Inter-
net Fraud Complaint Center, is a service center set up for victims
of cybercrime. The center was established as a partnership be-
tween the National White Collar Crime Center and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in order to receive and refer complaints
to the appropriate agencies regarding violations of the law. IC3
has received numerous cybercrime complaints, including reports
of identity theft, hacking, intellectual property rights violations,
economic espionage, and international money laundering. The
center also issues annual reports of information on complaints
received through their Web site.
206
Directory of Organizations

INTERPOL
www.interpol.int
INTERPOL—the International Criminal Police Organization—
is the largest police organization in the world. Comprised of
186 member countries, it was established in 1923 to foster coop-
eration between police agencies around the world. INTERPOL
uses the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as its founda-
tion for law enforcement support, but it also respects the limits
of existing laws in its various member countries. The constitu-
tion of the organization does not allow interventions of a politi-
cal, religious, military, or racial character. INTERPOL’s
organizational structure includes a general assembly, an execu-
tive committee, a general secretariat, national census bureaus,
and advisers. The organization focuses its efforts on securing
communication services for police around the world, maintain-
ing databases for police, and overseeing support services for
police. Its communications system, called I-24/7, gives police
agencies throughout the world a platform to share information
about crime and criminals. INTERPOL’s numerous databases
link police agencies to global information on stolen goods and
to profiles of known criminals. A 24-hour command and coordi-
nation center is also run by the organization to support police
agencies. 
The Latin American Centre for Development 
Administration
www.clad.org.ve
The Latin American Centre for Development Administration
(CLAD) was established in 1972 by the governments of Mexico,
Peru, and Venezuela. CLAD acts as an agency of intergovern-
mental collaboration. It is recognized as a regional agency that
promotes the modernization of public administration through-
out Latin America. CLAD links member countries with the re-
search and teaching institutions of Europe, the United States,
and Canada. The organization supports many missions, includ-
ing the promotion of knowledge exchange between countries
about state reform. Many nations have joined CLAD since its
founding. The heads of government of CLAD have expressed
their commitment to progress in the civil service arena and have
signed treaties with other multilateral and bilateral organizations
with the goal of creating global cooperation.
Directory of Organizations
207

National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL)
nacdl.org
The mission of the National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers (NACDL) is to ensure justice and due process for per-
sons accused of crime; to foster the integrity, independence, and
expertise of the criminal defense profession; and to promote the
proper and fair administration of criminal justice. The NACDL is
a professional bar association that was founded in 1958. It has
roughly 12,800 members and 94 state, local, and international or-
ganizations with an additional 35,000 members. Members include
public defenders, private criminal defense attorneys, active U.S.
military defense counsel, judges, and law professors. According
to its Web site, the association promotes a “rational and humane
criminal justice policy” at all levels of federal, state, and local gov-
ernment—speciﬁcally, a criminal justice system that encourages
fairness for everyone, due process for those accused of violations
of law, concern for both victims and witnesses of crime, and just
punishment for those found guilty. The NACDL’s mission gives
reverence to the civil rights and liberties that are a fundamental
part of the democracy of the United States. Members of the
NACDL direct society to avoid simple crime prevention solutions
such as inﬂexible mandatory sentencing, punishment of juveniles
as adults, and the trampling of the constitutional rights of all be-
cause of the actions of a few. The Web site of the NACDL acts as
an open forum to discuss criminal justice practice and policy. The
organization has recently appointed a director of its White Collar
Crime Project whose main duties are to oversee the over-crimi-
nalization and over-federalization of white-collar offending. 
National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C)
www.nw3c.org
The mission of National White Collar Crime Center is to provide
a nationwide support system for agencies involved in prevent-
ing, investigating, and prosecuting economic and high-tech
crimes and to support and partner with other appropriate enti-
ties in addressing homeland security initiatives as they relate to
economic and high-tech crimes. The center is a congressionally
funded, nonproﬁt corporation that equips state and local law en-
forcement agencies with the skills and resources they need to un-
dertake emerging economic and cybercrime problems. It also
208
Directory of Organizations

provides information to the general public so that citizens can
become proactive in the prevention of these types of crimes. Vic-
tims can visit the center’s Web site for information on registering
Internet crime complaints and notifying the appropriate authori-
ties at local, state, and federal levels promptly, accurately, and se-
curely of the offenses committed against them. NW3C also
provides global, national, and regional conferences and work-
shops on the latest techniques and information for investigation
and prosecution of white-collar crimes. NW3C believes that
through conferences, beneﬁcial networks can be set up consist-
ing of law enforcement, prosecutors, regulators, and other pro-
fessionals, as well as researchers, educators, and advocates, in
order to receive information on programs and disseminate best
practices that address all facets of white-collar crime.
Organization for Competitive Markets (OCM)
www.competitivemarkets.com
The Organization for Competitive Markets is a nonproﬁt, nation-
ally based public policy research organization. The main ofﬁce is
in Lincoln, Nebraska, and its purpose is to reinforce competitive
markets for rural America and farmers and ranchers. Focusing
mainly on trade policies and antitrust issues in the agricultural
sector, the organization wishes to carry on the legacy of
Theodore Roosevelt by upholding antitrust laws and supporting
true competition and entrepreneurship. The organization also
campaigns for government to take a proper role in regulating the
market and enforcing the rules when necessary in order to make
markets fair and accessible to all citizens. OCM is especially con-
cerned about antitrust issues, fair trade, and competition in to-
day’s increasingly global marketplace, which threatens national
sovereignty and increases the strength of global agribusinesses.
OCM believes that the goal for America is to regain competitive
markets in agriculture for farmers, ranchers, and rural communi-
ties. The organization has undertaken an extensive program of
disseminating information and knowledge about the American
tradition of free market principles. The organization maintains a
monthly newsletter of important events and ideas regarding
competition and trade. Members of the staff of OCM discuss and
comment on current issues in annual meetings and on weekly ra-
dio programs broadcast in agricultural communities. 
Directory of Organizations
209

The Organization of American States (OAS)
www.oas.org
The Organization of American States is made up of Western
Hemisphere nations that seek to strengthen cooperation, debate
some of the major concerns of the region and the world, and de-
fend common interests. OAS objectives include promoting
human rights, strengthening democracies, and combating prob-
lems such as poverty, terrorism, narcotics, and corruption. OAS
recognizes four official languages—English, Spanish, Por-
tuguese, and French—and is made up of 35 member states, in-
cluding the independent nations of North, Central, and South
America and the Caribbean. Cuba, however, has been banned
from participation since 1962. The OAS member countries es-
tablish policies and goals through their General Assembly,
which gathers once every year. 
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission
www.sec.gov
The SEC’s mission is to protect investors and promote fair and
efﬁcient markets through market regulation. The SEC was estab-
lished by Congress in 1934 to enforce securities laws and protect
investors. One of the SEC’s mandates is to ensure that public
companies make their ﬁnancial records public. The U.S. laws and
rules governing the securities industry were designed to make
sure that all investors have access to facts about investments be-
fore going ahead with them. The SEC works with many agencies
to see that this mandate is met. 
The SEC provides oversight of many areas of the securities
market: securities exchanges, mutual funds, brokers and dealers,
and investment advisors. Every year, the SEC brings civil en-
forcements against companies and individuals for violations
such as insider trading, providing false information, and ac-
counting fraud. The SEC maintains a Web site where the public
can access important information assisting them in navigating
the investment market. The SEC has ﬁve commissioners who are
appointed by the president, four divisions, and 18 offices. It is
headquartered in Washington, D.C., with 11 regional ofﬁces and
approximately 3,100 staff.
210
Directory of Organizations

White Collar Crime Research Consortium (WCCRC)
www.nw3c.org/research/white_collar_crime_consortium.cfm
The White Collar Crime Research Consortium is the research
arm of the National White Collar Crime Center. This group uses
research and studies to promote increased public awareness
about the effects of white-collar and corporate offending for soci-
ety. Speciﬁcally, it encourages the membership of individuals in-
terested in developing and enhancing research on white-collar
and corporate offending. Its mission is to highlight the impor-
tance and need for increased research as well as funding sources
to support this research.
World Bank
worldbank.org
The World Bank is an institution devoted to assisting develop-
ing countries with financial and technical issues with the objec-
tive of reducing poverty around the globe. Another goal is to
improve living standards for those in many of the poorest
countries. The bank provides grants, low-interest loans, and in-
terest-free credit for infrastructure, education, health, and other
uses to developing countries. The World Bank is actually com-
prised of two development institutions: the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the Interna-
tional Development Association (IDA). The former focuses on
middle-income countries and the latter focuses on the poorest
of countries. The World Bank is headquartered in Washington,
D.C., but it has over 100 offices in countries around the globe. It
was established on July 1, 1944, and now employs roughly
10,000 people worldwide. Generally, the governors of the mem-
ber states are ministers of finance or ministers of development
in each country. They convene annually at the meetings of the
boards of governors of the World Bank Group and the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund. On July 1, 2007, Robert B. Zoellick be-
came president of the World Bank; it is his duty to chair the
meetings and manage the bank. Traditionally, the bank presi-
dent is a U.S. citizen, nominated by the United States because it
is the World Bank’s largest shareholder. In 2006, the World
Bank provided $23.6 billion for 279 projects. 
Directory of Organizations
211

World Trade Organization (WTO)
www.wto.org
The World Trade Organization is a global organization head-
quartered in Geneva, Switzerland. It is made up of 150 member
nations and oversees global trade. First and foremost, the WTO
deals with the rules surrounding trade on a global scale. It is also
an advocate for the liberalization of trade, a negotiator for gov-
ernments wishing to do trade with one another, and a forum
where trade disputes can be settled. The WTO began in 1995; be-
fore its inception, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) laid forth the rule dealing with trade. The WTO is run by
its member governments and decisions are made by consensus.
The WTO negotiates, makes decisions, and even imposes sanc-
tions regarding trade through its member delegates. In this way,
the power of the organization is not entrusted to one head ofﬁ-
cial or board of directors. The WTO’s chief objective is to ensure
that trade ﬂows smoothly, freely, and fairly. The WTO is headed
by a director general and has roughly 637 staff. It has no branch
ofﬁces outside of Switzerland. The WTO’s annual budget is ap-
proximately 182 million Swiss francs. 
Member countries can raise disputes at the WTO if they be-
lieve their rights have been infringed upon under current trade
agreements. Settlements are made by independent experts who
are appointed to interpret the correct action under the agree-
ments. This method pushes countries to consult with each other
ﬁrst to attempt a settlement, and then seek the help of the WTO.
The WTO has settled over 300 cases in the last decade. The WTO
also holds hundreds of training sessions and conferences every
year to help developing countries with issues and technical assis-
tance, and it holds trade policy courses for government ofﬁcials
every year in Geneva. The organization has set up over 100 refer-
ence centers in the capital cities of the least developed and devel-
oping countries, giving them access to the resources and latest
developments of the WTO.
212
Directory of Organizations

8
Resources
R
esource materials in print about corporate crime are slowly
becoming more widely published and available, although
compared to other criminal justice topics, resources about
corporate and white-collar crime are limited. This chapter lists
key resources devoted to the topic: books, journal articles, disser-
tations, magazines, newsletters, government documents, and
agency publications. Books include texts and scholarly pieces
that feature topics related to corporate and white-collar crime.
Journal articles are usually research studies on various aspects of
white-collar and corporate offending written to enhance our
knowledge of current issues. Doctoral dissertations or theses are
also important sources of information because they are usually
empirical studies that are eventually converted to books or jour-
nal articles. The end of the list offers some nonprint resources as
well, including videos, DVDs, and Web site URLs.
Many agencies, most of which were mentioned in the previ-
ous chapter, also collect information about topics related to
white-collar and corporate criminal offending. Governmental
and nonproﬁt organizations often publish reports and informa-
tion sheets on statistics they have collected and trends they have
observed. These reports keep administration officials informed
of progress and problems related to prevention, enforcement,
and prosecution of corporate offending and governmental fraud,
waste, or abuse. They are usually available at the organizations’
Web sites, or they can be requested from governmental offices
(sometimes a small fee may be required to purchase the docu-
ment). Finally, there are also various resources that are available
on DVD or in VHS format. These are most often advertised to
academic institutions for the purpose of classroom instruction.
213

214
Resources
Print Resources
Books
Albanese, Jay S. White Collar Crime in America. 1995. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 320 pages.
This textbook presents material on white-collar crime in a very
clear and precise manner. The book defines white-collar crime
and divides different crime types into three categories: crimes of
fraud, regulatory offenses, and crimes against public administra-
tion. It also cites statistics on the nature and extent of white-collar
offending, as well as data on enforcement, prosecution, and sen-
tencing of white-collar criminal offenders. This text is unique in
that it deals with white-collar offending in the same manner that
other criminal justice texts portray street offending.
Blankenship, Michael B., ed. Understanding Corporate Crimi-
nality. 1995. New York: Garland. 266 pages.
This book is a collection of original works by a number of white-
collar and corporate crime scholars. Articles range from prob-
lems with understanding corporate crime to measurement issues
surrounding corporate crime to the regulation and punishment
of corporate criminal behavior. It covers a wide range of the most
important issues in this ﬁeld.
Brickley, Kathleen F. Corporate and White Collar Crime: Cases
and Materials. 2006. New York: Aspen Publishers. 755 pages.
This book deals with corporate criminal liability, intent, organi-
zations, deﬁnitions of participation and management, as well as
white-collar and corporate offenses themselves. It also gives in-
formation regarding different types of corporate and white-collar
offending from fraud to the environment. In addition, it outlines
material and cases on investigation, governance, and sentencing
and punishment of white-collar and corporate wrongdoing.
Coleman, James W. The Criminal Elite: Understanding White-
Collar Crime. 2005. New York: Worth Publishers. 352 pages.
This book takes advantage of the fact that white-collar and cor-
porate offending are receiving greater attention from the media
and the public. It provides a look into the most prevalent forms

and causes of white-collar offending, as well as the repercussions
for American society. It also provides readers with updated sta-
tistics, research, and information on new laws.
Fisse, Brent, and John Braithwaite. Corporations, Crime, and
Accountability. 1993. New York: Cambridge University Press.
289 pages.
This book looks at various corporate behaviors and the harm
they cause. The authors pose thought-provoking questions such
as: Who should be held responsible in these cases? Should it be
the individual actor? Or should the corporation also be held ac-
countable? The writers also note that accountability is seldom
enforced by the law and proffer remedies that would include im-
puting accountability to a wider range of persons.
Fraser, Jill A. White Collar Sweat-Shop: The Deterioration of
Work and Its Rewards in Corporate America. 2001. New York:
W. W. Norton. 279 pages.
This book provides insight into how corporate mergers,
takeovers, and buyouts have made ﬁnancial goals more impor-
tant than any other aspect of doing business. The author outlines
what this means for the workforce in corporate America: beneﬁt
reduction, layoffs, and cutting of costs. Speciﬁcally, Fraser looks
at the banking, technology, and communications industries and at
sector trends within power structures. She says that management
and CEOs are getting more powerful, while the workforce has
been left with little inﬂuence and a lot of stress. The book shows
that many of our so-called “white-collar” employees do not have
the high salaries or good beneﬁts that we believe they do. This
book is similar to others in the past that have attempted to show
how changes in industry affect each section of the workforce.
Friedrichs, David O. Trusted Criminals: White Collar Crime in
Contemporary Society. 2006. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 464
pages.
This book clearly and comprehensively explains the key issues in-
volved in the study of white-collar crime. These include: theories
for explaining offending, the role of the media, whistleblowers’
and news reporters’ responsibilities, policing and prosecuting,
and policy responses to white-collar crimes and criminals.
Print Resources
215

Gaines, Larry K., Richard Ball, and David Shichor, eds. Read-
ings in White-Collar Crime. 2001. Long Grove, IL: Waveland
Press. 400 pages.
This book is an edited work of 18 articles published together to
give readers an increased understanding of the issues surround-
ing white-collar crime, the consequences it has for society, and
what can be done by way of deterrence and prevention. These ar-
ticles deal with issues such as: How is white-collar crime de-
ﬁned? What does white-collar offending say about the society in
which it exists? What has the criminal justice system done in re-
sponse to white-collar offending and offenders? And is there a
difference between white-collar and street-level offending?
Geis, Gilbert. White-Collar and Corporate Crime. 2007. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 100 pages.
This book is part of Prentice Hall’s Masters Series in Criminology
and presents a brief and easily understandable introduction to
topics in criminology, in this case, white-collar and corporate
crime. The authors in this series have forged the way to a better
understanding of issues that provide the foundations for modern
criminology.
Gerber, Jurg, and Eric Jensen, eds. Encyclopedia of White-Col-
lar Crime. 2006. Portsmouth, NH: Greenwood Press. 336 pages.
This encyclopedia covers currents events such as recent corpo-
rate scandals and their players, and it also highlights important
incidents that helped shape the history of white-collar crime. It
features descriptions of 200 persons, places, events, corporations,
and laws relating to various facets of white-collar crime.
Gray, Kenneth R., Larry A. Freider, and George W. Clark. Cor-
porate Scandals: The Many Faces of Greed. St. Paul, MN:
Paragon House. 307 pages.
This book focuses on the nature of corporate scandals. It looks at
the history of corporate offending in various realms as well as
the attempts by government to respond to corporate criminal ac-
tivity. It reveals the extent of business impropriety and unethical
behavior, offers advice for what the government can do to ad-
dress future corporate criminal activity, and looks at the impact
these issues have for the business community. This book is an
216
Resources

excellent source for how businesses in the United States should
be functioning. The authors provide insight into what corporate
America needs to do in order to regain trust lost by scandals
throughout history.
Green, Gary S. Occupational Crime. 1997. Chicago: Nelson-
Hall. 329 pages.
This book focuses on crime in the workplace and takes a differ-
ent stance than most other white-collar crime books by showing
that occupational crime is committed by employees of all differ-
ent types, not just the elite. The author presents a deﬁnition of oc-
cupational crime and discusses four different categories:
individual occupational crime, organizational occupational
crime, professional occupational crime, and state authority
crime. The book also discusses theories behind this type of de-
viance as well as research, policy, legal issues, and case studies.
Green, Stuart P. Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory
of White-Collar Crime. 2007. New York: Oxford University
Press. 306 pages.
The premise of this book is that our ideas of white-collar ver-
sus conventional offenders and offending provide two very
divergent pictures. It can be difficult to differentiate between
lawful and unlawful behaviors and between criminal and civil
matters. What is the difference between criminal fraud and
tax evasion? What is the difference between obstruction of jus-
tice and zealously defending a client? These are some of the
questions this book brings to the fore in an attempt to show
that uncertainty still permeates the idea of what constitutes
white-collar offending. The author tries to ameliorate some of
the confusion by examining what types of behavior warrant
criminal sanction. 
Leap, Terry L. Dishonest Dollars: The Dynamics of White-Collar
Crime. 2007. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 243 pages.
This book looks at various aspects of corporate behavior and of-
fending and takes a more integrated approach to explaining it.
The author believes that by using various disciplines from busi-
ness and public policy to psychology and sociology, we can gain
a better understanding of criminal behavior within the business
Print Resources
217

sector. He includes many examples of different types of offend-
ing and concludes that there are many similarities between
white-collar and conventional criminal offending.
Lewis, Roy V. White Collar Crime and Offenders: A 20-Year Lon-
gitudinal Cohort Study. 2002. Lincoln, NE: Writers Club Press.
232 pages.
This book is based on a longitudinal study conducted over 20
years involving a cohort of both street offenders and white-collar
criminal offenders. It analyzes data from more than 17,000 of-
fenders followed from 1973 to 1993. Results of the study shed
light on patterns of behavior, frequency of arrest and charging,
and specialization of offenders in certain types of offenses.
Lynch, Nancy K., and Michael J. Lynch. Corporate Crime, Cor-
porate Violence: A Primer. 1992. Albany, NY: Harrow and Hes-
ton. 176 pages.
This is a revised edition of an earlier book called Crimes against
Health and Safety. It breaks down popular myths associated with
traditional reporting of crime in the country, revealing that cor-
porate crime costs more in monetary loss and lives lost than
street-level offenses. The actions of corporations often harm
America’s workforce, consumers, and the public in general.
Sometimes what we have labeled an accident should have been
prosecuted as a criminal offense. The authors analyze numerous
cases of corporate wrongdoing (crime and violence), offer possi-
ble reasons for why they occurred, describe the impact of prose-
cution, and suggest what might be done to avoid future episodes
of these crimes.
Michalowski, Raymond J., and Ronald C. Kramer, eds. State-
Corporate Crime: Wrongdoing at the Intersection of Business
and Government. 2006. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University
Press. 298 pages.
This book features 15 different articles relating to state corpo-
rate crime. The main theme is that those persons in positions of
power, whether political or economic, often work in concert
and collaborate in the name of profit and political advantage—
typically at the expense of the general public. The essays
218
Resources

recount incidents of wrongdoing that resulted in harmful and
deleterious consequences. The book reminds readers that the
greatest threat to the public comes not from conventional
crimes but from the corrupt practices of those most powerful
and those in the upper echelon of society.
Pontell, Henry N., and Gilbert Geis, eds. International Hand-
book of White-Collar and Corporate Crime. 2007. New York:
Springer. 702 pages.
This handbook includes 34 articles written on various topics re-
lated to white-collar and corporate crime. The contributors come
from nine different countries, and each one adds a different dy-
namic to the literature on white-collar and corporate offending.
Some of the articles are case studies, others are historical analy-
ses, others still report on legal perspectives or theoretical under-
pinnings in explaining this type of crime. Many of the pieces
discuss enforcement issues, including the roles of the govern-
ment, the criminal justice system, the media, and corporations
themselves.
Poveda, Tony G. Rethinking White-Collar Crime. 1994. West-
port, CT: Praeger. 184 pages.
This book acts as an overview and synthesis of some of the re-
search on white-collar crime. The author contends that learning
about white-collar crime also lends insight into issues about
crime and criminal justice at the conventional level. He also pro-
vides a new deﬁnition of white-collar offending and encourages
critical thought about our current system of justice and the na-
ture of criminal offending.
Rosoff, Stephen, Henry Pontell, and Robert Tillman. Profit
without Honor: White Collar Crime and the Looting of America.
2007. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 624 pages.
This book examines the conﬂict between personal gain and indi-
vidual integrity and the consequences for white-collar criminal
offending in the United States. It looks at several high-profile
cases and analyzes trends regarding offending, victimization,
and corollary consequences for society.
Print Resources
219

Salinger, Lawrence M., ed. Encyclopedia of White-Collar and
Corporate Crime. 2004. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 1,016 pages.
This encyclopedia includes nearly 500 entries on individuals,
places, events, corporations, crimes, and scandals related to
white-collar and corporate offending. It also has entries on differ-
ent types of immoral behavior as well as coverage of suspicious
events that were not investigated by law enforcement ofﬁcials,
such as the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.
Shover, Neal, and Andrew Hochstetler. Choosing White-
Collar Crime. 2006. New York: Cambridge University Press.
272 pages.
The authors state that rational choice theory has been widely
used to explain traditional street offending and has been the im-
petus behind increased crime control efforts as well as the imple-
mentation of sanctions that are more harsh. They report,
however, that this theory has not been applied as broadly in ex-
planations of white-collar offending and crimes of the upper
class. The authors purport that if the same stance were taken
against white-collar crime as has been taken against more con-
ventional criminal behaviors, we might see increased progress
toward deterrence. They believe that policy on corporate crimi-
nal wrongdoing will be of the utmost importance in the coming
years with increases in the global economy. They call for in-
creased oversight as well as harder lines taken by citizens’ rights
groups to thwart white-collar offending.
Simon, David R. Elite Deviance. 2006. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
372 pages.
This book explains elite deviance as a product of the power
structure and wealth distribution in the United States. It contains
information on both criminal and noncriminal actions that are
damaging to society. The authors cite public opinion polls that
reveal the extent to which the American populace lacks confi-
dence in business and governmental practices. They also exam-
ine serious malfeasance, analyze the recent wave of corporate
scandals, and propose some remedies to help alleviate the social
suffering caused by these events.
220
Resources

Simpson, Sally, S. Corporate Crime, Law, and Social Control.
2002. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 192 pages.
This book asks whether a change in the criminal law emphasiz-
ing punishment and shame would work as a way to curb and
control corporate crime. The author examines whether our cur-
rent system of dealing with corporate offending—whether crimi-
nal, civil, or regulatory—is really a deterrent to this behavior. She
concludes that strict criminalization will not lead to compliance,
and that cooperative models probably work best. She does, how-
ever, stress that punishment must be used jointly with coopera-
tive prosecution models.
Sutherland, Edwin, H. White Collar Crime. 1949. New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
This is Sutherland’s seminal work on white-collar crime, in
which he attempts to define and explain this type of criminal
behavior. In it, he touts his own differential association theory
as an explanation for the causes of white-collar offending. He
focuses on the social position of the persons involved in these
activities, emphasizing the actor rather than the act. This is the
first book devoted solely to white-collar crime and has been the
impetus for numerous books, articles, and other works that fol-
lowed it.
Williams, Howard F. Investigating White-Collar Crime: Embez-
zlement and Financial Fraud. 2006. Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C.
Thomas. 346 pages.
This book begins with a deﬁnition of white-collar offending and
discusses the varying types of behaviors included under that
heading. It then gives examples of offenses such as fraud and
embezzlement and discusses problems with the investigation of
them. The author integrates accounting and auditing theory in a
discussion of techniques for the investigation of ﬁnancial crimes.
A portion of the book is devoted to interviewing strategies for in-
vestigators to help uncover any wrongdoing. It ﬁnishes with a
discussion of documented evidence as well as strategies for
proving illicit transactions and methods for preparing reports
and cases for court.
Print Resources
221

Journal Articles
Boss, Barry. “Sentencing in White Collar Cases: Time Does Not
Heal All Wounds.” 2000. Federal Sentencing Reporter 13: 15–18.
This article uses 1997 data from the United States Sentencing
Commission to examine sentencing practices for white-collar of-
fenders. It discusses issues related to sentencing guidelines for
federal offenders.
Holtfreter, Kristy. “Is Occupational Fraud ‘Typical’ White-Col-
lar Crime? A Comparison of Individual and Organizational
Characteristics.” 2005. Journal of Criminal Justice 33: 353–65.
This study used 1,142 occupational fraud cases and compared
organizational victim characteristics and offender characteristics
for three types of fraud: corruption, asset misappropriation, and
fraudulent statements. The results show that there were charac-
teristic differences between persons committing corruption and
asset misappropriation compared to those who committed
fraudulent statements. Furthermore, organizations victimized by
corruption ﬁt the traditional literature’s view of a large, for-proﬁt
company, whereas those victimized by the other two offenses
had different characteristics.
Lynch, Michael, Danielle McGurrin, and Melissa Fenwick.
“Disappearing Act: The Representation of Corporate Crime
Research in Criminological Literature.” 2004. Journal of Crimi-
nal Justice 32: 389–98.
This article looks at the two divergent assumptions among crimi-
nologists regarding the frequency with which articles on white-
collar and corporate offenses appear in the literature. The
argument is that criminologists in general believe that the subject
is adequately represented; however, those conducting research
on corporate and white-collar offending believe that their topics
still lack sufficient coverage in the criminological literature.
These authors utilized three methods to gauge the prevalence of
corporate crime research: interviews with criminology depart-
ments to determine whether they offer courses in these topics,
analyses of textbooks to gauge coverage of the topic, and content
analysis of journals in criminal justice for ﬁve years. The authors
then compared the coverage on this topic to article and textbook
coverage on other issues in criminology.
222
Resources

Passas, Nikos. “Lawful but Awful: ‘Legal Corporate Crime.’”
2005. Journal of Socio-Economics 34: 771–86.
In this article, the author purports that serious threats to society
are not given priority when authorities focus on behaviors that
are only ofﬁcially criminal or illegal. Basically, the author notes
that there is some corporate behavior that is not illegal yet has
serious consequences for society. This article also looks at the
role of the state and deregulation in perpetuating misconduct by
corporations.
Piquero, Nicole Leeper, Stephen G. Tibbetts, and Michael B.
Blankenship. “Examining the Role of Differential Association
and Techniques of Neutralization in Explaining Corporate
Crime.” 2005. Deviant Behavior 26: 159–88.
This article examines the extent to which differential association
theory and techniques of neutralization theory can explain cor-
porate crime etiology. The authors studied 133 MBA students’ at-
titudes toward offending behaviors related to the marketing and
sale of a pharmaceutical drug. Findings revealed that agreement
to wrongdoing by other employees and management in a com-
pany makes it more likely that students may engage in inappro-
priate corporate behavior. Findings counter to a differential
association explanation, however, were also found. Results also
show that neutralization techniques play an important role in of-
fending, especially for older persons and if proﬁt is involved.
Recine, Jennifer S. “Examination of the White Collar Crime
Penalty Enhancements in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.” 2002.
American Criminal Law Review 39: 1535–70.
This study looks at whether giving white-collar criminals longer
sentences will remedy some of the corporate criminal offending
the United States is experiencing. It looks at the business events
that occurred in 2001 and 2002 with a description of the Sar-
banes-Oxley Act and the political processes that led to its pas-
sage. The author concludes that white-collar offenders rarely pay
penalties that are proportional to the losses involved in their acts,
and that longer punishment may not deter them, but it is neces-
sary for the criminal justice system to have options to hold culpa-
ble individuals responsible for their actions.
Print Resources
223

Rosenmerkel, Sean P. 2001. “Wrongfulness and Harmfulness as
Components of Seriousness of White-Collar Offenses.” Jour-
nal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 17: 308–27.
This article examines perceptions of crime seriousness by com-
paring rankings for white-collar offenses with rankings for tradi-
tional street crimes. The author contends that white-collar
offenses will be rated as less serious.
Schanzenback, Max, and Michael L. Yeager. 2006. “Prison
Time, Fines, and Federal White-Collar Criminals: The
Anatomy of a Racial Disparity.” Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology 96: 757–93.
This article looks at race and sex disparities for white-collar crim-
inal sentences. Data come from the United States Sentencing
Commission. The authors focus on the fact that white-collar of-
fenses are typically nonviolent and economic in nature and that
alternative punishments such as ﬁnes can open the door for in-
creased judicial discretion. Controlling for all other characteris-
tics, the authors find large racial and ethnic disparity where
blacks and Hispanics are punished more harshly than whites.
They attribute some of this disparity to the ability of whites to
pay ﬁnes. Disparities regarding sex are present as well and re-
sults show that males are punished more harshly than females,
all else being equal.
Schoepfer, Andrea, Stephanie Carmichael, and Nicole Leeper
Piquero. 2007. “Do Perceptions of Punishment Vary Between
White-Collar and Street Crimes?” Journal of Criminal Justice
35: 151–63.
This study uses data from a national probability sample to look
at whether the perceptions of the certainty and severity of sanc-
tions are the same for white-collar crime as for street crime. The
authors studied robbery and fraud as the street level and white-
collar offenses and found that although street-level offenders are
perceived as being more likely to get caught and punished, re-
spondents did not feel that one type of crime deserved harsher
punishment than the other.
224
Resources

Dissertations
Chopra, Parveen C. “Organizational and Environmental Corre-
lates of OSHA Violations in Selected Industries: An Ex-
ploratory Study.” 1997. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microﬁlms
International. 222 pages.
This dissertation explores both the organizational and environ-
mental factors that may contribute to corporate violation of
OSHA laws. The study was conducted on both large and small,
public and private companies and their compliance with indus-
try standards. Among the variables that had signiﬁcant inﬂuence
were corporate negative growth rate, number of OSHA inspec-
tions and long term debt ratio, all of which had positive effects,
on likelihood to offend.
Gibbs, Carole E. “Corporate Citizenship, Sanctions, and Envi-
ronmental Crime.” 2006. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microﬁlms
International. 280 pages.
This dissertation looks at three different subject areas: corporate
citizenship, the environment, and corporate crime. It points out
that traditional research on corporate crime leaves out measures
of environmental crime. It looks at environmental performances
of businesses to explain engagement in environmental criminal
activity. The study concludes that the addition of corporate citi-
zenship is negligible in an understanding of the environmental
practices of a business.
Jamieson, Katherine Marie. “Corporate Crime and Organiza-
tional Processes.” 1989. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microﬁlms
International. 241 pages.
This dissertation examines violations of antitrust for Fortune 500
companies over a ﬁve-year period. Data are from 1981–1985 and
include 166 violators. Findings from the analysis include that vi-
olators tend to be larger companies, those companies with
greater profit and high levels of industry production intensity.
The study provides several explanations for corporate offending
and includes dialogue from interviews with regulatory enforce-
ment agents.
Print Resources
225

Mullen, Linda Greef. “An Examination of the Antecedents 
of White-Collar Criminal Behavior in Marketing.” 2005. Ann
Arbor, MI: University Microﬁlms International. 159 pages.
This dissertation examines which theories are relevant to white
collar offending. It is an interdisciplinary study that uses data
from convicted white-collar criminals. It assesses the extent to
which various factors—corporate culture, personality character-
istics, and social variables—contributed to their engaging in
white-collar offending. Specifically, it attempts to answer three
questions: which corporate cultures increase or decrease the like-
lihood for a marketer to commit a white-collar offense, what per-
sonality characteristics increase or decrease this likelihood, and
what social variables are related. The data for this study come
from three federal institutions.
Reifert, Steven Edward. “State-Corporate Crime in Kalamazoo
Department of Public Safety: A Case Study of Deviant Activity
between the Police and Computer Vendors.” 2006. Ann Arbor,
MI: University Microﬁlms International. 251 pages.
This dissertation examines the state corporate crimes that took
place in Kalamazoo, Michigan, and the resultant injury, death,
and monetary loss that occurred because of it. An integration of
theories is used in an explanation of wrongful behavior among
public departments, private vendors, and the government. Pol-
icy recommendations are given as well as directions for future
replication and research.
Magazines and Newsletters
Corporate Crime Reporter
1209 National Press Building
Washington, DC 20045
(202) 737–1680
www.corporatecrimereporter.com
The Corporate Crime Reporter is a legal print newsletter published
48 times a year. It contains various reports and news about cur-
rents events each week. It is aimed at federal and state prosecu-
tors, corporations, law schools, media outlets, and white-collar
and corporate criminal defense ﬁrms.
226
Resources

FTC: Watch
P.O. Box 356
Basye, VA 22810–0356
(202) 639–0581
www.ftcwatch.com
This is a newsletter that is published 22 times a year and was
started in 1976 by former Federal Trade Commission employ-
ees. It specializes in covering information about the FTC, states’
attorneys general, U.S. Congress, and the Department of Jus-
tice’s Antitrust Division. Topics covered include trade regula-
tion, consumer protection, the latest corporate mergers and
acquisitions, and issues surrounding trade at the national and
global level.
Multinational Monitor
Essential Information
P.O. Box 19405
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 387–8034
multinationalmonitor.org
This is a monthly journal published by Essential Information, a
nonproﬁt organization started by Ralph Nader that tracks corpo-
rate activity around the globe. It spotlights Third World develop-
ment by publishing information on the environment, worker
health and safety, labor union issues, and the politics of business.
Each year, this journal compiles a list of the 10 worst corpora-
tions based on their involvement in corporate criminal behavior.
White Collar Crime Fighter
213 Ramapoo Rd.
Ridgeﬁeld, CT 06877
(202) 440–2261
www.wccﬁghter.com
This magazine is published monthly and offers strategies to com-
bat fraud for organizations and corporations. The magazine’s
purpose is to give information on detection, prevention, and in-
vestigation of fraud-related activity and how best to deal with it.
It also discusses the latest technologies, software, tools, and tech-
niques available to protect businesses.
Print Resources
227

White Collar Crime Report
The Bureau of National Affairs
1231 25th St. NW
Washington, DC 20037
(202) 372–1033
www.bna.com/products/lit/wcln.htm
This is a biweekly magazine that focuses on legal developments
concerning the prosecution and defense of white-collar crime. It
keeps subscribers up to date on any policy changes or action
taken by the United States Sentencing Commission and the Jus-
tice Department. It also tracks litigation pertaining to white-col-
lar and fraud-related cases from federal courts and significant
state court cases.
Government Documents and Agency
Publications
Corporate Fraud Task Force. First Year Report to the President.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the
Deputy Attorney General, 2003. 76 pages.
This is the ﬁrst report of the Corporate Fraud Task Force to the
president. It outlines the task force’s mission and provides a
summary of first-year highlights regarding criminal prosecu-
tions and civil and regulatory enforcement efforts. It also dis-
cusses the role and contributions of various members of the task
force, including the FBI, U.S. attorneys, the Securities and Ex-
change Commission, the Department of Labor, and the Depart-
ment of Treasury.
Corporate Fraud Task Force. Second Year Report to the Presi-
dent. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Ofﬁce of the
Deputy Attorney General, 2004. 45 pages.
This report provides facts and statistics from the task force’s sec-
ond year of combating corporate criminal activity and enforcing
the nation’s laws, both criminal and civil. This is a summary of
the efforts of each contributing member toward apprehension,
prosecution, and punishment of corporate wrongdoers.
228
Resources

Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Care
Fraud and Abuse Control Program FY 2005. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Justice, Health Care Fraud and Abuse Con-
trol Program, 2005. 44 pages.
This publication is an annual report of the Health Care Fraud
and Abuse Control Program, which is under the direction of the
secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services and
the U.S. attorney general. The program was set up to coordinate
health care fraud enforcement activities at the federal, state, and
local levels. This report is a summary of the results of cooperated
efforts to investigate and prosecute the most harmful health care
fraud cases for the past year.
Helmcamp, James, Richard Ball, and Kitty Townsend, eds. Def-
initional Dilemma: Can and Should There Be a Universal Deﬁni-
tion of White Collar Crime? Morgantown, WV: Training and
Research Institute of the National White Collar Crime Center,
1996. 343 pages.
This publication is based on the proceedings of a white-collar
crime workshop cosponsored by the National White Collar
Crime Center and West Virginia University. The workshop cen-
tered on the many definitions of white-collar crime. This docu-
ment brings together the ideas of prominent white-collar crime
scholars to form a working definition of the term for the Na-
tional White Collar Crime Center and its membership. A defini-
tion that is common and can be operationalized will help to
support and expand research efforts on white-collar criminal
offending.
Kane, John, and April D. Wall. Identifying the Links Between
White-Collar Crime and Terrorism: For the Enhancement of Lo-
cal and State Law Enforcement Investigation and Prosecution.
Morgantown, WV: National White Collar Crime Center, 2005.
94 pages.
This report identifies and discusses the relationship between
white-collar crime and terrorism and presents the issues and
problems involved in investigating and prosecuting these types
Print Resources
229

of cases. It gives detailed information on cases investigated in
Colorado that involved insurance fraud, identity theft, money
laundering, and tax evasion by a terrorist group for the purposes
of raising money to fund terrorism. 
Kane, John, and April D. W6all. The 2005 National Public Sur-
vey on White Collar Crime. Morgantown, WV: National White
Collar Crime Center, 2006. 54 pages.
This is a report of the National Public Survey on White Collar
Crime conducted in 2005, which is a follow-up to the original
survey conducted in 1999. The survey utilizes individual and
household measures in a nationally representative survey. This
report highlights the ﬁndings from the survey on such topics as
public experience with white-collar offending. Questions were
asked about victimization, perceptions of crime seriousness, and
reporting behavior of those victimized.
McNulty, Paul J. Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business
Organizations. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice,
Ofﬁce of the Deputy Attorney General. 2006. 21 pages.
This memorandum from Deputy Attorney General Paul Mc-
Nulty emphasizes the importance of protecting the integrity of
the U.S. economy and marketplace. It informs the U.S. attorneys
of changes to policy that support corporate crime prevention and
makes clear the goals of the department. McNulty’s memo re-
places an earlier memorandum from Larry D. Thompson, the
previous deputy attorney general.
National White Collar Crime Center. Annual Report. Morgan-
town, WV: Training and Research Institute of the National
White Collar Crime Center, 2007. 40 pages.
This report is a summary of the yearly activities of the Na-
tional White Collar Crime Center and is intended to be used
for informational purposes by the agencies that provide fund-
ing for the center. It summarizes the accomplishments and
work conducted by each of the departments and divisions and
includes updates of future goals and a list of objectives for
each section.
230
Resources

Ofﬁce of the Inspector General. Quarterly Report to Congress.
Baghdad, Iraq: Coalition Provisional Authority, 2004. 87 pages.
This is a quarterly report to Congress by the Special Inspector
General for Iraq Reconstruction, who oversees the Iraq Relief and
Reconstruction Fund. The publication summarizes the progress of
efforts in Iraq regarding reconstruction. It reports on the effective-
ness of the administration of program efforts as well as any detec-
tion of waste, fraud, or abuse in the operations of the program.
These quarterly reports were designed to keep Congress, the
American taxpayers, the secretary of defense, and the secretary of
state informed of deﬁciencies or issues relating to program goals.
Transparency International. Global Corruption Report 2007.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 429 pages.
Transparency International’s annual corruption report examines
wrongdoing in the judicial process around the globe. It brings to-
gether legal professionals, scholars, and activists to discuss reme-
dies for systems that are corrupt. The report focuses on two main
issues: the pressure on judges from politicians to make rulings in
favor of certain legislative or economic interests, and smaller in-
cidents of bribes from court ofﬁcials. It analyzes how judicial in-
tegrity and accountability can be strengthened in order to
combat corruption worldwide. It also includes case studies from
different countries around the world.
U.S. Department of Justice. Financial Crimes Report to the Pub-
lic. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bu-
reau of Investigation, 2006. 48 pages.
The FBI investigates crimes of fraud, embezzlement, and theft
and characterizes these as crimes of deceit, violation of trust, or
concealment. The ﬁnancial crime investigations by the FBI focus
on health care fraud, corporate fraud, identity theft, mortgage
fraud, insurance fraud, and money laundering to name a few.
This report is an annual summary of the extent and nature of the
crimes that have come to the attention of the FBI and that they
have investigated. These statistics are released by the FBI to in-
form the public, to gauge trends, and to analyze the effectiveness
of the Department of Justice’s efforts.
Print Resources
231

Nonprint Resources
Videos
Crime in the Suites
Type: VHS
Date: 1987
This video discusses the extent of white-collar offending in the
United States and looks at how these individuals use their posi-
tions of power to embezzle billions of dollars. It includes per-
sonal stories of white-collar criminals and victims.
Cyber Crime Fighting II
Type: DVD
Date: 2005
This video was produced by the National White Collar Crime
Center and contains information for law enforcement agencies
on investigative tools designed to fight cybercrime. It features
tactics and techniques for searching for digital evidence and how
to maintain and preserve it. The disc is divided into four sec-
tions: First Responders, Detectives and Investigators, Computer
Forensics, and Case Files.
Organized Crime: A World History
Type: VHS, 4 tapes
Date: 2001
This video series looks at organized crime in Sicily, Russia,
Colombia, and China/India. Together, they give a comprehen-
sive review of the most infamous crime organizations in the
world. The video includes interviews with gangsters and law en-
forcement ofﬁcials in these ﬁve different countries.
Theories of Crime: Crooks in White Collars
Type: VHS
Date: 1985
This video discusses white-collar crime and group conﬂict the-
ory. It debates the theories of Ralph Dahrendorf, George Vold,
Austin Turk, and Richard Quinney.
232
Resources

Web Sites
American Antitrust Institute
www.antitrustinstitute.org
Center for Corporate Policy
www.corporatepolicy.org
Council of Europe
www.coe.int
Environmental Protection Agency
www.epa.gov
Federal Bureau of Investigation
www.fbi.gov
Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
www.ﬁncen.gov
FTC Watch
www.ftcwatch.com
International Monetary Fund
www.imf.org
Internet Crime Complaint Center
www.ic3.gov
Interpol
www.interpol.int
Multinational Monitor
multinationalmonitor.org
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
nacdl.org
Nonprint Resources
233

National White Collar Crime Center
www.nw3c.org
Organization for Competitive Markets
www.competitivemarkets.com
Organization of American States
www.oas.org
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse
trac.syr.edu
Transparency International
www.transparency.org
United States Computer Emergency Response Team 
(US-CERT)
www.us-cert.gov
United States Department of Justice
www.usdoj.gov
United States Secret Service
www.treas.gov/usss
United States Securities and Exchange Commission
www.sec.gov
White Collar Crime Fighter
www.wccﬁghter.com
World Bank
worldbank.org
World Trade Organization
www.wto.org
234
Resources

Glossary
Actus reus
An actual physical criminal act. Actus reus is necessary to
prove that a crime actually occurred, except in instances of conspiracy
or attempts at wrongdoing.
Antitrust legislation
Laws prohibiting businesses from engaging in
practices or acts that deprive consumers of the beneﬁts of competition,
resulting in higher prices for inferior products and services.
Bribery
Offering or taking something of value, usually money or
monetary instruments, to inﬂuence persons or gain an unfair advantage.
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914
Expanded the Sherman Antitrust Act in
an attempt to remedy some deﬁciencies relating to monopolies. The Clay-
ton Antitrust Act addresses the issues of economic competition involving
the sale, merger, or acquisition of corporate entities. It prohibits any one
person from being in charge of more than one competing organization.
Compliance programs
Programs implemented by corporations and
businesses to ensure conformity with laws or legal rules. Compliance
programs can be mandated for corporations by law enforcement author-
ities as part of punishment for legal wrongdoing.
Corporate charter
A document, ﬁled with authorities by the founders
of a corporation, which states or proves the existence of a corporation
as well as its purposes. Corporate charters include important informa-
tion about a corporation and are sometimes referred to as articles of in-
corporation.
Corporate crime
Any criminal behaviors engaged in by a corporation
for its own beneﬁt or for the beneﬁt of its employees.
Corporate death penalty
Revoking the licenses (corporate charter) of
a corporation for criminal wrongdoing and forcing the corporation out
of business.
Corporate Fraud Task Force (CFTF)
A task force created by President
George W. Bush and led by the deputy attorney general of the United
States. It was created to vigorously enforce laws against corporate
235

236
Glossary
criminal violations and restore investor conﬁdence in corporations. The
CFTF is made up of two groups: the Department of Justice group, which
focuses on the enforcement of the corporate criminal law, and an inter-
agency group, whose purpose is to assist in maintaining cooperation be-
tween legal and regulatory enforcement authorities.
Corporation
An organization composed of a group of individuals
organized by law for some purpose and having powers and existence
apart from its members.
Corruption
Among organizations, corruption occurs when part of an
organization is not performing actions that are intended by law or per-
forms actions in an improper manner. Among individuals, corruption
refers to any dishonest practice or abuse of a position of power for per-
sonal gain.
Criminal forfeiture
The taking of property by the government as
punishment for criminal violations. Property can typically be seized if
it was used in committing a criminal offense or was acquired by crimi-
nal activity.
Criminal liability
Responsibility for actions or behaviors under crimi-
nal law.
Elite crime
Violations of the law that occur while carrying out the du-
ties of an occupation or through any ﬁnancial transactions.
Embezzlement
Taking or using money entrusted by another to some-
one’s care.
Extortion
Acquiring money or property by force, intimidation, harm
to reputation, damage of property, or other unfavorable outcome rather
than by threat of imminent bodily harm.
False advertising
Using deceptive or misleading statements in adver-
tising to gain an advantage in the market.
False pretenses
Obtaining the personal property of another by mis-
representation of a past or present fact, swindling, and/or conﬁdence
game. The confidence game is an attempt to cheat someone out of
money or some other assets by gaining their conﬁdence.
Forgery
Falsifying documents with the intent to deceive. 
Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 
Set up the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) to control trade, oversee the activity of large corpo-
rations, and limit unfair trading practices. It made illegal several unfair
methods of trading and competition that affect different areas of com-
merce. This act made it possible for the FTC to take action against any
corporation that violated laws pertaining to the Sherman Act, the Clay-
ton Act, and other violations not stated in those two acts.

For-proﬁt corporation
An organization that functions to increase the
wealth of investors through some commercial purpose.
Fraud
Deliberate deception for personal gain or an unfair advantage.
Free-market economy
Economic system where the production and
distribution of goods or services are directed by supply, demand, and
competition; a system in which the government has no part of any as-
pect of the production or distribution. In its purest sense, a free-market
economy does not exist; most countries have some sort of mixed eco-
nomic system.
Globalization
Process by which societies around the world increas-
ingly use the same or similar practices, whether economic, social, tech-
nological, or cultural.
Limited liability
The features of a corporation which state that the
owners cannot be responsible or liable for more than they have person-
ally invested in the corporation.
Mala in se
Behaviors that are inherently criminal or wrong.
Mala prohibita
Behaviors that are criminal only because a legislature
has deﬁned them as such.
Mens rea
The criminal intent or guilty mind. Proving mens rea shows
premeditation by the perpetrator.
Money laundering 
Literally, the cleaning of money. Engagement in
any ﬁnancial transactions that are meant to hide the source or destina-
tion of money from legal and financial authorities; attempts to make
money that was obtained illegally into money that comes from a legiti-
mate source.
Monopoly
A corporation that has exclusive control over a service or a
commodity; also, when a business has no competition for its goods,
products, or services.
Multinational corporations
Corporations that operate in two or more
countries.
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS)
A system of
recording crimes and situational factors of crimes. For each criminal in-
cident known by the police, the information recorded includes the na-
ture and type of criminal offense, the characteristics of the offender and
victim, and the nature and type of property taken.
Not-for-profit corporation
An organization with noncommercial
goals; these corporations are not concerned with monetary proﬁt; rather,
they support matters of private or public interest. Examples include the
environment, charities, education, health care, politics, religion, sports,
and research.
Glossary
237

Occupational crime
Illegal activities committed during the course of
employment in a legitimate occupation.
Organization
According to the U.S. Sentencing Commission, an orga-
nization is a person other than an individual. An organization may be a
corporation, association, partnership, union, joint-stock company, pen-
sion fund, unincorporated entity, trust, government, or nonproﬁt entity.
Organizational crime
Acts in violation of the law performed to fur-
ther an organization’s goals.
Perpetual lifetime
The idea that a corporation, its assets, and structure
will continue to exist after the lifetimes of its members.
Political crime
Crime committed by or for any agent of the govern-
ment. Political crimes involve commissions or omissions that threaten
any interests of the government or state.
Price ﬁxing
When companies act in collusion to ﬁx the prices of a com-
modity or service at a high level in order to make a bigger proﬁt at the
expense of consumers.
Price gouging
Pricing commodities or services over the expected mar-
ket price when the supply is low or there is no other vendor.
Racketeering
Engaging in illegal or criminal activities through a busi-
ness enterprise.
Respondiat superior
Doctrine enabling corporations to be held re-
sponsible for the wrongful behavior of their employees.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Passed into law in response to corporate
and accounting scandals that caused numerous investors and share-
holders to lose their investments and retirement funds. It established
new guidelines for corporate entities, added responsibilities to corpo-
rate boards for the actions of their companies, and enhanced criminal
penalties for violations. Under this act, board members must dissemi-
nate earnings reports to shareholders. The act also established a new
agency, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, to oversee ac-
counting ﬁrms’ activities in auditing publicly traded companies.
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890
Legislation enacted to prohibit the re-
straint of trade or commerce between the states or with foreign nations.
Aimed at those who attempt to decrease economic competition, it pro-
hibits monopolies, including attempts or conspiracies to form monopo-
lies. Violations can be prosecuted by the government in civil or criminal
jurisdictions, and penalties under the act include ﬁnes of up to $10 mil-
lion for corporations, $350,000 dollars for individuals, and imprison-
ment of up to three years.
238
Glossary

Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics
A compilation of data and
statistics from over 100 sources that gives information on various as-
pects of crime and criminal justice in the United States. Funded by the
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Transparency
Accurate disclosure—in full and in a timely fashion—of
information that is of a public nature.
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
Established in 1929 by the Interna-
tional Association of Chiefs of Police to provide a comprehensive list of
annual crime statistics in the United States. Today, compiled by the FBI,
the UCR provides information on eight index offenses and reﬂects infor-
mation on criminal arrests by over 17,000 police agencies in the country.
Welfare fraud
The intentional misuse of welfare systems by providing
inaccurate or false information. Involves obtaining beneﬁts of the sys-
tem that are not deserved because the recipient does not meet the quali-
ﬁcations or standards for receipt.
White-collar crime
According to Edwin H. Sutherland, this type of
crime is “committed by a person of respectability and high social sta-
tus in the course of his [or her] occupation.” White-collar crime over-
laps with corporate crime because opportunities to commit such
crimes as fraud, embezzlement, or forgery occur more often among
white-collar employees.
Glossary
239


241
Index
AAI. See American Antitrust
Institute
Abacha, Sani, 89, 115
Abbott, 82–83
Actus reus, 71
Adelphia Communications
Corporation, 43, 141, 158
Africa, 87, 89, 93
black market in drugs, 
100–101
HIV/AIDS in, 100
prosecutions and convictions,
115
African Americans, 169–170
Age of offenders, 171–172
Alesina, Alberto, 94
Alexander, Justin, 95, 96, 97
AMC. See Antitrust
Modernization Commission
American Antitrust Institute
(AAI), 202
ANCORAGE-NET, 116
Andrade, Leandro, 54
Andrews, Charles, 84–85, 113
Antitrust Criminal Penalty
Enhancement and Reform
Act of 2004, 140
Antitrust Division of the
Department of Justice,
204–205
Antitrust Modernization
Commission (AMC),
202–203
Antitrust violations, 47
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 180
number of arrests, 174
See also Clayton Antitrust Act
of 1914; Sherman Antitrust
Act of 1890
AOL Time Warner, 140
Archer Daniels Midland, 24, 136,
183
Arthur Anderson LLP, 42, 138,
141
Ashcroft, John, 195
AT&T, 134
Attorney General, 66, 153–154
Australia, 105
Automobile industry, 30
AVERT, 99
BAE Systems, 82
Bakker, Jim and Tammy Faye,
23–24
Bank fraud, 47, 177
Bank Secrecy Act of 1970, 133
Banker’s Trust, 183

BASF Aktiengesellschaft, 183
Bhutto, Benazir, 116
Boards of directors, and self-
regulation of corporations,
74
Bolivia, 115
Borger, Julian, 55
Brandeis, Louis, 195
Brazil, 117
Bribery, 47
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
demographics of offenders,
170–172
economic costs of, 92
execution of Zheng Xiaoyu,
117–118
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169, 180
and infrastructure projects,
91–92
institutions targeted by, 87
international perspective,
81–83, 86, 87, 89, 91
number of arrests, 174
and political corruption, 89
value of property taken, 173
British Petroleum, 118, 143
Buffett, Warren, 74
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 64
Bush, George W., 195
corporate connections, 55–56,
138
and Corporate Fraud Task
Force, 68
California “three strikes” laws, 
54
Cameroon, 117
Campaign contributions, 55–56
Caucasians, 169–170
Center for Corporate Policy, 71,
72, 203
CEOs, 59–60, 184. See also Buffett,
Warren; Ebbers, Bernard;
Kozlowski, L. Dennis; Lay,
Kenneth; Skilling, Jeffrey K.;
Winnick, Gary
CFTF. See Corporate Fraud Task
Force
Cheney, Dick, 55
Child Labor Deterrence Act
(introduced but not passed),
134
Chile, 115, 148–149
China, 117–118
Christie, Christopher J., 49
Chronology of events, 
127–143
Citizen’s Bank, 32
Civil rights offenses, 174
Clayton, Henry, 145
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914,
130, 145, 187–188
Clinard, Marshall B., 14, 52, 82,
145–146
Coalition Provisional Authority
(Iraq), 97
Coleman, James, 71
Colleges and universities, 8–10,
31–32
Collier, Paul, 92
Colombia, 102
Comey, James, 62
Commerce clause of the U.S.
Constitution, 15, 46–47
Community service, 58
Compendium of International Legal
Instruments on Corruption,
113
Conspiracy, 47, 174, 177
Constitution of the U.S., 8, 11, 15,
46–47
Construction projects. See
Government contracts;
Infrastructure projects
242
Index

Consumer Product Safety
Commission, 28–30, 
134
Convention on Combating
Bribery of Foreign Public
Ofﬁcials, 136
Convictions for corporate crimes,
115, 118, 177–179
Corporate crime, 5–6
consequences of, 43–44, 75, 88.
See also under International
perspective on corporate
crime
cost effectiveness of violating
the law, 27, 54–55, 67–68
costs of, 43, 75, 184
deaths and injuries resulting
from. See Violent corporate
offenses
deﬁnitions, 2–6, 41–44
difﬁculties in detecting and
controlling, 67–71
distinguished from white collar
crime, 2–3, 5–6, 65
harmfulness compared to
street crime, 27, 43
importance of studying, 33
mala in se vs. mala prohibita
crimes, 3
measurement of, 62–67
and political corruption, 54–56.
See also Political corruption
pros and cons of holding
corporations socially
responsible, 44–46, 75
public perceptions of, 14, 27–31
quotations on, 195
recommendations for reducing,
71–75, 89–90, 102–104,
114–115
social construction of crime, 3
statistics. See Statistics on
corporate crime
types of, 16–17, 21–31, 41–44,
47
See also Convictions for
corporate crimes;
Government commentary on
corporate offending;
Government documents and
reports; History of corporate
crime; International
perspective on corporate
crime; Legislation;
Prosecution of corporate
crimes; Punishment of
corporate crimes; speciﬁc
crimes
Corporate Fraud Task Force
(CFTF), 68–69, 105, 203–204
accomplishments of, 176
excerpt of Executive Order
13271, 185–186
reports, 140, 141
Corporate theft, 25–27
Corporations
campaign contributions, 55–56
chronology of events, 127–143
corporate culture, 60–61
cost to taxpayers, 13
current status of, 12–14
economic exploitation by,
21–24
lack of transparency, 43
legal status of corporations in
early U.S., 7–9
limited liability, 11–12, 14, 
132
low corporate taxes, 24, 70
and loyalties of Supreme Court
justices, 11
mergers, 13–14
perpetual lifetime, 11–12
personhood of, 10–11, 130
and political corruption, 13,
43–44, 54–56
Index
243

politics and the economic elite,
52–53
proﬁt motive and exploitation
of citizens and workforce,
13, 25–27, 30
self-regulation of, 74
worst corporations list, 82–83
yearly proﬁts from, 13
See also Multinational
corporations
Corruption
and debt burden on poor
countries, 83
international conventions
against, 107–111
and international ﬁnancial
institutions, 85–86
UN publications on, 112–113
See also International
perspective on corporate
crime; Political corruption;
Statistics on corporate crime
Costa, Antonio, 106–107
Costa Rica, 115
Council of Europe, 136–137, 
204
Counterfeiting. See Forgery and
counterfeiting
Court cases
Dartmouth College v. Woodward,
9–10, 129
Dukes v. Wal-Mart, 26–27, 141
New York Central & Hudson
River Railroad v. United
States, 15–16, 17
In re Hellenic, 138–139
and respondiat superior doctrine,
15–16
The Rev. John Bracken v. the
Visitors of William and Mary
College, 8–9, 128
Santa Clara County v. Southern
Pac. R. Co., 8, 11, 130
Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts v.
Town of Pawlet, 10, 11, 129
Standard Oil Company of Texas v.
United States, 132
statistics on disposition of
cases, 181
United States v. Bainbridge
Management, 139
United States v. Booker, 57–58, 
72
Criminal Law Convention on
Corruption, 136–137
Croatia, 117
Cuomo, Andrew, 32
Daiwa Bank Ltd., 183
Dal Bo, Ernesto, 93
Dartmouth College v. Woodward,
9–10, 129
Davison, John, 95–96, 97
Debt burden on poor countries,
83, 91
Defense attorneys, list of, 182
Deferred prosecution, 49, 60–62,
76
Demographics of corporate
crime, 169–173
Deterrence, 50–52, 57, 60–61
components of, 67–68, 76–77
international perspective,
115–118
recommendations for reducing
corporate crime, 71–75
Di Tella, Rafael, 102
Differential association theory,
164
DiMento, Joseph, 45
Dow Corning, 30
Drug offenses, prosecutions
compared to white collar
crime, 176
Dukes v. Wal-Mart, 26–27, 141
244
Index

Duvalier, Jean-Claude “Baby
Doc,” 89
Earthquakes, 91–92
East India Company, 127–129
Ebbers, Bernard, 146–147
Economic espionage, 47
Economic exploitation, 21–24, 26
Ecuador, 115
Eigen, Peter, 91, 115
Elkins Act of 1903, 15–16
Embezzlement, 16, 47
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
demographics of offenders,
170–172
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169, 180
international perspective, 82,
83, 89
number of arrests, 168, 174
value of property taken, 173
Employee Retirement Income
Security Act (ERISA), 20
Employees
chronology of labor disputes
and legislation, 129–140
and difﬁculties of prosecuting
corporations, 46
exploitation of, 25–27, 31, 85
and UN Global Impact, 112
unsafe working conditions, 31
Energy scandal (California), 54
English Joint Stock Company, 127
Enron, 42, 53, 138
campaign contributions, 56
legislation following scandal.
See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002
See also Fastow, Andrew; Lay,
Kenneth; Skilling, Jeffrey K.
Environmental offenses, 28
Japan, 82
number of arrests, 174
statistics, 179–180
and UN Global Impact, 112
ERISA. See Employee Retirement
Income Security Act
Ernst and Young, 42
Estache, Antonio, 93
European Union, 105, 115, 116,
136, 139
Ewing, Gary, 54
Executive Order 13271, 185–186
Extortion
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
demographics of offenders,
170–172
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169
international perspective, 83,
86
number of arrests, 174
value of property taken, 173
Exxon, 183
Exxon Valdez oil spill of 1989,
28, 134, 135, 140, 142
merger with Mobil, 136
price gouging, 25
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., 25,
137, 183
Factory Act (Britain), 129
False Claims Act of 1863, 73–74
False pretenses/false advertising,
25, 47
demographics of offenders,
170–172
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169
prosecutions and convictions,
177
value of property taken, 173
False Statements Accountability
Act of 1996, 135
Index
245

Fastow, Andrew, 43, 147–148
FBI, 15
statistics on violent crime, 51
Uniform Crime Reports
(UCRs), 51, 63, 167
FDA. See Food and Drug
Administration
Federal Trade Commission,
205–206
Federal Trade Commission Act of
1914, 130–131, 188–189
Fines
determination of, 58
and difﬁculties of prosecuting
corporations, 44
money not recovered from
corporations, 70
statistics, 57, 181, 183
See also Punishment of
corporate crimes
Finland, 117
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 29
Food and drug violations, 25, 
29
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 180
number of arrests, 174
Foreign corrupt practices, 47. See
also International
perspective on corporate
crime
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of
1977, 134
Forgery and counterfeiting, 47
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
demographics of offenders,
170–172
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169
number of arrests, 168, 174
value of property taken, 173
Fourteenth Amendment, 8, 11
France, 82, 115, 117
Frank, Nancy K., 5–6
Fraud, 16, 21–24, 47
examples, 22–24, 42
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169
and Iraq, 95–97
number of arrests, 168, 174
prosecutions and convictions,
177–178
See also Bank fraud; Welfare
fraud; Wire fraud
French Mississippi Company, 128
Friedman, Thomas L., 84–85
Friedrichs, David O., 5, 12–13, 26,
27
Frye, Eric, 116
Fujimori, Alberto, 81–82, 89,
115–116, 143
biographical sketch, 148–149
Gambling offenses, 179–180
Geis, Gilbert, 5, 45, 52–53, 149
Gender of offenders, 170
Georgia, 117
Germany, 105
GlaxoSmithKline, 103
Global Corruption Barometer, 
87
Global Corruption Report, 87, 89
Global Crossing, 42, 165–166
Global Organization of
Parliamentarians against
Corruption (GOPC),
109–110, 139
Globalization, 14, 84–86, 118–119.
See also International
perspective on corporate
crime
Gonzales, Alberto, 62, 176, 194
246
Index

GOPC. See Global Organization
of Parliamentarians against
Corruption
Government commentary on
corporate offending
Gonzales’s commentary of
2007, 194
McNulty’s commentary of
2006, 192–194
Thompson’s commentary of
2002, 190–192
Government contracts
corporate offending in services,
development, and post-
conﬂict
construction/reconstruction,
91–97
and fraud, 22–23
international perspective, 81,
86, 91–97
and Iraq, 95–97
and recommendations for
reducing corporate crime, 72
Government documents and
reports, 184–194
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914,
187–188
Executive Order 13271,
185–186
Federal Trade Commission Act
of 1914, 188–189
Holder memorandum on
criteria for prosecution,
47–49
Ralph Nader letter to Ashcroft,
196–197
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
189–190
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890,
186–187
Grabowsky, Peter, 52, 54, 73–74
Greece, 117
Guatemala, 117
Haarman & Reimer Corp., 183
Haiti, 89
Halliburton, 22
Hanna, Robert M., 49
Harkin, Tom, 134
Harrison, Kenny, 42
Hatch, Orrin, 152
Hawley, Susan, 85
HCA. See Hospital Corporation of
America
Health care industry, 23, 47
black market in drugs, 100–101
Colombia and Venezuela, 102
and HIV/AIDS, 99–101
international perspective,
97–104
loss of life due to malfeasance
in, 98, 100
Mexico, 101
recommendations for, 102–104
History of corporate crime, 1–21
chronology of events, 127–143
colonial era, 7
current status of corporations,
12–14
deﬁnitions, 2–5
earliest corporations, 6
globalization, 14
Industrial Revolution, 7, 10–11
legal origins of corporate
crime, 14–20
legal status of corporations in
early U.S., 7–9
personhood of corporations, 8,
10–11
recent legislation, 20–21
United Kingdom, 8
HIV/AIDS, 99–101
Hobbs Act of 1946, 131–132
Hodess, Robin, 82, 88, 89
Hoefﬂer, Anke, 92
Hoffman-La Roche, 25, 137, 183
Holder, Eric, 47–49, 137
Index
247

Hospital Corporation of America
(HCA), 137, 140
Houssain, Kamal, 115
Human rights, 111–112
Hurricane Katrina, 22–23
Hurricanes, and price gouging, 
25
Hussein, Saddam, 95, 96
IAMB. See International Advisory
and Monitoring Board
IC3. See Internet Crime
Complaint Center
IDB. See Inter-American
Development Bank
IMF. See International Monetary
Fund
Immigration offenses, 176, 180
In re Hellenic, 138–139
Indonesia, 82, 89, 163
INDUCE Act, 152
Industrial Revolution, 7, 10–11
Infant formula, 82–83
Inﬂation, 44
Informal social control, 51–52
Infrastructure projects, 91–97
Intellectual property rights, and
health care industry, 100
Inter-American Convention
against Corruption, 107–109,
135
Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB), 132
Internal Revenue Service, 15, 
70
International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB),
96
International Anticorruption and
Good Governance Act of
2000, 138
International Monetary Fund
(IMF), 113, 132, 206
International perspective on
corporate crime, 81–119
consequences of corporate
offending by politicians, 88
consequences of globalization,
84–86, 118–119
consequences of malfeasance
in health care industry, 98
corporate offending in services,
development, and post-
conﬂict
construction/reconstruction,
22, 91–97, 142
debt burden on poor countries,
83, 91
detecting and controlling
corporate crime, 113–114
development projects ﬁnanced
by international ﬁnancial
institutions, 85–86
extent of corporate offending
in other countries, 86–88
health care, 97–104
international ﬁnancial
institutions, 85–86
legislation around the world,
104–113
political corruption, 81–82,
86–90
prohibitive cost of drugs in
developing countries, 83
prosecutions, 114–116
punishment of corporations,
116–118
recommendations for detecting
and controlling corporate
crime, 114–115
recommendations for health
sector, 102–104
recommendations for reducing
political corruption, 89–90
See also Africa; Latin America;
speciﬁc countries
248
Index

Internet Crime Complaint Center
(IC3), 206–207
INTERPOL, 207
Iraq
corporate offending in
reconstruction projects, 22,
95–97, 142
political corruption, 96–97
Ireland, 117
Israel, 115
Italy, 91
Japan, 82, 117
Jefferson, Thomas, 8
JP Morgan Chase Bank, 32
Justice system
Antitrust Division, 204–205
and costs of corporate crime,
43
differing treatment of street
criminals vs. corporate
criminals, 53–54, 59–60, 71
names of defense attorneys
and prosecutors, 182–183
recommendations for reducing
corporate crime, 71–75
See also Deterrence; Street
crime
Kane, John, 70
Kaufmann, D., 92
Kelley, David, 62
Kennedy, Ted, 32
Kouassi, Eugene, 93
Kozlowski, L. Dennis, 43, 142,
149–150
KPMG, 42, 62
Kuwait, 116–117
Labor force. See Employees
Latin America
black market in drugs, 100–101
bribery statistics, 87
corruption in, 81
Alberto Fujimori, 81–82, 89,
115–116, 143
health care reform in Colombia
vs. Venezuela, 102
Inter-American Convention
against Corruption, 107–109
Mexican health care system,
101
prosecutions and convictions,
115, 118
utility companies, 93
Latin American Centre for
Development
Administration, 117, 134, 
207
Lay, Kenneth, 42, 53, 140, 142,
150–151
Le Billion, Philippe, 94, 104
Leahy, Patrick, 151–152
Leautier, F., 92
Leenders, Reinoud, 95, 96, 97
Legislation, 17–19
agencies involved in
enforcement, 15, 47
Antitrust Criminal Penalty
Enhancement and Reform
Act of 2004, 140
Bank Secrecy Act of 1970, 133
chronology, 127–143
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914,
130, 145, 187–188
commerce clause of the U.S.
Constitution, 15, 46–47
Consumer Product Safety Act
of 1972, 134
Elkins Act of 1903, 15–16
False Claims Act of 1863, 73–74
False Statements
Accountability Act of 1996,
135
Federal Trade Commission Act
of 1914, 130–131, 188–189
Index
249

Legislation (cont.)
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
of 1977, 134
and Fourteenth Amendment, 8
Hobbs Act of 1946, 131–132
INDUCE Act, 152
International Anticorruption
and Good Governance Act
of 2000, 138
international perspective,
104–113
legal origins of corporate
crime, 14–20
legal status of corporations in
early U.S., 7–9
Major Fraud Act of 1988, 134
Model Penal Code section 2.07,
15–19
National Trafﬁc and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,
133
Occupational Safety and
Health Act (OSHA) of 1970,
133
offenses under Title 15 and 18
of U.S. Code, 47
personhood of corporations, 8,
10–11
Pirate Act, 152
Racketeer Inﬂuenced and
Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) Act of 1970, 133
recommendations for reducing
corporate crime, 71–75
and respondiat superior doctrine,
15–16
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 20,
139, 157, 159, 189–190
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890,
21, 130, 186–187
state-level variations, 19–20
White Collar Crime Penalty
Enhancement Act, 20
Levitt, Theodore, 84
Lewis, James, 91
Liability
difﬁculties of prosecuting
corporations, 15
early legislation, 129
limited liability, 11–12, 14, 132
and mens rea, 16
and Model Penal Code, 15–19
pros and cons of holding
corporations socially
responsible, 44–46
In re Hellenic, 138–139
and recommendations for
reducing corporate crime,
71–75
Standard Oil Company of Texas v.
United States, 132
state-level variations, 19–20
Libby, Lewis, Jr., 55
Lilly, Eli, 56
Limited liability. See Liability
Logging industry, 56
Lynch, Michael J., 5–6
Mail fraud, 47, 177
Major Fraud Act of 1988, 134
Mala in se vs. mala prohibita
crimes, 3
Malaysia, 117
Marcos, Ferdinand, 89, 152–153
Marcos, Imelda, 152
Marshall, John, 9
Martz, Stephanie A., 153
Mastruzzi, M., 92
McNulty, Paul J., 153–154,
192–194
Measurement of corporate crime,
62–67. See also Statistics on
corporate crime
Media, 116–117
Medicare, 23
Meier, Robert F., 154
250
Index

Mennen, Tiernan, 116
Mens rea, 16, 71
Merck, 143
Messick, Richard E., 116
Mexico, 101
Milken, Michael, 154–155
Miller, Arthur, 11
Milosevic, Slobodan, 89, 155–156
Mitchell, William A., 92
Mobil, 136
Mobutu Sese Seko, 89
Model Penal Code section 2.07,
15–19
The Modern Corporate State
(Miller), 11
Mokhiber, Russell, 69, 82–83
Money laundering, 47, 178–179
Morocco, 116–117
Mortality rate. See Violent
corporate offenses
Multinational corporations, 14,
84–86. See also International
perspective on corporate
crime
Multinational Monitor list of worst
corporations, 82–83
NACDL. See National Association
of Criminal Defense
Lawyers
Nader, Ralph, 156–157, 196–197
National Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers (NACDL),
153, 208
National Incident-Based
Reporting System (NIBRS),
168
National Trafﬁc and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,
133
National White Collar Crime
Center (NW3C), 64–65, 70,
141–142, 208–209
Natural disasters, and corporate
offending, 91–92
Nepal, 115
New York Central & Hudson River
Railroad v. United States,
15–17
New Zealand, 117
NIBRS. See National Incident-
Based Reporting System
Nigeria, 89, 115
Nussbaum, David, 98
Nutt, Dominic, 95–96, 97
NW3C. See National White Collar
Crime Center
OAS. See Organization of
American States
Obstruction of justice, 47, 174,
179–180
Occupational Safety and Health
Act (OSHA) of 1970, 133
OCM. See Organization for
Competitive Markets
Oil industry, 56, 118, 130. See also
speciﬁc corporations
Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and
Development, 117, 132, 
136
Organization for Competitive
Markets (OCM), 209
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD) 
Anti-Bribery Convention, 
90
Organization of American States
(OAS), 132, 210
Organizational crime, 4, 6
Organized crime, 44, 137–138
OSHA. See Occupational Safety
and Health Act of 1970
Oxley, Michael, 157
Index
251

Page, Justin, 92
Pakistan, 116
Panama, 117
Papua New Guinea, 117
Perjury/contempt, 174
Perpetual lifetime of
corporations, 11–12
Personhood of corporations, 8,
10–11, 130
Peru, 81–82, 89, 115, 143, 148–149
Pﬁzer, 83
Pharmaceutical industry, 30
black market in drugs, 100–101
execution of Zheng Xiaoyu,
117–118
lawsuits over Vioxx, 143
loss of life due to malfeasance
by, 98, 100
prohibitive cost of drugs in
developing countries, 83,
100
recommendations for, 103
Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), 100
Philip Morris, 55–56
Philippines, 82–83, 89, 152–153
Pirate Act, 152
Plea agreements, 49–51
Poland, 117
Political corruption, 13, 43–44,
54–56
Global Organization of
Parliamentarians against
Corruption (GOPC), 109–110
Inter-American Convention
against Corruption, 107–109
international perspective,
81–82, 86–90
public perceptions of, 105–106
recommendations for reducing,
89–90
UN Convention against
Corruption, 110–111
Pontell, Henry N., 157–158
Pornography, 179–180
Praise the Lord (PTL) Club
ministries, 23–24
President’s Report on Occupational
Safety and Health, 31
Price ﬁxing, 24, 31
Price gouging, 24–25
PricewaterhouseCoopers Global
Economic Crime Survey, 70,
142
Prison. See Sentencing
Private regulatory enforcement,
73
Product safety violations, 28–30,
117–118
Prosecuting attorneys, list of, 183
Prosecution of corporate crimes
categories of offenses, 16–17
and commerce clause of U.S.
Constitution, 46–47
criteria for, 47–49
deferred prosecution, 49,
60–62, 76
difﬁculties of, 14, 15, 44–46
international perspective,
114–116
and limited liability, 14, 15
and Model Penal Code, 15–19
prosecution options/plea
agreements, 49–51
and public perceptions about
abilities of corporations to
offend, 14
and respondiat superior doctrine,
15–16
statistics, 175–177
See also Deterrence
Prostitution, 179–180
Provida, 101
252
Index

Providian Financial Corporation,
164–165
Public Accounting Oversight
Board, 20
Public interest groups, 73
Public perception of corporate
crime, 14, 64–65
and differing treatment of
street criminals vs. corporate
criminals, 53
loss of public conﬁdence, 43
myth of harmlessness of
corporate crime, 27–31
WorldCom and Enron
scandals, 42
Punishment of corporate crimes,
43, 54–62
determining ﬁnes, 58
differing treatment of street
criminals vs. corporate
criminals, 53–54, 59–60,
67–68
and difﬁculties of prosecuting
corporations, 44
and the economic elite, 52–53
goals of punishment, 50, 57,
67–68, 76–77
international perspective,
116–118
money not recovered from
corporations, 70
pre- and post-Booker ﬁnes, 57
prison sentences not served, 
70
probationary sentences, 58–60
regulatory sanctions, 50
remedies for harm done, 58
statistics, 180–183
United States Sentencing
Guidelines Manual, 56–58
See also Deterrence
Pyrrhic Defeat Theory, 53
Quotations on corporate
offending, 195
Race of offenders, 169–170
Racketeer Inﬂuenced and
Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) Act of 1970, 133
Racketeering, 47, 174, 178–179
Regulatory sanctions, 50
Reiman, Jeffrey, 27, 31, 53
Religious leaders, 23–24
Respondiat superior doctrine, 15–16
Restitution, 58. See also
Punishment of corporate
crimes
The Rev. John Bracken v. the Visitors
of William and Mary College,
8–9, 128
The Rich Get Richer and the Poor
Get Prison (Reiman), 53
RICO. See Racketeer Inﬂuenced
and Corrupt Organizations
Act of 1970
Rigas, John, 43, 141, 158–159
Rigas, Tim, 43, 141
Robinson, Matthew B., 3
Rogers, Will, 61
Romania, 117
Roosevelt, Theodore, 195
Rossi, Martin A., 93
Santa Clara County v. Southern Pac.
R. Co., 8, 11, 130
Sarbanes, Paul, 159
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 139,
157, 159
problems with, 52–53, 61
text of, 189–190
Savedoff, William D., 102
Schmidt, Julie, 29
Sears Bankruptcy Recovery
Management Services, 183
Index
253

SEC. See Securities and Exchange
Commission
Secret Service, 15
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), 15, 20,
69, 131, 210
Securities fraud, 47
Serono, 23, 141
SGL Carbon Aktiengesellschaft,
183
Shareholders, 15, 43, 44, 46
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890,
21, 130, 186–187
SIGIR. See Special Inspector
General for Iraq
Reconstruction
Silicone breast implants, 30
Simon, David R., 43–44
Simpson, Sally S., 159–160
Skilling, Jeffrey K., 142, 160
Slave trade, 6
Slovakia, 117
Smith, Adam, 7, 128, 160–161
Social construction of crime, 3
Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts v.
Town of Pawlet, 10, 129
South Africa, 117
South Korea, 117
Special Inspector General for Iraq
Reconstruction (SIGIR), 95
Specter, Arlen J., 161–162
Spitzer, Eliot, 162
Standard Oil Company, 130
Standard Oil Company of Texas v.
United States, 132
Statistics on corporate crime,
167–183
bribery in other countries, 87
convictions, 177–178
costs of crime, 184
demographics of offenders,
169–173
disposition of cases, 181
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 169, 180
number of arrests, 168, 174
prosecutions, 175–177
sentencing, 57, 180–182
sources for, 63–67, 167–169,
173–175
top violators in the 1990s, 
183
value of property taken,
171–173
Street crime
and criminal justice system,
27–28
differing treatment of street
criminals vs. corporate
criminals, 53–54, 59–60,
67–68, 71
harmfulness compared to
corporate crime, 27, 43
public perceptions of, 53
Strossen, Nadine, 162–163
Suharto, Mohammed, 82, 89, 163
Sullivan, Scott, 42
Sutherland, Edwin H., 2, 131, 164,
195
Sutton, Willie, 61
Swiss banks, 116
Switzerland, 117
Tax law violations, 24
convictions and sentencing,
178–179
costs of, 184
France, 82
frequency and percentage of
offenses, 180
number of arrests, 174
Taxes: low corporate taxes, 24, 70
Tayler, Liz, 100, 103
Telemarketing fraud, 47
Tenet Healthcare, 23, 142
254
Index

Thalidomide, 30
Third-party vigilance, 73
Thompson, Larry D., 60–61,
164–165, 190–192
“Three strikes” laws, 54
TI. See Transparency International
TRAC. See Transactional Records
Access Clearinghouse
Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), 100
Transactional Records Access
Clearinghouse (TRAC),
174–175
Transparency International (TI),
87, 103
TRIPS. See Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property
Rights
Turkey, 91–92
Tyco Corporation, 43
legislation following scandal.
See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002
See also Kozlowski, L. Dennis
UCAR International, Inc., 
183
UCRs. See Uniform Crime
Reports
UK Joint Stock Companies Act,
129
UN Convention against
Corruption, 90, 106, 110–111,
114, 117
UN Convention against
Transnational Organized
Crime, 137–138
UN Global Impact, 111–112
UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), 106, 113–114
Uniform Crime Reports (UCRs),
51, 63, 167
United Kingdom
BAE Systems, 82
chronology of events, 127–139
UK Joint Stock Companies Act,
8
United Nations Anti-Corruption
Toolkit, 113
United Nations Development
Programme, 93–94
United Nations Handbook on
Practical Anti-Corruption
Measures for Prosecutors and
Investigators, 112
United Nations Manual on Anti-
Corruption Policies, 113
United States, 10–11
chronology of events, 127–143
history of corporations in, 7–11
See also Legislation
United States Sentencing Guidelines
Manual, 56–58
United States v. Bainbridge
Management, 139
United States v. Booker, 72
Universities. See Colleges and
universities
University of Texas at Austin, 32
UNODC. See UN Ofﬁce on Drugs
and Crime
Utility companies, 54, 93
Venezuela, 102, 115
Violent corporate offenses, 27–31
compared to street crime, 27,
43
environmental offenses, 28
loss of life due to corporate
offending by politicians, 88
loss of life due to corruption in
infrastructure projects, 91–92
loss of life due to malfeasance
in health care industry, 98,
100
Index
255

Violent corporate offenses (cont.)
unsafe consumer products,
28–30, 117–118
unsafe working conditions, 31
Waksal, Sam, 141
Wall, April D., 70
Wal-Mart, 26–27, 140, 141
WCCRC. See White Collar Crime
Research Consortium
The Wealth of Nations (Smith), 128
Weapons manufacturing, 82
Weapons offenses, 176, 180
Weder, Beatrice, 94
Weissman, Robert, 69, 82–83
Welfare fraud, 169–172, 173
White collar crime
deﬁnitions, 2–6
distinguished from corporate
crime, 2–3, 5–6, 65
term origin, 131, 164
See also Statistics on corporate
crime
White Collar Crime Penalty
Enhancement Act, 20
White Collar Crime Project, 153
White Collar Crime Research
Consortium (WCCRC), 211
White Collar Crime (Sutherland), 2
WHO. See World Health
Organization
William and Mary College, 8–9,
128
Winnick, Gary, 42, 165–166
Wire fraud, 47, 169–173, 177
Wolfowitz, Paul, 85–86, 143
World Bank, 83, 85–86, 113, 211
World Health Organization
(WHO), 98, 99, 103
The World is Flat (Friedman),
84–85
World Trade Organization
(WTO), 100, 113, 135, 137,
212
WorldCom, 42, 140
legislation following scandal.
See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002
See also Ebbers, Bernard
WTO. See World Trade
Organization
Xerox, 42
Yeager, Peter C., 14, 52, 82, 166
Yokoyama, Minoru, 82
Yugoslavia, 89. See also Milosevic,
Slobodan
Zaire, 89
Zheng Xiaoyu, 117–118
Zoellick, Robert B., 211
256
Index

257
About the Author
Richard D. Hartley is an assistant professor of criminal justice at Texas
A&M International University in Laredo, Texas. He received his Ph.D.
from the University of Nebraska at Omaha and his M.S. and B.S.
degrees from Minot State University. Hartley is or has been a member of
several professional organizations, including the American Society of
Criminology, the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences, the Midwestern
Criminal Justice Association, and the Southwestern Association of
Criminal Justice. He is the coauthor of Criminal Courts: Structure, Process,
and Issues (2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 2008) as well as several peer-reviewed
journal articles. His research interests include disparities in sentencing
practices, especially at the federal level; prosecutorial and judicial
discretion; sentencing for narcotics; white-collar violations; and race/
ethnicity and crime.

