 

Corrosion of Steel in Concrete 
2nd Edition
 

Also available from Taylor & Francis
Steel Corrosion in Concrete
A. Bentur, S. Diamond and N. Berke
Hb: 0–419–22530–7
High Performance Concrete
P. C. Aitcin
Hb: 0–419–19270–0
Sulfate Attack on Concrete
J. Skalny, J. Marchand & I. Odler
Hb: 0–419–24550–2
Determination of Pore Structure Parameters
K. K. Aligizaki
Hb: 0–419–22800–4
Fundamentals of Durable Reinforced Concrete
M. G. Richardson
Hb: 0–419–23780–1
Diffusion of Chloride in Concrete
E. Poulsen & L. Mejlbro
Hb: 0–419–25300–9
Binders for Durable and Sustainable Concrete
P. C. Aitcin
Hb: 0–415–38588–1
Information and ordering details
For price availability and ordering visit our website www.tandf.co.uk
Alternatively our books are available from all good bookshops.
 

RUST’S A MUST
Mighty ships upon the ocean
Suffer from severe corrosion,
Even those that stay at dockside
Are rapidly becoming oxide
Alas that piling in the sea
is mostly Fe2O3,
And where the ocean meets the shore
You’ll find there’s Fe3O4,
‘Cause when the wind is salt and gusty
Things are getting awful rusty.
We can measure we can test it,
We can halt it or arrest it,
We can gather it and weigh it,
We can coat it, we can spray it,
We examine and dissect it,
We cathodically protect it,
We can pick it up and drop it,
But heaven knows, we’ll never stop it.
So here’s to rust, no doubt about it,
Most of us would starve without it.
T.R.B Watson, June 1974
‘Corrosion Control Services’
 

 

Corrosion of Steel in
Concrete
Understanding, investigation 
and repair
2nd edition
John P. Broomfield
 

First published 1997
by E & FN Spon
Second edition published 2007 
by Taylor & Francis
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Taylor & Francis
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Taylor & Francis is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group,
an informa business
© 1997, 2007 John P. Broomfield
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
The publisher makes no representation, express or 
implied, with regard to the accuracy of the information 
contained in this book and cannot accept any legal 
responsibility or liability for any efforts or omissions 
that may be made.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Broomfield, John P.
Corrosion of steel in concrete : understanding, investigation and 
repair / John P. Broomfield. – 2nd ed.
p. cm.
“First published 1997 by E & FN Spon.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Reinforcing bars – Corrosion. 2. Steel – Corrosion.
3. Reinforced concrete – Corrosion. I.Title.
TA445.5.B76 2006
620.1’3723–dc22
2006014880
ISBN10: 0–415–33404–7 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–41460–8 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–33404–4 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–41460–6 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-41460-8 Master e-book ISBN
 

Contents
Preface
xi
Illustration credits
xiii
Acknowledgements
xv
1 Introduction
1
References
4
2 Corrosion of steel in concrete
6
2.1
The corrosion process
7
2.2
Black rust
9
2.3
Pits, stray current and bacterial corrosion
10
2.4
Electrochemistry, cells and half cells
13
2.5
Conclusions
15
References
15
3 Causes and mechanisms of corrosion in concrete
16
3.1
Carbonation
16
3.2
Chloride attack
19
3.3
Corrosion damage
26
3.4
Cracks, crack orientation and corrosion
28
3.5
The synergistic relationship between chloride and 
carbonation attack, chloride binding and release
29
References
30
4 Condition evaluation
31
4.1
Desk study
33
4.2
Preliminary survey
33
 

4.3
The detailed survey
33
4.4
Available techniques
35
4.5
Visual inspection
36
4.6
Delamination
37
4.7
Cover
42
4.8
Reference electrode (half cell) 
potential measurements
44
4.9
Carbonation depth measurement
55
4.10
Chloride determination
57
4.11
Resistivity measurement
63
4.12
Corrosion rate measurement
70
4.13
Permeability and absorption tests
83
4.14
Concrete characteristics: cement content, 
petrography, W/C ratio
85
4.15
Ground penetrating radar
85
4.16
Ultrasonic pulse velocity
88
4.17
Impact-echo
91
4.18
Radiography
93
4.19
Survey and assessment methodology
95
4.20
Special conditions – prestressing and coated rebars
96
References
98
5 Corrosion monitoring
103
5.1
Regular surveys to monitor corrosion
104
5.2
Permanent corrosion monitoring systems 
104
5.3
Remote monitoring systems and data management
111
References
111
6 Physical and chemical repair and rehabilitation 
techniques
112
6.1
Concrete removal and surface preparation
113
6.2
Patches
119
6.3
Coatings, sealers, membranes and barriers
123
6.4
Encasement and overlays
128
6.5
Sprayed concrete
130
6.6
Corrosion inhibitors
130
6.7
Standards and guidance on physical and 
chemical repair
136
References
137
viii
Contents
 

7 Electrochemical repair techniques
140
7.1
Basic principles of electrochemical techniques
140
7.2
Cathodic protection
141
7.3
The components of an impressed current 
cathodic protection system 
153
7.4
Cathodic protection system design
171
7.5
Control criteria
178
7.6
Standards and guidance documents for 
cathodic protection of steel in concrete
181
7.7
System installation
183
7.8
Cathodic protection of prestressed concrete
187
7.9
Cathodic protection of epoxy coated reinforcing steel
189
7.10
Cathodic protection of structures with ASR
189
7.11
Electrochemical chloride extraction
190
7.12
Realkalization
198
7.13
Standards and guidance for electrochemical 
chloride extraction and realkalization
199
7.14
Electro-osmosis
200
7.15
Comparison of techniques
201
References
203
8 Rehabilitation methodology
208
8.1
Technical differences between repair options
209
8.2
Repair costs
209
8.3
Carbonation options
213
8.4
Chloride options
218
8.5
Standards and guidance for selection of repairs
222
References
225
9 Modelling and calculating corrosion, deterioration 
and life cycle costing of reinforced concrete structures
227
9.1
Activation time T0 carbonation induced corrosion
227
9.2
Chloride ingress rates (initiation)
230
9.3
Rate of depassivation (activation)
233
9.4
Activation time T1
233
9.5
The Clear/Stratfull empirical calculation
236
9.6
Corrosion without spalling and high corrosion rates
236
9.7
Cracking and spalling rates, condition indexes
and end of functional service life
236
Contents
ix
 

9.8
Summary of methodology to determine service life
238
9.9
Diffusion models proposed in literature
238
References
241
10 Design for durability
244
10.1
Cover, concrete and design
244
10.2
Fusion bonded epoxy coated rebars
247
10.3
Waterproofing membranes
253
10.4
Penetrating sealers
255
10.5
Galvanized rebar
256
10.6
Stainless steel reinforcement
256
10.7
Corrosion inhibitors
257
10.8
Installing cathodic protection in new structures
258
10.9
Durable buildings
259
10.10
Conclusions
259
References
261
11 Future developments
263
References
266
Appendix: sources of information on 
corrosion of steel in concrete
267
Glossary and index
271
x
Contents
 

Preface
This second edition provides information on corrosion of steel in concrete
in atmospherically exposed concrete structures with some additional
information on early 20th century steel framed stone and brick buildings.
The sections on corrosion theory, corrosion monitoring, galvanic cathodic
protection and other areas have been introduced or expanded to reflect the
changes of the past decade since the first edition. The increasing number of
relevant national and international standards is also reflected in the text.
The book provides a guide for those responsible for buildings and other
reinforced concrete structures as they are engaged to design, construct,
maintain and repair them. It reviews the present state of knowledge of
corrosion of steel in concrete from the theory through to site investigations
and then remedying the problem. There is also a section on building more
corrosion resistant structures.
The aim of the book is to educate and guide engineers, surveyors and
owners of structures so that they will have a clear idea of the problem and
will know where to go to start finding solutions. No single book can be a
complete course in any subject and there is no substitute for personal ‘hands
on’ experience. There are many experienced engineers and corrosion
experts who deal with these problems on a day-to-day basis. The reader is
recommended to seek expert advice when dealing with subjects that are
new to him. However, the aim of being an ‘informed client’ is to be
recommended and this book should help in that respect. It is also essential
that students of civil engineering, building sciences and architecture
understand the problems they will face as they start to practice their skills.
We need more engineers, materials scientists, building surveyors and archi-
tects who are trained to look at wider durability issues in these days of
sustainable development and conservation of resources.
It is impossible in one book to be totally comprehensive. Consequently
some subjects such as cement chemistry and concrete admixtures have not
been covered in much detail. They are better covered in other specialist texts.
This book concentrates on the corrosion of steel in its cementitious environ-
ment and how it is dealt with in methods that are sometimes unique to the
corrosion engineering field rather than the civil or building engineering field.
 

 

Illustration credits
A number of figures are reproduced in this book by kind permission of the
copyright holders or authors as appropriate. In some cases acknowledge-
ment is made in the figure caption; in the other cases the Publisher would
like to gratefully acknowledge the permissions granted as follows:
Permission to reproduce extracts of BS EN 206-1: 2000 and BS EN
DDENV 1504-9:1997 (E) in Tables 8.3 and 10.1 is granted by BSI. British
Standards can be obtained from BSI Customer Services, 389 Chiswick High
Road, London W4 4AL. Tel: 44 (0)20 8996 9001. email: cservices@bsi-
global.com
 

 

Acknowledgements
It is difficult to know where to start and end with acknowledgements. I
started my career after finishing University at the Central Electricity
Research Laboratory, working in one of the largest groups of corrosion
scientists in the UK and Europe. Sadly that group is dispersed with the
privatisation of the Central Electricity Generating Board. I learned the basics
of corrosion from Mike Manning, Jonathan Forrest and Ed Metcalfe and
many others at CERL.
I then joined Taywood Engineering and enjoyed carrying out some of
the first trials of impressed current cathodic protection on reinforced
concrete structures above ground in the UK, Hong Kong and Australia.
I learned enormous amounts about deterioration of reinforced concrete
structures, civil engineering and contracting from Roger Browne, Roger
Blundell, Roger McAnoy, Phil Bamforth and a powerful team of engineers
and scientists who were all at the forefront of concrete technology. I
continue to have good relations and helpful exchanges with the Taywood
team.
I was then privileged to be invited to work at the Strategic Highway
Research Program (SHRP) in Washington DC. For three years we coaxed a
$150 million research programme into life, and after five years we then shut
it all down having spent allotted budget. My thanks go to Damian Kulash
who led the programme and was brave enough to take on a foreigner to
oversee the Structures research and to Jim Murphy and Don Harriott who
led the Concrete & Structures Group and taught me about highways. I must
also thank all my colleagues at SHRP, the researchers who did the real
research work and the advisory and expert committee members who gave
their time and insights to help create some very valuable manuals and
guidance for highway engineers.
The first draft of the first edition of this book was produced three years
after returning to the UK as an independent consultant. I had the chance
to work with some of the leading experts in the field of corrosion and
deterioration of reinforced concrete. I picked their brains mercilessly
 

and enjoyed working and relaxing with many such as Brian Wyatt,
Nick Buenfeld, Gareth Glass, Ken Boam, Mike Gower and Peter Johnson,
the late David Whiting, Ken Clear, Jack Bennett, Carmen Andrade, Jesús
Rodríguez and many others.
In the 12 years since the first edition I have been fortunate to continue to
work with many knowledgeable and experienced engineers and specialists
on the committees of NACE, the Corrosion Prevention Association,
Concrete Society, Institute of Corrosion, the Transportation Research Board
and CEN. I must specifically acknowledge Andrew Trafford of Aperio who
kindly supplied a lot of useful information as well as photographs about
radar, radiography, pulse velocity, ultrasonic and impact-echo techniques.
My thanks also go to my publisher, and to Nick Clarke whose helpful
suggestions strengthened the first draft of the book considerably.
Finally, eternal thanks to my wife, Veronica and my parents, Olive and
Philip. Everything one says about the support of the family sounds glib and
clichéd, but it is, none the less, true. Without my parents support I would
not have got where I am today. Veronica’s support has been invaluable in
quietly encouraging me to get on with the job, make sure that I am focussed
on the task in hand and not involved in pie in the sky ideas. She has
supported my activities while getting on with her own very busy career.
My apologies for naming such a small number of the many people who
I continue to have the pleasure and privilege of working with. My thanks
to all of them and their willingness to share their knowledge with me and
many others.
It is better to wear out than to rust out
Richard Cumberland, English Divine (1631–1718)
Paint, graffiti, and everything else that man can do cannot win against rust.
Rust trumps all.
Laura Moncur commenting on a photograph by Ward Jenkins
xvi
Acknowledgements
 

Chapter 1
Introduction
Reinforced concrete is a versatile, economical and successful construction
material. It can be moulded to a variety of shapes and finishes. In most
cases it is durable and strong, performing well throughout its service life.
However, in some cases it does not perform adequately due to poor design,
poor construction, inadequate materials selection, a more severe environment
than anticipated or a combination of these factors.
The corrosion of the reinforcing steel in concrete is a major problem
facing civil engineers today as they maintain an ageing infrastructure.
Potentially it is a very large market for those who develop the expertise to
deal with the problem. It is also a major headache for those who are
responsible for dealing with structures suffering from it.
Worldwide, more concrete is used than any other man made material
with approximately 12 billion tonnes being manufactured annually. The
production of Portland cement accounts for 6–8% of human-generated
CO2. The United Kingdom produces 100M tonnes equivalent to 2 tonnes
of concrete per head per year (Frost, 2005). According to the US Portland
Cement Association, the consumption of cement in North America for
2006 is expected to reach more than 130 million metric tonnes, a 3.7%
increase from 2005. An average annual increase of 2.5% is projected
through 2009. Correctly selected intervention that repairs a concrete structure
cost effectively helps in conserving resources and reducing pollution.
One American estimate that there is $150 billion worth of corrosion
damage on their interstate highway bridges due to deicing and sea salt
induced corrosion. In a Transportation Research Board report on the costs
of deicing (Transportation Research Board, 1991) the annual cost of bridge
deck repairs were estimated to be $50–200 million, with substructures and
other components requiring $100 million a year and a further $50–150 million
a year on multi-storey car parks.
In a more recent cost of corrosion study (Koch et al., 2002), the annual
direct cost of corrosion on US highway bridges was estimated at $8.3 billion
overall, with $4.0 billion of that on the capital cost and maintenance
of reinforced concrete highway bridge decks and substructures. Indirect
 

costs due to traffic delays were calculated to be more than 10 times the
direct costs.
In the United Kingdom, the Department of Transport’s (DoT) estimate of
salt-induced corrosion damage is a total of £616.5 million on motorway
and trunk road bridges in England and Wales alone (Wallbank, 1989).
These bridges represent about 10% of the total bridge inventory in the
country. The eventual cost may therefore be 10 times the DoT estimate. The
statistics for Europe, the Asian Pacific and Australia are similar.
In the Middle East the severe conditions of warm marine climate,
especially in the more heavily populated areas, with saline ground waters,
increases all corrosion problems. This is made worse by the difficulty of
curing concrete that has led to very short lifetimes for reinforced concrete
structures (Rasheeduzzafar et al., 1992).
In many countries with rapidly developing infrastructure, economies or
poor supervision and quality control procedures in construction have led
to poor quality concrete and low concrete cover to the steel leading to
carbonation problems.
Corrosion became a fact of life as soon as man started digging ores out
of the ground, smelting and refining them to produce the metals that we use
so widely in the manufacturing and construction industries. When man has
finished refining the steel and other metals that we use, nature sets about
reversing the process. The refined metal will react with the non-metallic
environment to form oxides, sulphates, sulphides, chlorides and so on,
which no longer have the required chemical and physical properties of the
consumed metal. Billions of dollars are spent every year in protecting,
repairing and replacing corrosion damage. Occasionally lives are lost when
steel pipes, pressure vessels or structural elements on bridges fail. But
corrosion is a slow process and is usually easy to detect before catastrophic
failure, and the consequences of corrosion are usually economic rather than
death or injury.
The corrosion of steel in concrete used to be considered to cause
engineering and economic problems. However, there have been cases of
large pieces of concrete falling from bridges in North America, with the loss
of a motorist’s life in New York City. The failure of post-tensioning tendons
in a bridge caused a bridge collapse with the loss of a tanker driver’s life in
Europe and another failure of a pedestrian bridge in the United States. Car
park collapses (Simon, 2004) and other major failures have been recorded
in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom (not always directly
attributed to reinforcement corrosion).
The economic loss and damage caused by the corrosion of steel in con-
crete makes it arguably the largest single infrastructure problem facing
industrialized countries. Our bridges, public utilities, chemical plants and
buildings are ageing. Some can be replaced, others would cause great cost
and inconvenience if they were taken out of commission. With major political
arguments about how many more bridges, power plants and other structures
2
Introduction
 

we can build, it becomes crucial that the existing structures perform to their
design lives and limits and are maintained effectively.
One of the biggest causes of corrosion of steel in concrete is the use of
deicing salts on our highways. In the United States approximately 10 million
tonnes of salt are applied per year to highways. In the United Kingdom
1–2 million tonnes per year are applied (but to a proportionately far smaller
road network). In continental Europe the application rates are comparable,
except where it is too cold for salt to be effective, or the population density
too low to make salting worthwhile (e.g. in northern Scandinavia).
However, research in the United States has shown that the use of deicing
salt is still more economic than the alternative, more expensive, less
effective deicers (Transportation Research Board, 1991).
In the early years of this century corrosion of steel in concrete was
attributed to stray current corrosion from electric powered vehicles. It was
only in the 1950s in the United States that it was finally accepted that
there were corrosion problems on bridges far from power lines but in areas
where sea salt or deicing salts were prevalent. During the 1960s attempts
were made to quantify the problem and in the 1970s the first cathodic
protection systems were installed to deal with the problem. In Europe and
the Middle East sea water for mixing concrete and the addition of calcium
chloride set accelerators were acceptable until the 1960s and still used until
the 1970s in a mistaken belief that most of the chlorides would be bound
up in the cement and would not cause corrosion. This was found to be an
expensive error over the next 20 years, particularly in the Middle East,
where the low availability of potable water led to the frequent use of sea
water for concrete mixing.
While corrosion of steel in concrete is a major cause of deterioration it is
not the only one. Out in the real world we must not become blinkered to
other problems like alkali-silica reactivity, freeze thaw damage and the
structural implications of the damage done and of repairs. In this setting,
however, we will concentrate on the corrosion issue although there will be
passing references to other problems where relevant.
There is some discussion in the book of the results of the Strategic Highway
Research Program (SHRP). The author was a member of the SHRP staff for
the first three years and a consultant for the last three years of SHRP. About
$10 million worth of research was carried out over six years (1987–1993) on
corrosion problems on existing reinforced concrete bridges. A complete list of
SHRP reports on corrosion of steel in concrete is now available on the
Transportation Research Board website (www.trb.org). SHRP was probably
the largest single effort to address the problem of corrosion of steel in
concrete and provide practical solutions for engineers to use.
In the United Kingdom the ‘Concrete In the Oceans’ research programme
in the 1970s did much to improve our understanding of the fundamentals
of corrosion of steel in concrete, particularly in marine conditions (Wilkins
and Lawrence, 1980). Government laboratories around the world have
Introduction
3
 

worked on the problems since the 1960s when the problems started to
manifest themselves.
The text draws on corrosion problems and experience from around the
world where possible, attempting to achieve a balanced view of different
approaches in different countries, particularly comparing the European and
North American approaches which are sometimes quite different.
Inevitably it concentrates on the author’s primary experience in the United
Kingdom, North America and, to a lesser extent Europe, Australasia, the
Middle and Far East and Africa.
Chapters 2 and 3 explore the basics of corrosion of steel in concrete. The
author has attempted to be thorough but also to start from the position of
the generalist, with a minimal memory of chemistry.
The first requirement when addressing a deterioration problem is to quan-
tify it. Chapter 4 discusses condition evaluation and the testing procedures
and techniques we can use to assess the causes and extent of the corrosion
damage on a structure. Chapter 5 covers permanent corrosion monitoring,
a subject that has grown considerably since the first edition of the book.
Chapters 6 and 7 are then concerned with repair and rehabilitation
options, first the conventional physical intervention of concrete repair, patch-
ing, overlaying and coatings. The electrochemical techniques of cathodic pro-
tection, chloride extraction and realkalization are dealt with in Chapter 7.
Chapter 8 deals with how to select a rehabilitation method. It discusses
the different techniques for repair covered in the previous chapters and the
cost differentials. Chapter 9 reviews models for determining deterioration
rates and service lives.
The penultimate chapter turns away from the issues of dealing with the
problems on existing structures and reviews the options for new construction
to ensure that the next generation of structures do not show the problems
associated with some of the present generation. Many materials and methods
of improving durability are on the market, but which ones are cost effective?
The final chapter discusses future developments. As materials science,
computer technology, electronics and other disciplines advance, new meth-
ods for assessing corrosion are becoming available. The author speculates
about what will be on offer and perhaps more importantly what we need
to efficiently assess and repair corrosion damage on our fixed infrastructure
in the future.
References
Frost, A. (2005). ‘The material world’, New Civil Engineer, Concrete Engineering
Supplement, p 24.
Koch, G.H., Brogers, P.H., Thompson, N., Virmani, Y.P. and Payer, J.H. (2002).
Corrosion Cost and Preventive Strategies in the United States, FHWA Report;
FHWA-RD-01–156, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC.
4
Introduction
 

Rasheeduzzafar, H.S., Dakhil, F.H., Bader, M.A. and Khan, M.N. (1992). ‘Performance
of corrosion resisting steel in chloride-bearing concrete’, ACI Materials Journal,
89(5): 439–448.
Simon, P. (2004). Improved Current Distribution due to a Unique Anode Mesh
Placement in a Steel Reinforced Concrete Parking Garage Slab CP System. NACE
Corrosion 2004. Paper No. 04345.
Transportation Research Board (1991). Highway Deicing: Comparing Salt and
Calcium Magnesium Acetate, Special Report 235, National Research Council,
Washington, DC.
Wallbank, E.J. (1989). The Performance of Concrete in Bridges: A Survey of 200
Highway Bridges, HMSO, London.
Wilkins, N.J.M. and Lawrence, P.F. (1980). Concrete in the Oceans: Fundamental
Mechanisms of Corrosion of Steel Reinforcements in Concrete immersed in Sea
Water, Technical Report 6, ClRIA/UEG Cement and Concrete Association,
Slough, UK.
Introduction
5
 

Chapter 2
Corrosion of steel in concrete
This chapter discusses the basics of corrosion and how it applies to steel in
concrete. To start with a basic question; why does steel corrode in concrete?
A more sensible question is why does not steel corrode in concrete? We
know from experience that ordinary carbon steel reinforcing steel bars
corrode (rust) when air and water are present. As concrete is porous and
contains moisture why doesn’t steel in concrete usually corrode?
The answer is that concrete is alkaline. Alkalinity is the opposite of
acidity. Metals corrode in acids; they can be protected from corrosion by
alkalis. This is generally the case in concrete.
When we say that concrete is alkaline we mean that the concrete contains
microscopic pores which contain high concentrations of soluble calcium,
sodium and potassium oxides. These form hydroxides, which are very
alkaline, when water is present. This creates a very alkaline condition of
pH 12–13. The composition of the pore water and the movement of ions
and gases through the pores is very important when analyzing the suscepti-
bility of reinforced concrete structures to corrosion. This will be discussed
in Chapter 3.
The alkaline condition leads to a ‘passive’ layer forming on the steel
surface. The passive layer is a dense, impenetrable film, which, if fully
established and maintained, prevents further corrosion of the steel. The layer
formed on steel in concrete is probably part metal oxide/hydroxide and part
mineral from the cement. A true passive layer is a very dense, thin layer of
oxide that leads to a very slow rate of oxidation (corrosion). There is some
discussion as to whether or not the layer on the steel is a true passive layer
as it seems to be thick compared with other passive layers and it consists of
more than just metal oxides but as it behaves like a passive layer it is generally
referred to as such.
Corrosion scientists and engineers spend much of their time trying to find
ways of stopping corrosion of steel by applying protective coatings. Other
metals such as zinc, polymers such as acrylics or epoxies are used to stop
corrosive conditions getting to steel surfaces. The passive layer is the
 

corrosion engineer’s dream coating as it forms itself and will maintain and
repair itself as long as the passivating (alkaline) environment is there to
regenerate it if it is damaged. If the passivating environment can be
maintained it is far better than any artificial coatings like galvanizing or
fusion bonded epoxy that can be damaged or consumed, allowing corrosion
to proceed in damaged areas.
However, the passivating environment is not always maintained. Two
conditions can break down the passivating environment in concrete
without attacking the concrete first. One is carbonation and the other is
chloride attack. These will be discussed in Chapter 3. In the rest of this
chapter we will discuss what happens when depassivation has occurred.
2.1
The corrosion process
Once the passive layer breaks down then areas of rust will start appearing
on the steel surface. The chemical reactions are the same whether corrosion
occurs by chloride attack or carbonation. When steel in concrete corrodes
it dissolves in the pore water and gives up electrons:
The anodic reaction: Fe →Fe2  2e
(2.1)
The two electrons (2e) created in the anodic reaction must be consumed
elsewhere on the steel surface to preserve electrical neutrality. In other
words we cannot have large amounts of electrical charge building up at one
place on the steel. There must be another chemical reaction to consume the
electrons. This is a reaction that consumes water and oxygen:
The cathodic reaction: 2e  H2O  O2 →2OH
(2.2)
This is illustrated in Figure 2.1. You will notice that we are generating
hydroxyl ions in the cathodic reaction. These ions increase the local
alkalinity and therefore will strengthen the passive layer, warding off the
effects of carbonation and chloride ions at the cathode. Note that water and
oxygen are needed at the cathode for corrosion to occur.
The anodic and cathodic reactions ((2.1) and (2.2)) are only the first steps
in the process of creating rust. However, this pair of reactions is critical to
the understanding of corrosion and is widely quoted in any discussion on
corrosion and corrosion prevention for steel in concrete. The reactions will
be referred to often in this book.
If the iron were just to dissolve in the pore water (the ferrous ion Fe2 in
equation (2.1) is soluble) we would not see cracking and spalling of the
concrete. Several more stages must occur for ‘rust’ to form. This can
be expressed in several ways and one is shown here where ferrous
1
2
Corrosion of steel in concrete
7
 

hydroxide becomes ferric hydroxide and then hydrated ferric oxide or 
rust:
Fe2  2OH →Fe(OH)2
(2.3)
Ferrous hydroxide
4Fe(OH)2  O2  2H2O →4Fe(OH)3
(2.4)
Ferric hydroxide
2Fe(OH)3 →Fe2O3·H2O  2H2O
(2.5)
Hydrated ferric oxide (rust)
The full corrosion process is illustrated in Figure 2.1. Unhydrated
ferric oxide Fe2O3 has a volume of about twice that of the steel it replaces
when fully dense. When it becomes hydrated it swells even more and
becomes porous. This means that the volume increase at the steel/concrete
interface is six to ten times as indicated in Figure 2.2. This leads to the
cracking and spalling that we observe as the usual consequence of corrosion
of steel in concrete and the red/brown brittle, flaky rust we see on the bar
and the rust stains we see at cracks in the concrete.
Several factors in the explanation given in this section are important and
will be used later to explain how we measure and stop corrosion. The elec-
trical current flow, and the generation and consumption of electrons in the
anode and cathode reactions are used in half-cell potential measurements
and cathodic protection. The formation of protective, alkaline hydroxyl
ions is used in cathodic protection, electrochemical chloride removal and
realkalization. The fact that the cathodic and anodic reactions must balance
8
Corrosion of steel in concrete
Ionic
current
The cathode
The anode
Fe  Fe2+ 2e–
Fe2+ + 2OH–  Fe(OH)2 Ferrous hydroxide
4Fe(OH)2 + O2 + 2H2O  4Fe(OH)2 Ferric hydroxide
2Fe(OH)2  Fe2O3 · H2O + 2H2O Hydrated ferric oxide (rust)
O2 + H2O + 2e–  2OH–
Electronic current
1
2
Figure 2.1 The anodic, cathodic and oxidation and hydration reactions for corroding steel.
 

each other for corrosion to proceed is used in epoxy coating protection of
rebars. All this will be discussed later.
2.2
Black rust
There is an alternative to the formation of ‘normal’ red rust described in
reactions (2.3) to (2.5) earlier. If the anode and cathode are well separated
(by several hundred millimetres) and the anode is starved of oxygen (say by
being underwater) the iron as Fe2 will stay in solution. This means that
there will be no expansive forces as described earlier to crack the concrete
so corrosion may not be detected.
This type of corrosion (known as ‘black’ or ‘green’ rust due to the
colour of the liquid when first exposed to air after breakout) is found
under damaged waterproof membranes and in some underwater or
other water saturated conditions. It is potentially dangerous as there is
no indication of corrosion by cracking and spalling of the concrete and
the reinforcing steel may be severely weakened before corrosion is
detected. Rebars may be hollowed out in such deoxygenated conditions
particularly under membranes or when water is permanently ponded
on the surface.
Examples of rebars attacked in this way are shown in Figure 2.3. These
bars were taken from underneath damaged waterproof membranes.
Corrosion of steel in concrete
9
F
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Fe(OH)3 · 3H2O
Fe(OH)3
Fe(OH)2
Fe2O3
Fe3O4
FeO
Fe
Figure 2.2 Relative volume of iron and its oxides from Mansfield Corrosion, 1981, 37(5):
301–307.
 

Rust staining on the concrete surface may be indicative of this type of
attack, but obviously if water is getting under a membrane and excluding
oxygen it is unlikely that the iron in solution will get to the concrete surface
where it will then precipitate out to form rust stains.
2.3
Pits, stray current and bacterial corrosion
2.3.1
Pit formation
Corrosion of steel in concrete generally starts with the formation of pits.
These increase in number, expand and join up leading to the generalized
corrosion usually seen on reinforcing bars exposed to carbonation or
chlorides. The formation of pits is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
The chemistry of pitting is quite complex and is explained in most chem-
istry text books. However, the principle is fairly simple, especially where
chlorides are present. At some suitable site on the steel surface (often
thought to be a void in the cement paste or a sulphide inclusion in the steel)
the passive layer is more vulnerable to attack and an electrochemical poten-
tial difference exists that attracts chloride ions. Corrosion is initiated and
acids are formed, hydrogen sulphide from the MnS inclusion and HCl from
10
Corrosion of steel in concrete
Figure 2.3 Reinforcing bars taken from under the end of a waterproofing membrane. They
have been subjected to low oxygen conditions and therefore one of them
shows severe local wasting. There was no expansive oxide growth.
 

the chloride if they are present. Iron dissolves (equation (2.1)), the iron in
solution reacts with water:
Fe2  H2O →FeOH  H
(2.6)
MnS  2H →H2S  Mn2
(2.7)
A pit forms, rust may form over the pit, concentrating the acid (H),
excluding oxygen so that the iron stays in solution preventing the formation
of a protective oxide layer and accelerating corrosion.
We will return to the subject of pitting corrosion later. It is related to the
problems of coated reinforcement and to the ‘black rust’ phenomenon
discussed earlier.
2.3.2
Bacterial corrosion
Another complication comes from bacterial corrosion. There are bacteria in
soil (thiobaccilli) that convert sulphur and sulphides to sulphuric acid. There
are other species (ferrobaccili) that attack the sulphides in steel (FeS). This is
often associated with a smell of hydrogen sulphide (rotten eggs) and smooth
pitting with a black corrosion product when rebars are exposed having been
in water saturated conditions. In anaerobic (oxygen starved) conditions such
bacteria can contribute to the pitting corrosion discussed earlier.
Corrosion of steel in concrete
11
Red rust 
FeOOH
Black rust
Fe3O4
H2
Porous 
crust
3FeOOH + e–  Fe3O4.H2O + OH–
Steel
Aerated NaCI
solution
Steel
Mill scale 
Fe3O4
Solid FeCl2
O2 + 2H2O + 4e–  4OH–
Fe  Fe2+ + 2e–
Fe2+ + H2O  FeOH+ + H+
2H+ + 2e–  H2
Cl–
Cl–
FeCl2
HCl
Fe2+
Figure 2.4 The classical corrosion model of pitting attack after Wranglen G. Corrosion Sci,
1974, 14: 331. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.
 

2.3.3
Stray current induced corrosion
As stated in the introduction, stray currents were originally blamed for all
corrosion in concrete in the United States until the problem of chloride
attack was identified in the 1950s. The main cause of stray current induced
corrosion was the direct current from DC traction systems on trams (street-
cars), when current flowed through buried or embedded steel work. In find-
ing the lowest resistance path to ground, current will jump from one metal
conductor to another via an ionic medium when the metals are not in con-
tact. This might be from one reinforcement cage to another via the concrete
pore water. One end of the reinforcement cage will become negative (a
cathode), and will not corrode. The other end will become positive and will
actively corrode. The problems of stray currents in cathodic protection
systems are discussed in Section 7.7.2 where the effect of having electrically
discontinuous steel in the structure is considered.
Today, stray current corrosion in bridges, buildings and above ground
structures is a specialized problem dealt with by engineers designing and
maintaining light rail systems. Below ground the problem also occurs on
cathodic protection systems for pipelines and other structures. Cathodic
protection systems on buried pipelines can interact with adjacent or cross-
ing facilities. There must be an ionic path between the source of current and
the metal at risk which must also be on the path of lowest resistance. For
this reason stray current induced corrosion is most unlikely on above
ground structures when the DC source is below ground.
There is some discussion in the literature about AC induced stray currents.
These are generally far lower than DC effects although recent literature sug-
gests that in some cases it can be significant (Gummow et al., 1998). One case
where AC can be significant is on a structure with cathodic protection
installed. In such conditions, the AC can shift the steel potential to the
actively corroding regions of the electrochemical spectrum causing corrosion.
2.3.4
Local vs. general corrosion (macrocells vs.
microcells)
Corrosion is often local, with a few centimetres of corrosion and then up to
a metre of clean passive bar, particularly for chloride induced corrosion.
This indicates the separation of the anodic reaction (2.1) and the cathodic
reaction (2.2) to form a ‘macrocell’. Chloride induced corrosion gives rise
particularly well defined macrocells. This is partly due to the mechanism of
chloride attack, with pit formation and with small concentrated anodes
being ‘fed’ by large cathodes. It is also because chloride attack is usually
associated with high levels of moisture giving low electrical resistance in
the concrete and easy transport of ions so the anodes and cathodes can
separate easily.
12
Corrosion of steel in concrete
 

In North America, this is used as a way of measuring corrosion by
measuring ‘macrocell currents’. This is discussed later in Section 4.12.6.
2.4
Electrochemistry, cells and half cells
The first two reactions we discussed in this chapter were the anodic and
cathodic reactions for steel in concrete. The terms ‘anode’ and ‘cathode’
come from electrochemistry which is the study of the chemistry of electri-
cal cells. Figure 2.5 is a basic Daniell cell which is used at high school to
illustrate how chemical reactions produce electricity. The cell is composed
of two ‘half cells’, copper in copper sulphate and zinc in zinc sulphate. The
total voltage of the cell is determined by the metals used and by the nature
and composition of the solutions. What is happening is that in each half cell
the metal is dissolving and ions are precipitating, that is,
M ←→Mn  ne
Copper is more resistant to this reaction than zinc so when we connect the
two solutions by a semi permeable membrane and connect the two metals
with a wire, the zinc goes into solution, and the copper sulphate plates out
as pure copper on the copper electrode.
Corrosion of steel in concrete
13
Copper
Porous
membrane
Zinc
Zinc sulphate
Copper sulphate
V
Figure 2.5 The Daniell cell. Cell voltage  0.34  (0.76)  1.10 V.
 

The voltage of any half cell can be recorded against a standard hydrogen
electrode (half cell or reference electrode). Table 2.1 gives the standard
reference electrode or half cell potentials that are of interest to us as we
evaluate corrosion problems.
Reference electrode potentials are a function of solution concentration as
well as the type of metal and the solution. A more concentrated solution is
(generally) more corrosive than a dilute one so a current will flow in a
cell made up of a single metal in two different concentrations of the same
solution. We can consider the corrosion of steel in concrete as a
concentration cell.
We can measure the corrosion risk in the cell by introducing an external
reference electrode. This is most easily illustrated by a copper/saturated
copper sulphate reference electrode moved along the surface of the concrete
with a rebar in the concrete which has anodic (corroding) areas and
cathodic (passive) areas.
As we see in Figure 2.6, by placing a reference electrode on the concrete
surface and connecting it via a voltmeter to the steel, we have a similar
circuit to our Daniell cell (Figure 2.5). The electrical potential difference
will be a function of the iron in its pore water environment. If we move the
cell along the steel we will see different potentials because the iron is in
different environments. At the anode it can easily go into solution like the
zinc in our Daniell cell. At the cathode, the passive layer is still strong
and being strengthened further by the cathodic reaction, so the steel resists
dissolution.
As a result we see higher potentials (voltages) on our voltmeter in
anodic, corroding areas and lower voltages in the cathodic, passive areas.
The use and interpretation of reference electrode potential measurements is
discussed further in Section 4.8.
We must be careful in our use of electrochemical and theory to explain
what is going on in a corrosion cell. Electrochemical theory generally
applies to equilibrium conditions and well defined solutions. Corrosion is
not an equilibrium, but a dynamic situation. Therefore using the theory and
equations of electrochemistry is an approximation and can lead to errors if
the model is stretched too far.
14
Corrosion of steel in concrete
Table 2.1 Standard reference electrode
potentials
Zn →Zn2  2e
0.76 V
Fe →Fe2  2e
0.44 V
Cu →Cu2  2e
0.34 V
 

2.5
Conclusions
This chapter has discussed the mechanism of what happens at the steel sur-
face. The chemical reactions, formation of oxides, pitting, stray currents,
bacterial corrosion, anodes, cathodes and reference electrode potentials
(half cells) have been reviewed. A more detailed account of the electro-
chemistry of corrosion and corrosion of steel in concrete is given in
Appendix B. Chapter 3 will discuss the processes that lead to the corrosion
and the consequences in terms of damage to structures. We will then move
on to the measurement of the problem and how to deal with it.
References
Gummow, R.A., Wakelin, R.G. and Segall, S.M. (1998). AC Corrosion – A New
Challenge to Pipeline Integrity. NACE Corrosion 98. Paper No. 566.
Corrosion of steel in concrete
15
 D.V.M. 
Half cell
2e– + H2O +     O2  2OH–
Fe  Fe2+ + 2e–
   
Steel
Concrete
High impedance
Digital Volt 
metre measures
potential difference 
between metal in 
half cell and
steel in concrete
M  Mn+ + ne–
1
2
Figure 2.6 Schematic of a reference electrode (half cell) potential measurement of steel in
concrete.
 

Chapter 3
Causes and mechanisms of
corrosion in concrete
There are two main causes of corrosion of steel in concrete. This chapter
will discuss how chloride attack and carbonation lead to corrosion and how
the corrosion then proceeds. There will also be discussion of the variations
that can be found when carrying out investigations in the field.
The main causes are chloride attack and carbonation. These two
mechanisms are unusual in that they do not attack the integrity of the
concrete. Instead, aggressive chemical species pass through the pores and
attack the steel. Other acids and aggressive ions such as sulphate destroy the
integrity of the concrete before the steel is affected. Most forms of chemical
attack are therefore concrete problems before they are corrosion problems.
Carbon dioxide is very unusual in penetrating the concrete without signifi-
cantly damaging it. Accounts of (for instance) acid rain causing corrosion
of steel embedded in concrete are unsubstantiated as far as this author is
aware. While the carbonation process affects the microstructure of the
concrete it is not generally deleterious.
3.1
Carbonation
Carbonation is the result of the interaction of carbon dioxide gas in the
atmosphere with the alkaline hydroxides in the concrete. Like many other
gases carbon dioxide dissolves in water to form an acid. Unlike most other
acids the carbonic acid does not attack the cement paste, but just neutralizes
the alkalies in the pore water, mainly forming calcium carbonate that lines
the pores:
CO2  H2O →H2CO3
(3.1)
Gas
Water
Carbonic acid
H2CO3  Ca(OH)2 →CaCO3  2H2O
(3.2)
Carbonic Pore
acid
solution
 

There is a lot more calcium hydroxide in the concrete pores that can
dissolve in the pore water. This helps maintain the pH at its usual level of
12–13 as the carbonation reaction occurs. However, as carbon dioxide pro-
ceeds to react with the calcium (and other) hydroxides in solution, eventu-
ally all the calcium hydroxide reacts, precipitating the calcium carbonate
and allowing the pH to fall to a level where steel will corrode. This is illus-
trated in Figure 3.1(a) and (b) which show the pH drop across the carbon-
ation front and the corrosion rate of steel as the pH changes.
Carbonation damage occurs most rapidly when there is little concrete
cover of the reinforcing steel. It can also occur when the cover is high but
the pore structure is open, pores are well connected together and allow
rapid CO2 ingress and when alkaline reserves in the pores are low. This
occurs when there is a low cement content, high water cement ratio and
poor curing of the concrete.
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
17
Quantity of rust % wt of
steel
pH
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
–
(a)
(b)
13.5
14
13
12.5
12
11.5
11
10.5
10
9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
Distance (mm)
30
35
40
45
50
pH values
6–8 mm 3–6 mm
Limit of fully alkaline area
pH threshold for corrosion
Neutralization front 
measured by 
phenolphthalein
Figure 3.1 (a) Corrosion of steel in aqueous solutions as a function of pH, showing the
effect of the passive layer above pH 12.5. Adapted from Shalon and Raphael 
J ACI, 1959, 30(12): 1251–1268. (b)The pH levels for carbonation, corrosion and
phenolphthalein indicator.
 

A carbonation front proceeds into the concrete roughly following the
laws of diffusion. These are most easily defined by the statement that the
rate is proportional to the thickness:
(3.3)
where x is distance, t is time and Do is the diffusion constant.
The diffusion constant Do is determined by the concrete quality. At the
carbonation front there is a sharp drop in alkalinity from pH 11–13 down
to less than pH 8. At that level the passive layer, which we saw in Chapter 2
was created by the alkalinity, is no longer sustained so corrosion proceeds by
the general corrosion mechanism as described in the Chapter 2.
Many factors influence the ability of reinforced concrete to resist
carbonation induced corrosion. As the carbonation rate is a function of
thickness, good cover is essential to resist carbonation. As the process is one
of neutralizing the alkalinity of the concrete, good reserves of alkali are
needed, that is, a high cement content. The diffusion process is made easier
if the concrete has an open pore structure. On the macroscopic scale this
means that there should be good compaction. On a microscopic scale well
cured concrete has small pores and lower connectivity of pores to the CO2
has a harder job moving through the concrete. Microsilica and other
additives can block pores or reduce pores sizes.
Carbonation is common on old structures, badly built structures
(particularly buildings) and reconstituted stone elements containing
reinforcement (often having a low cement content and being very porous).
Carbonation is rare on modern highway bridges and other civil engineering
structures where water cement ratios are low, cement contents are high with
good compaction and curing and enough cover to prevent the carbonation
front advancing into the concrete to any significant extent. On these
structures the chlorides usually get there first. Wet dry cycling will acceler-
ate carbonation by allowing CO2 in and then supplying the water for it to
dissolve in. This gives problems in some countries where the cycling
between wet and dry seasons seems to favour carbonation.
When a repairer talks of repairing corrosion due to ‘low cover’ he usually
means that the concrete has carbonated around the steel leading to corrosion.
As the cover is low it was a quick process. If the concrete were of the highest
quality carbonation may not have been possible and low cover might not
have mattered.
Carbonation is easy to detect and measure. A pH indicator, usually
phenolphthalein in a solution of water and alcohol, will detect the change
in pH across a freshly exposed concrete face. Phenolphthalein changes from
clear at low pH (carbonated zone) to pink at high pH (uncarbonated
dx
dt  Do
x
18
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
 

concrete). Measurements can be taken on concrete cores, fragments and
down drilled holes. Care must be taken to prevent dust or water from
contaminating the surface to be measured but the test, with the indicator
sprayed onto the surface, is cheap and simple. Figure 3.1(b) shows a typical
carbonation front in concrete.
3.1.1
Carbonation transport through concrete
As stated earlier, carbon dioxide diffuses through the concrete and the rate
of movement of the carbonation front approximates to Fick’s law of diffu-
sion. This states that the rate of movement is proportional to the distance
from the surface as in equation (3.3) earlier. However, as the carbonation
process modifies the concrete pore structure as it proceeds this is only an
approximation. Cracks, changes in concrete composition and moisture
levels with depth will also lead to deviation from the perfect diffusion
equation. Integration of equation (3.3) gives a square root law which can be
used to approximate the movement of the carbonation front. The calculation
of diffusion rates is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Empirically, a number of equations have been used to link carbonation
rates, concrete quality and environment. Table 3.1 summarizes some of
those equations and shows the factors that have been included. Generally
there is a t1/2 dependence. As discussed earlier the other factors are
exposure, water/cement ratio, strength and CaO content (both functions of
cement and, that is, alkali content).
If we consider the basic equation:
d  At0.5
In a study of a range of structures (Trend 2000 et al., 2001) the following
was found:
●
For 11 buildings 8–24-years-old, the constant A ranged from 1.2–6.7
with an average of 3 y1/2/mm.
●
For 7 car parks 14–41-years-old, the constant A ranged from 2.2–7.6
with an average 4.27 y1/2/mm.
●
For a 10-year-old jetty and a 90-year-old bridge A was 1.8 for the jetty
and 1.6 for the bridge.
3.2
Chloride attack
3.2.1
Sources of chlorides
Chlorides can come from several sources. They can be cast into the
concrete or they can diffuse in from the outside. Chlorides cast into
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
19
 

concrete can be due to:
●
deliberate addition of chloride set accelerators (calcium chloride CaCl2
was widely used until the mid-1970s);
●
use of seawater in the mix;
●
contaminated aggregates.
Chlorides can diffuse into concrete due to:
●
sea salt spray and direct seawater wetting;
●
deicing salts;
20
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
Table 3.1 A selection of carbonation depth equations
Equation
Parameters
d  Atn
d  carbonation depth
t  time in years
A  diffusion coefficient
n  exponent (approximately 1/2)
d  A.B.C.t0.5
A  1.0 for external exposure
1.7 for internal exposure
B  0.07 to 1.0 depending on surface finish
C  R(wc  0.25)/(0.3(1.15  3wc) )1/2
for water cement ratio (wc)  0.6
C  0.37R(4.6wc  1.7) for wc 0.6
R  coefficient of neutralization, a function of
mix design and additives
d  A(B.wc  C)t0.5
A is a function of curing
B and C are a function of fly ash used
d  0.43(wc  0.4)(12(t  1))0.50.1
28 day cured
d  0.53(wc  0.3)(12t)0.5  0.2
Uncured
d  (2.6(wc  0.3)20.16)t0.5
Sheltered
d  (wc  0.3)20.07)t0.5
Unsheltered
d  10.3e0.123f 28
(unsheltered at 3 years)
(fX  strength at day X)
d  3.4e0.34f 28
(sheltered)
d  680(f 2825)1.5  0.6 at 2 years
d  AB/f 280.5  c/(CaO46)0.5
CaO is alkali content expressed as CaO
d  (0.508/f 350.5  0.047)(365t)0.5
d  0.846(10wc/(10f 7)0.5  0.193
0.076wc)(12t)0.5  0.95
d  A(Tti)T0.75(C1/C2)0.5
ti  induction time
T  temperature in K
C1  CO2 concentration
C2  CO2 bound by concrete
Source: Parrott, L.J.A Review of Carbonation in Reinforced Concrete.A review carried out by the
Cement and Concrete Association under a BRE Contract Publ. BRE Garston,Watford, UK: 1987, Jul.
 

●
use of chemicals (structures used for salt storage, brine tanks,
aquaria, etc.).
Much of our discussion will centre on the diffusion of chlorides into
concrete as that is the major problem in most parts of the world either due
to marine salt spray or use of deicing salts. However, the cast in chlorides
must not be overlooked especially when they are part of the problem. This
often happens in marine conditions where sea water contaminates the
original concrete mix and then diffuses into the hardened concrete.
3.2.2
Chloride transport through concrete
Like carbonation, the rate of chloride ingress is often approximated to Fick’s
law of diffusion. There are further complications here. The initial mechanism
appears to be suction, especially when the surface is dry, that is, capillary
action. Salt water is rapidly absorbed by dry concrete. There is then some
capillary movement of the salt laden water through the pores followed by
‘true’ diffusion. There are other opposing mechanisms that slow the chlorides
down. These include chemical reaction to form chloroaluminates and absorp-
tion onto the pore surfaces. The detailed transport mechanisms of chloride
ions into concrete are discussed in Kropp and Hilsdorf (1995).
The other problem with trying to predict the chloride penetration rate is
defining the initial concentration as the chloride diffusion is a concentration
gradient, not a front. In other words we can use the square root relationship
for the carbonation front as the concrete either is or is not carbonated, but
we cannot use it so easily for chlorides as there is no chloride ‘front’, but a
concentration profile in the concrete. Typical chloride profiles are shown in
Figure 3.2(a) and (b). Figure 3.2(a) shows a ‘classical’ diffusion curve.
Figure 3.2(b) shows the more erratic profiles in a multi-storey car park. The
higher chloride concentrations at the deepest increments may be close to
the soffit of the slab where chloride is concentrating due to evaporation. The
calculation of chloride diffusion rates is discussed more fully in Chapter 8.
The different mechanisms of chloride transport into concrete.
3.2.3
Chloride attack mechanism
In Chapter 2, we discussed the corrosion of steel in concrete and the effec-
tiveness of the alkalinity in producing a passive layer of protective oxide on
the steel surface which stops corrosion. In the previous section we observed
that alkalinity is neutralized by carbonation. The depassivation mechanism
for chloride attack is somewhat different. The chloride ion attacks the pas-
sive layer although in this case (unlike carbonation) there is no overall drop
in pH. Chlorides act as catalysts to corrosion. They are not consumed in the
process but help to break down the passive layer of oxide on the steel and
allow the corrosion process to proceed quickly. This is illustrated in
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
21
 

Figure 3.3, while the main pitting process is shown in Figure 2.4. 
The effective recycling of chloride ions makes chloride attack more difficult
to remedy as chlorides are therefore harder to eliminate.
Obviously a few chloride ions in the pore water will not break down
the passive layer, especially if it is effectively re-establishing itself when
damaged as discussed in Chapter 2. There is a well known ‘chloride thres-
hold’ for corrosion given in terms of the chloride/hydroxyl ratio. This was
first investigated by Hausmann (1967).
Hausmann used a simple Monte Carlo (random number) calculation to
show that if chloride ions and hydroxyl ions are competing to fill a break
in the passive layer, the chloride ion starts to break down the passive layer
when the chloride concentration exceeds 0.6 of the hydroxyl concentration.
Haussman compared his theoretical calculations with laboratory tests with
22
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
0.4
Cl– by mass % of cement
Cl– by mass % of cement
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Car park 97
Depth (mm) 
% Chloride by mass of
cement
4
3.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
3
2
1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2 (a) Chloride profile of a highway bridge from Broomfield, J. P. Field Survey
of Cathodic Protection on North American Bridges.Materials Performance,
1992 Sep.; 31(9): 28–33. Courtesy NACE International 1992. (b) Chloride
profiles from a car park depth from Trend 2000; BRE; J Broomfield
Consultants, and Risk Review Ltd. Structures Data Base – Project Data
Base. Corrosion of Steel in Concrete – 2001 Dec; DTI DME 5.1. BRE.
 

calcium hydroxide solutions. This is illustrated in Figure 3.4. The 0.6
Cl/OH ratio approximates to a concentration of 0.4% chloride by weight
of cement if chlorides are cast into concrete and 0.2% if they diffuse in. In
the United States a commonly quoted threshold is 1 pound of chloride per
cubic yard of concrete. Although these figures are based on experimental
evidence, the actual numbers are a function of practical observations of real
structures.
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
23
Concrete
Passive layer
Gamma Fe2O3
Steel
FeCl2
Fe2+ + 2Cl–
2Cl–
Figure 3.3 The breakdown of the passive layer and ‘recycling’ chlorides.
Probadility of corrosion (%)
100
75
50
25
0
0
1
2
3
4
Sat, Ca(OH)2
NaOH, pH 13.2
NaOH, pH 11.6
Monte Carlo
Cl–/OH–
Figure 3.4 Probabilities of chloride-induced steel corrosion determined experimentally in
high-pH solutions and predicted by a Monte Carlo Calculation. From Haussman
(1967). Courtesy NACE International 1967.
 

All these thresholds are approximation because:
(a) concrete pH varies with the type of cement and the concrete mix. A tiny
pH change is a massive change in OH concentration as pH is the
logarithm of hydroxyl ion concentration and therefore the threshold
moves radically with pH;
(b) chlorides can be bound chemically (by aluminates in the concrete) and
physically (by absorption on the pore walls). This removes them
(temporarily or permanently) from the corrosion reaction;
(c) in very dry concrete corrosion may not occur even at very high Cl
concentration as the water is missing from the corrosion reaction as dis-
cussed in Chapter 2;
(d) in sealed, polymer impregnated or water saturated concrete, corrosion
may not occur even at a very high Cl concentration as there is no
oxygen presents to fuel the corrosion reaction. This can also occur
when there is total water saturation, but if some oxygen gets in then the
pitting corrosion described in Chapter 2 can occur.
(e) Macrocells develop on the steel surface which means that sampling in
a cathodic area will show no corrosion despite high chloride levels.
Therefore corrosion can be observed at 0.2% chloride if the concrete
quality is poor and none seen above 1.0% or more if oxygen and water are
excluded. If the concrete is very dry or totally saturated (as in (c) or (d))
then a change in conditions may lead to rapid corrosion.
In fact the threshold of corrosion should be considered to be a
probabilistic function rather than a fixed number. Figure 3.5(a) shows the
cumulative probability of corrosion vs. the chloride concentration on a UK
bridge (Vassie, 1987). However, when differentiated (3.5b), it can be seen
that there are ‘thresholds’ at 3%, 6% and 1.2% chloride by mass of cement.
One possible reason is discussed in the next section.
3.2.4
Macrocell formation
As stated in Chapter 2, corrosion proceeds by the formation of anodes and
cathodes (Figures 2.1 and 2.2). In the case of chloride attack they are often
well separated with areas of rusting separated by areas of ‘clean’ steel. This
is known as the macrocell phenomenon. Chloride induced corrosion is par-
ticularly prone to macrocell formation as a high level of water is usually
present to carry the chloride into the concrete and because chlorides in con-
crete are hygroscopic (i.e. they absorb and retain moisture). The presence of
water in the pores increases the electrical conductivity of the concrete. The
higher conductivity allows the separation of anode and cathode as the ions
can move through the water filled (or water lined) pores.
24
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
 

The separation of corroded areas does not necessarily represent the
distribution of chlorides along the rebar. It is the separation of anodic and
cathodic reactions which is seen with large cathodic areas supporting small,
concentrated anodic areas. The phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 3.6
from a jetty substructure in Jersey where anodes and cathode areas are
strongly differentiated on the central bar.
The peaks seen in Figure 3.5(b) may correspond to the breaking down of
pits into more generalized corrosion and the breaking down of macrocells
into uniform corrosion.
For carbonation the concrete is generally dryer (otherwise the CO2 does
not penetrate far). Corrosion therefore tends to be on a ‘microcell’ level
with apparently continuous corrosion along the reinforcing steel for
carbonated concrete.
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
25
%
90
(a)
(b)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
% Chloride by mass of cement
Cumulative probability of corrosion
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
%
80
60
40
20
–20
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
% Chloride by mass of cement
Probability of corrosion
Figure 3.5 (a) The probability of finding corroding steel associated with a specified
chloride concentration on a 20-year-old bridge deck (Vassie, 1987).
(b) Differential of Figure 3.5(a) showing thresholds at 3%, 6% and 1.2% chloride
by mass of cement.
 

3.3
Corrosion damage
In most industries corrosion is a concern because of wastage of metal
leading to structural damage. This can be collapse, perforation of
containers and pipes, etc. However, most problems with corrosion of steel
in concrete are not due to loss of steel but the growth of the oxide. This
leads to cracking and spalling the concrete cover.
Structural collapses of reinforced concrete structures due to corrosion are
rare. The author knows of two multi-storey parking structures in North
America which have collapsed due to deicing salt induced corrosion
(Simon, 2004). A prestressed concrete bridge collapsed in Wales due to
deicing salt attack on the strands hidden from investigation (Woodward
and Williams, 1988), and another one in Europe. Usually concrete damage
would have to be well advanced before a structure is at risk.
Particular problems arise when the corrosion problem is the black rust
described in Chapter 2 and prestressed, post-tensioned structures where
corrosion is difficult to detect as the tendons are enclosed in ducts. Tendon
failure can be catastrophic as they are loaded to 50% or more of their
ultimate tensile strength and modest section loss leads to failure under load.
The particular problems of assessing prestressed concrete structures are
addressed in Chapter 4.
The most common problem caused by corrosion is spalling of concrete
cover. A man was killed in New York City by a slab of concrete which
26
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
Figure 3.6 Strongly differentiated anode and cathode regions or macrocell effects on
a jetty substructure (new reinforcement has been placed to replace
corroded stirrups prior to repair and the application of impressed current
cathodic protection).
 

spalled off a bridge substructure due to deicing salts and a small truck was
badly damaged in Michigan in another similar incident. Special metal
canopies have been built around the lower floors of high rise buildings
where corrosion has lead to risk of falling concrete. This action also
allowed the investigators to collect the fallen concrete at regular intervals
and weigh it. In that way they could determine whether the corrosion rate
was stable, accelerating or decelerating.
A typical example of a corroding substructure is shown in Figure 3.7
where a regular hammer survey is undertaken to remove loose concrete to
avoid the risk of it falling on vehicles or pedestrians below.
The important factor in corrosion of steel in concrete compared to most
other corrosion problems is the volume of oxide and where it is formed. 
A dense oxide formed at high temperatures (such as in a power station
boiler) usually has twice the volume of the steel consumed. In most aqueous
environments the excess volume of oxide is transported away and deposits
on open surfaces within the structure. In the case of steel in concrete two
factors predominate. The main problem is that the pore water is static and
there is no transport mechanism to move the oxide away from the steel sur-
face. This means that all the oxide is deposited at the metal/oxide interface.
The second problem is that the oxide is not dense. It is very porous and
takes up a very large volume, up to ten times that of the steel consumed
when the porosity of the corrosion product is taken into account. The
relative volumes of fully dense oxides are given in Figure 2.2.
The thermodynamics of corrosion, coupled with the low tensile strength
of concrete mean that the formation of oxide breaks up the concrete. It has
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
27
Figure 3.7 The M4 elevated section in West London showing exposed reinforcement
due to concrete spalling induced by reinforcement corrosion. Corrosion
was caused deicing salt leakage from the deck above.
 

been suggested that less than 100 micrometres of steel section loss is needed
to start cracking and spalling the concrete. The actual amount needed will
depend upon the geometry in terms of cover, proximity to corners, rebar
spacing, bar diameter and the rate of corrosion. This is discussed further in
Section 4.11 on corrosion rate measurement where the amount of corrosion
needed to crack concrete is described and in Chapter 9 where the
mathematical modelling of the corrosion process is discussed.
Corners tend to crack first on corroding reinforced concrete structures.
This is because the oxygen, water, chlorides and carbon dioxide have two
faces as pathways to the steel. Delaminations occur as corrosion proceeds
on neighbouring rebars and the horizontal cracks join up as shown in
Figure 3.8.
3.4
Cracks, crack orientation and corrosion
The importance of cracks in accelerating corrosion by allowing access of
corrosion agents to the steel surface has been widely discussed. If reinforc-
ing steel is doing its job in areas of tension in the structure, small cracks will
occur as the tensile load exceeds the tensile strength of the steel. Most of
these are small cracks (0.5 mm) at right angles to the reinforcing
steel. They should not significantly affect the rate of corrosion of the steel
as any local ingress of chlorides, moisture and carbonation is limited and
contained by the local alkalinity. Obviously there is a limit to this ‘self
healing’ ability. If there are large cracks that stay open (0.5 mm), or
excessive shrinkage cracks along the bars then corrosion can be accelerated.
28
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
Corner spall
Due to doubled access
For water, oxygen
Chlorides, CO2
Delamination leading to spall of cover
Horizontal corrosion induced cracks
Due to ‘plane of weakness’ at rebar level
Figure 3.8 Schematic of corrosion induced spalling at corners and delamination at the
plane of the reinforcement.
 

The relationship between cracks and reinforcement corrosion is more fully
discussed in Concrete Society Technical Report 44 (1995).
Corrosion causes horizontal cracking along the plane of the rebar and
the corner cracking around the end rebar. This leads to the loss of concrete
cover as shown in Figure 3.8. This is the main consequence of reinforcement
corrosion with its subsequent risk of falling concrete and unacceptable
appearance.
3.5
The synergistic relationship between 
chloride and carbonation attack,
chloride binding and release
We have already discussed the fact that chlorides can be bound by the con-
crete. One of the constituents of cement paste is C3A, a complex inorganic
aluminium salt. This reacts with chloride to form chloroaluminates. This
removes the chloride from availability in the pore water to cause corrosion.
This binding process is strongest for chlorides cast into concrete, and is why it
was considered acceptable to use sea water to make concrete for many years.
The extent of binding and its effectiveness is not well understood.
However, it is known that a reduction in pH as caused by carbonation will
break down the chloroaluminates. This leads to a ‘wave’ of chlorides
moving in front of the carbonation front. Consequently structures with
chlorides in them that carbonate are more susceptible to corrosion than
those with only one source of problem. A clear example of the unbinding
process is clearly shown in Figure 3.9.
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
29
Carbonated paste
Wt. % Cl in paste
Depth from surface (mm)
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
0.0
Figure 3.9 A chloride profile through a partially carbonated concrete sample. Courtesy
University of East Anglia and Structural Studies and Design Ltd.
 

References
Concrete Society (1995). The Relevance of Cracking in Concrete to Corrosion of
Reinforcement. Concrete Society Technical Report 44.
Hausmann, D.A. (1967). Steel Corrosion in Concrete: How Does it Occur? Materials
Protection, 6: 19–23.
Kropp, J. and Hilsdorf, H.J. (1995). Performance Criteria for Concrete Durability
Rilem Report 12. Product of RILEM Technical Committee 116-PCD. Publ E&FN
Spon London.
Simon, P. (2004). Improved Current Distribution Due to a Unique Anode Mesh
Placement in a Steel Reinforced Concrete Parking Garage Slab CP System. NACE
Corrosion 2004. Paper No. 04345.
Trend 2000. BRE; J Broomfield Consultants, and Risk Review Ltd. Evaluation of
Life Performance and Modelling. Corrosion of Steel in Concrete – Report D29.
2001 Dec; DTI DMI 5.1(Report 2).
Vassie, P.R. (1987). The Chloride Concentration and Resistivity of Eight Reinforced
Concrete Bridge Decks after 50 years Service. Transport and Road Research
Laboratory. Research Report 93.
Woodward, R.J. and Williams, F.W. (1988). ‘Collapse of Ynys-y-Gwas Bridge, West
Glamorgan’, Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs, Part 1, 84: 635–669.
30
Causes and mechanisms of corrosion
 

Chapter 4
Condition evaluation
We have considered the main mechanisms of corrosion in Chapter 2. We have
seen that the chemical process is the same regardless of whether the cause is
carbonation or chloride attack as described in Chapter 3. But if we are to
perform an effective repair we must fully understand the cause and extent
of damage or we risk wasting resources with an inadequate or unnecessarily
expensive repair. This chapter explains how to evaluate the condition of
corroding reinforced concrete structures.
A full evaluation is normally a two stage process. The preliminary survey
should characterize the nature of the problem and give guidance in planning
a detailed survey. The detailed survey will confirm the cause and quantify
the extent of the problem. The UK Concrete Society Technical Report 26
(Concrete Society, 1984), the Concrete Bridge Development Group
Technical Guide 2 (Concrete Bridge Development Group, 2002), the
American Concrete Institute Committee 222 reports (ACI, 2001) give
excellent reviews of how to conduct the surveys. It is also important to
undertake a desk study of the available design, construction, and relevant
maintenance drawings and reports.
Corrosion is not the only deterioration mechanism in reinforced concrete.
Alkali-silica reactivity (ASR), sulphate attack, thurmasite attack, delayed
ettringite formation, freeze thaw, thermal movement, settlement and other
movement can all lead to concrete damage and their assessment must be
included in the surveys.
Some structures may be prone to unusual chemical attack of the steel or
the concrete. For example:
●
storage vessels can contain liquids that will attack aggregates, cement
paste or the steel;
●
carbonates in water can attack concrete pipelines and underground
structures.
However, we will concentrate on corrosion of atmospherically exposed
reinforced concrete structures and elements.
 

A condition evaluation as described here is not a structural survey. A
structural engineer must be consulted if there are concerns about the
capacity of the structure either due to corrosion damage or for any other
reasons. Any excessive deflection of structural elements, misalignment,
impact damage, excessive cracking, loss of concrete or loss of steel section
will require a structural evaluation before repairing corrosion damage.
This may lead to limiting the amount of break out permitted during repair,
adequate time for concrete strength gain after repair and a requirement
for propping during the repair process itself. If repairs are to be structural
then a structural engineer must design them. It is usually necessary to
support the live and dead loads on the structure during repair, so
that the loads will go through the repairs after the support is removed.
In some cases structural support is needed to remove significant amounts
of concrete. A structural support system for concrete repair is shown in
Figure 4.1.
32
Condition evaluation
Figure 4.1 Structural support system on the Midland Links Motorway elevated section
(Junction 9 M6) prior to repair.The support system is jacked up to take some
of the load while concrete repair is undertaken. Conductive coating cathodic
protection systems can be seen on subsequent cross heads. Courtesy of Kevin
Davies, Corrosion Consultant, taken December 2005.
 

4.1
Desk study
Where possible the first stage of an investigation should be to study
whatever records are available. Ideally this will consist of ‘as built’
drawings, inspection records, previous test results and previous repair
records. These may be detailed and extensive, for instance in the case of
major highway bridges. Alternatively they may be non-existent or illegible
in the case of older buildings and structures with multiple previous owners.
The desk study may reveal areas at risk, and help plan the investigation.
Access requirements can be evaluated from the desk study.
4.2
Preliminary survey
This normally involves a visual inspection, probing of cracks and spalls to
see their extent, reinforcement cover measurement, possibly a few carbon-
ation measurements, reference electrode measurements and taking samples
(sometimes taking broken pieces of concrete rather than coring) for labora-
tory testing. Particular attention must be paid to safety and structural
integrity from concrete spalling or steel section loss. Loose concrete that
could cause a risk to the public or users of the structure should of course be
removed. If there are inaccessible areas of potentially loose material then a
‘make safe survey’ may be an urgent next step, possibly using abseiling
operatives if no other access can be provided. Other causes of concrete
cracking (e.g. ASR, freeze thaw, thermal movement, structural movement,
impact damage, etc.) must not be overlooked at this stage.
4.3
The detailed survey
The purpose of the detailed survey is to ensure a cost-effective repair in line
with the client’s requirements. This is done by accurately defining and mea-
suring the cause, extent and severity of deterioration. In Chapter 7, we will
discuss how test measurements may be used to model the deterioration rate,
time to corrosion and life cycle costing. We will need to know how much
damage has been done and what has caused the damage. Quantities for repair
tenders will probably be based on the results of this survey, so a full survey of
all affected elements may be required. Alternatively a full visual survey may be
required, with a hammer (delamination) survey of all accessible locations. A
number of representative areas may be selected for a detailed survey of cover
depths, carbonation depths, chloride content or profile, half cell potentials and
other techniques described in the following sections of this chapter.
It is usual to produce pro formas for noting down all deterioration, as
well as readings and samples taken so that everything can be tied together
in the analysis. Weather conditions are also recorded as these can affect
some readings. An example of a report drawing of a condition evaluation
is given in Figure 4.2.
Condition evaluation
33
 

CLADDING
CLADDING
BRICK
BRICK
BRICK
BRICK
BRICK
BRICK
CLADDING
CONCRETE
STAIRS
STAIRS
CLADDING
BRICK
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
B3
A1
A1
A1
B3
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
A1
A1
B3
R1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
B3
A1
B3
A1
C101
A1
B3
B3
B3
B3
B3 C3
B3
B3
R1
A1
B3
A1 B3
B3
B3
B3
D113–115
D00–1–5mm
D110–112
D0C–6mm
B3
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
R1
A1
A1
A1
A1
A1
B3
B3
B3
B3
B3
C3
C3
C3
B3
B3
B3
R1
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
A1 A1
B3
A1
B3
A1
B3
B3
BAR
EXP.
A1
A1
A1
A1
TEST
AREA 1
A1
B3
TEST
AREA 2
A1
C3
A1
A1
BAR EXP.
C3
C3
A1 A1
B3 B3 B3
X
D116–118
D0C–5mm
X
Key
D1100 – 118
X – DRILLED POWER SAMPLE
C101
     – DRILLED CORE SPECIMEN
Drilled powder sample
Key
Drilled core specimen
A1   Cracking (general)
A2   Pattern cracking
B1   Exudation
B2   Incrustation
B3   Rust stains
B4   Dampness
C1   Popouts
C2   Spall
C3   Delamination
C4 Weathering
D2   Honeycombing
D3  Contamination of shutter
D4  Scouring
E1  Construction joint
E2  Panel joint
photograph reference
R1 Repair
5
4
Figure 4.2 Typical visual survey of a reinforced concrete framed building suffering from sea salt spray ingress on top of cast in chlorides leading
to chloride induced corrosion.
 

4.4
Available techniques
The following sections explain some of the available techniques, their
advantages and limitations, and the resources needed to employ them. The
list is not exhaustive and new techniques are always in development. If all
the techniques available were used to thoroughly survey a corroding rein-
forced concrete structure then huge resources could be used before doing
anything to stop the problem. However, expensive repairs can be useless if
the problem is not properly diagnosed. So what techniques should be used
and what are their limitations and capabilities?
Table 4.1 lists most of the techniques that are used for condition
surveying and have relevance to corrosion or the damage it causes. A minimum
Condition evaluation
35
Table 4.1 Methods for condition surveying
Method
Detects
Use
Approximate speed a
Visual
Surface defects
General
1 m2s1
Hammer/chain
Delaminations
General
0.1 m2s1
Cover meter
Rebar depth 
General
1 reading in 2–5 min
and size
50–500 m2 per day
Phenolphthalein
Carbonation 
General
1 reading in 5 min
depth
80–250 per day
Chloride content
Chloride 
General
Core in 10 min 7–80 per
corrosion
day (small or large
diameter) or drillings in
2 min 100–250 per day 
lab or special site analysis
Reference 
Corrosion risk
General/
1 reading in 5 s after 
electrode
specialist
connecting to steel
(half cell) survey
50–500 per day
Linear 
Corrosion rate
General/
1 reading in 5 to 
polarization
specialist
30 min depending on 
equipment used
Resistivity
Concrete 
General/specialist
1 reading in 20 s
resistivity/
10 to 20 per day.
corrosion risk
Permeability 
Diffusion rate
General/specialist
1 reading in 5 min 
(ISAT)
or core  lab
6–12 per day
Impact/ 
Defects in 
Specialist
1 reading in 2 min
ultrasonics
concrete
20–30 per day
Petrography
Concrete 
General
Core in 10 min 
condition, etc.
7–80 per day (small or 
large diameter)  lab
Radar/ 
Defects, steel 
Specialist
1 m2 per sec for 
radiography
location,
vehicle system or 
condition
1 m2 in 20 s for hand
system  interpreting
Note
a Daily progress rates from Concrete Bridge Development Group Technical Guide 2 (2002).
 

requirement would usually be a visual survey, a delamination survey,
carbonation and chloride measurements, and cover depth measurements.
A petrographic analysis of the concrete is also usually required. These
will be done in three or more representative or more severely damaged
areas. These measurements should tell the engineer the cause of corrosion,
the extent to which chlorides or carbonation have depassivated the steel
and the extent of existing damage.
Reference electrode surveys are increasingly popular as a rapid way of
showing how corrosion is spreading ahead of the damage it causes. The
other techniques are used for specific requirements as described later.
There are a number of specialist survey companies that carry out
condition surveys. Some are independent, and some are attached to large
contractors or to consultants. They will get analyses done to the relevant
national and international standards with suitable quality management
systems for the site work. When developing a specification and contract for
such survey it is important that the required outcome is clearly stated in the
documentation and understood by the survey company. It is easy to gener-
ate large amounts of test data and fail to come to a conclusion about the
cause and extent of damage and the best options for repair. Concrete Bridge
Development Group Technical Guide 2 (Concrete Bridge Development
Group, 2002) gives detailed information and a model specification for
inspection and reinstatement of inspection damage, including November
1991 UK costs for inspection tests and reporting.
4.5
Visual inspection
The visual inspection is the first step in any investigation. It may start out
as a casual ‘look over’ that spots a problem and end up as a rigorous log-
ging of every defect seen on the concrete surface.
4.5.1
Property to be measured
The aim of the visual survey is to give a first indication of what is wrong
and how extensive the damage is. If concrete is spalling off then that can be
used as a measure of extent of damage. In some cases weighing the amount
of spalled concrete with time can be a direct measure of the deterioration
rate. In most cases loose concrete should be removed to avoid safety
problems.
4.5.2
Equipment and use
The main equipment is obviously the human eye and brain, aided with a
notebook, pro forma or hand-held computer and a camera. Binoculars
may be necessary, but close inspection is better if access can be arranged.
36
Condition evaluation
 

A systematic visual survey will be planned in advance. Many companies
that carry out condition surveys will have standardized systems for indicat-
ing the nature and extent of defects. These are used in conjunction with
customized pro formas for each element or elevation of the structure. It is
normal to record date time and weather conditions when doing the survey,
also noting visual observations such as water or salt run down, damp areas,
etc. Examples are given in Figures 4.2 and 4.3. Digital cameras have made
it easier to produce visually interesting reports and to highlight specific
problems but are rarely ideal for recording all defects as contrast is often
lost and exact locations and sizes difficult to pin down from photographs.
Meticulous records of photograph locations, times and features must be
kept if they are to be of greatest possible benefit.
4.5.3
Interpretation
Interpretation is usually based on the knowledge and experience of the engi-
neer or technician conducting the survey. The Strategic Highway Research
Program (SHRP) has produced an expert system (Kaetzel et al., 1994). This
guides the less experienced engineer or technician through the different
types of defects seen on concrete highway pavements and structures, includ-
ing alkali-silica reaction, freeze thaw damage and corrosion. There is a
detailed discussion of visual surveys of highway bridges in The Concrete
Bridge Development Group Technical Guide 2 (Concrete Bridge
Development Group, 2002).
4.5.4
Limitations
The main limitation is the skill of the operative. Some defects can be mis-
taken for others. When corrosion is suspected it must be understood that
rust staining can come from iron bearing aggregates (iron pyrites) as well as
from corroding reinforcement. Different types of cracking can be attributed
to different causes.
4.5.5
Standards and guidance
The recognition of ASR is discussed in the SHRP manual on ASR (Stark,
1991) and in HWYCON 1994. Visual surveys must always be followed up
by testing to confirm the source and cause of deterioration. Concrete Bridge
Development Group (2002) has a table of 25 examples of cracks and visual
defects with photographic examples in an appendix.
4.6
Delamination
As corrosion proceeds the corrosion product formed takes up a larger volume
than the steel consumed. This builds up tensile stresses around the rebars.
Condition evaluation
37
 

BH
50
50
50
585
Grids at 500 centres
51
5049
48
47
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10 9
8
AD
BH
Cg
Cr
Cv
Efl
ER
ER10
ES
FD
F or FV
0.4
GL
Key
Accidental damage
Blow hole
Crazing
Crack
Cavity
Crack with efflorescence
Exposed reinforcement
Exposed reinforcement
original cover 10 mm
Efflorescence stains
Frost damage
Fine or very fine cracks
Crack 0.4 mm wide
Grout loss
GR
H
Isp
NVD
R
Rep
RN
Rs
RST
Sev
Sl
Sp
Sp 10
at
Grout runs
Honeycombing
Incipient spall
No visible defect
Rust
Repair
Rusty nails
Rust spot
Rust stain
Severe
Slight
Spall
Spall, 10 mm deep
Atalactites
W
WS
CS
EW
SS
TW
B
T
NW
LS
FP
PF
WD
Weathering
Water stain
Core sample
Excess washers
Short stud on bearing
Tie wire
Bottom plate
Top plate
No washer
Long stud
Flaking paint
Poor finish
Water deposits
Incipient spall (hollow area)
Isp
Rsp
Rs
Rs
EP
Rs
VF
VF
VF
VF
VF
VF
VFVFVF VF
Rst
Rst
rep
Rst
Rst
Rst
rep
Rst
Rst
Rst
Rst
Rst
Rst
Rs
Rst
Rst
Sev.Rst
Sev.
Rst
Sev.
Rst
Rst
Rst
Rst
Sp
Sp
Sp
Isp
Isp
f
Rs
Rs
Rs
Rs
Vf
Vf
Vf
Vf
Vf
Vf
Vf
Vf
2mm
1mm
2mm
Rst Sp
Sp
Rst
10mm
1mm
1mm
Rst
RG
BH
BH
f
f
GL
GL
GL
Cr
Cr
GL
GL
GL
WR
Isp
Isp
Rst
Sp
Isp
Rs
Cp
Alg
f
GL
Rst
Cr1mm
Rs
Rs
Rs
Rs
Rs
Rst
Rst
Rst
2mm
1mm
f
Er
Cr
Erl
Cg
ALE
Sev.
Rst
Sp
Sp
Sp
Sp
Efl
SlEfl
Vf
CSrep
Isp
VF Cr
VF
VF
VF
VF
Sp
Sp
St
SR
Sp
Sp
Vf
Sp
Sp
rep
Slefl
Sp
Rs Sp
Isp
Isp
Sp+Ea
Ef
Ef
GL
Ef
Isp
4mm
2mm
2mm
1mm
VF
VF
VF
Cp
Rs
Rs
BH
BH
F
F
Cg
Cg
Sp
VF
VF
VF
VF
VF
VF
BH
VF
CR
Rst
Rs
PF
Rst
2mm
1mm
45mm
CR2mm
3mm
3mm
Cg
Cg
WR
RS
Tell
tale
Tell
tale
V
0.6
Efl
Figure 4.3 Visual and delamination survey of a cross beam on a motorway bridge suffering from deicing salt ingress (developed view of beam). Courtesy
of the Highway Agency.
 

A layer of corroding rebars will often cause a planar fracture at rebar depth,
prior to concrete spalling off as shown in Figure 3.7.
4.6.1
Property to be measured
The aim is to measure the amount of cracking between the rebars before it
becomes apparent at the surface. It should be noted that this can be a very
dynamic situation. Figure 3.7 shows the way that cracks propagate between
corroding bars. The horizontal cracks are detected by a hollow sound when
Condition evaluation
39
Figure 4.4 (a) Vehicle mounted ground penetrating radar conducting a bridge deck and
pavement survey, courtesy Transportation Research Board (Strategic Highway
Research Program). (b) Infrared thermogram of a patched bridge deck show-
ing a delaminated patch, courtesy Transportation Research Board (Strategic
Highway Research Program).
(a)
(b)
 

hit or other properties associated either with the presence of an unexpected
boundary in the concrete or the phase change from concrete to air to
concrete when subjected to electromagnetic radiation or ultrasound.
4.6.2
Equipment and use
The hammer survey (or chain drag used on decks) is usually quicker,
cheaper and more accurate than the other more sophisticated alternatives
such as radar, ultrasonics or infrared thermography. However, these tech-
niques do have their uses for instance in large scale surveys of bridge decks
(radar and infrared) of waterproof membranes or other concrete defects
(ultrasonics and radar). A vehicle mounted radar system is show in
Figure 4.4a. The more sophisticated techniques may be needed for deep
delaminations and are discussed later in this chapter.
The delamination survey with a hammer is often conducted at the same
time as the visual survey as shown in Figure 4.3. Hollow sounding areas are
marked directly onto the surface of the structure with a suitable permanent
or temporary marker and then recorded on the visual survey pro forma. An
automated device was developed by Texas Transportation Institute for
highway bridge decks (Gannon and Cady, 1992) The delamatect® used an
automated tapper and transducer to detect irregular responses symptomatic
of delaminations. These were plotted on a strip chart recorder driven by the
turning wheels. It was developed in 1973 and has not been used much after
initial trials gave mixed results and the transferring of data from the chart
recorder to the deck or a suitable plan of the deck.
Suitably tuned infrared cameras can be used to detect the temperature
difference between solid and delaminated concrete. This is best done when
the concrete is warming up or cooling down as the delaminated concrete
heats and cools faster. This means that the technique’s sensitivity is
dependent upon the weather conditions and the orientation of the face
being surveyed. Infrared thermography tends to work best on bridge decks
in the early morning or late evening, or just after dark to eliminate the effect
of reflected sunlight. Figure 4.4b shows a bridge deck thermogram. The
best systems incorporate a visual light camera for joint recording of visual
and infrared image so that the location of defects is recorded simultane-
ously. The development of global positioning systems makes defect location
much easier for vehicle mounted systems. ASTM D4788-03 (2003) gives a
standard test method for its application to bridge decks, which can be used
as guidance for its application on other concrete elements.
Radar records changes in the dielectric constants associated with the
concrete/air phase change. However, the radar also senses the dielectric
changes at the steel concrete interface, the presence of water and, to a small
amount, chlorides. This makes interpretation of radar images a difficult
process. In North America the main use of radar and infrared has been for
bridge deck surveys with vehicle mounted systems. In Europe and the
40
Condition evaluation
 

United Kingdom hand-held systems have been used for surveys of building
and other structures. The reader is recommended to review the literature for
further information (Cady and Gannon, 1992; Bungey, 1993; Titman,
1993; Concrete Society, 1997b; Matthews, 1998; ASTM D6087-05, 2005).
There is further discussion of this topic in Section 4.15.
Radar is used in North America for surveying bridge decks using truck
mounted rapid data acquisition. They are not accurate in defining the size
and location of individual delaminations but can be used for generalized
condition surveys or comparative ranking of damaged decks (Alongi et al.,
1993). Radar and Infrared have been used in combination in North America
which increases the accuracy of the measurement of delaminations and other
defects but at the expense of doubling equipment and interpretation costs.
4.6.3
Interpretation
The interpretation of radar and infrared is a specialist process usually
carried out by the companies who have the equipment and who are hired
in to conduct such surveys.
With the hammer or chain drag survey the experience of the operative is
vital. A skilled technician who is experienced in carrying out delamination
surveys will often produce better and more consistent results than the more
qualified but less experienced engineer.
4.6.4
Limitations
The trapping of water within cracks, deep cracks (where bars are deep
within the structure) and heavy traffic noise can complicate the accurate
measurement of delamination for hammer techniques radar and infrared
thermography.
It is common during concrete repairs for the amount of delamination to
be far more extensive than delamination surveys indicate. This is partly due
to the inaccuracy of the techniques available but also because of the time
between survey and repair. Once corrosion has started delaminations can
initiate and grow rapidly. An underestimate of 40% or more is not unusual
and should be borne in mind when budgeting for repairs.
Radar has been found to be reasonably accurate in predicting the amount
of damage on a bridge deck, but not the precise location of the damage. The
problem with thermography is getting the right weather conditions to carry
out a useful survey. Radar and thermography have been used in tandem in
some North American highway departments with greater success than with
individual techniques.
4.6.5
Standards and guidance
ASTM D4580-03 (2003) describes delamination detection in concrete
bridge decks using a chain drag or hammers, the delamatect system and
Condition evaluation
41
 

a rotary percussion device. The standard concludes that the chain drag
procedure is the most reliable technique.
There is a standard, ASTM D4788 (2003) covering infrared thermography
of concrete and asphalt-covered concrete bridge decks. This requires a scanner
with a minimum thermal resolution of 0.2oC and says that the temperature
difference between a sound area and a delamination or a debonded area
should be 0.5oC. The standard is for a vehicle mounted system and claims
80–90% of delaminations can be found in concrete decks with or without an
asphalt overlay.
ASTM D6087-05 (2005) covers the use of ground penetrating radar to
evaluate asphalt covered concrete bridge decks. It is designed for vehicle
mounted or manually driven systems. It claims that the system is accurate
in detecting delaminations to within 11.2% according to a precision test
on 10 bridge decks in New York, Virginia and Vermont.
Cady and Gannon (1992), Bungey (1993), Titman (1993) Matthews (1998)
and Concrete Society (1997b) provide information on radar and infrared.
4.7
Cover
Cover measurement is carried out on new structures to see that adequate
cover has been provided to the structure in line with design requirements.
It is also carried out when corrosion is observed because low cover will
increase the corrosion rate both by allowing the agents of corrosion
(chlorides and carbonation) more rapid access to steel, and also allowing
more rapid access of the ‘fuels’ for corrosion, moisture and oxygen. A cover
survey will help to explain why the structure is corroding and show which
areas are most susceptible to corrosion due to low cover.
4.7.1
Property to be measured
A cover survey requires the location of the rebars three dimensionally, that is,
their position with regard to each other and the plane of the surface (X, Y)
and depth from the surface (Z). If construction drawings are not available
then it may be necessary to measure the rebar diameter as well as its location.
4.7.2
Equipment and use
Magnetic cover meters are now available with logging features and digital
outputs. A spacer can be used to estimate rebar diameter. Other alternatives
such as radiography can be used to survey bridges or other structures but
this is rarely cost effective (Cady and Gannon, 1992; Bungey, 1993). Radar
can be employed where the reinforcement layout is complex and congested.
Cover meters are surprisingly difficult to use as they are slow and deep cover
and closely spaced bars affect the readings. A typical device is shown in
Figure 4.4a. An alternating magnetic field is used to detect the presence of
42
Condition evaluation
 

magnetic materials such as steel rebars. Modern units are available that will
detect non-magnetic stainless steels as well as conventional magnetic steels.
A more recent development is the scanning cover meter which can
produce a plot of steel layout and depth. Figure 4.5 shows the different
equipment and outputs.
Condition evaluation
43
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5 (a) A small head manual cover meter being used to detect a corroding
wrought iron band in a Grade II listed building. (b) A scanning cover meter
being used to map reinforcement layout. Courtesy Hilti Great Britain.
(c) Output of a scanning cover meter showing a bar termination. Courtesy
Hilti Great Britain.
 

4.7.3
Interpretation
One of the few standards for cover meters is BS 1881 Part 204. This refers
to the measurement on a single rebar. A useful paper has been published
which discusses cover meter accuracy when several rebars are close together
(Alldred, 1993). The paper suggests that different types of head are more
accurate in different conditions. The smaller heads are better for resolving
congested rebars.
4.7.4
Limitations
The main problem with cover measurements is the congestion of rebars
giving misleading information (Alldred, 1993). Iron bearing aggregates
can lead to misleading readings as they will influence the magnetic field.
Different steel also have different magnetic properties (at the extreme
end, austenitic stainless steels are non-magnetic). Most cover meters have
calibrations for different reinforcing steel types. The devices are slow
and are not very accurate in the field as any operative who has tried to
use one to locate steel and excavate the steel will tell you. You often
miss the steel that is indicated when trying to find it to make electrical
connections or visually examine it. It is always advisable to check
cover meter measurements by breaking out and examining one or more
reinforcing bars.
Problems can arise when the steel is not vertical or horizontal as
expected. Scanning cover meters can improve our understanding of what
steel lies below the surface. This can be particularly important when designing
cathodic protection systems as discussed in Section 7.3.11.
4.7.5
Standards and guidance
One of the few standards for cover meters is BS 1881 Part 204. Alldred
(1993) discusses cover meter accuracy when several rebars are close
together. Concrete Bridge Development Group Technical Guide 2 (2002)
gives good coverage of cover meters, their design and performance.
4.8
Reference electrode (half cell) potential
measurements
The electrochemistry of corrosion, cells and half cells were discussed in
Section 2.4. The standard reference electrode or half cell is a simple device.
It is a piece of metal in a fixed concentration solution of its own ions (such
as copper in saturated copper sulphate, silver in silver chloride, etc.). If we
connect it to another metal in a solution of its own ions (such as iron in
44
Condition evaluation
 

Fe(OH)2, see equations 1.1 and 1.3) there will be a potential difference
between the two ‘half cells’. We have made a simple electrical cell like the
Daniell cell in Figure 2.5. The cell will generate a voltage because of the
different positions of the two metals in the electrochemical series (Table 2.1)
and due to the difference in the solutions (Figure 2.6). This is galvanic
action in which a voltage is developed, corrosion occurs and current flows
due to coupling of different metals. A second type of cell is a concentration
cell that will generate a voltage depending upon differences in the
concentration of the solution (strictly the activity), around otherwise similar
electrodes.
4.8.1
Property to be measured
By keeping one half of the cell standard (our reference electrode or half
cell) and moving it along the concrete surface, we change our full cell
by the difference in condition of the steel surface below the moving
reference electrode. If the steel is passive the potential measured is small
(typically 0 to 200 mV, or even a small positive reading), if the passive
layer is failing and increasing amounts of steel are dissolving (or if
small areas are corroding but the potential is being averaged out with
passive area), the potential moves more negative, typically 350 mV.
At more negative than 350 mV the steel is usually corroding actively.
By convention, we connect the positive terminal of the voltmeter to the
steel and the negative terminal to the reference electrode. This gives a
negative reading for a silver/silver chloride or copper/saturated copper
sulphate reference electrode.
Very negative potentials can be found in saturated conditions where
there is no oxygen to form a passive layer but with no oxygen there can be
no corrosion (see Section 2.2). This shows the weakness of potential
measurements. It is a measure of the thermodynamics of the corrosion,
not of the rate of corrosion. Corrosion potentials can be misleading, their
interpretation is based on empirical observation, not rigorously accurate
scientific theory. The problem is that the potential is not purely a function
of the corrosion condition but also other factors, and that the corrosion
condition is not the corrosion rate.
The reference electrode potential measurement gives an indication of the
corrosion risk of the steel. The measurement is linked by empirical
comparisons to the probability of corrosion.
The major factors that affect the activity of the iron in solution are the
extent to which the steel is depassivated, that is, the extent of carbonation
around the steel or the presence of sufficient chloride to break down the
passive layer, and the presence of oxygen to sustain the passive layer. In the
absence of oxygen, iron will dissolve but will remain stable in solution as
Condition evaluation
45
 

there is no compensating cathodic reaction so the potential may be very
negative but the corrosion rate will be low. However, there may be a very
large (negative) potential against a standard reference electrode.
4.8.2
Equipment and use
The equipment used is illustrated schematically in Figure 2.6. It consists
of a voltmeter, reference electrode and cables. A high impedance digital
voltmeter is required (around 10 megohm). This is connected to the rein-
forcing steel and to the reference electrode. Silver/silver chloride/calcium
chloride (Ag/AgCl/KCl) and manganese/manganese dioxide/sodium
hydroxide (Mn/MnO2/NaOH) double junction electrodes are recom-
mended. These use gel electrolytes and are of very low maintenance.
Copper/copper sulphate (CSE) cells are also used and now come in a gel
electrolyte form. CSE electrodes with a liquid saturated copper sulphate
electrolyte are not recommended because of the maintenance needs,
temperature and photosensitivity, the risk of contamination of the cell, the
difficulty of use in all orientations and the potential for leakage of corrosive
copper sulphate.
It is important to record the equipment used. Different reference
electrodes have different ‘offsets’. The Ag/AgCl/KCl electrode gives poten-
tials that are a function of the potassium chloride concentration in them.
This is usually about 110 mV more positive than a copper/saturated copper
sulphate electrode. This can be compensated for internally in the logging
equipment if used or during reporting if the ASTM criteria are being used
(discussed later).
Standard electrode potentials are given against the ‘hydrogen scale’.
That is against a standard cell consisting of one atmosphere (strictly unit
fugacity) of hydrogen gas in a solution containing one mole (strictly
unit activity) of hydrogen ions. The cell itself has a platinum electrode
with hydrogen bubbling over it and is in a 1M solution of hydrochloric
acid.
It is more usual to measure potentials in the laboratory against a
saturated calomel electrode (mercury in saturated mercuric chloride). This
cell is recommended for calibrating field reference electrodes. It is possible
to adjust the chloride content of a silver/silver chloride cell so that it
behaves like a calomel cell. A calomel cell is not usually used in the field
because it contains mercury.
A high impedance digital volt meter is used to collect the data in the
simplest configuration. Other options are to use a logging voltmeter (or
logger attached to a voltmeter), an array of cells with automatic logging or
a reference electrode linked to a wheel for rapid data collection (Broomfield
et al., 1990). Examples are shown in Figures 4.6(a) and (b).
46
Condition evaluation
 

Loggers can be linked to individual reference electrodes as in
Figure 4.6(a) or built into the wheel or array systems as in Figure 4.6(b).
They will store readings against position data. They will download to
computers and some have built-in printers to output the data on site.
Condition evaluation
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 (a) Logging voltmeter with reference electrode. Courtesy of Proceq S.A.
(b) A ‘Potential Wheel’ scanning reference electrode. Courtesy of CNS
Farnell Ltd.
 

The procedure of measurement with a reference electrode is as follows:
1 Check and calibrate the reference electrode.
2 Check the digital voltmeter or logger and the associated cables and
connections.
3 Select the area of measurement, usually a whole element such as a
bridge deck or cross head beam, or representative areas of element or
structures several square metres in size.
4 Use a cover meter to locate the steel and determine rebar spacing.
5 Make a connection to the steel either by exposing it or using already
exposed steel. The connection must be metal to metal and secure.
Self-tapping screws are frequently used.
6 Check that the steel is continuous with a DC resistance meter between
two points that are well separated and on well separated rebars. The
resistance should be less than 1 ohm and should not change significantly
when the connections are reversed.
7 Mark out a grid. This will typically be 0.2–0.5 m2 but may be smaller,
larger or rectangular depending on the steel spacing, the geometry
of the element being surveyed and other factors determined by the
experience of the investigator. The grid may coincide with the rebar
spacing on small surveys, but not usually on larger scans.
8 If necessary wet the area to ensure good contact between the electrode
and the concrete. Alternatively wet the immediate area of the measure-
ment. Tap water, soap solution and even saline solutions have been
recommended for wetting. The author prefers tap water. It may be
necessary to chip away surface contaminants or coatings. The surface
should be damp, not flooded. For a reading to be made, ionic contact
is required between the reinforcing steel and the metal in the reference
electrode. The concrete must be damp enough for ions to flow. Direct
contact between the reference electrode and the steel must not occur.
9 Record the environmental conditions, details of the reference electrode,
contact fluid, electrical connection, reinforcement cover depth, condition of
the concrete and the precise location of the measurements. These factors
may affect readings and their interpretation. If there is a concern about
local DC power supplies the issue of stray current may require addressing.
10 Take and record the readings. For manual readings (without logging
equipment), it is good practice to take two immediately adjacent readings to
check that they are within a few millivolts of each other.
11 Examine for anomalies, check most negative reading areas for signs or
causes of corrosion, usually by systematically breaking out, examining
and recording the condition of reinforcement.
Data are normally recorded on a plan reflecting the survey grid. The
interpretation and presentation is discussed later. The potential map should
48
Condition evaluation
 

be drawn up while still on site in order to check that the data are sensible and
that apparent ‘corrosion hot spots’ are investigated as part of the survey.
4.8.3
Interpretation and the ASTM criteria
At the time of writing, the main standard for measuring and interpreting
reference electrode potentials on reinforced concrete, ASTM C867, is under
revision. The present version presents one way of interpreting reference
electrode potentials in the field. ASTM quotes the values against a copper/
copper sulphate reference electrode. However, as noted earlier, copper/copper
sulphate is not recommended and cells should be calibrated against
a calomel cell. Therefore, the criteria are given in Table 4.2 against a
saturated calomel electrode (SCE) the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)
and a routinely used silver/silver chloride electrode. It should be noted that
reference electrode potentials have been found to be stable and reproducible
25 mV. Also there are some discrepancies in the literature as to the exact
correspondence between different electrode types.
The negative sign is by convention and will depend upon how the
leads are connected to the reference electrode and the rebar from the
millivoltmeter.
This interpretation was devised empirically from salt-induced corrosion
of cast-in-place bridge decks in the United States. Also offsets are seen for
different types of concrete (precast or containing cement replacement
materials).
Problems with this interpretation occur for a number of reasons. When
there is little oxygen present, especially where saturated with water, the
potentials can go very negative without corrosion occurring. The wet bases
of columns or walls often show more negative potentials regardless of cor-
rosion activity. Very negative potentials have been measured below the water
line in marine environments, however, the lack of oxygen will often slow the
Condition evaluation
49
Table 4.2 ASTM criteria for corrosion of steel in concrete for different standard
reference electrodes
Copper/copper
Silver/silver
Standard 
Calomel
Corrosion 
sulphate
chloride/
hydrogen
condition
1.0M KCl
electrode
200 mV
100 mV
120 mV
80 mV
Low (10% risk of 
corrosion)
200 to
100 to 
120 to 
80 mV to 
Intermediate 
350 mV
250 mV
30 mV
230 mV
corrosion risk
350 mV
250 mV
30 mV
230 mV
High (90% risk of 
corrosion)
500 mV
400 mV
180 mV
380 mV
Severe corrosion
 

corrosion rate to negligible levels. Other problems may arise in the presence
of carbonation, high-resistivity concrete and with stray electrical currents.
In carbonated concrete the anodes and cathodes are so close together that
a ‘mixed potential’ (an average of the anode and cathode) is measured. Also
carbonated concrete wets and dries quickly as the pores are partly blocked
by the calcium carbonate deposits. This means that the resistivity of the
concrete will affect the measurement. If the reading is taken with no wetting
a very positive reading may be found. If the reading is taken after wetting the
measurement may drift more negative for many hours.
A third problem arises due to the existence of the carbonation front. This
is a severe change in the chemical environment from pH 12 to pH 8, that
is, a factor of 104 difference in the concentrations of the hydroxyl and
hydrogen ions, with similar changes in the calcium and other metal ions
that precipitate out on carbonation. This can lead to a ‘junction potential’
superimposed on the corrosion potential giving misleading results (Arup
and Klinghoffer, 1998).
For carbonated concrete one method is first to do a potential survey with
minimum wetting (if stable potentials can be established). Then wet the
surface thoroughly and leave it for at least two hours or until potentials are
stable. Resurvey once potentials have stabilized and then look for the most
anodic (negative potential) areas. These are most probably active if a
potential difference of 100 mV or more exists over a space of 1.0 m or less.
A physical investigation is essential to see if there is reasonable correlation
between corrosion and anodic areas.
Given the thermodynamic nature of the measurement and our current
understanding of potential measurements, that is probably the best we can
do presently on interpretation of reference electrode potentials. Corrosion
rate measurement is discussed in Section 4.12.
Stray currents can also influence the readings. These were discussed in
Section 2.3. The effect of stray currents on reference electrode potential
readings can be used as a diagnostic tool where stray current corrosion is
suspected in the presence of DC fields. If a reference electrode is mounted
in or on the concrete and attached to the reinforcement via a logging
voltmeter, fluctuations in the potential may be linked to the operation of
nearby DC equipment, especially if the equipment can be deliberately
turned on and off and the potentials fluctuate accordingly. According to
BS7361 Part 1 (1991) the maximum positive change due to stray currents
should not exceed 20 mV (there is some discussion in the standard
about steel in concrete and the passivation effects but in the end the 20 mV
criterion is recommended here too).
There has been a tendency to correlate reference electrode potentials with
corrosion rate. The reference electrode potential is a mixed potential
representing anodic and cathodic areas on the rebar, it is not the driving
potential in the corrosion cell. Any correlation between potential and
50
Condition evaluation
 

corrosion rate is fortuitous and is often due to holding other variables
constant in laboratory tests.
There has been some discussion earlier and in the literature of the ‘junction
potentials’ created by the change in chemical concentrations within the con-
crete (Bennett and Mitchell, 1992). This effect was severe in a concrete slab
subjected to chloride removal, but that may be due to the treatment (discussed
in a later chapter), rather than being a real problem under normal conditions.
However, the junction potential may explain the erratic changes in potentials
seen in carbonated structures as potentials exist across the carbonation front
due to the pH change, and due to concentration changes as carbonated con-
crete wets and dries quickly because of the lining of the pores by calcium car-
bonate. Reports of potential measurements on structures treated with
electrochemical chloride extraction are varied. Some see normal potential
ranges quite quickly, others see highly polarized steel (very negative potentials)
for periods exceeding a year.
A further cause of error can be the proximity of other metals, particularly
galvanizing, which move the potential to more negative values (often see on
buildings around galvanized steel window frames).
A histogram or cumulative frequency plot will show what proportion of
measurements exceed the criteria to show the extent of high corrosion risk.
Where the ASTM criteria do not apply they will show the distribution of
readings so that high risk areas can be identified.
The best way of interpreting reference electrode potential data is to
expose areas of rebar which show the most negative potentials, intermediate
and least negative potentials to correlate corrosion condition with readings.
If there are severe potential gradients across the surface then corrosion is
likely to be localized with pitting present. Care must be taken in areas of
moisture, for instance, puddles that remain on the surface or where mois-
ture comes up from the ground. These may show very negative potentials
due to chloride accumulation or to oxygen starvation. Corrosion rate mea-
surements may be required to determine whether a very negative potential
measurement is an artifact or to a high active level of corrosion.
4.8.4
Reference electrode potential mapping
A fuller understanding of the corrosion condition is given by drawing a
potential map of the area surveyed. This is a plot of the readings where lines
are drawn separating the levels of potential. This shows the high corrosion
risk areas and the low corrosion risk areas. A rapid change in potential is
seen as a steeper gradient. This indicates a greater risk of corrosion.
Figure 4.7 shows a typical reference electrode potential plot for a bridge beam,
which correlates with the visual survey in Figure 4.3. Figure 4.8 shows a
survey of a leaf pier with chlorides leaking form the deck above and being
splashed up from the road traffic. While these isopotential contour plots are
Condition evaluation
51
 

50
50
50
585 583
Grids at 500 centres
5049 48
47
< – 500 mV CSE
> – 200 mV CSE
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30 29
28
27
26
25
24 23
22
21
20
19
18
17 16
15 14
13
12
11
109
8
7
Figure 4.7 Potential survey as per delamination and visual survey Figure 4.3. Courtesy of the Highway Agency.
 

Figure 4.8 Reference Electrode Potential survey of a Bridge Pier, also recording cover
meter chloride concentrations at three different depths. Courtesy Highways
Agency & AmeyMouchel.
 

not as quantitative as simply following the ASTM criteria, such mapping of
anodic areas is valid over a wider range of structures and conditions.
A line of potential measurements can be plotted on a distance vs. potential
plot. This will show which points exceed the ASTM criteria and where the
steepest potential gradients and the most anodic areas are with the most
negative values.
4.8.5
Cell to cell potentials
If it is not feasible to make direct connections to the reinforcing steel it is
possible to get comparative potential data by measuring the potentials
between two reference electrodes, with one kept in a fixed position and the
other moved across the surface. This is the linking of two full cells, one kept
constant (the fixed cell and the steel directly below it), while the other
reference electrode moves, changing the steel to concrete reference
electrode. We will not know the absolute value to the steel to concrete
reference electrode, but we will measure how it changes from point to
point. Interpretation of data from fixed vs. moving reference electrode
surveys is more difficult than interpreting absolute values, but again, the
contour plot is probably the most valid method of interpretation.
4.8.6
Limitations
The following is a non-exhaustive list of possible sources of error in the
taking and interpretation of reference electrode potentials:
1
Electrical continuity – poor metal to metal contact, poor reinforcement
continuity within survey area or scanning across a discontinuity such as
an expansion joint.
2
Surface contact – failure to remove contamination, coatings or to wet
the surface adequately.
3
Cracked and spalled concrete – this can distort the current path or give
low readings due to poor contact between steel and electrode.
4
Saturated concrete – as discussed earlier, can give very negative
potentials while excluding the oxygen needed to fuel corrosion.
5
Other metals – the presence of galvanizing, galvanic anodes or conduits
in the concrete can distort potential measurements.
6
Stray currents – nearby sources of DC such as cathodic protection or
DC traction systems can lead to potential shifts.
7
Electrochemical treatments – cathodic protection, electrochemical
chloride extraction and electrochemical realkalization are designed to
shift the potential of the steel. This effect may be permanent in the case
of cathodic protection or temporary but quite long term in the case of
the other two techniques.
54
Condition evaluation
 

8
Chemical contamination – anything that inhibits or promotes the
anodic or cathodic reactions on the steel surface can distort interpretation
of potential measurements. This may include surface applied corrosion
inhibitors.
9
Carbonation – the issues of carbonation have been discussed in the
previous section.
4.8.6
Standards and guidance documents
Detailed methodologies for undertaking reference electrode potential
surveys and their interpretation can be found in Concrete Society (2004),
Chess and Grønvold (1996) and ASTM C876-91 (1999).
4.9
Carbonation depth measurement
Carbonation depth is easily measured by exposing fresh concrete and
spraying it with phenolphthalein indicator solution. The carbonation depth
must then be related to the cover (the average and its variation) so that the
extent to which carbonation has reached the rebar can be estimated, and
the future carbonation rate estimated.
There is some discussion in the previous chapter as to whether the
carbonation front is truly as well defined as the indicator shows it to be
(see Figure 3.1(b)) but for most practical considerations it is a reliable
technique. Some aggregates can cause problems usually making the colour
transition difficult to see. Also very poorly consolidated concrete and
concrete underground exposed to dissolved carbonates in the water may
not show clearly defined carbonation fronts due to the non-uniform
progress of the carbonation front.
Splitting cores to expose a fresh surface should be done carefully to
prevent dust from carbonated areas contaminating the uncarbonated
surface and vice versa.
4.9.1
Equipment and use
Carbonation is easily measured by exposing fresh concrete and spraying on
phenolphthalein indicator as shown in Figure 4.9. This can be done either
by breaking away a fresh surface (e.g. between the cluster of drill holes used
for chloride drilling as described earlier), or by coring and splitting or
cutting the core in the laboratory. The phenolphthalein solution will remain
clear where concrete is carbonated and turns pink where concrete is still
alkaline.
The best indicator solution for maximum contrast of the pink colouration
is a solution of phenolphthalein in alcohol and water, usually 1 g indicator
Condition evaluation
55
 

in 100 ml of alcohol/water (50:50 mix) or more alcohol to water (BRE
Digest 405, 1995). If the concrete is very dry then a light misting with water
prior to applying the phenolphthalein will also help show the colour. Care
must be taken that dust from drilling, coring or cutting does not get on the
treated surface. Other indicators such as thymolphtalein, Alizarin yellow
and universal indicator have been used, along with pH metres. However,
phenolphthalein is the most reliable, convenient and widely used indicator.
4.9.2
Interpretation
Carbonation depth sampling can allow the maximum, average and standard
deviation of the carbonation depth to be calculated. If this is compared with
the average reinforcement cover then the amount of depassivated steel can
be estimated. If the carbonation rate can be determined from historical data
and laboratory testing then the progression of depassivation with time can
be calculated. Generally, the maximum carbonation depth at any particular
location is the most important. However, if this is at cracks and they are sig-
nificantly deeper than the general carbonation depth this should be noted.
4.9.3
Limitations
Phenolphthalein changes colour at pH 9. The passive layer breaks down at
about pH 11. If the carbonation front is 5–10 mm wide the steel can be
depassivated 5 mm away from the colour change of the indicator as shown
56
Condition evaluation
Figure 4.9 Phenolphthalein applied to a concrete window mullion showing
approximately 10 mm carbonation depth (clear area at surface) and an
uncorroded bar in uncarbonated concrete with a cover depth of
approximately 40 mm.
 

in Figure 3.1. This should be considered when using phenolphthalein measured
carbonation depths to determine the rate and extent of depassivation.
Some aggregates can confuse phenolphthalein readings. Some concrete
mixes are dark in colour and seeing the colour change can be difficult. Care
must be taken that no contamination of the surface occurs from dust and
the phenolphthalein sprayed surface must be freshly exposed or it may be
carbonated before testing.
It is also possible for the phenolphthalein to bleach at very high pH, for
example, after chloride removal or realkalization. If the sample is left for a
few hours it will turn pink. There can also be problems on below ground
structures where carbonation by ground water does not always produce the
clear carbonation front induced by atmospheric CO2 ingress.
The number of test areas is frequently limited by the amount of concrete
that those responsible for the structure will allow to be broken off or holes
drilled or cores taken so it is rarely possible to systematically carry out
carbonation tests. It is often necessary to carry out carbonation tests away
from the public gaze. Often it is not possible to carry out tests systematically.
They are often done at accessible locations where damage is not too often.
Damaged areas should be repaired after coring or breaking out.
4.9.4
Standards and guidance documents
There is a draft CEN standard on carbonation depth measurement DRAFT
prEN 14630 (2003). The Concrete Society (2004) report is similar to the
CEN standard. BRE Digest 405 (1995) specifically discusses carbonation
and its measurement in Portland cement concrete. BRE Digest 444 (2000)
Part II and BRE IP 11/98 (1998) discuss measurement in high alumina
cement concrete (HAC).
4.10
Chloride determination
Chlorides are usually measured by dissolving powder samples in acid. The
samples are taken from drillings or from crushed cores. It is preferable to
collect a series of drillings at different depths so that a chloride profile can
be produced. If a single sample is taken it is recommended that it is taken
at the reinforcement depth.
Alternatively a core can be cut into slices and the slices crushed. Like the
carbonation tests the chloride profile must be related to cover so that the
extent to which rebars are exposed to high chlorides can be determined.
Chloride profiles can also be used to determine the diffusion coefficient
and thus predict the ongoing rate of ingress. However, to do this a minimum
of four depth increments are required for sensible curve fitting.
The corrosion thresholds were discussed in Section 3.2.3. It is important to
recognize that these are approximate for the reasons discussed in Section 3.2.3.
Condition evaluation
57
 

It is also important to realize that the chloride level at the rebar determines
the present extent of corrosion, but the profile determines the future
rate, as that is what drives more chlorides from the environment to the steel
surface.
Chloride contents can be measured by several methods. In the laboratory,
powdered samples are usually digested in acid and then titrated to find the
concentration in the conventional wet chemical method.
In the field there are two well known methods of measuring chlorides,
Quantab strips and specific ion electrodes. The former are of modest
accuracy and can be made inaccurate by certain aggregate types. The latter
can be highly accurate but the equipment is expensive and requires training
and a good methodology to use effectively. Any field technique should be
checked against laboratory analysis of duplicate samples. In the United
Kingdom, laboratory testing to ISO quality management standards is
routine and widely available from independent commercial test houses. The
cost of laboratory analysis is very competitive. This is not true in many
other countries.
The methods discussed earlier are referred to as the ‘total’ or ‘acid
soluble’ chloride contents. There are also methods for measuring the ‘free
chlorides’ or water soluble rather than the acid soluble chlorides. This refers
to the fact that it is the chlorides dissolved in the pore water that contribute to
the corrosion process. Any chlorides chemically bound up in the cement paste
(chloroaluminates or C3A), or bound up in the aggregates are ‘background’
chlorides that should not contribute to the corrosion threshold.
Unfortunately the water soluble techniques produce results that are
difficult to reproduce so they are rarely used in the United Kingdom or
Europe, although the ‘soxhlet extraction technique’, a method of refluxing
concrete chips in boiling water to extract the chloride is a standard
technique used in North America. See, for example, AASHTO T260
‘Sampling and Testing for Total Chloride Ion in Concrete and Concrete
Raw Materials’ which includes a procedure for water soluble ion sample
preparation and analysis.
It has also been suggested that the interaction of bound and unbound
chlorides is more complex than previously asserted (Glass and Buenfeld,
2000). Bound chlorides may be available and may reduce the time to
corrosion initiation. There is one case that the author knows of where a
particular aggregate used in Ontario, Canada contains internally bound
chlorides that are not available to the cement paste. In this case, an acid
soluble test will add those chlorides to those in the cement paste overesti-
mating the corrosion risk. In other cases the use of the acid soluble test is a
reasonable method of assessing the corrosion risk. Chlorides can be cast into
concrete or can be transported in from the environment. The chloride ion
attacks the passive layer even though there is no significant generalized drop
in pH. Chlorides act as catalysts to corrosion. They are not consumed in the
58
Condition evaluation
 

process but help to break down the passive layer of oxide on the steel and
allow the corrosion process to proceed quickly.
Chloride testing will show:
1
Whether chlorides are present in a high enough concentration to cause
corrosion (typically above 0.2–0.4% chloride by weight of cement is at
risk of corrosion).
2
Whether chlorides were cast in or diffused in later. Distribution of
chloride with depth and about the structure will show a profile with
depth if chlorides diffused in. If there is either even distribution,
random distribution or one that looks more closely related to the (cold
weather) construction schedule than any exposure to external sources
of chlorides then chlorides could have been cast in either as a rapid
setting agent or contaminated water or aggregates.
4.10.1
Property to be measured
The amount of chloride ion in the concrete can be measured by sampling
the concrete and carrying out chemical analysis (titration) on a liquid
extracted from the sample. This is usually done by mixing acid with
drillings or crushed core samples. An alternative is pore extraction by
squeezing samples of concrete or, more usually mortar. This technique is
frequently used in laboratory experimental work as it is often difficult to
extract useful pore water samples from field concrete. The ‘soxhlet extraction’
techniques for free chlorides was discussed earlier.
Considerable work has gone into differentiating between bound and free
chlorides. As only the free chlorides contribute to corrosion that is ideally
what we want to know. However, the binding of chlorides is a reversible
and dynamic reaction, so attempts to remove and measure free chlorides
will release bound chlorides. A further complication is that carbonation
breaks down chloroaluminates thus freeing chlorides which proceed as a
wave ahead of the carbonation front.
The most accurate and reproducible tests are the acid soluble chloride
tests that effectively measure total chlorides. Pore water extraction and
water soluble chloride measurement are less reproducible and less accurate
but are probably what we really want to know. However, the chloride
threshold values are based on total chloride levels so the system is at least
self consistent.
4.10.2
Equipment and use
The collection of chloride samples should be done incrementally from the
surface either by taking drillings or sections from cores. The first 5–10 mm
is usually discarded as being directly influenced by the immediate environment.
Condition evaluation
59
 

This first increment can show excessively high levels if salt has just
deposited on the surface or excessively low levels if rain or other water has
just washed away the chlorides as shown in Figure 3.2(b). Care should be
taken to minimize cross contamination of samples at different increments.
Measurements of chloride content are made at suitable increments, typi-
cally 5–10 mm but often bigger, up to 25 mm. For improved statistical
accuracy when taking drillings, multiple adjacent drillings are made and the
depth increments from each drilling are mixed. Special grinding kits are
available and sample sizes required for analysis vary from 10 to 50 g (see
Figure 4.10). Methods of sampling are discussed in CBDG (2002) and
Concrete Society (2004). See also Section 9.2.2.
The major concern with sample size is ensuring that there is a uniform
amount of cement paste in each sample and that there is no risk of the sample
being dominated by a large piece of aggregate. Some researchers have crushed
cored and removed the larger aggregate pieces, measuring only the paste
and small aggregates. This is time consuming and the sample is no longer a
balanced sample as the removal of aggregates cannot be done quantitatively.
Each sample should be at least 25 g for accurate analysis. Dry drilling two
25 mm diameter holes (typically 30–40 mm apart) to a 15–25 mm depth has
been found to give an adequate sample. Care should be taken to collect all the
fine powder as this has the highest chloride content (Concrete Society, 2004).
There are several ways of measuring the chlorides once samples are
taken. Field measurements of acid soluble chloride can be made using a
chloride specific ion electrode (Herald et al., 1992). Conventional titration
60
Condition evaluation
Figure 4.10 RCT Profile Grinder used to collect incremental chloride measurements
to produce a chloride profile which can be used to calculate the diffusion
coefficient for an existing structure as discussed in Section 9.2. Courtesy
Germann Instruments.
 

by BS 1881 part 124 and potentiometric titration methods are also available
(Grantham, 1993). A new European standard, EN 14629 is due for
publication soon (2006). The methodology described in Concrete Society
(2004) is abased on the draft of EN 14629. Generally measurements are
quoted in increments on 0.01% chloride by mass of sample. This is
frequently converted to chloride by mass of cement assuming 14% cement
content giving a lowest resolution of 0.07% by mass of cement.
There has been some discussion on the literature about the accuracy and
reproducibility of test results (Nustad, 1994; Grantham and Van Es, 1995).
Problems with the accuracy of measurement have lead to recommendations
to split samples and either submit them separately for analysis as different
specimens to check how closely the results come out or submit one of the
duplicates to another laboratory for independent checking. Alternatively it
is possible to purchase dust samples of known chloride content for
inclusion with the unknown samples.
As well as acid soluble chloride there are the water soluble chloride tests
(ASTM D 1411, 1982; AASHTO T 260, 1984). These techniques use
different levels of pulverization of large samples that are refluxed to extract
the supposedly unbound chlorides. These are the chlorides that are free in
the pore water to cause corrosion as opposed to the chloride bound by the
aluminates in the concrete, or bound up in some aggregates of marine origin
that are also bound up. The water soluble chloride test is rather inaccurate
as the bound chlorides can be released and the finer the grinding the more
will be extracted. However, this test can be useful in showing the corrosion
condition where chlorides have been cast into concrete, and particularly
where aggregates are known to contain chlorides that do not leach out into
the pore water.
4.10.3
Interpretation
There is a well known ‘chloride threshold’ for corrosion given in terms of
the chloride/hydroxyl ration (Hausmann, 1967). By simple modelling of
chloride and hydroxyl ions contacting the steel surface, Hausmann showed
that when the chloride concentration exceeds 0.6 of the hydroxyl concen-
tration the passive layer will break down. He corroborated this with
laboratory testing in calcium hydroxide solutions. The 0.6 threshold
approximates to a concentration of 0.2–0.4% chloride by weight of
cement, 1lb/cu yard of concrete or 0.05% chloride by weight of concrete.
The threshold is discussed in Section 3.2.3. A figure was produced by BRE
from empirical evidence of chloride thresholds vs. corrosion. This is repro-
duced as Figure 4.11 and shows the probabilistic nature of the corrosion
threshold for chlorides in concrete.
The American Concrete Institute gives recommendations for chloride
limits for new construction as shown in Table 4.3. The UK Highways
Condition evaluation
61
 

agency has a limit of 0.3% by mass of cement by the acid soluble BS 1881
part 124 technique.
Table 4.4 gives the criteria widely used in Europe for existing structures.
This assumes there is sufficient moisture and oxygen for corrosion and
that the location observed is not acting as a cathode to a local anode.
Figure 3.4(a) and (b) show results from Vassie (1987) from 50-year-old UK
62
Condition evaluation
Risk category
Extremely
high
High
Negligible
0
0.5
1
1.5
Chloride ion concentration (% by weight of cement)
2
2.5
Low or
moderate
Figure 4.11 Estimated risk of steel reinforcement corrosion associated with ingressed
chloride in the absence of carbonation. BRE copyright. Reproduced from
Digest 444 Part 2 by permission of BRE.
Table 4.3 Chloride limits for new construction in % chloride by mass of
cement (ACI, 2001)
Test method
Acid soluble
Water soluble
ASTM C1152
ASTMC1218
Soxhlet
ACI 222.1:96
Prestressed concrete
0.08
0.06
0.06
Reinforced concrete in 
0.10
0.08
0.08
wet conditions
Reinforced concrete 
0.20
0.15
0.15
in dry conditions
 

highway bridges. This demonstrates that there must always be cathodes
regardless of chloride level so that the probability of corrosion is never
100% even at 2% chloride by mass of cement.
The important questions from chloride measurement is how much of
the rebar is depassivated and how will this progress? Points (a) to (c) in
Section 3.2.3 review how the corrosivity of the chloride can change. If
chlorides have been transported in from outside then the chloride profile can
be used along with measurements (or estimates) of the diffusion constant to
estimate future penetration rates and the build up of chloride at rebar depth.
Methods of predicting chloride diffusion and the movement of the
chloride threshold are discussed in Section 9.3.
4.10.4
Standards and guidance
CEN has produced a test method for chloride analysis. Products and
systems for the protection and repair of concrete structures – Test methods –
Determination of chloride content in hardened concrete. 2003; DRAFT
prEN 14629.
There are three relevant ASTM standards; ASTM C1152/C1152M-04e1
Standard test method for acid soluble chlorides in concrete and mortar;
ASTM C1524-02a Standard test method for water-extractable chloride
form aggregate; ASTM C1218/C1218M-99 Standard test method for water
soluble chloride in mortar and concrete. ASTM committee G01.14 is also
in the process of developing a laboratory test for chloride thresholds for
concretes with different admixtures. ACI 2001 gives extensive discussion on
thresholds as well as the Table 4.4. BRE Digest 444 (2000) has a compre-
hensive table and ‘cloud data’ graph of chloride content versus risk based
on field data (Figure 4.11).
4.11
Resistivity measurement
Since corrosion is an electrochemical phenomenon, the electrical resistivity
of the concrete will have a bearing on the corrosion rate of the steel as an
Condition evaluation
63
Table 4.4 Corrosion risk at given chloride contents
% Chloride by mass
% Chloride by mass
Risk
of cement
of sample (concrete)
0.2
0.03
Negligible
0.2–0.4
0.03–0.06
Low
0.4–1.0
0.06–0.14
Moderate
1.0
0.14
High
 

ionic current (electric current in the form of a flow of charged ions in the
pore water) must pass from the anodes to the cathodes for corrosion
to occur.
The four probe resistivity meter or Wenner Probe was developed for
measuring soil resistivity (ASTM G57). Specialized modifications of the
Wenner probe are frequently used for measurement of concrete resistivity on
site. The measurement can be used to indicate the possible corrosion activ-
ity if steel is depassivated. Proprietary version of the system are shown in
Figure 4.12. Most systems uses four probes. The outer probes pass a current
through the concrete while the inner probes detect the voltage difference.
This approach eliminates any effects due to surface contact resistances.
For a semi-infinite, homogeneous material the resistivity  is given by:
where a is the electrode spacing, I is the applied current across the outer
probes and V is the voltage measured between the inner probes.
At one time it was considered necessary to drill holes to insert the probes,
but modern four probe devices are spring loaded and just push onto the
concrete surface. In one version a wetting gel is applied, in another wooden
plugs in the end of the probes are wetted. Cheaper, less accurate two probe
systems are also available (Figure 4.12(c)). These are often inserted into
drilled holes in the concrete to improve electrical contact by getting below
the surface latence and any minor carbonation.
An alternative approach using a single electrode on the surface and
the rebar network can be used to measure the resistivity of the concrete
cover. This is available as part of a corrosion rate measuring device (see
Section 4.12 and Figure 4.13) and uses the reinforcement cage as one elec-
trode and a small surface probe as the other electrode. The advantage of
this approach is that it measures the resistivity of the cover concrete only. The
disadvantage is that it suffers from contact resistance problems.
4.11.1
Property to be measured
The electrical resistivity is an indication of the amount of moisture in the
pores, and the size and tortuosity of the pore system. Resistivity is strongly
affected by concrete quality, that is, cement content, water/cement ratio,
curing and additives used. The chloride level does not strongly affect
resistivity as there are plenty of ions dissolved in the pore water already and
a few more chloride ions here or there does not make a big difference.
However, chlorides in concrete can be hygroscopic, that is, they will encourage
the concrete to retain water. This is why chlorides are often accused of
reducing concrete resistivity.
  2aV
I
64
Condition evaluation
 

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12 (a) A four probe resistivity meter with push on contacts. Courtesy CNS
Farnell Ltd. (b) Logging four probe resistivity meter. Courtesy of CMT
(Instruments) Ltd. (c) Two probe resistivity meter (usually pushed into
drilled holes). Courtesy of CMT (Instruments) Ltd. (d) A combined four
probe resistivity meter with reference electrode and temperature
sensor, showing logger, computer, reinforcement connection and sensors
on a extension plo. Courtesy of CITec GMbH.
 

4.11.2
Equipment and use
Millard (1991) described two versions of the four probe equipment. The
suppliers and the details of the equipment have changed over the years
but are similar and are shown in more recent reports such as Concrete
Society (2004).
It is generally agreed that the four (or two) probe system needs a probe
spacing larger than the maximum aggregate size to avoid measuring
the resistivity of a piece of aggregate rather than of the paste and aggregate.
If it is not possible to avoid the influence of reinforcing steel then measure-
ments should be made at right angles to the steel rather than along
the length of it as the steel can provide a ‘short circuit’ path for the current
during the measurement. Measurements should also be taken away from
66
Condition evaluation
(d)
Figure 4.12 Continued.
 

edges of the concrete and water must not be ponded on the surface during
readings.
An alternative approach measures the resistivity of the cover concrete by
a two electrode method using the reinforcing network as one electrode and
a surface probe as the other tubular sensor B in Figure 4.13 (Feliú et al.,
1988; Broomfield et al., 1993, 1994).
Concrete resistivity of the area around the sensor is obtained by the
formula:
Resistivity  2RD ( cm)
where R is the resistance by the ‘iR drop’ from a pulse between the sensor
electrode and the rebar network (see Section 6.5 for a discussion of the iR
drop); D is the electrode diameter of the sensor.
This approach requires a damp surface and the probe is best situated
between bars rather than directly over them.
4.11.3
Interpretation
Interpretation of resistivity results is empirical. The following interpreta-
tion of resistivity measurements from the Wenner four probe system
Condition evaluation
67
Figure 4.13 The Gecor 6 linear polarization meter with sensor controlled guard ring for
corrosion rate measurement (circular sensor A) and concrete cover
resistance/resistivity head (tubular sensor B). Courtesy James Instruments
USA and Geocisa SA, Spain.
 

have been cited when referring to depassivated steel (Langford and
Broomfield, 1987).
20 k cm
Low corrosion rate
10–20 k cm
Low to moderate corrosion rate
5–10 k cm
High corrosion rate
5 k cm
Very high corrosion rate.
Researchers working with a field linear polarization device for corrosion
rate measurement have conducted laboratory and field research and found
the following correlation between resistivity and corrosion rates using the
two electrode surface to rebar approach (Broomfield et al., 1993).
100 k cm
Cannot distinguish between active and passive steel
50–100 k cm Low corrosion rate
10–50 k cm
Moderate to high corrosion where steel is active
10 k cm
Resistivity is not the controlling parameter.
In the previous method and interpretation resistivity measurement is used
along side linear polarization measurements (see Section 4.12), not as a
stand alone technique.
4.11.4
Limitations
The resistivity measurement is a useful additional measurement to aid in
identifying problem areas or confirming concerns about poor quality
concrete. Readings can only be considered along side other measurements.
There is a frequent temptation to multiply the resistivity by the reference
electrode potential and present this as the corrosion rate. This is incorrect.
The corrosion rate is a function of the interfacial resistance between the
steel and the concrete, not the bulk concrete resistivity. The potential
measured by a reference electrode on the concrete surface is not the poten-
tial at the steel surface that drives the corrosion cell. Correlations between
resistivity, reference electrode potential and corrosion rate may be found in
similar samples in similar conditions in the laboratory but in the variability
of the real world any correlation is fortuitous.
The main problem with the four probe technique is that the reinforcing
steel will provide a ‘short circuit’ path and give a misleading reading.
However, research at the University of Liverpool has shown that if
measurements are taken at right angles to a single reinforcing bar the error
is minimized as shown in Figure 4.14.
Obviously corrosion is an electrochemical process with current in the
form of ions flowing through the concrete. The resistivity can tell us the
capacity of the concrete to allow corrosion. It will not tell us if corrosion
68
Condition evaluation
 

has started or if that capacity is being used to the full. Hence the earlier
statement that at less than 10 k cm resistivity is not the controlling
parameter, but at more than 100 k cm you cannot distinguish between
active and passive steel as the resistivity will effectively stop corrosion.
The resistivity calculation assumes the concrete to be homogeneous.
The local inhomogeneity in electrical resistance of the aggregate must be
allowed for by suitable probe spacing. The systematic inhomogeneity of the
reinforcement network must be allowed for by minimizing its effect as
shown in Figure 4.14. The effect of layers of different resistivity (e.g. the
carbonated concrete zone or water penetration) is discussed in Millard
(1991) and an ‘influence diagram’ given to show the effects of layers of
different resistance on the measurement.
4.11.5
Standards and guidance
There is no current standard on resistivity measurements other than British
Standard BS 1881 Testing Concrete: Part 201: 1986 ‘Guide to the use of
nondestructive methods of test for hardened concrete.’ Concrete Society
(2004) provides a detailed procedure and a pro forma for recording
resistivity measurements. Concrete Bridge Development Group (2002) also
gives information and guidance.
Condition evaluation
69
Figure 4.14 Minimizing the effect of reinforcing steel on four probe resistivity
measurements when the probe array is bigger than the reinforcement spacing.
 

4.12
Corrosion rate measurement
The corrosion rate is probably the nearest the engineer will get with
currently available technology to measuring the rate of deterioration. There
are various ways of measuring the rate of corrosion, including AC
Impedance and electrochemical noise (Dawson, 1983). However, these
techniques are not suitable for use in the field for application to the
corrosion of steel in concrete so this section will concentrate on linear
polarization, also known as polarization resistance or LPR, and will discuss
various macrocell or galvanic current measurement techniques.
Unfortunately we cannot yet use corrosion rate measurements to
accurately calculate total section loss or predict concrete spalling rates but we
can tell the engineer how much steel is turning into rust and how much metal
is being lost at the time of measurement. The increasing use of corrosion
monitoring systems (discussed in Chapter 5) will improve our ability to inte-
grate the instantaneous rate to a loss of steel. The use of a corrosion model
to try to predict deterioration rates using chloride profiles, carbonation
depths and corrosion rate measurements is discussed in Chapter 9.
4.12.1
Property to be measured
It is possible, with varying degrees of accuracy, to measure the amount of
steel dissolving and forming oxide (rust). This is done directly as a
measurement of the electric current generated by the anodic reaction:
Fe →Fe2  2e
and consumed by the cathodic reaction:
H2O  O2  2e →2OH
and then converting the current flow by Faraday’s law to metal loss:
where m is the mass of steel consumed, i is the current (amperes), t is time
in seconds, z is the ionic charge (2 for Fe →Fe2  2e) and M is the
atomic mass of metal (56 g for Fe). This gives a conversion of 1 A cm2 
11.6 m steel section loss per year.
4.12.2
Equipment and use – linear polarization
The linear polarization technique (also known as polarization resistance or
conflated to LPR) requires us to polarize the steel with an electric current
and monitor its effect on the reference electrode potential. It is carried out
m  Mit
zF
1
2
70
Condition evaluation
 

with a sophisticated development of the reference electrode incorporating an
auxiliary electrode and a variable low voltage DC power supply. The
reference electrode potential is measured and then a small current is passed
from the auxiliary electrode to the reinforcement. The change in the reference
electrode potential is simply related to the corrosion current (Stern and Geary,
1957) by the equation:
(4.1)
where B is a constant (in concrete 26 to 52 mV depending upon the
passivity or active condition of the steel surface) and Rp is the polarization
resistance (in ohms)
(4.2)
Rp gives the technique its alternative name of ‘polarization resistance’.
The change in potential must be kept to less than 20 mV or so for the
equation to be valid and remain linear (hence the name ‘linear polarization’).
Also, there is an ‘iR drop’ in the circuit. This is the voltage that exists
because a current is flowing through concrete which has a finite electrical
resistance. This is also referred to as the ‘solution resistance’. This can be
measured by switching off the current at some point during the measurement
process so that the potential without the ‘iR drop’ is measured. The iR drop
is discussed further in the section on cathodic protection.
The measurement is made in one of two ways. Either steadily fixed levels
of current are applied and the potential monitored (galvanostatic), or the
current increased to achieve one or more target potentials (potentiostatic). In
both cases allowances for the iR drop (solution resistance) may be made. A
plot of change in current vs. change in potential gives a gradient of the polar-
ization resistance Rp (equation 4.2) to calculate the steel section loss rate.
The corrosion rate in m/year is:
(4.3)
where A is the surface area of steel measured in cm2. A schematic of a typ-
ical linear polarization device is shown in Figure 4.15. This consists of a ref-
erence electrode with an annular auxiliary round which passes the current
to the steel. The electrode may be stainless steel with conductive or wetted
conventional foam to give a good contact to the concrete surface.
Defining the area of measurement is important for accurate corrosion
rate measurement. In other (non-reinforced concrete) applications linear
polarization is carried out on a sample of known size in a pipe or tank or
x  11 	 106·B
Rp·A
Rp  (change in potential)
(applied current)
Icorr  B
Rp
Condition evaluation
71
 

condenser where corrosion is a risk. However, we cannot put a sample into
concrete, we must use the steel that is there which is all connected together
and is in the corrosion environment, not some grout used to fix a coupon
into the concrete.
The area of steel sensed by the electrodes is obviously far smaller than the
whole rebar network, however we cannot assume that the area measured is
that directly below the electrode as the current ‘fans out’ as shown in
Figure 4.15. Assuming a 1:1 relationship between probe size and area of
steel polarized can lead to errors of up to 100	 in our measurement 
(Fliz et al., 1992). However, this is mainly at low corrosion rates. One
device uses a large electrode with a conductive foam pad as the auxiliary
electrode to minimize wetting of the concrete and ensure that area of mea-
surement is directly below the electrode as shown in Figure 4.16.
In some commercial device a guard ring system has been developed to
confine the area of the impressed current and thus define the parameter A
in equation (4.3) which allows us to calculate the metal loss. One system
uses extra reference electrodes to define the amount of current applied to
the guard ring to ensure confinement of the signal. This is shown in
Figure 4.13. A new development of that system is illustrated in Figure 4.17.
Some devices have guard rings that apply fixed levels of current based on
the auxiliary electrode current. These approaches are reasonably accurate
72
Condition evaluation
Digital
control
system
Reference
electrode
Auxiliaary
electrode
Steel
Concrete
Simple linear polarization
unconfined area of measurement
Fe  Fe2+ 2e–
2e– + H2O +    O2  2OH–
1
2
Figure 4.15 Schematic of a simple LPR system with unconfined measurement area.
 

Figure 4.16 BGB Bigfoot LPR probe with manual meter and charger. A ‘little foot’
probe is also available for accessing small spaces such as concrete rafters
under floor boards.
Figure 4.17 Gecor 8 (developed from Gecor 6 Figure 4.13) has separate heads for
corrosion rate of atmospherically and buried or submerged corrosion
rate measurement, resistivity, and assessment of cathodically protected
structures. Courtesy James Instruments and Geocisa.
 

at high corrosion rates but less accurate when corrosion rates are low or
localized (which may be when you may require greatest accuracy).
Criteria relating LPR readings to deterioration rates similar to the ASTM
C876 criteria for reference electrode potentials have been published
(Broomfield et al., 1993). These show some comparability between differ-
ent devices and will be discussed later under interpretation (Section 4.12.4).
A set of conversion equations is provided in the final report of the Strategic
Highway Research Program (SHRP) contract on corrosion rate measure-
ment (Fliz et al., 1992).
4.12.3
Carrying out a corrosion rate survey
Corrosion rate measurement is slow compared with reference
electrode potential measurement. This is because the concrete reacts slowly
to the electric field and changes must be reasonably slow to ensure that the
electrochemistry in the concrete is changing linearly and without capaci-
tance effects. However, the speed of the total operation varies significantly
from device to device. The slowest devices are manually operated and take
10–20 min to take a reading that then must be manually plotted to calculate
the corrosion current. These devices are rarely used today. The fastest
microprocessor controlled devices take a few minutes and give the
corrosion current directly. However, all devices must be set up over the
reinforcement of known lay out and dimensions so that set up time is
significant.
As the technique is slower than taking reference electrode measurements
it is important to take measurements at the most significant locations on the
structure, for example, by following up a potential survey with strategic
corrosion rate measurements. Rate measurements should be taken at the
positions of the highest and lowest potentials and at the steepest potential
gradients.
It should also be noted that corrosion rates vary with the weather
conditions. Corrosion rates accelerate in warm conditions. Resistivity will
decrease as the concrete gets wet, also allowing corrosion rates to increase.
For a full picture of corrosion conditions, measurements should be taken at
regular intervals either throughout the year, or the same time each year so
that results are comparable.
The corrosion rate is measured over a known area of rebar. This means
that the rebars must be located and their sizes known so that the area of
steel below the sensor is known. For purely comparative readings it can be
adequate to take readings in comparable locations (such as isolated sections
of bars or a cross over).
The potential must be stable throughout the reading so that a true change
in potential (equations (4.1) and (4.2)) is recorded. This can lead to prob-
lems on very dry structures and where conditions are changing rapidly.
74
Condition evaluation
 

Local wetting and coming back to the problem location later can sometimes
overcome these problems.
Gowers et al. (1992) have used the linear polarization technique with
embedded probes (reference electrode and a simple counter electrode) to
monitor the corrosion of marine concrete structures. This technique was
described previously without reference to isolating the section of bar to be
measured (Langford and Broomfield, 1987). By repeating the measurement
in the same location on an isolated section of steel of known surface area
the corrosion rate of the actual rebar can be inferred. The main problem
is the long-term durability of electrical connections in marine conditions.
Also the probes should ideally be built into the structure during construction.
A desirable but rare occurrence. Recent developments in corrosion
monitoring are described in Chapter 5.
A methodology and pro formas for recording results are given in
Concrete Society (2004).
4.12.4
Interpretation – linear polarization
The following broad criteria for corrosion have been developed from field
and laboratory investigations with the sensor controlled guard ring device
shown in Figures 4.12 and 4.14 (Broomfield et al., 1993, 1994):
Icorr 0.1 A·cm2
Passive condition
Icorr 0.1–0.5 A·cm2
Low to moderate corrosion
Icorr 0.5–1 A·cm2
Moderate to high corrosion
Icorr 1 A·cm2
High corrosion rate.
The device without sensor control has the following recommended
interpretation (Clear, 1989):
Icorr 0.2 A·cm2
No corrosion expected
Icorr 0.2 – 1.0 A·cm2
Corrosion possible in 10 to 15 years
Icorr 1.0 – 10 A·cm2
Corrosion expected in 2 to 10 years
Icorr 10 A·cm2
Corrosion expected in 2 years or less
These measurements are affected by temperature and relative humidity
(RH), so the conditions of measurement will affect the interpretation of the
limits defined earlier. The measurements should be considered accurate to
within a factor of 2.
It should be noted that different values of ‘B’ are used by the two devices
(equation (4.1)), with 26 mV used by the guard ring device and 52 mV used
by the device without a guard ring. This may explain the factor of two
difference in interpretation at the low end. At the high end, the lack of a
Condition evaluation
75
 

guard ring may lead the simpler device to include a larger area of steel in its
measurement, indicating a higher corrosion rate. Alternatively, the device
may have been used on more actively corroding structures and the inter-
pretation range may therefore have been extended. An equation linking the
devices and a third, simple guard ring, is given in Fliz et al. (1992). The cor-
relation factors (R2) showed relative accuracies of the devices of 70–90%.
4.12.4.1
Effects of temperature
Temperature affects the corrosion rate directly. The rate of the oxidation
reaction is affected by the amount of heat energy available to drive the
reaction. Also the concrete resistivity reduces with increased temperature as
ions become more mobile and salts become more soluble. It also affects the
RH in the concrete, lowering it when temperature increases and therefore
introducing an opposite effect. At the other extreme the pore water will
freeze and corrosion stops as the ions can no longer move. It should be
noted that this will happen well below ambient freezing point as the ions in
the pore water depress the freezing point well below 0C. This is shown in
Figure 4.18 for carbonated concrete. In a paper on the results from a per-
manent corrosion monitoring system in a highway tunnel Broomfield et al.
(2003) found corrosion rates fluctuated by a factor of 2.5 when the tem-
perature varied from 2 to 25oC. There was no significant corrosion but the
rates ranged from 0.08 to 2 m/year.
4.12.4.2
Effects of RH
This will also be a factor in determining how much water is there in the
pores to enable the corrosion reaction to be sustained. Chloride induced
corrosion is believed to be at a maximum when the RH within the concrete
is around 90–95% (Tuutti, 1982). This is shown in Figure 4.19 for
76
Condition evaluation
1
0.1
–2
–10
0
10
20
30
0.01
0.001
0.0001
Temperature°C
A. cm–2
Figure 4.18 The effect of temperature on carbonated concrete (Tuutti, 1982).
 

specimens exposed to a 3% NaCl solution (approximation of sea water
concentration). For carbonation there is experimental evidence from the
same source that the peak is around 95–100% RH (Figure 4.20). However,
it is important to recognize that the RH in the pores is not simply related
to the atmospheric RH, water splash, run off or capillary action, formation
of dew, solar heat gain, thermal mass of the structure and other factors
mean that atmospheric RH is often quite different from that seen by the
reinforcing steel.
Condition evaluation
77
10
1.0
0.10
0.01
60
70
80
%RH
A . cm–2
90
Envelope
of corrosion
rates vs.
RH
100
0.001
Figure 4.19 Variation in corrosion rate with RH in chloride contaminated concrete
(based on Tuutti, 1982).
10
1.0
0.10
0.01
0.001
70
80
90
100
%RH
A .cm–2
Figure 4.20 Variation in corrosion rate with RH in carbonated concrete (based on
Tuutti, 1982).
 

Increased water saturation will slow corrosion through oxygen starvation
once the pores are filled with water and oxygen cannot get in. Conversely,
totally dry concrete cannot corrode due to the absence of water. However,
highly water saturated structures can corrode rapidly without signs of
cracking. This is due to the limited amount of oxygen available as the iron
ions (Fe2) stays in solution without forming solid rust that expands and
cracks the concrete. A totally saturated structure can reach a very high
negative reference electrode potential (900 mV) without corroding due to
oxygen starvation. However, if oxygen then does get access to the steel the
corrosion rate will be very high as the steel will have no passive oxide layer
to protect it.
This is one of the reasons why corrosion rate measurement can be very
important in finding the true situation in such ambiguous conditions.
4.12.4.3
Pitting and rapid corrosion
Much of the research on linear polarization has been done on highway
bridge decks in the United States where chloride levels are high and fairly
uniform. Bridge decks are rarely protected with membranes and overlays
and therefore pitting is rarely observed (see Section 2.3). However, in
Europe, where corrosion is localized in run down areas on bridge substruc-
tures and pitting is more common, the problems of interpretation can be
complicated as the Icorr reading is coming from isolated pits rather than
uniformly from the area of measurement.
Laboratory tests with the guard ring device have shown that the
corrosion rate in pits can be up to 10 times higher than generalized
corrosion. This means that the device is very sensitive to pits. However it
cannot differentiate between pitting and generalized corrosion. That must
be done by direct observation of the steel or by careful study of the
reference electrode potentials and chloride contents. In a long-term study of
the corrosion of concrete posts the author observed that corrosion rates
increased with time, then decreased just before cracking and spalling was
observed on the structures. One tentative conclusion was that the rise in
corrosion rate measurement was associated with pit formation where high
corrosion rates are observed. As the pits widened and joined up the corro-
sion rate decreased but the oxide formation was more generalized and
cracking ensued (Broomfield et al., 2000).
In the photograph in Figure 2.3 we can see a plane reinforcing bar
approximately 25 mm in diameter, reduced in section to about 8 mm. The
bar was from a highway bridge built in the 1960s or 1970s. The bar was
extracted in the 1990s. Therefore in less than 30 years it had lost 17 mm of
its section, that is, a rate of more than 0.5 mm/year (this assumes that
corrosion started as soon as the bridge was built. In this case corrosion was
78
Condition evaluation
 

caused by deicing salt penetrating the concrete and attacking the steel.
We know that it takes several years for sufficient deicing salt to penetrate
concrete to the reinforcement and start corrosion. It is therefore probable
that corrosion was occurring at 1 mm/year or faster. In this case the corrosion
was on steel in good quality modern concrete but caused by deicing salt
ingress.
In another case (Figure 4.21) prestressing strands in a marine pile were
found to have corroded through shortly (three years) after repair. The
tendons were 7/16 inch in diameter. This implies a rate of over 3 mm/year
if a 7/16
  11 mm tendon looses its full section in three years. This
demonstrates that corrosion rates in concrete can be very high and have
nothing to do with generalized corrosion rates for atmospheric conditions.
While these examples pertain to steel suffering from chloride induced
corrosion, the author has also seen severe section loss on steel which had
no chlorides. However, this was a clinker concrete. These are known to be
acidic when wet and very aggressive to steel and are no longer used with for
reinforced concrete (Neville, 1995).
4.12.4.4
Predicting deterioration rates
Measurements can be used to predict the deterioration rate of a structure
when used in combination with diffusion data, chloride or carbonation
Condition evaluation
79
Figure 4.21 A post-tensioned marine pile showing rapid tendon section loss after
removal of a jacketing repair from Rapa, (1999). Courtesy NACE
International.
 

penetration, and cover measurements. The ongoing rate of deterioration
may be important in deciding whether to defer rehabilitation work, carry
out minor cosmetic repairs in anticipation of later major works, or whether
to bring forward major works. It may also be used to prioritize repairs
either on an element by element or a structure by structure basis. There is
further discussed in Chapter 9.
Some work has been done in translating Icorr to loss of cross section of
reinforcement and hence end of service life (see equation 4.3 and Andrade et
al., 1990). However, the loss of concrete is the most usual cause for concern,
rather than loss of reinforcement strength. It is far more difficult to predict
cracking and spalling rates especially from an instantaneous measurement.
A simple extrapolation, assuming that the instantaneous corrosion rate on a
certain day is the average rate throughout the life of the structure, often gives
inaccurate results (Broomfield et al., 1993). This is true for section loss.
Converting that to delamination rates is even less accurate as it requires
further assumptions about oxide volume and stresses required for cracking.
One approach is to work on the estimates of how much section loss will
generate enough expansive oxide growth to cause cracking. This has been
found to be between 10 and 100 m (0.01–0.1 mm).
The oxides produced by iron have volume increases between twice and
six times the steel consumed as shown in Figure 2.2. This assumes that they
are 100% dense (with no porosity occupying extra space). To generate
cracking the oxides must be deposited at the metal/oxide interface.
If we assume that the average expansion ratio is 3 allowing for oxide
depositing elsewhere and some porosity in the oxide, then the corrosion
rates given earlier translate as follows:
0.1 A.cm2  1.1 m/year section loss  3.3 m/year rust growth
0.5 A.cm2  5.5 m/year section loss  16.5 m/year rust growth
1.0 A.cm2  11.5 m/year section loss  34.5 m/year rust growth
5.0 A.cm2  57.5 m/year section loss  173 m/year rust growth
10 A.cm2  115 m/year section loss  345 m/year rust growth.
In laboratory tests (Rodríguez, 1994) found 15–40 m section loss gave
rise to cracking on bars with a cover/diameter ratio between 2 and 4. This
is around the 0.5 A·cm2 transition from low to moderate corrosion rate.
4.12.4.5
Before and after measurements
Another major application is in defining the effectiveness of a repair. The
application of a silane, an inhibitor or of chloride removal or realkalization
can lead to the need for long-term monitoring to see if the treatment reduces
the corrosion rate in a before and after comparison. Long-term monitoring
is recommended to ensure that the treatment is still working.
80
Condition evaluation
 

4.12.5
Limitations – linear polarization
There are two major limitations to the linear polarization devices described
earlier:
1
They detect the instantaneous corrosion rate which can change with
temperature, RH and other factors.
2
Either they make assumptions about the area of measurement or they
define an area of measurement.
The first factor is a limitation because we do not want to know the
instantaneous corrosion rate. We actually want to know the integrated
corrosion rate from the time of initiation of corrosion. We must therefore
make assumptions or multiple measurements with time to estimate the
average or integrated rate.
The second limitation is that there can be errors of 10–100 in the
estimated area of measurement especially at low corrosion rates, unless the
sensor controlled system is used. Even if the sensor controlled system is used
it gives a single value for the steel contained within a 105 mm circle blow
the sensor. If corrosion is at a few pits it will underestimate the corrosion
rate in the pits and over estimate the general corrosion rate. If it is known
that there is pitting corrosion then corrections can me made based on the
fact that corrosion rates in pits are 5–10 times that of generalized corrosion.
There are further errors because the value of B in equation (4.1) varies
from 26 to 52 mV depending upon whether the steel is active or passive.
Further, corrosion may be concentrated on the top of the bar, or, if bars are
close together or deep within the concrete, the device may only send current
to the top steel. Both of these errors mean that the best accuracy you can
expect from a linear polarization device is a factor of 2 to 4 (Andrade et al.,
1995). This is supported by the discussion in Section 4.12.4 which showed
that seasonal fluctuations give a factor of 2.5 variation in LPR measure-
ments. However, the scale is logarithmic so such errors are less critical than
they seem to be.
The final limitation is the difficulty of converting the corrosion rate in
terms of rate of metal section loss to a total section loss or cracking and
spalling rate. Further work in this area is leading to the resolution of this
problem.
4.12.6
Equipment and use – macrocell techniques
An alternative approach, which reintroduces the theme of long-term corrosion
monitoring, is the embedding of macrocell devices. This includes galvanic
couples of different steels (Beeby, 1985) or embedding steel in high chloride
concrete to create a corrosion cell, as is popular in cathodic protection
monitoring systems, particularly in North America (NACE, 2000).
Condition evaluation
81
 

This approach is also popular in laboratory corrosion studies and has
been developed as an ASTM procedure known as ASTM G109 (ASTM,
2005a) concrete prisms are made with a single top rebar in chloride
containing concrete and two bottom rebars in chloride-free concrete. The
current flow between the top and bottom is monitored as shown in
Figure 4.22.
Another development has been used for installing in new structures, for
instance the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark (Shiessl, 1993). This uses a
‘ladder’ of steel specimens of known size, installed at an angle through the
concrete cover. As the chloride (or carbonation) front advances each
specimen becomes active and the current flow from the anodic specimen to
its adjacent cathodic specimen can be monitored along with the reference
electrode potential. This system is discussed fully in the Chapter5.
4.12.7
Interpretation – macrocell techniques
There are two major problems with interpreting macrocell systems. The
first is that we are not actually measuring corrosion on the reinforcing steel.
We must assume that the current flows are representative of what is
happening on the steel we want information about. That will partly depend
upon the care and thought taken about installation of the probes.
The second issue is how representative are macrocell currents of the true
corrosion currents in the steel. The microcell currents may be more
important than macrocell current flows. In a comparison with linear
82
Condition evaluation
75mm
75mm
20–25mm
280mm
R
25mm
115mm
150 mm
Figure 4.22 Schematic of ASTM G109 macrocell current prism.
 

polarization (Berke et al., 1990) it was found that the macrocell technique
underestimates the corrosion rate, sometimes by an order of magnitude. As
this was using the ASTM prism technique, it should be considered the most
accurate use of the macrocell technique, so if it is an order of magnitude
out, field use of macrocell techniques could be even less accurate.
The advantage of these techniques is that they are permanently set up and
can be used to monitor the total charge passing with time. This is a clearer
indication of the total metal loss or total oxide produced than an instanta-
neous measure of the corrosion rate. Also the measurement equipment is
fairly straight forward, being a voltage measurement across a resistor or a
direct zero (or low) resistance ammeter measurement of the current.
4.12.8
Standards and guidance
The macrocell test ASTM G109 ASTM (2005a) is the only standard for
measuring macrocell corrosion rates of steel in concrete. Guidance on LPR
comes from Concrete (2000) and from the manuals provided by manufac-
turers and suppliers of the equipment.
4.13
Permeability and absorption tests
Since corrosion of steel in concrete is usually caused by the ingress of
various agents (Cl, CO2, H2O, O2) through the concrete cover, many
attempts have been made to calculate and measure the permeability and
absorbtion characteristics the concrete. Measurements are most accurately
done on a conditioned core in the laboratory, since the environment 
(i.e. degree of saturation) will strongly influence field measurements.
However, field measurements are made with vacuum devices and water
absorption kits to give a rating of the permeability.
4.13.1
Property to be measured
In the laboratory, diffusion, permeability permittivity and absorption can
all be measured under controlled conditions. When conducting such an
investigation it is important to differentiate between permeability which is
measured under steady state conditions driven by a constant pressure dif-
ference, and initial surface absorption driven by rapid capillary absorption
(Concrete Society, 1997a, p. 54).
4.13.2
Equipment and use
Most laboratory tests are concerned with modelling the flow of chloride
into concrete. Unfortunately even the most accurate measurements in the
laboratory can rarely be equated to field conditions where wetting and
Condition evaluation
83
 

drying accelerate chloride uptake and the surface concentration is rarely
either known or constant so steady state diffusion is a poor model at best.
‘Effective’ chloride diffusion coefficients can be back calculated from the
fitting of chloride profiles to diffusion curves using the error function
equation. An alternative technique is to plot the square root of the effective
concentration (total minus background) vs. depth, and extrapolating a
straight line fit to the Y axis. This method is discussed in Chapters 3 and 9.
Field devices are most effective when used to check improvements in
water absorption after a treatment such as the application of a penetrating
sealer such as silane. The ISAT test (BS 1881-208, 1996) is particularly
useful for checking the effectiveness of coatings.
4.13.3
Interpretation
Concrete Society Technical Report 50 is a Guide to surface treatments for
protection and enhancement of concrete (Concrete Society, 1997a). This
gives the following criteria for the ISAT test:
●
Good concrete judged to have low absorption 750 g/m2.h0.5
●
Most coatings can achieve 35 g/m2.h0.5
●
Very impermeable coatings can achieve 10 g/m2.h0.5.
A draft European standard BS EN 1062-3 (1997) is under development.
Vacuum tests which equate air movement with moisture permeability and
other devices give approximate indications of the rate of diffusion (Whiting
et al., 1992; Concrete Bridge Development Group, 2002).
4.13.4
Limitations
Most laboratory tests are concerned with modelling the flow of chloride
into concrete. Unfortunately even the most accurate measurements in the
laboratory can rarely be equated to field conditions where wetting and
drying accelerate chloride uptake and the surface concentration is rarely
either known or constant so steady state diffusion is a poor model at best.
‘Effective’ surface concentrations are used by some researchers to back
calculate diffusion constants from the measured concentrations. These are
usually the concentrations measured at 5–13 mm depth, where the chloride
concentration is less affected than at the the surface where recent washing,
drying, etc. may deplete or enhance the chloride concentration (see
Figure 3.2(b)).
An alternative technique is to plot the square root of the effective
concentration (total minus background) vs. depth, and extrapolating a
straight line fit to the Y axis. This method is discussed in Chapters 3 and 9.
84
Condition evaluation
 

4.13.5
Standards and guidance
The ISAT test (BS 1881-208 1996) is particularly useful for checking
the effectiveness of coatings. Concrete Society Technical Report 50 is a Guide
to surface treatments for protection and enhancement of concrete (Concrete
Society, 1997a). Rilem Report 12 (Kropp and Hilsdorf, 1995) goes into great
detail on the various tests and transport phenomena in concrete.
4.14
Concrete characteristics: cement content,
petrography, W/C ratio
It is usually essential to take cores and carry out selective petrographic
analysis during the full survey. This can be used to determine the types of
aggregates (susceptibility to ASR, freeze thaw damage, sulphate attack,
presence of highly absorptive constituents, etc.), mix design (cement, water
and aggregate ratios) and the extent of curing and hydration.
It is normal (in the United Kingdom and Europe) to determine the
chloride concentration as a percentage by mass of sample but to quote
chloride concentrations in weight percent of cement so the cement content
must be known or estimated (usually assumed to be 14%). This is not a
very accurate procedure which is why in North America they quote
chloride contents in pounds per cubic yard of concrete. The European
approach has a better grounding in the mechanism of corrosion, while the
North American approach is more accurate in practice, but slightly less
informative.
Standards for petrographic analysis include ASTM C457-98. Standard
test method for microscopical determination of parameters of the air-void
system in hardened concrete. ASTM C856-95e1. Standard practice for
petrographic examination of hardened concrete. BS 1881 Testing concrete.
Part 124: 1988 Methods of analysis of hardened concrete. BS812-104: (1994)
Testing aggregates. Methods for quantitative and qualitative petrographic
examination of aggregates.
4.15
Ground penetrating radar
Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is an electromagnetic technique that has
been used for many years with the engineering industry to supply informa-
tion on construction and condition detail of various types of structure. GPR
also known as impulse radar gives valuable information on the location of
reinforcement and can often supply information where cover meters
cannot, such as lapping bars, multiple layers and tendon ducts behind cover
reinforcement. There has already been some discussion of its application for
delamination measurement in Section 4.6.
Condition evaluation
85
 

4.15.1
Property to be measured
The GPR is an electromagnetic echo sounding method where a transducer
(transmitter/receiver) is passed over the surface at a controlled speed. Short
duration pulses of radio energy are transmitted into the subject and reflections
from material boundaries and embedded features such as metalwork or voids
are detected by the receiver. Sampling is so rapid that the collected data are
effectively a continuous cross section, enabling rapid assessment of 
thickness and condition over large areas. By assessing the strength, phase 
and the scatter of signals it is often possible to find cracking and changes in
compaction, bond and moisture content. However, the main application is 
to locate reinforcement and tendon ducts (arrangement and depth of cover) 
as well as delaminations, voids, cracks and honeycombing.
4.15.2
Equipment and use
The GPR equipment is generally portable and self-contained enabling
access to most structures. The antenna can be operated from the end of a
long cable enabling large areas to be covered relatively easily. The technique
demands hand access to the structure so hoists or scaffolding are often
required. In North America vehicle mounted systems are used, as described
in Section 4.4, on concrete and asphalt-covered bridge decks.
When assessing reinforced concrete structures it is recommended that
high frequency antenna are used, where possible, in order to give the
highest resolution image. Antenna of 1.5 GHz are most commonly used to
give the required amount of information and will give useful information
typically to a depth of c.300 mm. Where greater penetration is required a
lower frequency antenna should be used. Recent developments in higher
frequency antennas, up to 4 GHz, may result in much higher resolution in
the future.
In order to accurately relocate any features identified from the investigation
it is recommended that an electronic distance measuring (EDM) wheel is
linked to the GPR system. This enables scans to be taken at fixed distance
intervals and removes the necessity for surveying at a constant speed that is
required from time triggered systems. Typically scans would be taken at
c.5–10mm intervals to give the required lateral resolution.
It is essential that all collected data are recorded digitally in order that
post-processing and quality control can take place. Filtering of data off site
can often result in higher levels of quality as well as reducing errors from
digitizing of analogue plots.
4.15.3
Interpretation
Data collection is far more rapid than using cover meters or other hand-held
instruments. However, interpretation is far more complex as many features
86
Condition evaluation
 

in the concrete will reflect the radar waves. A radar trace is shown in
Figure 4.23 showing honeycombing and reinforcing bars.
4.15.4
Limitations
Vehicle mounted radar has been found to be reasonably accurate in
predicting the amount of damage on a bridge deck, but not the precise loca-
tion of the damage. The problem for both vehicle mounted and hand-held
systems, is the number of features in the concrete that will cause reflections.
It can therefore be difficult to resolve types of features (delaminations from
honeycombing from patch repairs). It is also difficult to resolve features at
different depths. In the United Kingdom and the United States, GPR
services are offered by specialist companies who interpret the data using
proprietary algorithms as well as their extensive experience in conducting
radar surveys of reinforced concrete.
4.15.5
Standards and guidance
ASTM D4788-03 (2003) gives a standard test method for its application to
bridge decks, which can be used as guidance for its application on other
concrete elements.
Condition evaluation
87
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
0.0
0.1
Depth [metre] at v = 0.11(m/ns)
0.2
0.3
0.4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Distance (metre)
Honeycombing
at low cover
causing ‘ringing’
throuth the data
Reinforcement
Figure 4.23 Radar trace showing honey combing and reinforcing bars. Courtesy
Aperio Ltd.
 

4.16
Ultrasonic pulse velocity
The pulse velocity approach is best done in a ‘transmission mode’ with the
pulse created on one side of a concrete member and detected on the other
side. It can be used at corners or in a ‘reflective’ mode if necessary, but it
loses effectiveness and interpretation gets harder. The impact-echo tech-
nique can be used with pulse generator and detector side by side as the echo
is reflected back from defects.
The UPV involves the measurement of acoustic wave velocity and gets
the name ultrasonic from the range of frequencies beyond the audible range
that it employs: c.20 – c.300 kHz. In order to determine the wave velocity a
transmitter and receiver are placed onto the surface of the structure at a
measured distance apart. The time taken for a pulse to travel from the trans-
mitter to the receiver is measured. Good contact generally requires the use of
a coupling gel between the transducers and the structure is necessary when
using the PUNDIT (Portable Non-Destructive Digital Instrument Tester).
4.16.1
Property to be measured
Estimating concrete strength from ultrasonic measurements using a PUNDIT
is a well tested technique. Recent developments have meant that the
technique can also be used in reflection mode as an assessment of condition
as well as in the more traditional transmission mode for strength estimation.
4.16.2
Equipment and use
The Pundit Plus for use in transmission mode is shown in Figure 4.24. The
A1220 Ultrasonic Flaw Tester is an example of a multi-headed ultrasonic
probe for use in reflection mode is shown in Figure 4.25.
4.16.3
Interpretation
The analysis of direct travel times can be used to:
●
relate velocity to the mechanical properties of the materials such as the
elastic moduli and the uniaxial compressive strength;
●
locate and identify defects such as cracks and voids;
●
determine the depth of penetration of a crack (to a maximum depth of
approximately 250 mm);
●
determine the depth of fire damaged concrete.
In the reflection mode the technique can be used to:
●
determine thickness of concrete;
●
locate voiding, delamination within the concrete.
88
Condition evaluation
 

Figure 4.24 The Pundit Plus system for use in direct transmission mode. Courtesy CNS
Farnell Ltd.
Figure 4.25 The multi headed ultrasonic flaw detector for use in reflection mode.
Courtesy Aperio Ltd.
 

Figure 4.26 shows the combination of data from radar and ultrasonic to
resolve reinforcement location and delaminations in a reinforced concrete
structure of unusual construction.
4.16.4
Limitation
The collection of ultrasonic data is relatively slow due to the need to collect
the data from point locations. The results often give a relative condition
only and as such a good knowledge of the structure is necessary. As with
many non-destructive tests it is often necessary to calibrate the findings
from limited targeted intrusive work.
The surface of the structure to be investigated needs to be smooth in
order to get sufficient energy into the concrete. Whereas gel couple methods
such as the pundit require a smooth surface the dry couple transducers can
accommodate a certain amount of roughness and therefore less surface
preparation is necessary.
90
Condition evaluation
Figure 4.26 Combined GRP and ultrasonic investigation to resolve reinforcement
location (diagonal and horizontal bars) as well as delaminations using a
A1220 Low frequency flaw detector in reflection mode. Courtesy
Aperio Ltd.
 

On many sites external noise sources may interfere with the instrument and
this should be discussed to avoid wasted trips to site. Many factors such as
traffic movement and general site noise should not affect the instrument 
as the frequency would be outside the recording range of the equipment.
Needle guns are a source of interference which would affect the technique.
Although ultrasonics in reflection mode may give some information on
presence of reinforcement it is not a suitable method for accurate assessment
of reinforcement detail.
4.16.5
Standards and guidance
The use of ultrasonic pulse velocity is documented in BS EN12504-4:2000
‘Testing Concrete. Determination of ultrasonic pulse velocity’.
4.17
Impact-echo
Impact-echo is a method for non-destructive evaluation of concrete and
masonry structures, based on the use of impact-generated stress (sound)
waves that propagate through a structure and are reflected by internal flaws
and external surfaces.
4.17.1
Property to be measured
It can provide the thickness of concrete slabs up to an accuracy of 3% and can
determine the location and extent of flaws such as cracks, delaminations, voids,
honeycombing and debonding in plain, reinforced and post-tensioned con-
crete structures It can also locate voids in the subgrade beneath slabs and pave-
ments. For masonry it can determine thickness and locate cracks, voids and
other defects where the brick or block units are bonded together with mortar.
Impact-echo is not adversely affected by the presence of steel reinforcing bars.
4.17.2
Equipment and use
The typical equipment is portable and battery powered enabling it to be used
in most locations. The equipment comprises a control unit and transducer
with the system being run from a laptop computer. the energy source used
consists of spherical impactors (ball bearings) which are used to strike the
concrete surface to set up standing waves within the structure. The smaller
the impactor the higher the frequency and therefore the higher resolution.
Figure 4.27(a) shows typical equipment used for impact-echo measurement
and interpretation
4.17.3
Interpretation
If the speed of sound through the concrete is known or can be determined
on site then it is possible to determine the depth of features immediately as
Condition evaluation
91
 

in Figure 4.27(b) where the time domain and frequency domain plots are
shown.
4.17.4
Limitations
As with several other techniques discussed in the last few sections, this
technique requires specialized expertise and is therefore usually conducted
by test houses who use it on a regular basis. Intimate contact is required
between the impactor and the surface.
92
Condition evaluation
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27 (a) Impactor/transducer, electronic interface and laptop computer for
generating the impact and recording the echo spectrum. Courtesy
Physical Acoustics Ltd. (b) Impact echo response showing a delamination
at 94 mm depth (lower frequency domain plot). Courtesy Aperio Ltd.
 

4.17.5
Standards and guidance
ASTM C597-02 ‘standard test method for pulse velocity through concrete’
and ASTM C1383-04 ‘test method for measuring the P-wave speed and
the thickness of concrete plates using the impact-echo method’ cover the
application of impact echo to concrete structures.
4.18
Radiography
Radiography uses high frequency electromagnetic radiation (X-rays and
gamma rays) to gain detailed images of the internal structure of concrete
bodies. This method is more commonly known for its applications in the
field of medical science. Despite the highly specialized equipment and safety
precautions, radiography produces the most readily understandable results.
The principle behind radiography involves the measurement of
attenuation of radiation as it passes through the material under investiga-
tion. The radiation is provided by a focussed source directed at one side of
the structure which is detected /recorded on the other side by photographic
film or a detection plate.
The resulting images can be produced relatively quickly to allow
preliminary interpretation on site.
4.18.1
Property to be measured
As the radiation is transmitted through the concrete it interacts with the atoms
in the material. This interaction causes some of the radiation to be absorbed
by the concrete and some to be scattered. The result is that the amount of
radiation detected varies spatially depending on the density and nature
(atomic number) of the material(s) of the structure under investigation.
Therefore, variations in the concrete (such as cracks, voiding and
compaction variation) will be caused by variations in density and the
location and extents of inclusions (such as ducts and steel reinforcement)
will be produced by variations in material types.
4.18.2
Equipment and use
A typical site investigation may use a portable X-ray system such as the
Betatron (Figure 4.28). The system comprises three units with intercon-
necting cables with a total weight of 190 kg. Although this is bulky com-
pared to the other equipment described in this section this system is
compact and portable with a power output comparable with permanent
systems (capable of penetrating concrete in excess of 1 m thick in ideal
circumstances). Smaller systems are available that have associated reduced
penetration and resolution.
Condition evaluation
93
 

4.18.3
Interpretation
A typical image is shown in Figure 4.29 before and after image clean up.
Metallic items embedded in the concrete can be clearly seen, even down to
some section loss of the reinforcement.
4.18.4
Limitations
For all systems the site considerations are the same:
●
Access is required to both sides of the structure.
●
The site needs to be screened and secure to provide a safe environment.
●
Progress rates tend to be slow so time limitations and coverage needs to
be considered.
94
Condition evaluation
Figure 4.28 Portable X-ray Betatron. Courtesy of JME Ltd.
Void
Bolt
Past-processed image
Raw image before processing
Water
Corroded
bar
Figure 4.29 Raw and processed images of a radiogram of a concrete structure. Courtesy
of JME Ltd.
 

●
Multiple layers of reinforcement will be superimposed and may limit
interpretation.
●
Although interpretation can be straight forward the specialized
equipment and safety considerations require expert operators.
4.18.5
Standards and guidance
General information regarding radiography of concrete structures can be
found in BS 1881: Part 205. ‘Concrete Testing. Recommendations for
radiography of concrete’. National regulations on ionizing radiation should
also be consulted.
4.19
Survey and assessment methodology
When carrying out a survey (or commissioning a specialist test house) it is
important to define what information is needed and how that information
can be collected accurately but economically. If access is a problem (e.g. on
a bridge or a working plant) it may be important to collect available
information during a single access period rather than go through the
expense or difficulty of providing repeat access. On highway structures
access costs including traffic control can be the largest cost of the job.
Plan what measurements will be taken and where they will be taken.
Allow for flexibility as the information changes during the survey. Try to
check and analyse data from the survey as it proceeds. If potentials are high
in one area that may be the best place for coring and drilling (as well as
taking some representative samples from other areas).
Plan to spend significant resources on the survey. It could save you from
wasting a lot of money later on. Have regard for the repair options available.
If an electrochemical technique is under consideration it may be worth
checking for the degree of continuity of reinforcement as good continuity is
essential but may be difficult or expensive to establish. Time and effort
spent at this stage may produce later savings. Conversely a poorly executed
survey can produce problems if a rehabilitation technique based on the
survey results turns out to be uneconomic or impractical. Examples that the
author has come across include expensive patch repairs and coatings that
failed after less than a year leading to later installation of a cathodic
protection system, doubling rehabilitation costs, and a cathodic protection
system which had to be redesigned when it was found that there was two
to five times as much steel in the structure as originally estimated.
An important aspect when considering cathodic protection or the other
electrochemical techniques is zero cover or tie wire touching the surface. If
there is a direct metallic connection between the anode and the rebar it
could short out the electrochemical protection if a surface applied anode is
under consideration. Excessive shorts have caused CP systems to be
Condition evaluation
95
 

abandoned in the United States. On the other hand, severe congestion of the
reinforcement can make the installation of discrete anodes difficult or
uneconomic. Contrary to popular opinion, lack of electrical continuity
between reinforcing steel bars is rarely a problem and is usually fairly
straight forward to overcome. These issues are discussed further in Section 7.6
on cathodic protection.
When planning a survey it is important to know what information you
want by the end of it. While executing the survey it is important to inter-
pret the data as you go to ensure that the most useful measurements are
taken and then new information is used to draw the correct conclusions,
not just the expected ones. The survey report should draw conclusions and
make recommendations, not just be a summary of the data.
Concrete Bridge Development Group (2002) has information on UK
highway contract documentation, specification and prices November 2001
pricing of the elements of a UK highway bridge survey.
4.20
Special conditions – prestressing and 
coated rebars
There are particular problems when the reinforcing steel is not of the
conventional type of steel bars embedded directly into the concrete. There
are problems for galvanized steel bars with respect to reference electrode
and corrosion rate measurement because the zinc affects the readings in
poorly understood ways. However, when the bar is coated in epoxy or the
reinforcement is in the form of wires in ducts the problems are multiplied
as described later.
4.20.1
Epoxy coated and galvanized reinforcing bars
Epoxy coated rebars present particular problems to determining the
corrosion condition of the steel. In the first place the bars are electrically
isolated from the concrete except at areas of damage. The size and locations
of the areas of damage are obviously unknown. Attempts to carry out ref-
erence electrode potential surveys and linear polarization measurements
have therefore been unable to come up with definitive criteria for corrod-
ing and non-corroding areas. The other problem is that the bars are isolated
from each other, therefore a connection must be made to each bar measured
to be sure that there is electrical contact.
When the steel is covered in other coatings, such as the zinc of galvanizing,
then the potentials are created by the zinc, not the steel. This leads to very
negative potentials (about 500 mV with respect to a Ag/AgCl or calomel
electrode) when the structure is new. This drifts down to less negative val-
ues either as the zinc passivates in the alkaline concrete or as it is consumed
and the steel becomes active. It can be impossible to distinguish the two
96
Condition evaluation
 

conditions so potential measurements are not useful on galvanized
structures.
Corrosion rate measurements should be representative of galvanized steel
but the ‘B’ value in equation (4.1) for zinc may be very different from that
of steel in concrete. The author is not aware that any B values for zinc or
galvanized steel in concrete have been published. However, comparative
results may be useful in showing areas of high and low corrosion.
4.20.2
Internal prestressing cables in ducts
Pretensioned prestressing systems with wires or rods embedded directly in
the concrete can be treated as though they are reinforcing bars, allowing
for the different metallurgy. However, the problem of prestressing steel
cables in internal post-tensioned structures with ducts is more difficult.
These structures are usually built of precast elements that are either indi-
vidually or collectively stressed by cables in ducts running deep within the
structures (cover of typically 50–100 mm) and then the duct is filled with a
cementitious grout.
Investigations around the world has shown extensive problems with poor
grouting of the ducts and consequent leakage of water, with and without
chlorides, onto the steel cables with subsequent severe corrosion. In some
cases this has lead to failure of bridges and other structures 
(e.g. Woodward and Williams, 1988). The problem is that once the steel has
been placed 50–100 mm or deeper within a structure, surrounded by a steel
or polymer conduit, normal non-destructive test techniques are not effective.
Prestressing steel is loaded typically to around than 80% of its ultimate ten-
sile strength. Therefore modest section loss, particularly due to pits, can lead to
crack initiation and rapid, catastrophic failure. There are apocryphal tales of
prestressing rods shooting out of buildings due to corrosion induced failures.
The following test techniques are used in these situations:
1
Radiography using mobile unit to ‘X-ray’ the structure and examine for
tendon failures as discussed in Section 4.18.
2
Drilling in to ducts at two location and using air flow to check for poor
grouting.
3
A ‘magnetic flux’ technique that may to be able to detect section loss
and tendon failure using a high powered magnet and detecting magnetic
flux leakage (Ghorbanpoor and Shi, 1995). This is still in development.
4
More conventional investigations of the anchorages and ducts to see if
they are in good condition or whether any deterioration has occurred
that could also have reached the tendons within the ducts.
The failures of prestressed concrete structures and concern about methods
of investigating and rehabilitating them are a major issue in the civil
Condition evaluation
97
 

engineering and concrete repair industries. The problems of repairing and
rehabilitating these structures are discussed in later chapters.
References
Alldred, J.C. (1993). Quantifying the Losses in Cover-meter Accuracy Due to
Congestion of Reinforcement. Proc. 5th Intl. Conf. on Structural Faults and
Repair, 2: 125–130.
Alongi, A.A., Clemena, G.G. and Cady, P. (1993). Condition Evaluation of Concrete
Bridges Relative to Reinforcement Corrosion, Volume 3: Method for Evaluating
the Condition of Asphalt Covered Decks. SHRP-S-325 Strategic Highway
Research Program, National Research Council Washington, DC.
American Concrete Institute (2001). Protection of Metals in Concrete Against
Corrosion. Reported by ACI Committee 222. ACI 222R-01 American Concrete
Institute Farmington Hills Michigan.
American Concrete Institute (2003). Design and Construction Practices to Mitigate
Corrosion of Reinforcement in Concrete Structures. Reported by ACI Committee
222. ACI 222R-03 American Concrete Institute Detroit Michigan.
Andrade, C., Alonso, M.C. and Gonzalez, J.A. (1990). An Initial Effort to Use
Corrosion Rate Measurements for Estimating Rebar Durability. Corrosion rates
of Steel in Concrete, ASTM STP 1065, N.S. Berke, V. Chaker and D. Whiting
(eds), ASTM, pp 29–37. West Conshohocken, PA.
Andrade, C., Alonso, C., Feliú, S. and González, J.A. (1995). Progress on Design and
Residual Life Calculation with Regard to Rebar Corrosion on Reinforced Concrete,
in Techniques to Assess the Corrosion Activity of Steel Reinforced Concrete
Structures, ASTM STP 1276, N.S. Berke, E. Escalante, C.K. Nmai and D. Whiting
(eds), American Society of Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken, PA. 
Arup, H. and Klinghoffer, O. (1998). Junction Potentials at a Concrete/Electrolyte
Interface. European Federation of Corrosion Publication. No. 25:31–39. ISSN:
ISBN 1–86125–083–5.
ASTM C1202 (1991). Standard Test Method for Electrical Indication of Concrete’s
Ability to Resist Chloride Ion Penetration. American Society of Testing and
Materials, West Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM C457-98 (1998). Standards for Petrographic Analysis Include. Standard Test
Method for Microscopical Determination of Parameters of the Air-void System in
Hardened Concrete. American Society of Testing and Materials, West
Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM C856-95e1. Standard Practice for Petrographic Examination of Hardened
Concrete. American Society of Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM C876 (1991). Standard Test Method for Half-cell Potentials of Uncoated
Reinforcing Steel in Concrete. American Society of Testing and Materials, West
Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM D4788 (2003). Standard Test Method for Detecting Delaminations in Bridge
Decks Using Infrared Thermography. American Society for Testing and Materials,
West Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM D6087 (2005). Standard Test Method for Evaluating Asphalt-covered
Concrete Bridge Decks Using Ground Penetrating Radar. American Society for
Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken, PA.
98
Condition evaluation
 

ASTM G57 (2001). Field Measurement of Soil Resistivity Using the Wenner 
Four-electrode Method American Society of Testing and Materials, West
Conshohocken, PA.
ASTM G109-99a (2005a) Standard Test Method for Determining the Effects of
Chemical Admixtures on the Corrosion of Embedded Steel Reinforcement in
Concrete Exposed to Chloride Environments. American Society of Testing and
Materials, West Conshohocken, PA.
Beeby, A.W. (October 1985). Development of a Corrosion Cell for the Study of the
Influences of Environment and Concrete Properties on Corrosion. Concrete 85,
Conference, Brisbane, pp 118–123.
Bennett, J.E. and Mitchell, T.A. (1992). Reference Electrodes for Use with Reinforced
Concrete Structures. Corrosion 92, Paper 191, Nashville.
Berke, N.S., Shen, D.F. and Sundberg, K.M. (1990). Comparison of the Linear
Polarisation Resistance Technique to the Macrocell Corrosion Technique.
Corrosion rates of Steel in Concrete, ASTM STP 1065, N.S. Berke, V. Chaker and 
D. Whiting (eds), ASTM, Philadelphia, pp 38–51.
BRE Digest 405 (1995). Carbonation of Concrete and its Effects on Durability.
Building Research Establishment, Garston, UK, Publ CRC Ltd. London. 
BRE Digest 444 (2000). Corrosion of Steel in Concrete: Part 2 – Investigation and
Assessment Building Research Establishment, Garston, UK, Publ CRC Ltd.
London.
BRE Information Paper IP 11/98 (1998). Assessing Carbonation Depth in Ageing
High Alumina Cement Concrete. Building Research Establishment, Garston, UK,
Publ CRC Ltd. London.
Broomfield, J., Davies, K., Hladky, K. and Noyce, P. (2003). Monitoring of
Reinforcement Corrosion in Concrete Structures in the Field. Concrete Solutions,
1st Intern. Conference on Concrete Repair, St.-Malo, France, Proceedings.
M. Grantham, F. Rendell, R. Jauberthie and C. Lanos (eds). Publ Concrete
Solutions (on CD Rom).
Broomfield, J.P. (2000). Results of Long Term Monitoring of Corrosion Inhibitors
Applied to Corroding Reinforced Concrete Structures. Corrosion 2000. Paper
No. 791.
Broomfield, J.P., Langford, P.E. and Ewins, A.J. (1990). ‘The use of a potential
wheel to survey reinforced concrete structures.’ Corrosion rates of Steel in
Concrete, ASTM STP 1065, in N.S. Berke, V. Chaker and D. Whiting (eds),
ASTM, Philadelphia, pp 38–51.
Broomfield, J.P., Rodriguez, J., Ortega, L.M. and Garcia, A.M. (1993). ‘Corrosion
rate measurement and life prediction for reinforced concrete structures’. Proc.
Structural Faults and Repair-93, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, 2: 155–164.
Broomfield, J.P., Rodríguez, J., Ortega, L.M. and García, A.M. (1994). Corrosion
Rate Measurements in Reinforced Concrete Structures by a Linear Polarisation
Device. Philip D. Cady Symposium on Corrosion of Steel in Concrete, R.E.
Weyers (ed.), American Concrete Institute Special Publication 151.
BS 1881 Testing Concrete. Part 124: 1988 Methods of Analysis of Hardened Concrete.
BS 1881–208 (1996). Testing Concrete – Part 208: Recommendations for the
Determination of the Initial Surface Absorption of Concrete. British Standards
Institute, London.
BS 7361 (1991). Cathodic protection: part 1. Code of Practice for Land and Marine
Applications. British Standards Institute.
Condition evaluation
99
 

BS EN 1062–3 (1997). Paints and Varnishes – Coating Materials and Coating
Systems for Exterior Masonry and Concrete. Part 3: Capillary Absorption and
Permeability to water, British Standards Institute, London.
Bungey, J.H. (ed.) (1993). Non-destructive testing in civil engineering. Interna-
tional Conf. by The British Institute of Non-Destructive Testing, Liverpool
University.
Cady, P.D. and Gannon, E.J. (1992). Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges
Relative to Reinforcement Corrosion. Volume 1: State of the Art of Existing
Methods. National Research Council. Washington, DC. SHRP-S-330. 
CEN Draft EN 14629 (2003). Products and Systems for the Protection and
Determination of Chloride Content in Hardened Concrete. British, Standards
Institute.
CEN (2003). Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Test Methods – Determination of Carbonation Depth in Hardened
Concrete by the Phenolphthalein Method. DRAFT prEN 14630.
Chess, P. and Grønvold, F. (1996). Corrosion Investigation – a Guide to Half Cell
Mapping. Publ. Thomas Telford.
Clear, K.C. (1989). Measuring the Rate of Corrosion of Steel in Field Concrete
Structures. Transportation Research Board Preprint 324. 68th Annual Meeting,
Washington, DC.
Concrete Bridge Development Group Technical Guide 2 (2002). Guide to Testing and
Monitoring the Durability of Concrete Structures. Publ. The Concrete Society
Camberley UK.
Concrete Society (1997a). Technical Report 50 Guide to Surface Treatments for
Protection and Enhancement of Concrete. The Concrete Society Camberley
Surrey.
Concrete Society (1997b). Guidance on Radar Testing of Concrete Structures.
Technical Report 48, Publ. The Concrete Society Camberley.
Concrete Society in Association with the Federation of Resin Formulators and
Applicators and the Association of Gunite Contractors (1984). Repair of concrete
damaged by reinforcement corrosion. Report of a Working Party. The Concrete
Society Technical Report No 26 Publ. The Concrete Society Camberley.
Concrete Society Technical Report 60 (2004). Electrochemical tests for reinforced
concrete. A Joint Concrete Society/Institute of Corrosion Report, Publ. The
Concrete Society Camberley Surrey.
Dawson, J.L. (1983). Corrosion monitoring of steel in concrete. Corrosion of
Reinforcement in Concrete Construction’, A.P. Crane (ed.), Publ. Ellis Horwood,
for Soc. of Chem. Industry. pp 175–192.
Feliú, S., González, J.A. Andrade, C. and Feliú, V. (1988). ‘On-site determination of
the polarization resistance in a reinforced concrete beam’, Corrosion, 44(10):
761–765.
Fliz, J., Sehgal, D.L., Kho Y-T., Sabotl, S., Pickering, H., Osseo-Assare, K. and Cady, P.D.
(1992). Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges Relative to Reinforcement
Corrosion. Volume 2: Method for Measuring the Corrosion Rate of Reinforcing
Steel. National Research Council. Washington, DC. SHRP-S-324.
Gannon, E.J. and Cady, P.D. (1992). Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges
Relative to Reinforcement Corrosion – Volume 1: State of the Art of Existing
Methods. SHRP/FR-92-103. National Research Council. Washington, DC. 
100
Condition evaluation
 

Ghorbanpoor, A. and Shi, S. (1995). Assessment of Corrosion of Steel in Concrete
Structures by Magnetic Based NDE Techniques. in Techniques to Assess the
Corrosion Activity of Steel Reinforced Concrete Structures, ASTM STP 1276,
N.S. Berke, E. Escalante, C. Nmai and D. Whiting (eds), American Society of
Testing and Materials, Philadelphia. 
Glass, G.K. and Buenfeld, N.R. (2000). The influence of chloride binding on the
chloride Induced Corrosion Risk in Reinforced Concrete. Corrosion Science, 42:
329–344.
Gowers, K.R., Millard, S.G. and Gill, J.S. (1992). Techniques for Increasing the
Accuracy of Linear Polarisation Measurement in Concrete Structures. Paper 205,
NACE, Houston Texas.
Grantham, M. and Van Es, R. (1995). Admitting that chlorides are variable.
Construction Repair, 9(5): 7–10.
Grantham, M.G. (1993). ‘An automated method for the determination of chloride in
hardened concrete’, Fifth Intl. Conf. on Structural Faults and Repair, 2: 131–136.
Hausmann, D.A. (1967). ‘Corrosion of Steel in Concrete: How doe Sit Occur?’
Materials Protection, 6: 19–23.
Herald, S.E., Henry, M., Al-Qadi, I., Weyers, R.E., Feeney, M.A., Howlum, S.F., and
Cady, P.D. (1992). Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges Relative to
Reinforcement Corrosion. Volume 6: Method of Field Determination of Total
Chloride Content. National Research Council. Washington, DC. SHRP-S-328. 
Kaetzel, L., Clifton, J., Snyder, K. and Kleiger, P. (1994). Users Guide to the
Highway Concrete (HWYCON) – Expert System. SHRP Report and Computer
Program SHRP-C-406 National Research Council. Washington, DC.
Kropp, J. and Hilsdorf, H.K. (1995). Performance Criteria for Concrete Durability.
Rilem Report 12, Publ E&FN Spon. 
Langford, P. and Broomfield, J. (1987). ‘Monitoring the Corrosion of Reinforcing
Steel,’ Construction Repair, 1(2): 32–36.
Matthews, S.L. (1998). Application of Subsurface Radar as an Investigative
Technique, Publ. CRC Ltd., London, BRE Report BR340. 
Millard, S.G., Harrison, J.A. and Gowers, K.R. (1991). ‘Practical measurement of
concrete resistivity’, British Journal of NDT, 33(2): 59–63.
NACE Standard Recommended Practice. (2000). Cathodic Protection of
Reinforcing Steel in Atmospherically Exposed Concrete Structures. RP0290–90
National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston Texas.
Neville, A.M. (1995). Properties of Concrete 4th Edition. Publ. Longman, pp 693–694.
Nustad, G.E. (Jul, 1994). Production and Use of Standardized Chloride Bearing
Concrete Dusts for the Calibration of Equipment and Procedures for Chloride
Analysis. Corrosion and Corrosion Protection of Steel in Concrete: Sheffield
Academic Press.
Rapa, M. and Hartt, W.H. (Apr, 1999). Non-Destructive Evaluation of Jacketed
Prestressed Concrete Piles For Corrosion Damage. NACE Corrosion 99. Paper
No. 566.
Rodríguez, J., Ortega, L.M. and García, A.M. (1994). ‘Asessment of structural
elements with corroded reinforcement’, Corrosion & Corrossion Potection of
Steel in Concrete. R.N. Swamy (ed.), Sheffield Academic Press, UK, pp 171–185.
Shiessl, P. and Ruapach, M. (April, 1993). ‘Non-destructive permanent monitoring
of the corrosion risk of steel in concrete.’ Non-Destructive Testing in Civil
Condition evaluation
101
 

Engineering, J.H. Bungey (ed.), British Institute of Non-Destructive Testing,
International Conference, University of Liverpool, 2: 661–654.
Stark, D. (1991). Handbook for the Identification of Alkali Silica Reactivity in
Highway Structures. SHRP-C-315 Strategic Highway Research Program,
National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Stern, M. and Geary, A.L. (1957). ‘Electrochemical polarisation. I. A theoretical
analysis of the shape of polarisation curves’ J. Electrochem. Soc., 104: 56–63.
Titman, D.J. (1993). ‘Fault detection in civil engineering structures using infra-red
thermography’, Proc. 5th Intl. Conf. on Structural Faults and Repair, 2: 137–140.
Tuutti, K. (1982). Corrosion of Steel in Concrete’. Publ. Swedish Cement &
Concrete Research Institute, Stockholm.
Vassie, P.R. (1987). The Chloride Concentration and Resistivity of Eight Reinforced
Concrete Bridge Decks after 50 years service. Transport and Road Research
Laboratory. Research Report 93.
Whiting, D., Ost, B., Nagi, M. and Cady, P. (1992). Condition evaluation of
concrete bridges relative to reinforcement corrosion, Volume 5: Methods for
evaluating the effectiveness of penetrating sealers. SHRP-S-327, Strategic
Highway Research Program, National Research Council Washington, DC. 
Woodward, R.J. and Williams, F.W. (1988). ‘Collapse of Ynys-y-Gwas Bridge, West
Glamorgan’, Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs. Part 1, 84: 635–669.
102
Condition evaluation
 

Chapter 5
Corrosion monitoring
Chapter 4 dealt with the different test methods available for assessing
corrosion related properties of reinforced concrete. Most of the techniques are
applied with hand-held battery operated equipment and a ‘one off’ reading is
taken. In some cases such as cover meter measurements that reading will not
change. In others, such as concrete resistivity, corrosion rate or corrosion
potential (reference electrode potential) it will change as aggressive agents in
the environment move into the concrete and lead to or accelerate corrosion.
We can define corrosion monitoring as collecting corrosion related data
on a regular basis. In this chapter we will exclude strain gauge monitoring
which is adequately covered elsewhere in the literature, and cathodic
protection monitoring which is discussed in Section 7.3.7.
Corrosion monitoring can be done on new or existing structures. Its
application to new structures requires forethought on the part of the
designer, a clear understanding of what is required, what sensors and mon-
itoring equipment is available and where to site sensors. Probe installation
is relatively straight forward and can be integrated with the construction
process along with power, signal and monitoring systems
In existing structures corrosion monitoring may be by regular inspection
using the techniques described in Chapter 4, or by probes installed in the
concrete or on its surface. These will have wired or wireless connections to
monitoring equipment.
There are two major issues with corrosion monitoring:
1
What can be monitored?
2
What are the merits of monitoring?
We can monitor with a limited number of the techniques listed in Chapter 4.
The main techniques are:
●
concrete resistivity
●
reference electrode potential
●
corrosion rate.
 

In addition there are relative humidity probes that can be embedded in
concrete.
The reasons for carrying out monitoring are:
●
early warning of significant deterioration (limit state being reached);
●
input into planned maintenance;
●
monitoring the effectiveness of repairs or protective measures being
installed;
●
development of a whole life deterioration and costing model for a struc-
ture or group of structures.
5.1
Regular surveys to monitor corrosion
This has been done on motorway bridges in the United Kingdom where
corrosion caused by deicing salt leakage through expansion joints onto
substructures is an acknowledge problem. The major cost is access on each
survey. The progress in chloride ingress and reference electrode potentials
was monitored along with a delamination survey.
Broomfield (2000) carried out regular surveys using LPR (see Section
4.12) on some reinforced concrete support pillars which had calcium
chloride cast in as a set accelerator. These had been repaired with vapour
phase corrosion inhibitors applied. Measurements from 1995 to 1999
showed the increase in the corrosion rate in treated and untreated control
areas, with the corrosion rate peaking at around 0.5 to 1.0 A/cm2 (5–10
mm per year) with cracking seen approximately one year later. This demon-
strated that the inhibitor applied with the chloride content of the structures
was too high to stop corrosion. It also showed that a factor of two differ-
ence in corrosion rate between treated and untreated area made no signifi-
cant difference to the rate and extent of cracking.
5.2
Permanent corrosion monitoring systems
A number of the techniques described in Chapter 4 are suitable for
embedding in concrete for permanent monitoring. The main requirements
are that they are durable when cast in concrete and exposed to the envi-
ronment, the readings are meaningful and that readings do not drift with
time as recalibration is difficult or impossible.
5.2.1
Permanent reference electrodes
The simplest probe is the reference electrode. These are designed for exposure
in concrete for installation with cathodic protection systems (Section 7.3).
104
Corrosion monitoring
 

However, it has been shown that once embedded in concrete they cannot be
recalibrated if they drift (Ansuini and Dimond, 1994) and a very large num-
ber are required if a useful ‘potential map’ (Section 4.8.4) is to be produced.
Reference  electrodes are incorporated into LPR probes (Section 5.2.2) but
are rarely used on their own.
As stated in Section 4.12, corrosion rates can be measured by linear
polarization or by galvanic or macrocell techniques. Both have their merits
and limitations as discussed in the Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3.
5.2.2
Corrosion rate by polarization resistance sensors
The LPR probe is ideally suited to permanent installation both in new
construction and as a retrofit into existing structures. Probes consist of a
reference electrode, an auxiliary electrode and a working electrode. In the
case of a ‘new build’ probe the working electrode can be a piece of steel of
known surface area so that an accurate corrosion rate measurement is made
on an electrode in the same environment as the rest of the reinforcement. An
electrical connection to the reinforcement means that measurements can
also be taken on the reinforcement itself. Figure 5.1 is an example of such
a probe installed in a reinforcing cage prior to casting. The results from the
installation are shown in Figure 5.3.
Such a design cannot be used in existing structures. In such cases the
working electrode must be the reinforcement in an undisturbed area of
concrete. This means that the probe consists of a reference electrode and
auxiliary electrode with a connection to the reinforcement at a suitable
location. The probe assembly must be installed with minimum disturbance
of the reinforcement as shown in Figure 5.2.
Corrosion monitoring
105
Reference electrode (with cap
on) and notice to remove before
pouring concrete
Auxiliary electrode to pass current
Working electrode of know area
Connection to reinforcement for
readings of unknown area
Conduit containing cables to
junction box on formwork
exposed after striking shutters for
connection to monitoring system.
Figure 5.1 A permanent LPR monitoring probe being installed in a precast deck unit of the Dartford
Tunnel (Broomfield et al., 2003) photograph. Courtesy BGB Projects Ltd.
 

Figure 5.2 A corrosion monitoring probe consisting of a reference electrode and an
auxiliary electrode potted up in mortar in the process of installation into a
continuously reinforced concrete pavement where corrosion monitoring is
required due to the high level of chloride found in the mix water after laying
several kilometres of concrete (Broomfield et al., 2003) photograph. Courtesy
BGB Projects Ltd.
Probe measurement
West tunnel
Probe corrosion rate [um/y]
10.00
10/28
Danger limit
Warning limit
11/1
11/14
11/26
1.00
0.10
0.01
1 March 2001
1 July 2001
31 October 2001
Date
2 March 2002
Figure 5.3 Three years data from corrosion rate probes shown in Figure 5.1 from 
the Dartford Tunnel, England (Broomfield et al., 2003). Courtesy NACE
International, 2003.
 

5.2.3
Corrosion rate by galvanic sensors
A galvanic ladder probe for installation in new structures is shown in
Figure 5.4. This consists of a series of mild steel anode rungs connected to a
stainless steel cathode via an ammeter. When chlorides or carbonation reach
successive rungs the current between anode and rises. 
The ladder probe is designed for installation in new structures and has
been installed in major bridges, tunnels and other structures though out
Europe. Variations on this design are supplied by different manufacturers.
A more recent development is a ‘washer probe’ that can be fitted tightly
into a cored hole to provide similar data on existing structures as shown in
Figure 5.5.
5.2.4
Corrosion rate by electrical resistance sensors
In an electrical resistance (ER) probe, a strip, wire or tube sensor of known
cross section is exposed to the environment. In the case of concrete structures,
it must be embedded at the time of construction otherwise it is not in the
same environment as the reinforcement it is supposed to simulate. The sensor
Corrosion monitoring
107
Figure 5.4 Galvanic ladder probe (Raupach and Schiessl, 1995). Ladders are at an
incline through the cover so that successive rungs depassivated and a
galvanic current starts to flow between the anode and a noble metal
cathode. Courtesy Dr-Ing. M. Raupach.
 

metal must be similar to the structure metal. The electrical resistance of the
sensor is measured after initial installation and at subsequent time periods. 
As metal is lost from the exposed surface of the sensor, the measured electrical
resistance will increase which allows the amount of loss to be quantified. 
A proprietary automated corrosion probe reader is used to report the
thickness loss directly. This uses a Wheatstone bridge with dummy leads to
compensate for the cables and uses an embedded thermometer to compensate
for the effect of temperature on readings.
This is the only technique that can measure in situ corrosion loss under
cathodic protection. Valid measurements are possible even in non-conductive
environments. This technique measures losses from corrosion due to
ineffective cathodic protection.
The main disadvantage of ER probes is that they only give valid data
when the corrosion mode is uniform. These instruments are not suitable
when corrosion is localized (pitting, cracking). This is its major limitation in
concrete where corrosion initiates with pitting, particularly when chlorides
are present. There is a trade-off between the sensitivity of the probe and its
usable lifetime. The thinner the probe the more sensitive but the more
quickly consumed.
Probes are permanently installed and measurements are made on a periodic
basis. As a guide, monitor the probe at least once a month for the first
12 months. Thereafter, the monitoring frequency can be reduced to once
every three months.
A graph is made of metal loss vs. time. The interval corrosion rate would
be the slope of the graph between any two data points while the average
108
Corrosion monitoring
Figure 5.5 Galvanic ‘washer’ probe (Raupach and Schiessl, 1995). The assembly is
fitted into a cored hole in the concrete cover so that successive washers
depassivated and a galvanic current starts to flow between the anode and
a noble metal cathode. Courtesy Dr-Ing. M. Raupach.
 

corrosion rate would be the slope of the trendline as calculated by the least
squares method. Many graphing programs, such as MS Excel, have built-in
capability to determine trendline slopes.
When used to demonstrate the effectiveness of a cathodic protection
system, an average corrosion rate (trendline) of less than 0.1 mils/year
(2.5 microns/year) over a 12 months monitoring period indicates that cathodic
protection is effective at the location of the sensor.
Corrosion probes of the electrical resistance type are rarely used in concrete.
They can suffer from localized pitting around the ends of the corrodible steel
leading to rapid failure once corrosion initiates in this environment. They have
been used to show that corrosion is under control, for example, in impressed
current cathodic protection systems, but in other cases have been found to be
poor indicators of rates of corrosion.
5.2.5
Concrete resistivity sensors
Resistivity probes can be embedded in concrete. The design shown in
Figure 5.6 was installed in the Dartford Tunnels on the River Thames estuary
(Broomfield et al., 2003). Data collected is shown in Figure 5.7.
5.2.6
Humidity monitoring
Commercially available relative humidity probes are available that are
durable and are suitable for embedding in concrete Section 4.12.4 discusses
the effect of relative humidity on corrosion rate.
Corrosion monitoring
109
Figure 5.6 This resistivity probe is directly attached to the formwork so that when
the concrete is cast around it the four stainless steel washers can be used
to make four probe resistivity measurements.
 

5.2.7
Chloride content and pH monitoring
There is discussion in the literature about monitoring pH and chloride content
(McCarter et al., 2004). However, there is no field data from such sensors and
interpretation is difficult as the corrosion threshold is not a fixed value of pH
or chloride content as discussed in Section 3.2.3.
110
Corrosion monitoring
1.0E+06
1.0E+05
1.0E+04
Concrete resistivity [ohm. cm]
1/7/98
30/12/98
1/7/99
30/12/99
30/6/00
Date
30/12/00
30/6/01
30/12/01
1/7/02
Dartford east tunnel
C6
C15
D5
D13
D25
Figure 5.7 Over three years of data from resistivity probes (Broomfield, 2003). Courtesy
NACE International 2003.
Figure 5.8 Termination box with connections for reference electrodes, LPR probes and
resistivity probes on a jetty.
 

5.3
Remote monitoring systems and 
data management
Manual systems, local logging systems, remote monitoring and wireless.
There is a range of options for a corrosion monitoring system. For easily
accessible systems with a limited number of probes, a simple termination box
with sockets for plugging in metres is suitable. Figure 5.8 shows a manual
corrosion monitoring on a jetty with a LPR corrosion rate meter, a resistivity
meter and a digital voltmeter for reading the reference electrode potentials
(Broomfield, 1998). The data in Figure 5.7 was collected manually.
Data can be collected automatically and stored either for download to a
portable computer brought to site or by telecoms connection where the
engineer can connect remotely to the computer and download data. The
data in Figure 5.3 was collected on a central computer from networked
sensors and downloaded remotely (Broomfield et al., 2003).
References
Ansuini, F.J. and Dimond, J.R. (1994). Long Term Stability Testing of Reference
Electrodes for Reinforced Concrete. Corrosion 94. Paper No. 295.
Broomfield, J.P. (1998). ‘Corrosion monitoring’, Concrete Engineering International.
2(2): 27–30.
Broomfield, J.P. (2000). Results of Long Term Monitoring of Corrosion Inhibitors
Applied to Corroding Reinforced Concrete Structures. Corrosion 2000. Mar;
Paper No. 791. NACE Houston Texas.
Broomfield, J., Davies, K., Hladky, K. and Noyce, P. (2003). Monitoring of
Reinforcement Corrosion in Concrete Structures in the Field. Proceedings of
Concrete Solutions, 1st International Conference on Concrete Repair, St.-Malo,
France. M. Grantham, F. Rendell, R. Jauberthie and C. Lanos (eds.) Publ
Concrete Solutions (on CD ROM).
McCarter, W.J. and Vennesland, O. (2004). ‘Sensor systems for use in reinforced
concrete structures’, Construction and Building Materials, 18: 351–358.
Raupach, M. and Schiessl, P. (Feb, 1995). Monitoring System for the Penetration of
Chlorides, Carbonation and the Corrosion Risk for the Reinforcement.
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Structural Faults and Repair.
Corrosion monitoring
111
 

Chapter 6
Physical and chemical repair 
and rehabilitation techniques
This chapter discusses the options for rehabilitating our corrosion damaged
reinforced concrete structures. We will start by examining the conventional
repairs by concrete removal and replacement. Removal techniques such as
pneumatic hammers, hydrojetting and milling and their limitations are
discussed. The problems of conventional repair such as continued corrosion
and structural considerations are covered, along with coatings, sealers, mem-
branes and barriers. Encasement, overlays, corrosion inhibitors are also cov-
ered in terms of corrosion performance. Mix designs and concrete chemistry
is not be discussed in detail as that information is better covered elsewhere
(see, for instance, SHRP-C-345 Synthesis of current and projected concrete
highway technology (Whiting et al., 1993 or Emberson and Mays, 1990).
Electrochemical techniques such as cathodic protection, chloride removal
and re-alkalization are discussed in a separate chapter following this one.
Rehabilitation methodology is discussed in Chapter 8 after discussion of the
major rehabilitation techniques. 
The appropriate repair and rehabilitation system must be chosen for each
structure according to its type, condition and its future use. There is no
point in spending large amounts of money on a structure due for demoli-
tion or other major works in a few years. Equally it is pointless carrying out
cosmetic patching to spalled concrete on a structure expected to last another
20–50 years where future access is difficult to arrange. What looks accept-
able on a bridge is not necessarily acceptable on a building, where aesthet-
ics have an important role to play, requiring good finishes to repairs and
cosmetic coatings. Historic structures have additional requirements which
will be discussed later. The selection of suitable repairs is discussed in
Chapter 8. The new European standard on concrete repair materials
EN1504 will be mentioned in this chapter where relevant but is covered in
more detail in Chapter 8.
One definition of the word rehabilitate is ‘to restore to proper condition’.
To repair is defined as ‘to replace or refix parts, compensating for loss or
exhaustion’. These definitions are worth bearing in mind. If we want to
rehabilitate a structure we want to restore it, not necessarily to its original
 

condition, because if we do, it may fail again because of intrinsic flaws. We
want to establish its ‘proper’ condition that is, resistant to corrosion. In
other words, to rehabilitate the structure we may need to improve it com-
pared to its original condition. To repair is merely fixing the damage. This
implies that deterioration may continue. Patch repairs are just what they
say. They repair the damaged concrete. They will not stop future deterioration
and may, as we will see later, accelerate it. Cathodic protection and the
other electrochemical techniques can rehabilitate the structure. They
mitigate the corrosion process across the whole treated areas. Coatings and
barriers can also rehabilitate if applied well at the correct time.
It is important to repeat that we are only discussing corrosion repairs.
Other problems, structural defects alkali-silica reaction (ASR) and so on
may also need to be addressed at the same time and rehabilitation systems
must be an integrated package of compatible, complementary systems.
Some of the issues of compatibility are discussed later. Specifically the com-
patibility of patch repair systems and ASR with electrochemical treatments
will be addressed.
Whatever repair or rehabilitation option we choose, most investigations
start after concrete has already been damaged by corrosion. Some concrete
removal and repair is therefore required on most jobs regardless of the
rehabilitation technique selected.
6.1
Concrete removal and surface preparation
There are a number of methods for removing concrete and the choice
depends on the specification, budget and contractor’s preferences. If
concrete is just starting to spall due to carbonation or if an electrochemical
treatment like cathodic protection is planned then a simple repair of removing
unsound concrete, cleaning the rebar surface, squaring the edges and
putting in a sound, cementitious, non-shrinking repair material may suffice.
Before patching carbonated concrete, the cracked and spalled concrete
must be removed from around the rebar or as far as the carbonation front
goes which ever is the lesser. The cementitious patch material is chosen to
ensure that the steel is back in a high pH, alkaline environment. This will
encourage the reformation of the passive layer to stop further corrosion.
If patching is required due to chloride corrosion then the usual specifica-
tion is to remove concrete to about 25 mm behind the rebar ensuring that
all corroded steel is exposed around delaminated areas and the rebar is
cleaned to a near white finish to remove all rust and chlorides. Figure 6.1
shows three types of repair. A bad repair, a good chloride repair and a patch
for cathodic protection. The cut edges and faces of the concrete must be
square and clean of all dust and debris.
The choice of patch repair material is discussed later. Wetting or bonding
agents are used to promote adhesion between the repair and the original
Physical and chemical repair
113
 

concrete. Bonding agents should not be used where electrochemical
treatment is required as it could create an insulating layer. If an electro-
chemical technique is being used then repairs only need to reinstate damaged
concrete. A clean rebar surface is needed and a simple patch to rebar depth
in cracked, spalled and delaminated areas will prepare the structure for
the application of the anode. In some cases the anode and overlay will fill
the excavated areas as a single operation. Materials used must be compatible
with the electrochemical treatment. These issues are more fully discussed in
Chapter 7.
In North America some highway agencies remove cover concrete on
bridge decks without waterproof membranes remove the cover concrete in
all areas where the half cell potentials exceed a threshold such as 170 m V vs.
saturated calomel (250 mV against copper/copper sulphate, CSE). It has
been shown (Weyers et al., 1993) that the higher (less negative) the thresh-
old the longer lasting the repair but this must be balanced by the cost and
structural implications of extensive concrete removal.
6.1.1
Pneumatic hammers
A summary of the properties and categories of hand held pneumatic
breakers is given in Vorster et al. (1992). For concrete repair work break-
ers usually range from about 10 to 45 kg, or a maximum of about 20 kg
114
Physical and chemical repair
Feathered edges and poor
preparation allow
breakway
at edges and poor
keying
Concrete removal beyond
the corroded area is not
required for electrochemical
treatment
Squared edges cutting
behind
the bar and removal
beyond
the corroded area restores
passivity and removes
contamination
Figure 6.1 Path repairs, bad, good and compatible with electrochemical treatment.
 

for vertical or overhead work. Small self contained electric units can be used
for small areas in low strength concrete but pneumatic units with a separate
compressor are required for most work.
Pneumatic hammers are labour intensive but have low capital cost and
are very versatile. They will cut behind the bars and get between them.
Research by the Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP) has shown
that the contract terms for a repair job are a major influence upon the
contractor’s decision as to how concrete removal is done (Vorster, 1992). If
concrete removal is in small areas, pneumatic hammers are more practical
than the larger plant such as hydrojetting or milling equipment discussed
later. If the area of concrete to be broken out undefined at the tender stage
and the contractor is paid by the square metre (or cubic metre) there is less
risk with a low capital cost approach like pneumatic hammers.
Drills will not clean the rebars and are operator sensitive in the finish
achieved. Work at the UK Transport Research Laboratory (Vassie, 1987)
has shown that inadequate rebar cleaning will allow corrosion to proceed.
Hydrojetting or grit blasting the rebars may be needed to remove all
chloride contamination as discussed below.
Typical production rates for pneumatic breakers range from about 0.025
to 0.25 m3 per hour for breakers ranging from 10 to 45 kg. Breakers are
well suited for jobs with small, discontinuous areas of concrete removal,
but not for large scale removal.
The latest requirements in health and safety and construction design in
the United Kingdom and other countries require the minimization of the use
of tools with high vibration due to the risk of ‘vibration white finger’ to
operatives.
6.1.2
Hydrojetting
This is an increasingly popular method of removing concrete on decks and
on substructures. In theory, on a deck, a vehicle mounted system can be set
up to remove concrete to a uniform depth across large areas. It will run
across the deck removing unsound concrete, cleaning the rebars and leaving
a surface ready for patching and overlaying. There is minimal damage to
sound concrete which means that this technique can be very cost effective on
medium to large areas. In practice concrete quality often varies and therefore
the amount and depth of concrete removed will also vary. Follow-up with
pneumatic hammers can be required where the insufficient concrete is
removed.
A small ‘peak’ or ‘shadow’ often remains behind the rebar after
hydrojetting as shown schematically in Figure 6.2a. If the specification or
the engineer on site requires its removal then the economic and efficiency
gains of using hydrojetting can be lost. Either the client or the contractor
will end up with doubled costs for concrete removal. Therefore, if
Physical and chemical repair
115
 

hydrojetting is required or preferred in a contract the contract specifications
must reflect the performance of the technique. The required finish and the
amount of concrete removed must reflect the performance of the hydrojetting
technique, not a theoretical standard for preparation prior to repair.
116
Physical and chemical repair
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2 (a) Schematic of results of hydrojetting showing the ‘shadow’ or peaks
behind the reinforcing bars. (b) Hydrojetting a wall with a robot arm
controlled system. Courtesy of Aquajet Systems AB.
 

Hydrojetting of substructures can be done manually by an operator
holding a high pressure hose, or by a unit mounted on an arm as shown.
Manual jetting requires a very high level of protection for the operator
and for bystanders.
In all cases attention must be paid to the water run off. There is a risk of
contaminating groundwater and streams with alkali, fine debris and the
contaminants that have built up on the concrete surface. It may be neces-
sary to put bunds around the repair area and collect the contaminated
water or to filter the runoff, collect the solid particles and prevent them
from being washed away. The water itself can undermine soil embankments
or other structures unless runoff is controlled.
Hydrojetting units typically consist of an engine driving a high pressure
pump connected via a high pressure hose to the nozzle which is either
manually held or moves under microprocessor control within a protective
guard system on a vehicle mounted system. Water is delivered at pressures
ranging from about 80 to 140 MPa at flow rates ranging from 75 to 270
l/min. Hydrodemolition contractors protect information about produc-
tion rates of their units. Typical rates will range from 0.25 m3/hr for
small single pumped systems to 1 m3/hr for top of the range dual pumped
systems. This assumes a 28 MPa concrete and removal down to 75 mm.
American hydrojetting practices are discussed in Vorster et al. (1992).
European practices are reviewed in Ingvarsson and Erikkson (1988) and
Anon (1993). The Swedish Bridge Code 88 section 7 on maintenance,
repair and strengthening discusses hydrodemolition and there is an ICRI
guide on the subject (ICRI, 2004).
6.1.3
Milling machines
Milling machines can be used to remove concrete cover on decks. They
must not be used right down to rebar level or they will damage the bars and
the milling head. They are of limited interest in the United Kingdom and
Europe with respect to corrosion repairs on bridge decks due to the exten-
sive use of waterproofing membranes, but extensively used to mill off
the asphalt wearing course with or without the waterproofing layer. They
are widely used in North America where heavily contaminated concrete
bridge decks are frequently milled with local removal to expose corroding
rebars that have delaminated the concrete.
Milling machines are far more precise in removing a defined amount of
cover compared with hydrojetting. However, they will cause considerable
damage to themselves and to the deck if they catch tie wires or stirrups, so
great care must be taken to ensure that the cover is uniform and a margin
is allowed to prevent exposure of the steel work.
Physical and chemical repair
117
 

Removal rates can be very rapid, usually greater than 1 m3/min using
machines with a 2 m wide cutting mandrel travelling at 1.5 m/min.
After milling, local, deeper removal is needed where cracking and
spalling has occurred. The deck is then patched in the delaminated areas
and a dense cementitious overlay is put back on. The use of concrete
overlays is discussed in a later section in this chapter.
6.1.4
Comparative costing
Little work has been carried out on comparative costing. Partly this is
because of the difficulty of getting comparative values, the commercial
sensitivity of the rates used and the difficulty of making comparisons that
are valid for more than one job.
Figure 6.3 shows a graph comparing milling, hydrojetting and jack
hammering based on 1860 m2 of concrete removal to a depth of 64 mm on
a bridge deck in the United States (Vorster et al., 1992). Using this analysis,
breakers are never economic even for an area of 50 m2. This suggests that
capital costs of equipment have not been compared adequately for small
areas. However, it does serve to illustrate the commercial benefits of using
the high tech approach.
118
Physical and chemical repair
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
Total quantity (sq. ft.)
Unit price ($/sq. ft)
Pneumatic breakers
Hydrodemolition
Milling
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Figure 6.3 Comparison of costs for concrete removal from Voster et al. (1992). Courtesy
Transportation Research Board (Strategic Highway Research Program).
 

6.1.5
Concrete damage and surface preparation
There has been some discussion in the technical literature (Vorster et al.,
1992) about damage done to the parent concrete during concrete removal
especially by milling and breakers. There is no clear indication of the effect of
such damage on repairs. However, a damaged substrate is more likely to dete-
riorate more rapidly and be more permeable to moisture and chloride ingress.
For the best bonding between old and new concrete a rough, clean and
crack-free surface is required. The surface should be damp enough not to
suck moisture out of the new concrete which is needed for hydration.
However, the surface must not be soaked or ponded with water as this will
increase the water/cement ratio of the new concrete and weaken it and the
bond between the parent and the repair material.
The exception to this is when bonding agents are used, particularly
epoxies. These must be applied according to the manufacturers’
instructions, particularly where there is a requirement to place the new
concrete while the bonding agent is still ‘tacky’. This is often very difficult
to ensure under site conditions and requires good supervision and quality
assurance on site.
Hydrojetting is probably the concrete removal technique of choice for
minimal damage, cleaning of rebars and removal to required depth. In all
cases the edges of removed areas must be square to the surface with no
‘feathering’ that would be difficult to fill with reasonably sized aggregates
(Figure 6.2).
6.2
Patches
Having removed the damaged and contaminated concrete we must patch it.
Many proprietary patch materials are on the market. Such pre-bagged
materials are most likely to be applied properly, especially to small repair
areas, but they are more expensive. If repair contractors must measure
quantities and mix on site it will save money at the risk of less consistency
and higher risks of shrinkage, poor bonding, etc. Specialized mix design can
be carried out by concrete experts to provide pumpable, pourable and trow-
elable mixes. In the United States and Canada many state highway agencies
have developed their own mix designs for concrete repair work based on
locally available materials and the prices of additives and cement replace-
ment materials such as microsilica, polymers, water reducing agents, etc.
CIRIA Technical Note 141 (CIRIA, 1993) laid down basic requirements
of shrinkage, expansion due to wetting and temperature, modulus of
elasticity, creep, etc. These have been taken up in standards such as the
European Standard on concrete repair BSEN1504 parts 1–10. This is
discussed more fully at the end of this chapter.
Physical and chemical repair
119
 

Most proprietary, pre-bagged mixes carry guarantees of the materials
particularly for carbonation repairs. Manufacturers and applicators will be
more cautious with chloride repairs and cannot guarantee that all chloride
is removed in areas adjacent to the patch. The incipient anode problem
(see Section 6.2.1) is far more prevalent in chloride contaminated structures
so corrosion will continue around the patches.
Fewer and fewer materials manufacturers have their own company
applicators although most have approved or recommended applicators. It is
now possible to get ‘back to back’ guarantees for concrete repairs to last
5–15 years, although there is a price to pay for the premium on such
insurance backed guarantees.
Some proprietary patch repair materials include bonding agents. These
should be avoided in electrochemical rehabilitation work. They may help
where a high standard of workmanship is difficult to achieve, but they often
require that the patch is applied at the right time when the bonding agent
is ready. This can be difficult to do on site and adequate supervision is
necessary to ensure that correct application is achieved.
Another major issue is curing. This can be done with curing membranes,
wet hessian, plastic sheeting. Well cured repairs will perform far better than
those left to ‘air cure’.
6.2.1
Incipient anodes
We have already seen that patch repairing is not usually adequate to stop
further deterioration in the presence of chloride attack. If a structure with
extensive chloride attack is to be patch repaired then it must be recognized
that patching the corroding areas can accelerate corrosion elsewhere. When
we stop the anodic reaction (2.1) we stop the generation of hydroxyl ions
at the cathode (equation (2.2)). Therefore, areas previously protected from
corrosion because they were made cathodic by the proximity of the anode
(now repaired) will rise above the critical chloride/hydroxyl ratio and
corrosion will be initiated. This often occurs around the new patch as
shown schematically in Figure 6.4. This ‘incipient anode’ problem is
avoided by applying an electrochemical rehabilitation technique.
One of the first cathodic protection installations in the United Kingdom
was to a police station in the North of England. The author visited the
station in 1987 and was shown the state of corrosion and the specification
of a high quality, high cost patch repair and epoxy coating applied across
the portal arches. A year later the author was invited back to examine
the corrosion around the patches and it was agreed that the patches and the
coating would be removed and a cathodic protection system would
be installed. All the previous work had to be undone as the repairs would
be incompatible with impressed current cathodic protection. The problem
was incipient anodes forming around the patches. This story of incipient
120
Physical and chemical repair
 

anodes forming around high quality patch repairs has been repeated on
many structures particularly in marine and deicing salt environments.
Figure 6.5 shows two examples of incipient anodes around repairs.
6.2.2
Load transfer and structural issues
Removing the concrete cover, either by spalling or concrete removal,
redistributes the load within the structure. The exposed steel may bend once
the bond between steel and concrete is lost. This can happen due to
corrosion as well as during repair. Obviously, bending of the steel will give
severe structural problems. Any significant concrete removal or corrosion
damage must be assessed by a structural engineer and propping may be
necessary during repairs, particularly on substructures or any other load
bearing element.
It cannot be assumed that a patch repair will take load though it in the
same way that the original concrete. This can be particularly important for
slender, lightly reinforced elements on buildings. Cutting out concrete
behind the rebar can be a risky operation and a patched structure, although
Physical and chemical repair
121
Before
Cathode
Cathode
Cathode
Concrete
Anode
Anode
Anode
Concrete
After
Patch
Figure 6.4 Incipient anode schematic showing how anode is displaced to the edge of the
repair by the formation of a new cathode in the patch repair.
 

cosmetically attractive (particularly if a coating is applied), may have lost
considerable load bearing capacity.
The author has been involved with repairs to several structures where
there was a risk of bars bending when exposed for patching due to
chlorides. This led to either an inferior patch repair (because chloride laden
concrete was not removed from behind the rebar) or a decision to cathodi-
cally protect the structure to avoid the need to carry out such strenuous
repairs (see Figure 6.1). An example of a load bearing system being used
during repair is shown in Figure 4.1 for a motorway viaduct repair on the
crossbeam.
122
Physical and chemical repair
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5 (a) Patch repair with surrounding spalling due to incipient anodes on a
building. (b) Incipient anode showing repair (left side) and corrosion in
original concrete.
 

In some cases the need for structural support for live and dead loads and
the effort to transfer loads into the repair (for instance as done as an exercise
on the Midland Links elevated motorway sections) have made such repairs
completely uneconomic. This is one reason for choosing an electrochemical
rehabilitation technique such as cathodic protection, as only ‘cosmetic’
repairs are required and the minimum of concrete is removed.
6.3
Coatings, sealers, membranes and barriers
One of the attractions of construction in concrete is that coatings are not usu-
ally required so the maintenance costs are lower. In some countries there is a
reluctance to coat concrete structures, in other counties it is more accepted.
However, coatings can be beneficial in excluding undesirable species such as
chlorides and carbon dioxide, or cosmetically restoring the appearance after
concrete repair. An example of a coating to ‘blend in’ repairs to the original
concrete is shown in Figure 6.6. Even the most carefully matched repair will
weather differently from the original material, eventually requiring a coating
to hide them again. There are architectural coatings designed to hide varia-
Physical and chemical repair
123
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6 (a) Roof structures before treatment showing obtrusive anticarbonation coat-
ings and exposed reinforcement due to chloride and carbonation-induced
corrosion. (b) Roof structures after repair and coating where the visual effect of
patch repairs are minimized by application of Keim Concretal Lazure coating.
 

tions in the concrete appearance. While designed to deal with new
construction the author has used them successfully on repaired structures.
One particular formulation also has anticarbonation properties.
A huge range of coatings and sealers can be applied to concrete. Apart
from looking different from each other, they also perform different tasks.
There are anticarbonation coatings which should be applied after carbonation
repairs to stop further carbon dioxide ingress. The carbonation resistance
should always be checked rather than relying upon coating formulation as
testing has shown that not all acrylics (for instance) have good carbonation
resistance (Robinson, 1986). Penetrating sealers, silanes, siloxanes, siloxysi-
lanes, etc. are recommended to reduce chloride ingress. They have been
known to accelerate carbonation in laboratory tests so care should be taken
in deciding where and when they are applied.
Once chloride induced corrosion has started it is very unlikely that a
coating of any sort will stop corrosion. There is sufficient moisture and
oxygen within the concrete to generate the small amount of rust needed to
crack the concrete and then the water and oxygen will have a free path to
the steel surface. It is also unlikely that a coating applied in the field to a
real structure will seal it totally. When chlorides get into concrete they form
hygroscopic salts. These will condense water from the atmosphere and
elsewhere in the concrete. It should be noted that the ‘average’ humidity in
the United Kingdom (and much of the US East Coast) is around 70–80%.
This is close to the optimum for corrosion. Any sealing coat is likely to seal
that optimum humidity level into the concrete. It has now been demon-
strated experimentally that coatings can control corrosion in carbonated
structures but not where corrosion is due to chlorides (Sergi et al., 2000).
The total or near total sealing of concrete can cause problems. Concrete
is porous and contains water and oxygen in its pores. The amount of water
as vapour and as liquid in the pores is in equilibrium with the atmosphere.
If a coating seals water in the pores then when the atmospheric humidity
drops or the temperature increases very large forces can be exerted against
the barrier coating causing blistering and coating failure.
6.3.1
Carbonation repairs
If a combination of patching and sealing is required for a carbonated
structure, the patch repairs must remove all carbonated concrete around the
steel. In some cases this will only require exposure of the front face but in
more extreme conditions it may need concrete removal behind the steel to
restore the passive alkaline environment. Much has been published about
anticarbonation coatings and their effectiveness but it is not easy to find
independent information about specific products. Careful comparison of
product information may be required. This may include the requirement for
independent testing. The principle of anticarbonation coatings are that they
are porous enough to let water vapour move in and out of the concrete but
124
Physical and chemical repair
 

the pores are too small for the large carbon dioxide molecule to pass
through. Anticarbonation coatings are generally high build coatings, with the
carbonation resistance increasing with thickness. Work at the UK Building
Research Establishment suggests that at least 200 m is required
to achieve adequate film thickness over the whole surface (Matthews et al.,
2003) Society Technical Report 50 (Concrete Society, 1997) discusses the
different tests available for CO2 diffusion resistance of coatings and
the development of EN 1062-6 (BSI, 1997) giving test methods for
anticarbonation coatings.
6.3.2
Coatings against chlorides, penetrating sealers
Penetrating sealers have been recommended as a way of stopping chlorides
getting into concrete. The chemistry of the process is that silanes, siloxysi-
lanes and similar chemicals will penetrate the pores of the concrete and
react with the water in the pores to from a hydrophobic (water repelling)
layer that stops water getting in as a liquid (that may carry salt with it), but
allows water vapour in and out of the concrete so that it will ‘breath’.
The penetrating sealer is within the concrete so it is protected from physical
damage and degradation by ultraviolet light, etc. The problem is that the
colourless liquid must be applied so that most of it gets into the pores and
there is enough water in the pores to react, but not too so much that it washes
the sealer back out and pores remain uncoated. There is still some debate
over the true penetration depth of sealers to good quality concrete in the field.
Since 1986 pure (100%) iso-butyl-trimethoxysilane has been specified to
prevent chloride ingress on exposed concrete on UK highway bridges
(Highway Agency, 2003). A penetration depth of 2–4 mm has been claimed,
but this may reduce to 1 mm or less in new, well cured concrete with a low
water/cement ratio. Other highway agencies have used different formula-
tion with some siloxanes in solutions and larger molecules that are less
volatile. All these chemicals form silicone resins within the pores. The larger
molecules are less volatile and therefore easier to get to the concrete surface,
but once there they are less mobile and penetrating.
In the United States many highway agencies have applied penetrating seal-
ers to concrete bridge decks. There has been no definitive research to show
whether sealers work on trafficked surface or for how long they are effective.
The penetrating sealers approved for application to highway structures in
Europe are generally solvent free and are applied in a series of coatings by
thorough wetting of the surface with the sealer with a drying period
between coats.
In the United States the SHRP program developed two field tests for
penetrating sealers (Whiting et al., 1992). These can be used in situ to
determine the effectiveness of sealers. One is a surface conductivity test and
the other is a variation on the initial surface absorption test (ISAT). If
silane-based sealers are being used then these tests are recommended. They
Physical and chemical repair
125
 

can be used to rank the performance of different materials on a given structure.
Once the structure is coated they will measure the effectiveness of the
application and check uniformity across the structure.
The alternative is to take cores and do laboratory tests of chloride
permeability. This is slow, expensive and damaging to the structure. There
is now a European Standard 1062-3 for water transmission through
coatings for concrete (BSI, 1999).
6.3.3
Waterproofing membranes
According to a report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (1989), most European countries put waterproofing
membranes on their decks where there is a risk of chloride ingress. This is
usually a sheet or a spray or ‘squeegee’ applied liquid system applied over
the new concrete surface, sometimes with a base or primer coat and with
protective layers, with a final asphalt overlay. A synthesis of practice of
waterproofing membranes in North America was published by Manning
(1995). Approximately 50 systems were tested by the UK Transport
Research Laboratory in a trial of membrane systems (Price, 1989).
Figure 6.7 is a schematic of the components of a waterproofing system.
These systems have been of variable quality in the past, although tighter
specifications have been introduced by most national DOTs. Membranes
have failed at joints, curbs and drains where chloride laden water could
get under them. Some were damaged or destroyed by the application of the
126
Physical and chemical repair
Surface course of
bituminous concrete
(wearing course)
Base course of
bituminous concrete
Tack coat
Protection board
Membrane
Ventilation layer
Adhesive
Primer
Concrete deck slab
Figure 6.7 Schematic of possible components of a waterproofing system from Manning
(1995).
 

asphalt wearing course over them. An example is shown in Figure 6.8. A
survey of UK Highway site practice and failures is given in Price (1991).
However, the lack of waterproof membranes is why there are many
cathodic protection systems are on bridge decks in Canada and the
northern states of the United States, where membranes were not widely
used, while many European systems applied to bridges are on the support
structure. Membranes and cathodic protection are not easily compatible as
gases are evolved by CP systems which could be trapped by a waterproofing
system. This is discussed in Chapter 7.
One problem with waterproofing membranes is that they have a 10 to
15-year life span. This means they must be replaced and any areas of concrete
damage repaired. There is also a problem with severe pitting and ‘black rust’
on the reinforcing steel as discussed in Chapter 2 and as shown in Figure 6.9.
Waterproofing membranes have been developed for car park decks.
These are generally very thin to minimize load and reduction in headroom.
The main problem is ‘scuffing’ and ‘shoving’ from the tight turns and
frequent braking of cars.
6.3.4
Barriers and deflection systems
These are the logical extension of the waterproofing membrane. Often one
of the simplest ways of reducing the deterioration rate due to chloride
attack is simple deflection of chloride laden water away from the concrete
surface. This can sometimes be done with the introduction of guttering and
Physical and chemical repair
127
Figure 6.8 Waterproofing membranes can fail to bond, dissolve into the concrete
under application of the hot mix wearing course or be punctured by the
aggregates.The photograph shows a failed membrane after testing at the
UK Transport Research Laboratory.
 

drainage on buildings or bridge substructures subject to salt water run off.
This can be a very cost-effective way of at least stopping the acceleration of
decay. It can also extend the life of rehabilitation systems such as patches,
cathodic protection anodes and chloride removal treatments.
A more expensive barrier approach can be seen on bridges where the
reinforced concrete has been clad in a brick or masonry finish, usually for
cosmetic reasons. The salt rarely penetrates to the concrete surface.
However, this option is rarely available for reasons of cost. Encasement of
building elements can often be undertaken as part of a refurbishment
programme, such as with a change of use. External cladding can be added
which encloses concrete elements at risk of corrosion. Once in a warm, dry,
indoor environment the risk of corrosion is significantly reduced.
This approach is far less effective once the critical chloride threshold for
corrosion has been exceeded. It is possible to determine the present chloride
profile in the concrete and predict the likely build up of chloride at the
reinforcement depth. This approach is discussed in Chapter 8.
6.4
Encasement and overlays
After milling, and deeper removal where cracking and spalling has
occurred, the deck is then patched in the delaminated areas and a dense
cementitious overlay of microsilica, polymer modified or low slump, low
water/cement ratio concrete is put back on. This will slow the corrosion
rate and the appearance of further delaminations.
128
Physical and chemical repair
Figure 6.9 When membranes fail to bind to the concrete and water and chlorides
get underneath, rapid local corrosion can lead to severe section loss
without cracking or spalling of the concrete as the expansive corrosion
product stays in solution.
 

These techniques are popular in the United States for delaying, or
preventing chloride induced delamination on substructures and bare
concrete bridge decks. A recent review of highway bridge deck maintenance
practice in the United States (Russell, 2004) found overlaying to be far
more popular than the application of cathodic protection.
In marine conditions Florida DOT has found that encasing bridge
columns in concrete is not effective in stopping corrosion. Prestressing
strands in a marine pile were found to have corroded through shortly (three
years) after repair. The tendons were 7/16 inch in diameter. This implies a
rate of over 3 mm/year if a 7/16
  11 mm tendon looses its full section in
three years. This demonstrates that corrosion rates in concrete can be very
high if encasement is used inappropriately (see Figure 6.10).
There was no indication of any problem with the reinforcement until the
encasement was removed and it was found that there was steel left to
restrain any sideways movement in the piles.
However, several DOTs in Northern States  are having some success with
encasement. There are also trials of carbon fibre wraps used for strengthening
as a method of suppressing corrosion.
Concrete overlays or encasement may absorb some of the chlorides,
reducing the level at the concrete surface. They will certainly reduce the
high chloride gradient that drives chloride further into the concrete if they
are coupled with removal of some or all of the old cover concrete. This has
been measured on bridge decks.
Recent research into overlays shows that many of them suffer from
shrinkage cracks and other but still seem to be effective in stopping or slowing
Physical and chemical repair
129
Figure 6.10 Pre-tensioned tendons corroded through three years after encasement
from Rapa and Hartt (1999). Courtesy NACE International 1999.
 

corrosion. Overlays last longest in the more southerly states like Virginia
when compared with the more Northerly ones like New York with colder
winters, higher salt application and also higher traffic density.
Overlays may be of polymer modified concretes, low slump dense con-
crete (the Iowa mixes), or microsilica concretes. They vary in cost and ease
of application. State highway agencies generally develop one or two mix
designs that suit their purposes and make competitive bidding possible.
Encasement on substructure columns is less routine. The concrete is
broken out where damage and an oversized shutter applied. Concrete is
then pumped or placed into the shutter either enlarging the whole column
or the damaged section.
6.5
Sprayed concrete
Sprayed concrete, shotcrete (dry sprayed) or gunite (wet sprayed) are
methods of rapidly applying concrete to soffits or vertical surfaces. It can
be used over patches and to overlay metal mesh anodes for cathodic pro-
tection as described in Section 7.6. It is sometimes applied as a temporary
‘cosmetic’ repair in the Northern USA and Canada when concrete has
spalled or is in danger of spalling. As it does nothing to slow the corrosion
rate it is comparable in effectiveness to patch repairing, and may suffer
from the same ‘incipient anode’ problem.
When the concrete is applied as shotcrete, water and dry mix cement and
aggregates are sprayed through two nozzles and mix ‘in flight’ and on
impact. Considerable operator skill is required to apply shotcrete effectively
with a minimum of delaminations. This is particularly true when cathodic
protection expanded metal mesh anodes are being installed. The shotcrete is
required to stick to the original surface which may not be as rough or
absorptive as the surface exposed by concrete removal from corrosion
damaged areas. Inadequate mixing or inappropriate quantities at the nozzle
can lead to voids, honeycombing or lenses of unhydrated concrete. Extensive
trials should be undertaken to show that good bond and mixing is achieved
on site. Thorough inspection afterwards should show a high consistency of
application achieved and maintained throughout the application.
Wet mix spraying of mortars is becoming more popular as proprietary
mixes have been developed. The consistency of the mix is easier to control in
wet mix application if segregation does not occur in the mixer before spray-
ing. Application rates are higher and it is often possible to finish the surface
of a wet sprayed mix. This is far more difficult with dry missed shotcrete.
6.6
Corrosion inhibitors
Corrosion inhibitors for steel in concrete are of great interest to the concrete
repair community. In this section we will discuss what they are, how they
work and what work is going on to assess their effectiveness.
130
Physical and chemical repair
 

There are various definitions of a corrosion inhibitor. The definition is
important because many things can inhibit corrosion, such as coatings,
a vacuum or cathodic protection. A definition is provided in ISO 8044
1989 ‘A chemical substance that decreases the corrosion rate when present
in the corrosion system at suitable concentration, without significantly
changing the concentration of any other corrosion agent.’ This definition
excludes coatings, pore blockers and other materials that act on the water,
oxygen and chloride concentrations and clarifies what we are talking
about.
In the case of steel in concrete we are talking about chemicals that are
either admixed into fresh concrete or that transport through the hardened
concrete to react on the reinforcing steel surface to slow down the rate of
corrosion. This difference is fundamental. By admixing during the
construction process the precise dosage is controlled and conditions can be
readily tested. Applying inhibitors to hardened concrete as part of a reha-
bilitation system is far more problematical in ensuring effective dosage at
the rebar, and in measuring, testing and predicting long-term performance.
There are a number of ways of subdividing inhibitors:
A.
By their action:
The corrosion reaction in concrete occurs by the formation of anodes
and cathodes (Figure 2.2). Corrosion inhibitors can therefore be:
●
Anodic inhibitors – suppressing the anodic corrosion reaction.
●
Cathodic inhibitors – suppressing the cathodic reaction.
●
Ambiodic inhibitors – suppressing both anodes and cathodes.
B.
By their chemistry and function:
●
Inorganic inhibitors – nitrites, phosphates and other inorganic
chemicals.
●
Organic inhibitors – amines and other organic chemicals.
●
Vapour phase or volatile inhibitors – a subgroup of the organic
inhibitors (generally aminoalcohols) that have a high vapour
pressure.
All of these inhibitors have been widely used by corrosion engineers for
many years to protect steel and other metals such as electronic components.
In some cases their chemistry is well understood, in other cases less so.
6.6.1
Corrosion inhibitors for admixing into 
fresh concrete
Specifically for steel in concrete there are several types of inhibitors. There
are those that are admixed into new concrete and those that are applied to
hardened concrete as part of a rehabilitation programme of a corrosion
Physical and chemical repair
131
 

damaged structure. Of the available materials the most widely applied is a
proprietary calcium nitrite admixture to new concrete which is of proven
effectiveness as long as the chloride : nitrite ratio stays less than about 1.8:1
Virmani and Clemena (1998). A dosage rate of 10–30 litres per cubic metre
of concrete is generally specified, depending on the expected maximum
chloride level at the rebar. This has proven efficacy and is usually the bench-
mark against which other inhibitors are tested. Competitor companies offer
other proprietary materials. They are generally organic inhibitors with
active amine and ester groups. The main problem with most organic and
inorganic inhibitors is that they act as severe set retarders. These formulations
of amines, esters and nitrites do not. In fact nitrites act as set accelerators
(their original use as a concrete additive was as a non-chloride set accelerators
for use in cold climates). In most conditions nitrites are sold with a set
retarder in the formulation to avoid flash setting.
The merits of admixed corrosion inhibitors have been debated for many
years. They are consumed as they compete with chloride ions to block the
anodic sites (where they are anodic inhibitors). However, the excess inhibitor
available in the concrete should maintain a constant availability at the steel
surface for any reasonable lifetime. There is increasing evidence of their sta-
bility although there has been some concern about the long-term leaching of
the inhibitor, particularly in concrete exposed to a marine environments
(Virmani and Clemena, 1998). There are several structures several decades
old protected by nitrite inhibitors. There are at least half-a-dozen marine
structures in the United Kingdom at least partly protected from reinforce-
ment corrosion by calcium nitrite. The organic admixtures are newer and
have less of a track record both in the field and in long-term testing.
The upsurge in interest in admixed inhibitors came from the failures of
fusion bonded epoxy coated reinforcing steel, mainly in the Florida Keys
Bridges in the Gulf of Mexico in the late 1980s. Epoxy coated steel had
become the protection system of choice in the United States for bridge decks
and substructures. When the failures were reported, Florida Department of
Transportation and the Federal Highways Administration were flooded
with offers of alternative protection systems. Although Florida no longer
uses epoxy coated reinforcing steel, most state and provincial highway
agencies in North America still find it satisfactory, and cheaper than the
alternatives. Florida DOT are assessing the long-term effectiveness of
inhibitors for marine bridge applications. Proprietary formulations are
offered more widely in North America than in Europe.
6.6.2
Corrosion inhibitors for hardened concrete
Vapour phase inhibitors or migrating corrosion inhibitors have been used
to impregnate packaging, greases and waxes for many years to protect steel
machinery and components, particularly before use. An American company
132
Physical and chemical repair
 

realized in the 1980s that they might be effective in diffusing through
concrete pores and protecting reinforcing steel. Several companies now
offer proprietary formulations, which are again amine and ester based, with
amino alcohols as the main volatile component.
Amino alcohols are ambiodic, forming a film on the steel surface,
blocking both anodic and cathodic reactions. They can be applied as a
coating on the surface of the concrete, a ‘plug’ of material in a hole,
admixed into repairs. The supplier claim that these materials will move very
rapidly through the air voids in the concrete, through pores and microcracks
to reach the steel and protect it.
A migrating inhibitor with no pretensions of volatility is MFP or
monofluorophosphate. This relies on capillary action other transport mech-
anisms to get the material down to the steel through the concrete cover.
A recent paper showed that it could be quite successful in carbonated
concrete Raharinaivo and Malric (1998). Calcium nitrite has also been
offered in a formulation for patch repairs or overlays with the intention that
the nitrite will diffuse out of the patch and protect the steel.
6.6.3
Track record, case histories and monitoring
One issue with corrosion inhibitors is to determine how effective they are.
There are two aspects to this, can they be detected and levels measured
quantitatively in the concrete and at the rebar surface? Are they effectively
suppressing the corrosion rate?
Detection is obviously specific to a particular active inhibiting chemical.
Some tests are expensive and difficult. Much work has gone on to develop
a test for aminoalcohols, with mixed results so far. As stated earlier, it is far
easier to carry out test on admixed inhibitors than for those applied to
hardened concrete. There can be dangers with under dosing inhibitors, in
that corrosion may occur very aggressively in small anodic pits. It is there-
fore important that the risk of pitting and under dosing is fully understood.
The most effective method of assessing corrosion inhibitors is to measure
the corrosion rate. If a corrosion inhibitor is effective it should reduce the
active corrosion rate by at least one and preferably two orders of magnitude.
The author has reported long-term monitoring of structures which had
corrosion inhibitors applied in 1995 (Broomfield, 1997). Aminoalcohol-
based inhibitors were applied by surface application, down holes drilled in
the concrete and in repair patches to support structures with over 1%
chloride by weight of cement cast into the concrete as calcium chloride set
accelerator. Over the years a large number of patch repairs have been carried
out. This trial on over 60 structures showed only a slight reduction in
corrosion rate and the onset of cracking of treated structures at approxi-
mately the same time as untreated controls. In a very small scale trial with
another proprietary aminoalcohol-based inhibitor, short-term results were
Physical and chemical repair
133
 

more encouraging, with a 91% reduction in the corrosion rate measured
with a linear polarization device in an area showing active corrosion rates
and corrosion potentials. However, there has been no follow up to this trial
on a car park deck with low cover, which would maximize the likelihood of
inhibitor reaching the steel.
The UK Transport Research Laboratory has recently set up laboratory
tests on a range of inhibitors available in the United Kingdom. They are also
doing field test on bridge bents on the Midland Links Motorway near
Birmingham for the Highways Agency. The UK Building Research
Establishment (BRE) has had long-term outdoor exposure trials going for
several years. BRE also did tests many years ago on calcium nitrite
(Treadaway and Russell, 1968).
In the United States Corrosion Inhibitor testing goes back many years.
The calcium nitrite inhibitor cast into concrete has been widely tested in the
laboratory and the field. Aminoalcohol-based inhibitors were first trialed in
hardened concrete in the 1980s, with some of the most comprehensive
testing done by the Strategic Highway Research Program (Al-Qadi et al.,
1993; Prowell et al., 1993). A recent review of the field trials on bridge
decks suffering from chloride ingress showed no beneficial effect of
inhibitor treatments (Sohanghpurwalla et al., 1997). Similarly, a large scale
exposure trial of inhibitors on slabs also found no beneficial effects of a
number of inhibitors (Sprinkel and Ozyildirim, 1998). The exception was
calcium nitrite cast into the concrete.
If coatings are applied after the inhibitor is introduced then corrosion
monitoring is made harder. In order to take measurements of the corrosion
condition, either the coating must be removed locally or (preferably)
corrosion rate probes embedded in the concrete, as has been done on some
car parks in the United Kingdom (Broomfield et al., 1999). Ideally this
should be done before the inhibitor is applied so that ‘control’ measure-
ments can be taken prior to treatment. Permanent monitoring probes will
effectively monitor the changes in corrosion rate without disturbing the
structure, and ensuring that readings are made in consistent ways in
consistent locations.
6.6.4
Summary of the use of corrosion inhibitors 
in repairs
This section cannot provide a definitive review or state-of the-art review of
corrosion inhibitors for concrete. It looks at the various issues facing those
who want to expand the use of corrosion inhibitors. The biggest issues are
for those wishing to use them for rehabilitation rather than for durable
construction.
134
Physical and chemical repair
 

The research and field trials on corrosion inhibitors reveal the following
issues:
●
There is very little field data on corrosion inhibitors.
●
The available field data there is often poor, with no clear evidence of
the amount of inhibitor applied, whether it reached the rebar and if it
is reducing corrosion rates and extending time to cracking.
●
Many claims have been made about the transport of inhibitors through
hardened concrete, these need to be independently assessed.
●
We will need definitive evidence of the dosage vs. chloride level to
achieve a given (low) corrosion rate.
●
For application to hardened concrete we need quantitative data on its
penetration vs. concrete cover and concrete permeability.
●
We need more information on the performance of inhibitors, particularly
well controlled field trials, and long-term corrosion monitoring.
Corrosion inhibitors are inexpensive materials that can be applied simply.
However, until there is clear evidence of their envelope of effectiveness in
terms of chloride level, corrosion rate, dosage cover and longevity, it will be
difficult to do comparative whole life costing of inhibitor application vs.
proven alternatives such as cathodic protection.
This is particularly so for inhibitors for hardened concrete. In the case of
inhibitors for admixing into fresh concrete, whole life costing programmes
are available from the manufacturers that show the cost effectiveness of
their inhibitor vs. some of their other products or alternative methods of
improving durability in aggressive environments.
It may prove that inhibitors for hardened concrete are most effective for
carbonated and low chloride level concretes, with low cover and reasonable
permeability. However, recent laboratory research found little effect of
organic inhibitors on the corrosion of steel in carbonated concrete (Bolzoni
et al., 2006). They may not be suitable for rehabilitation of highway struc-
tures with high chloride levels and high strength structural concrete with
low permeability. While some of the published and unpublished field data
support this view, there has been few published recommendations giving the
range of conditions under which they are effective. However, there is much
research both ongoing and reported, by manufacturers and independent
researchers, for example under the COST 521 programme in Europe and
the Florida DOT and FHWA funded research in the United States.
At this point the author would consider any use of the proven corrosion
inhibiting admixtures for new construction to be an effective corrosion
prevention measure if backed up with proper assessment and whole life costing.
However, any application of inhibitors for repair of existing structures should
be done on a trial basis with proper long-term monitoring of the treatment.
Physical and chemical repair
135
 

6.7
Standards and guidance on physical 
and chemical repair
However a concrete repair is carried out, by hand placing mortar, sprayed
or pumped into a new form, the important factor is that it is well consolidated
and well adhered. To this end a coring machine should be used to core
through repairs to the substrate, a pull off test done and the core evaluated
for its consolidation and compressive strength. Very few standards or
guidance documents are willing to give definitive values for the pull off tests
on repairs in the field. One of the few is Concrete Society (1991) which
states that the minimum pull of strength should be at least 0.8 N/mm2
unless failure occurs within the parent concrete. EN1504-10 (2003) states
in its non-mandatory appendix Table A.2 ‘Site values within the range
1.2–1.5 MPa for structural repairs and a minimum of 0.7 MPa for non
structural repair are acceptable. Values for laboratory performance are
given in prEN1504-3 2001.’
There is a systematic European standard to physical and chemical
techniques for concrete repair of chloride contaminated structures. This is
BSEN1504-9. Products and repair Systems for the Protection and repair of
Concrete Structures – Definitions, requirements, quality control and
evaluation of conformity. Part 9 General Principles for the use of products
and systems. The earlier parts cover different classes of materials while part
10 covers site application:
Part 1 – Definitions
Part 2 – Surface protection systems for concrete
Part 3 – Structural and non-structural repair
Part 4 – Structural bonding
Part 5 – Crack injection
Part 6 – Anchoring of reinforcing steel bar
Part 7 – Reinforcement protection
Part 8 – Quality control and evaluation of conformity
Part 9 – General principles for the use of products and systems
Part 10 – Site application of products and systems and quality control of the
works.
The aim is that the European ‘CE’ mark will start coming into use about
the time of publication of this book for the various concrete repair and
protection products covered in parts 2 to 7 using the methodology in Part 8.
Part 9 gives principles of repair depending on whether the damage is caused
by corrosion or not. Part 10 guides designers in the development of specifi-
cations and guides applicators in the application of the works. Part 10 has a
very useful informative (non-mandatory) appendix. The use of EN1504 will
be discussed further in Chapter 8 on rehabilitation methodology.
136
Physical and chemical repair
 

A comprehensive Concrete Repair Manual has been developed by ACI in
collaboration with BRE, ICRI and the Concrete Society (ACI, 2002). This
includes the ACI, Concrete Society, BRE and ICRI guides on condition eval-
uation and diagnosis, patch repairing and overlaying, as well as guidance
documents on protection and corrosion management. Concrete Society
(1991) is part of the manual. The manual also includes Corrosion
Prevention Association (CPA) monographs on electrochemical techniques,
but not NACE recommended practice or technical reports.
National Highway Agencies will also have internal standards and guid-
ance for concrete repairs. In the UK the Highways Agency publishes a
Design Manual for Roads and bridges, volume 3 covers, Highway
Structures: Inspection and Maintenance, Section 3 Repair, Part BD26/86
Materials for the repair of concrete highway structures. This contains model
specifications for concrete replacement on decks, piers columns and abut-
ments, beams; and on sprayed concrete, repair mortar and on impregnation.
References
ACI (2002). Concrete Repair Manual. 2nd Edition. 2002; Two Vols Publ. ACI
International, BRE, Concrete Society, International Concrete Repairs Institute.
Al-Qadi, I.L., Prowell, B.D., Weyers, R.E., Dutta, T., Gouru, H. and Berke, N. (1993).
Concrete Bridge Protection and Rehabilitation: Chemical and Physical Techniques –
Corrosion Inhibitors and Polymers SHRP-S-666, Strategic Highway Research
Program, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Anon. (1993). ‘Hydro-demolition’, Construction Repair, 7(2): 32–36.
Bolzoni, F., Lazzari, L., Ormellese, M. and Goidanich, S. (2006). Prevention of
Corrosion in Concrete the Use of Admixed Inhibitors Proc. Corrosion 2006, 
San Diego CA, NACE International Houston.
Broomfield, J., Davis, K. and Hladky, K. (April 1999). Permanent Corrosion
Monitoring for Reinforced Concrete Structures. Paper 99559, Corrosion/99,
NACE International, Houston, TX.
Broomfield, J.P. (1997). ‘The pros and cons of corrosion inhibitors’, Construction
Repair Journal, 11(4): 16–18.
BSI (1997). Paints and Varnishes – Coating Materials and Coating Systems for
Exterior Masonry and Concrete Part 6 – Determination of Carbon Dioxide
Permeability prEN 1062–6, British Standards Institute London.
BSI (1999). Paints and Varnishes – Coating Materials and Coating Systems for
Exterior Masonry and Concrete Part 3 – Determination and Classification of
Liquid Water Transmission Rate (permeability) EN 1062–3, British Standards
Institute London.
CIRIA (1993). Standard Tests for Repair Materials and Coatings for Concrete Part 3:
Stability, Substrate Compatibility and Shrinkage Technical Note 141, CIRIA
London UK.
Concrete Society (1991). Technical Report No 38 Patch Repair of Reinforced
Concrete – Subject to Reinforcement Corrosion. Concrete Society, Camberley,
Surrey, UK.
Physical and chemical repair
137
 

Concrete Society (1997). Guide to Surface Treatments for Protection and Enhancement
of Concrete. Technical Report 50. Concrete Society, Camberley, Surrey, UK.
Emberson, N.K. and Mays, G.C. (1990). Design of Patch Repairs: Measurements of
Physical and Mechanical Properties of Repair Systems for Satisfactory Structural
Performance. Protection of Concrete, in R.K. Dhir and J.W. Green (eds), Publ.
E&Fn Spon.
Highways Agency (1986). Design Manual for Roads and bridges, Volume 3 covers,
Highway Structures: Inspection and Maintenance, Section 3 Repair, Part
BD26/86 Materials for the repair of concrete highway structures. Highways
Agency, Department of Transport, London, UK.
Highways Agency (2003). The Impregnation of Reinforced and Prestressed
Concrete Highway Structures using Hydrophobic Pore-lining Impregnants
BD43/03 Design Manual for Roads and Bridges Volume 2 – Highway Structures:
Design (Substructures and Special Substructures) Materials Section 4 – Paints and
Other Protective Coatings.
ICRI (2004). Guideline for the Preparation of Concrete Surfaces for Repair Using
Hydrodemolition Methods Technical Guide G03737 International Concrete
Repair Institute Des Plaines, Illinois, USA.
Ingvarsson, H. and Eriksson, B. (1988). ‘Hydrodemolition for bridge repairs’,
Nordisk Betong, 2–3: 49–54.
Manning, D.G. (1995). Waterproofing Membranes for Concrete Bridge Decks: A
Synthesis of highway Practice, NCHRP Synthesis 220, National Cooperative
Highway Research Program, Transportation Research Board, National Research
Council, Washington, DC.
Matthews, S., Murray, M., Boxall, J., Bassi, R. and Morelidge, J. (2003).
‘Maintenance of concrete buildings and structures, in Concrete Building
Pathology, Susan Macdonald (ed.), Publ. Blackwells, Oxford. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (1989). Durability of
Concrete Road Bridges, OECD, Paris.
Price, A.R.C. (1989). A Field Trial of Waterproofing Systems for Concrete
BridgeDecks, TRRL Research Report 185, Transport Research Laboratory,
Crowthorne Berkshire, UK.
Price, A.R.C. (1991). Waterproofing of Concrete Bridge Decks: Site Practice and
Failures, TRRL Research Report 317, Transport Research Laboratory,
Crowthorne, Berkshire, UK.
Prowell, B.D., Weyers, R.E. and Al-Qadi, I.L. (1993). Concrete Bridge Protection and
Rehabilitation: Chemical and Physical Techniques – Field Validation SHRP-S-658,
Strategic Highway Research Program, National Research Council, Washington, DC. 
Raharinaivo, 
A. 
and 
Malric, 
B. 
(December, 
1998). 
Performance 
of
Monofluorophosphate for Inhibiting Corrosion of Steel in Reinforced Concrete
Structures’ Proc. International Conference on Corrosion and Rehabilitation of
Reinforced Concrete Structures. Orlando Florida.
Rapa, M. and Hartt, W.H. (1999). Non-Destructive Evaluation Of Jacketed
Prestressed Concrete Piles For Corrosion Damage. NACE Corrosion 99. (Paper
No 566). NACE International, Houston, TX, USA.
Robinson, H.L. (1986). Evaluation of Coatings as Carbonation Barriers.
Proceedings of the Second International Colloquium on Materials Science and
Restoration, Technische Akademie Essingen, Germany.
138
Physical and chemical repair
 

Russell, H.G. (2004). Concrete Bridge Deck Performance: A Synthesis of Highway
Practice. National Cooperative Highway Research Program Synthesis 333,
Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, USA.
Sergi, G., Seneviratne, A.M.G., Maleki, M.T., Sadegzadeh, M. and Page, C.L.
(2000). ‘Control of reinforcement corrosion by surface treatment of concrete’,
Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs. Structures & Buildings, 140(1): 85–100.
Sohanghpurwalla, A.A., Islam, M. and Scannell, W. (1997). Performance and Long
Term Monitoring of Various Corrosion Protection Systems used in Reinforced
Concrete Bridge Structures. Proceedings of International Conference Repair of
Concrete Structures, from Theory to Practice in a Marine Environment.
Sprinkel, M. and Ozyildirim, C. (1998). Evaluation of Exposure Slabs Repaired
with Corrosion Inhibitors. Proc. International Conference on Corrosion and
Rehabilitation of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Orlando Florida.
Treadaway, K.W.J. and Russell, A.D. (1968). ‘Inhibition of the Corrosion of Steel in
Concrete’, Highways and Public Works, 36(1704): 19–21.
Vassie, P.R. (1987). Durability of Concrete Repairs: The Effect of Steel Cleaning
Procedures, Research Report 109, Transport Research Laboratory, Crowthorne,
Berkshire, UK.
Virmani, Y.P. and Clemena, G.G. (1998). Corrosion Protection – Concrete Bridges.
Federal Highways Administration Report FHWA-RD-98-088, Washington, 
DC, p 30.
Vorster, M., Merrigan, J.P., Lewis, R.W. and Weyers, R.E. (1992). Techniques for
Concrete Removal and Bar Cleaning on Bridge Rehabilitation Projects SHRP-S-
336 National Research Council, Washington, DC, USA.
Weyers, R.E., Prowell, B.D., Sprinkel, M.M. and Vorster, M. (1993). Concrete
Bridge Protection, Repair, and Rehabilitation Relative to Reinforcement
Corrosion: A Methods Application Manual. SHRP Reports. SHRP-S-327.
Whiting, D., Ost, B. and Nagi, M. (1992). Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges
Relative to Reinforcement Corrosion, Volume 5: Methods for Evaluating the
Effectiveness of Penetrating Sealers. Strategic Highway Research Program Report
SHRP-S-327, National Research Council, Washington, DC, USA.
Whiting, D., Todres, A., Nagi, M., Yu, T., Peshkin, D., Darter, M., Holm, J.,
Anderson, M. and Geiker, M. (1993). Synthesis of Current and Projected
Concrete Highway Technology, Stratgic Highway Research Program Report
SHRP-C-345 National Research Council, Washington, DC, USA.
Physical and chemical repair
139
 

Chapter 7
Electrochemical repair 
techniques
7.1
Basic principles of electrochemical techniques
As we saw in reactions (2.1) and (2.2), corrosion occurs by the movement
of electrical charge from the anode (a positively charged area of steel where
the steel is dissolving and forming rust) to the cathode (a negatively charged
area of steel where a charge balancing reaction occurs turning oxygen and
water into hydroxyl ions). This means that the process is both electrical
and chemical, that is, electrochemical. We have also seen that, in the case
of chloride attack, patch repairs are only a local solution to corrosion and
repairing an anode may accelerate corrosion in adjoining areas due to the
incipient anode effect (Section 6.2.1 and Figure 6.5).
One solution to this problem is to apply an electrochemical treatment which
will suppress corrosion across the whole of the treated structure, element or
area at risk. Figure 7.1 shows the basic components of an electrochemical
system. They are a DC power supply, a control and monitoring system, an
anode (temporary or permanent) usually distributed across the surface either
fixed to it or embedded in the cover concrete, and monitoring probes, usually
in the form of embedded reference electrodes. Electrochemical methods work
by applying the external anode and passing current from it to the steel so
that all the steel is made into a cathode. Three techniques are described here.
The best known and most established technique is cathodic protection. This
subdivides into impressed current cathodic protection and galvanic (also
known as sacrificial) cathodic protection. An alternative using a temporary
anode and a short-term (typically 4 to 8 week) treatment time for chloride
infested structures is known as electrochemical chloride extraction (also
known as electrochemical chloride removal and as desalination). A similar
1 to 2 week treatment method for reinforcement subject to carbonation
induced corrosion concrete has also been developed. This is known as
electrochemical realkalization. This chapter discusses these techniques, their
advantages and limitations and their application.
All of these treatments are suitable for reinforcing steel in concrete.
However, the passing of electric current and of the voltages used can have
adverse effects on concrete and on steel. They can only be applied with great
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
141
care to structures containing prestressing steel (pre- or post-tensioned) and
to structures suffering from alkali-silica reactivity (ASR). They cannot be
applied through electrically insulating layers or patches. These problems are
discussed later.
7.2
Cathodic protection
7.2.1
Theory and principles – impressed current systems
Impressed current cathodic protection works passing a small direct current
(DC) from a permanent anode on top of or fixed into the concrete through the
concrete to the reinforcement. The power supply passes sufficient current from
the anode to the reinforcing steel to force the anode reaction (7.1) to stop:
Fe →Fe2  2e
(7.1)
and make cathodic reactions occur on the steel surface such as (7.2).
H2O  O2  e →2OH
(7.2)
The reinforcement network then becomes cathodic and corrosion is
suppressed. However, another cathodic reaction can occur if the potential
gets too negative:
H2O  e →H  OH
(7.3)
1
2
–ve to cathode (rebars)
+ve to anode
Anode (temporary or permanent)
Transformer/rectifier
power supply
and control system
Monitoring probes (refference  electrodes)
Refference
electrode
negative
Figure 7.1 Schematic of electrochemical protection systems.
 

This hydrogen evolution reaction can lead to hydrogen embrittlement.
Monatomic hydrogen can diffuse into the steel and condense at grain
boundaries or other defects in the crystalline matrix of the steel, weakening
it and causing failure under load. This problem is negligible for normal rein-
forcing steel, but is of considerable concern for prestressed structures where
the high tensile steel can be very susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement and
the loading of the steel to up to 75% of its ultimate tensile strength can
make it liable to catastrophic failure.
The problems of hydrogen embrittlement and of gas evolution are
usually controlled by limiting the potential of the steel to below the
hydrogen evolution potential. However, in acidic pits or crevices it may
be possible for the potential to exceed the hydrogen evolution potential
without being sensed by measuring electrodes. The cathodic protection
of prestressed structures should only be undertaken with great care and
input from experienced corrosion experts. An excellent state-of-the-art
report on the cathodic protection of prestressed has been published
(NACE, 2001).
The generation of hydroxyl ions in equations (7.2) and (7.3) will increase
the alkalinity and help to rebuild the passive layer where it has been broken
down by the chloride attack.
The chloride ion itself is negative and will be repelled by the negatively
charged cathode (reinforcing steel). It will move towards the (new external)
anode. With the carbon-based anodes it may then combine to form chlorine
gas at the anode:
2Cl →Cl2(gas)  e
(7.4)
The other major reaction at all major anodes is the formation of oxygen:
2OH →H2O  O2  e
(7.5)
and
H2O →O2  2H  2e
(7.6)
Reaction (7.5) is the reverse of reaction (7.2), that is, alkalinity is formed
at the steel cathode (enhancing the passivity of the steel) and consumed at
the anode. These and related reactions can carbonate the area around the
anode (especially where carbon-based anodes are used, where the carbon
also turns into carbon dioxide) and can lead to etching of the concrete
surface and attack on the cement paste and even some aggregates once the
alkalinity is consumed.
1
2
1
2
142
Electrochemical repair techniques
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
143
We can therefore see that three factors must be taken into account when
controlling our cathodic protection system:
1
There must be sufficient current to overwhelm the anodic reactions and
stop, or severely reduce the corrosion rate.
2
The current must stay as low as possible to minimize the acidification
around the anode and the attack on the anode for those that are
consumed by the anodic reactions.
3
The steel should not exceed the hydrogen evolution potential, especially
for prestressed steel to avoid hydrogen embrittlement.
The balancing of these requirements will be discussed later under criteria
for control of impressed current cathodic protection systems.
One of the more confusing facts of cathodic protection is that when 
we carry out a reference electrode potential survey of a reinforced 
concrete structure (Section 4.8) the most negative areas are those that are at
highest risk of corrosion while the areas with a positive potential are at 
the lowest risk of corrosion, that is, cathodic (Section 4.8.3). However, to
achieve cathodic protection, we must depress the potential of the steel. The
reasons for this are explained later.
One of the earliest criteria for achieving effective cathodic protection is
to depress the potential of the cathodes to that of the most anodic areas
(Mears and Brown, 1938). This stops the current flow from anode to
cathode. It works because cathodes are more easily polarized than anodes.
As discussed in Section 4.12, for a fixed current, an actively corroding area
shifts its potential less than a non corroding area. Therefore, once we
depress all the cathodes below the potential of the anodes, corrosion stops.
Another way of looking at it is to consider the Pourbaix diagram
Figure 7.2 (Pourbaix, 1973; Morgan, 1990) for iron in chloride solutions.
This shows pH and potential changes as the iron moves from areas of
corrosion to areas of passivity and then to immunity from corrosion.
Ideally, we would like to depress the potential sufficiently to reach the
immune zone. However, that is very close to the hydrogen evolution potential
(lower dotted line) at pH 12 which is where steel in concrete lies. For the
reasons discussed earlier in this section, we want to avoid hydrogen evolu-
tion, so we aim for the area below the pitting potentials. This is discussed
in Appendix 1 of BSEN12696 (2000) and also in the section on criteria 7.4.
7.2.2
Galvanic anode systems
As discussed earlier, there are two forms of cathodic protection, impressed
current and galvanic. The impressed current system has been described
earlier and is the system with the longest history of application to atmos-
pherically exposed reinforced concrete structures. An alternative method
 

is to connect the steel to a sacrificial or galvanic anode such as zinc. This
anode corrodes preferentially, liberating electrons with the same effect as
the impressed current system, for example:
Zn →Zn2  2e
This system is illustrated schematically in Figure 7.3.
The same phenomenon is used in galvanizing where a coating of zinc is
applied over steel to corrode preferentially, protecting the steel. However,
the main restriction on this system is that the zinc has a small driving
voltage when coupled to steel. This is only a few hundred millivolts, and
gets smaller with actively corroding steel. While a galvanizing system puts
the two metals in direct contact, with galvanic anode cathodic protection
144
Electrochemical repair techniques
+2
+1
0
–1
–2
0
2
4
6
8
pH
Immunity from
corrosion
General
corrosion
Pitting
General
corrosion
General
corrosion
E (volts vs. standard hydrogen electrode)
Imperfect
passivity
ASTM C876
Pitting potential for 0.05 M CI–
Pitting potential for 0.10 M CI–
Pitting potential for 0.50 M CI–
10
12
14
Figure 7.2 Pourbaix diagram showing experimental conditions of immunity to corro-
sion, general corrosion and imperfect passivity for iron in 355 ppm
(0.01M) chloride along with the pitting potentials at higher chloride levels.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
145
there is an electrolyte to carry the current. The resistance of the electrolyte
is crucial to the performance of the system.
The resistivity of normal ‘inland’ concrete is high compared with sea
water-exposed concrete and other aqueous, non cementitious electrolytes
where zinc galvanic anodes are often used. This resistivity can be made
higher by the formation of zinc oxides as it corrodes. 
Unlike a free flowing electrolyte, the corrosion products are not washed
away in concrete.
Aluminium and magnesium and their alloys are also used in galvanic
anode cathodic protection systems. One advantage of these alloys is that
they are lighter than zinc. However, their oxides and other corrosion prod-
ucts are voluminous and could attack the concrete. They are therefore less
attractive for concrete applications.
The earliest galvanic systems for reinforced concrete were installed in the
United States on bridge decks. The first was in 1978 using aluminium,
and from 1976 to 1980 a study was carried out on a zinc system in Illinois.
Galvanic anode
M Mn+ +ne–
Ion current flow
Electron flow
Concrete
H2O +     O2 + e–  2OH–
1
2
Figure 7.3 Schematic of a galvanic cathodic protection system.The steel is made cathodic
by the dissolution of a suitable metal which preferentially corrodes, generating
the electrons needed to sustain the cathodic reaction on the steel surface.
 

146
Electrochemical repair techniques
Both were metal sheets under overlays on bridge decks. Despite initial
negative reports, long-term performance appears to have been good with no
maintenance throughout their life.
Galvanic cathodic protection systems have been used extensively since
the early 1990s in Florida on prestressed concrete bridge support piles in
the sea. One of the reasons the galvanic system is used there is because
concrete resistivity is low due to the marine exposure conditions. The
Florida systems frequently incorporate a distributed anode of zinc fixed on
the atmospherically exposed concrete and bulk zinc anodes in the water
which pass current through the low resistance sea water to protect the
submerged area as shown in Figure 7.4.
The distributed anodes used in Florida are principally electric arc sprayed
zinc, a few tenths of a millimetre thick, or zinc metal mesh (Figure 7.5).
Current flow
Current flow
Soil or water
Buried or
submerged anode
Concrete
Figure 7.4 Schematic of a buried or submerged anode protecting reinforcement.
Figure 7.5 Thermal sprayed zinc being applied to a bridge substructure in the Florida
Keys. Courtesy Florida DOT.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
147
The sprayed anodes are widely used in the United States for impressed
current cathodic protection. Originally, the mesh anodes were mechanically
clamped to the pile. In later versions, a GRP jacket containing the zinc mesh
is attached to the pile and filled with grout after connecting the zinc to the
reinforcement (Figure 7.6). All these systems and their performance in
Florida are discussed in Kessler et al. (1995, 2002).
The next major development was of ‘humectants’ which are sprayed onto
thermal sprayed zinc anode surfaces. A humectant penetrates into the con-
crete and increases the humidity to maintain a low electrical resistance and
maintain current flow between the anode and the steel (Bennett et al., 2000).
In the United Kingdom the first major development was of a proprietary
anode for patch repair. This has the appearance of a ‘hockey puck’ consist-
ing of a disk of zinc in a specially formulated mortar that prevents the zinc
passivating. Two pairs of wires protrude from the opposite sides of the puck
and are attached to the reinforcing steel exposed during the repair. By
installing galvanic anodes within the repair (Figure 7.7) the ‘incipient
anode’ effect is eliminated (see Figure 6.5).
This has recently been developed further into a small ‘yogurt pot’ sized
anode with a single connecting wire that can be inserted into core holes
in the concrete and wired together to produce a galvanic discrete anode
system (Figure 7.8). They have been used predominantly on multi-storey
car parks and on bridge substructures.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.6 (a) A GRP jacket jetty anode assembly showing zinc mesh. Courtesy of Fosroc
Ltd. (b) Jacket anodes in place on a harbour in the Channel Islands, UK.
 

148
Electrochemical repair techniques
Since the maximum voltage that can be generated with zinc anodes is
extremely unlikely to generate hydrogen embrittlement, galvanic systems
have been used to protect prestressed concrete members. They are also
used on fusion bonded epoxy coated steel reinforced piles as the effects of
electrical discontinuity between bars is unlikely to lead to significant stray
current induced corrosion as the currents and potentials are low.
Table 7.1 summarizes the different anodes and their characteristics:
●
Thermal sprayed zinc – Zinc is flame or electric arc sprayed onto the
concrete surface and a direct connection made to the reinforcement. It
can be used as sprayed on marine splash or tidal applications. In drier
locations a humectant solution of hygroscopic salts can be applied.
Over 50,000m2 has been applied, mainly in Florida.
●
Thermal sprayed Aluminium/Zinc/Indium – A proprietary variation on
thermal sprayed zinc that uses an alloy to enhance the current rather
than a humectant. A 300 micrometre thick coating is applied by arc
spray. Approrimately 35,000m2 had been applied up to May 2003.
●
Adhesive zinc sheet – A proprietary system consisting of rolls of zinc
0.25mm thick, 25mm wide with a conductive gel adhesive on one side.
The installed system can be painted. The edges must be sealed against
water ingress as the gel can swell and leak.
●
Encasement system – A proprietary system developed by Florida DoT
consisting of expanded zinc mesh in a permanent form, grouted onto
Figure 7.7 Installation of a galvanic anode in a patch repair to prevent incipient anode
induced corrosion around the repair. Courtesy of Fosroc Ltd.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
149
concrete piles or columns. Several hundred piles and columns have
been protected with this system. It is for marine splash and tidal zone
applications.
●
Probe anodes in patch repairs – Proprietary anodes approximately
65mm diameter by 30mm high with four wires protruding for attach-
ment to exposed reinforcing steel in the patch. Anodes are installed on a
maximum of 750mm spacing around a patch. Approximately 200,000
sold protecting about 100,000 m2 of concrete at the end of 2002.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.8 (a) Galvanic anodes for installation in cored holes. Anodes are linked
with titanium wires to form a zone. (b) Galvanic anodes being installed
in core holes in a wall. Courtesy Fosroc Ltd.
 

150
Electrochemical repair techniques
Table 7.1 Anode types
Anode
Environment
Application
Durability/life
Comments
Thermal
Marine or
Requires bulky
Greater than
Colour change
sprayed 
anywhere
spray
10 year life 
to concrete is
zinc
(with 
equipment
expected.
the only effect
humectant)
and skilled
Reduces with
operator
severe exposure
Thermal
Marine and
Requires bulky
10–15 year 
Colour change
sprayed
deicing
spray equipment
marine exposure,
to concrete is
Al/Zn/In
and skilled
15–20 year in 
the only effect
operator
northern deicing
Adhesive 
Not for very
No special
Design life is
Anode is 1–2mm
zinc sheet
high wetting.
skills apart
25 to 50 years.
thick. Either leaves
Will work in
from soldering
Gel deteriorates 
zinc metal finish or
very dry
connections
in very wet 
painted metal finish
conditions
conditions
Encasement 
Marine only,
Special skills
Very durable.
Pile column section 
jacket
mainly columns
required for
Life up to 
enlarged by 25mm 
and piles
grouting up
50 year
or more. Load 
jacket
increase. Repair 
can be structural
Probe 
Anywhere
No special
15 to 25 year life.
Core holes at
anodes in
skills
Very durable
330 to 650mm
cored holes
centres. Requires
good design
Probe 
Any patch
No special
10 to 15 year life.
Only area
anodes in 
repairs
skills
Very durable
around patch
patch repairs
repairs protected
●
Probe anodes in cored holes – Potted up zinc anode approximately
45mm diameter by 40 or 60mm long. Installed on 330mm to 650mm
spacing in 50mm diameter cored holes.
7.2.3
The merits and laminations of galvanic 
cathodic protection
The principle advantage of galvanic cathodic protection is its simplicity,
with no power:
1
In principle this could lead to cost savings on a range of projects.
2
Its strength is also its weakness. The simplicity means there is no way
of controlling it and there is no automatic flow of information on its
performance in the field. However, monitoring systems can be installed
if required.
3
Anodes have a limited life and need replacement at intervals that can be
difficult to define. Most galvanic systems aim to provide at least ten
 

years life before the anode needs replacing. However, systems have been
designed to last up to 40 years.
4
If the concrete is too dry the system will not work although under such
conditions the risk of corrosion is likely to be reduced.
5
Although well behind impressed current cathodic protection which has
protected over 2 million m2 of concrete structures, galvanic systems are
progressing rapidly with at least 200,000m2 in less than five years of
serious commercial exploitation.
6
There is now a range of anodes, Which includes:
●
Thermal sprayed metals (usually zinc or alloys)
●
Encasement systems
●
Adhesive zinc sheet systems
●
Embedded anodes for extending the lives of patch repairs
●
Embedded anodes as discrete anodes.
7
The production of small galvanic anodes for patch repair systems is a
useful adjunct to conventional patch repairs. It is not designed to provide
full cathodic protection and would require a proper cathodic protection
design to ensure adequate protection and a reasonable life of the patches
8
The driving voltage of galvanic systems is low and may be inadequate
to provide full cathodic protection in very high chloride conditions.
9
The limited driving voltage may make it attractive for protecting
prestressed structures liable to hydrogen embrittlement and for epoxy
coated reinforcement, where electrical continuity cannot be guaranteed
and the consequences of discontinuity are small.
7.2.4
The history of cathodic protection 
of steel in concrete
The principles of galvanic anode cathodic protection were discovered by 
Sir Humphrey Davy in 1824. His results were used over the next century or
so to protect the submerged metallic parts of ships from corrosion. In the
early decades of the 20th century the technology was applied to underground
pipelines. Impressed current cathodic protection was developed when it was
found that the electrolytes like soils had too high electrical resistance for
galvanic systems to be effective.
The problem of corrosion of steel in concrete was first ascribed to
stray current flows from trams and DC railway systems (Hime, 1994).
Once chloride, in the form of deicing salt, was identified as the major
culprit (when chlorides took over from grit as a road deicier in the 1960s)
an enterprising engineer in the California Department of Transportation
(Caltrans) took a standard pipeline cathodic protection design and
‘flattened it out’ on a bridge deck. The system was straightforward. One of
Electrochemical repair techniques
151
 

the popular impressed current pipeline cathodic protection anodes of that
time was made of a corrosion resistant silicon iron, surrounded by a carbon
coke breeze backfill. A well was dug near the pipeline, the anode put in sur-
rounded by the backfill and the system connected to a DC power supply,
with the negative terminal connected to the pipeline to make a cathodic
protection system. Richard Stratfull took ‘pancake’ silicon iron anodes,
fixed them on a bridge deck and applied a carbon coke breeze asphalt over-
lay (Stratfull, 1974). The systems installed in 1973 and 1974 were reviewed
in 1989 and were still working (Broomfield and Tinnea, 1992). They have
since been replaced. The author conducted some of the earliest research in
the for the UK DoT on conductive coatings for cathodic protection of build-
ings (Geoghegan et al., 1985). The first United Kingdom trial in the United
Kingdom was designed and installed by the author on Melbury House above
Marylebone Station in London for British Rail in 1984. This included a
remote control monitoring by a modem link (Broomfield et al., 1987).
Four trial systems were designed and installed in 1987 for the UK DoT
on the Midland Links motorway system around Birmingham, Britain’s
second largest city. Those systems are still running (in 2006) and about 600
cross-beams have been protected (Unwin and Hall, 1993) with further
beams expected to be protected on the Midland Links as time goes on. An
example is shown in Figure 4.1. Early systems were also designed by the
author in 1986–1987 and were installed on bridges and buildings in 
Hong Kong and marine structures in Australia. There are now a large number
of systems on bridges and other structures all around the world. In 2001,
there was an estimate of 2–3 million m2 of impressed current anode applied
to structures worldwide.
Since those first systems were applied in the 1970s, systems have been
developed and applied to bridge decks, substructures and other elements,
buildings, wharves and every conceivable type of reinforced concrete
structure suffering from corrosion of the reinforcing steel. More recently
systems have also been applied to steel in mortar in stone brick and
terracotta clad structures.
Anodes have been developed in the form of conductive coatings, metals
embedded in concrete overlays, conductive concrete overlays and probes
drilled into the concrete. Anodes continue to be developed, applied in new
configurations and to new structures. In the next section we will discuss the
major components of the cathodic protection system, and particularly
the anode systems that are available as these are the most prominent part
of the cathodic protection system. Judicious choice of cathodic protection
anode can maximize the cost effectiveness of the system.
The reason for choosing cathodic protection is almost always cost
effectiveness. The cathodic protection system prevents corrosion across the
whole of the protected area of the structure, unlike localized patch repairs.
If repeated cycles of patch repairs are too expensive or unacceptable, then
152
Electrochemical repair techniques
 

a properly maintained cathodic protection will usually work out as more
cost effective in the long term. If the structure only has a short-term future
and patch repairing is acceptable and inexpensive, then cathodic protection
is not usually a suitable cost effective option.
7.3
The components of an impressed current 
cathodic protection system
The essential elements of a conventional impressed current cathodic
protection system are in this section and in Section 7.4.
The cathode is the reinforcing steel to be protected. It must be continuous,
that is, electrically interconnected to allow current flow, and separated from
the anode by an electrolyte (the pore water). If it is not electrically continu-
ous then it must be made so by adding reinforcing bars, wiring or welding
elements together. If there are ‘shorts’ to the anode (usually where tie wires
or shallow bars come into contact with the anode placed on the concrete sur-
face or in holes or slots in the concrete) they must be removed or the current
will not flow through the steel to concrete interface where it generates the
cathodic reactions (equations (7.2) and (7.3)). The electrical connection
from the reinforcement to the cable leading to the power supply is usually
made with a thermite weld or self tapping screw.
Impressed current anodes have very slow or controlled consumption rates
when the anodic reaction occurs on the anode surface. As the reaction con-
sumes alkalinity (equation (7.5)) and generates acid (equation (7.6)), it can
attack the anode and the concrete. The level of current is therefore impor-
tant in maintaining a good anode to concrete bond. Types of anode are
described later. The function of the anode is to spread the current to all
areas to be protected having converted the electrical current from the
transformer rectifier (DC power supply) to an ionic current that flows from
the anode to the cathode so that the cathodic reaction will occur on the
reinforcing steel surface, suppressing corrosion.
One important requirement is that the interfacial resistance between the
anode and the concrete. However, the electrical resistance of the anode
system should be proportionately lower than the combination of the inter-
facial resistance, the concrete cover resistance, and the steel to concrete
resistance, otherwise the current will not distribute evenly to the steel. For
atmospherically exposed reinforced concrete structures the anode is usually
a ‘distributed anode system’, such as a paint coating on the surface, an
expanded metal mesh across the surface encased in a concrete overlay, strips
of anode in slots across the surface or a series of small ‘point’ or ‘discrete’
anodes embedded in the concrete cover or among the rebars.
As gases are evolved at the anode (equations (7.3) and (7.4)) the distributed
anodes such as coatings or encased anodes must be gas permeable.
Electrochemical repair techniques
153
 

The electrolyte is the medium through which the ionic current flows from
the anode to the cathode. It can be soil or sea water for pipelines or ships.
In the case of atmospherically exposed reinforced concrete structures it is
the concrete pore water. In the case of buried or submerged concrete it will
be firstly water or soil and then the concrete pore water as shown in
Figure 7.4 for a galvanic system. Our discussion will concentrate on atmos-
pherically exposed concrete structures.
The tortuosity and small size of the pores in the concrete gives a higher
resistivity on concrete structures than in marine or soil CP systems. Added
to this is the fact that not all the pores are 100% full, or even lined with
water. This makes a very unusual highly oxygenated, stagnant, high
resistivity, alkaline medium. This contributes to the unique requirements of
cathodic protection systems for atmospherically exposed reinforced
concrete structures.
Problems can arise if the concrete around the anode dries out. Initially
this gives rise to a requirement for a higher driving voltage (10–15 V instead
of the usual 1–5 V). It is usually assumed that if the concrete dries out much
more than this, then the concrete around the steel is too dry for corrosion
to occur. This may not be true, but will not matter if the drying out is short
term (say less than a month or so during a hot dry summer). Problems have
been observed on indoor parking garages kept warm in the winter. Salty ice
melts on the deck, the salt transports into the concrete in the water and
accumulates around the steel but the moisture around the anode dries out.
The anode encounters a high resistance and cannot pass sufficient current
to control the corrosion at the moist, salty reinforcement surface.
The Transformer/Rectifier (T/R or rectifier) is the DC power supply that
transforms mains AC to a lower voltage and rectifies it to DC. The positive
terminal is connected to the anode and the negative to the cathode. The
level of the output is controlled as described later. T/R’s can be run at
constant voltage, constant current or constant potential (against a half cell).
They can be adjusted manually or automatically by circuitry or computer
control or remotely using a telephone line and modem link or a similar
remote connection as described later.
Transformer/rectifiers for conventional cathodic protection systems can be
very large and powerful, capable of delivering hundreds of amps, with oil
cooled transformers. However, for steel in concrete the requirements
are more modest. A graph of current requirement vs. chloride content (Figure
7.15) is discussed under ‘Control Criteria’ Section 7.4 later. Most systems are
designed for a current density of about 10–20 mA per square meter of steel
surface for actively corroding structures and for 0.2–2.0mA/m2 for new
structures where there is no pitting and so no need to passivate pits (see
Section 7.2). There may be a requirement for allowances to be made for
the current flow to lower layers of steel. Allowances must also be made
for the voltage drops down the connecting cables.
154
Electrochemical repair techniques
 

The problem with selecting a transformer rectifier is ensuring that it is
powerful enough, but not so powerful that all adjustments are made in the
first 10% or less of the output. This can lead to difficulties in control and
to inefficiency in output, with electrical energy lost as heat. The electrical
engineering of transformer rectifiers is covered in some of the main texts on
cathodic protection and will not be discussed in detail here.
In general terms, the systems for protection of steel in concrete are generally
full wave rectifiers with smoothing to minimize interference and any possible
adverse effects on the anode. A continuously variable output is usually
specified. Most cathodic protection systems are run under constant current
control, although constant voltage (or an option for both methods) is some-
times specified. Control by constant half cell potential against an embedded
reference electrode is rarely specified for steel in atmospherically exposed
concrete but may be applied to buried or submerged parts of structures.
Transformer rectifiers must be adequately protected from the elements. If
they are sited outside they are usually in steel enclosures (suitably corrosion
protected!) with adequate ventilation and protection against vandalism or
other damage. They often incorporate lightning arrestors and other protec-
tion for the public and the inspector of the system, with suitable fusing and
earth protection.
Other sources of DC power are available in principle but are usually too
expensive for use on large installations. Wind or water turbines, solar
arrays and even batteries have been proposed and experimented with, but
few have been used in large scale practical applications.
Reference electrodes or other small probes may be embedded in the con-
crete. These measure the effect of the CP current and enable operators to
set correct current and voltage levels for the system. These are specifically
designed for long-term durability in an alkaline concrete environment.
The commonly used designs are double junction electrodes to minimize
long-term contamination or leakage. They are usually silver/silver chloride
potassium chloride or a proprietary manganese/manganese dioxide type.
7.3.1
Selection of anodes and early anode development
The anode is a critical part of the cathodic protection system. It is usually
the most expensive item and has the highest cost of installation with major
disruption to the operation of the structure. It is crucial that the correct
anode is chosen and that it is applied properly.
The first anodes, developed by Stratfull, were silicon iron primary anodes
in contact with a conductive coke breeze asphalt overlay (the secondary
anode). This design was based upon CP designs for pipelines where a silicon
iron anode is embedded in a carbon coke breeze backfill to give a large con-
tact area and low resistance. The anode is then linked, via the transformer
rectifier, to the pipeline to be protected. A modified form of the conductive
Electrochemical repair techniques
155
 

156
Electrochemical repair techniques
asphalt system was still used in Ontario, Canada. In some cases carbon
anodes have been used instead of silicon iron. The next development was a
conductive polymer grout (carbon loaded resin) put into parallel slots cut
into the surface. These two systems were only suitable for decks and have
rarely been applied outside North America. The aim of the slot system was
to reduce the weight of the anode and to eliminate the change in deck
height. However, this system requires good concrete cover to the reinforc-
ing steel to avoid short circuits between the anode and the reinforcing steel.
One of the first commercial, proprietary anodes for decks was a flexible
cable with a conductive plastic round a copper conductor. The cable was
‘woven’ across the deck and then a concrete overlay applied. It was also
used on substructures with a sprayed concrete overlay. This system was very
popular in the 1980s but unfortunately the conductive plastic started to fail
after about five year’s of service. This led to attack of the copper and, in
some cases, expansion of the plastic which delaminated and spalled the con-
crete overlay. This system is no longer available.
7.3.2
Conductive organic carbon loaded paints
Conductive organic coatings consist of a conductive carbon ‘pigment’ in an
organic binder. The most widely used systems have been solvent based.
There are also water-based systems which have been developed more
recently. One proprietary system uses a nickel coated carbon fibre rather
than flaked graphite.
Coating anodes were developed from the carbon loaded paints used in
electronics and specialist electrical applications and developed for space
heating in the 1960s. Poor results for the application of these anode systems
were reported in North America in the 1980s, with the first generation of
coatings debonding and flaking off.
Research carried out in the United Kingdom for the DoT led to develop-
ment of a system that was durable in UK conditions. The North American
manufacturers developed their materials further and improvements in
concrete surface preparation have lead to more durable systems. A range of
coatings is now available.
Coatings do not have the durability of the coated titanium-based anodes.
However, they are less expensive, easier to apply and can be repaired and
maintained easily. They are not suitable for continuously wetted abraded or
trafficked surfaces. They require excellent surface preparation to get good
adhesion.
All anode systems require an electrical connection. Given their modest
conductivity this usually consist of a series of wires (platinized titanium,
platinized niobium copper, carbon fibres or other comparatively inert mate-
rials) running through the coating at a separation of 0.5–1.0m. Unfortunately,
the nomenclature used for the early anode systems has been misapplied 
 

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.9 (a) A conductive paint anode applied to a cross head on the M4 elevated
section in London. A solvent based and a water-based coating were trialed.
Note the step out where cover was increased to prevent short circuits
between the skewed reinforcement cage and the conductive coating.Probe
anodes are installed under the bearing shelf. Individual connections were
made to the dowel bars into the longitudinal beams to ensure electrical
continuity and protection. (b) Conductive coating anode being applied to a
building. Courtesy Taylor Woodrow Construction. (c) After application of
the cosmetic top coat. Courtesy Taylor Woodrow Construction.
 

to coatings. In the conductive asphalt system and the pipeline system it is
based upon, the silicon iron (or carbon) anode is called the primary anode.
The coke breeze material (backfill or asphalt) is called the secondary 
anode. Likewise the connection wire in the paint system is often referred to
as the ‘primary anode’ and the coating as the ‘secondary anode’. This
considerably inflates the significance of the connection wire and diminishes
the importance of the coating which is really the anode. Examples of
conductive coating anodes are shown in Figure 7.9.
7.3.2.1
Installability
Installation is by airless spray to accessible areas and by roller or brush to
inaccessible locations such as between the pairs of shear walls. Surface is
prepared by a light grit blast or similar, to achieve an adherent surface.
Requirements for a dry concrete surface 3oC or higher means that winter
application can be difficult as even with enclosures and space heating, the
cold concrete surface can create condensation.
7.3.2.2
Suitability for particular locations
The coatings are most suitable for application to dry or near dry elements or
faces. They do not tolerate water during installation or continuous wetting dur-
ing operation, they are easily applied and maintained but have a limited life.
7.3.2.3
Life and cost
According to the Highways Agency Bridge Advice Note HA BA 83/02 these
anodes have a life of up to 15 years and a cost of £20–£40/m2.
7.3.2.4
Impact on structure
With a decorative/protective coating the anode has minimal impact on the
structure in terms of loading, change of profile or appearance. However, as the
decorative coating deteriorates, the black conductive coating shows through.
7.3.2.5
Performance
Originally specified with a 10–15 year performance, the oldest systems on
the Midland Links are over 15 years old and will be in need of major
maintenance within a 20 year life. Some areas have performed badly due to
excessive water exposure. Some poor quality products have been used
and in some cases inadequate surface preparation has given problems. On
the M4 elevated section cathodic protection trial a water-based and a
solvent-based coating were applied ‘back to back’. This trial should be
evaluated after five years of operation.
158
Electrochemical repair techniques
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
159
7.3.2.6
Extent of use
This was the most widely used anode in the United Kingdom for many years
with over 600 cross heads protected on the Midland Links motorways in
Birmingham since the first trials in 1986–1987. They are also widely used on
building and other structures from water towers to multi-storey car parking
structures. It is also widely used in the United States and Canada, particularly
on parking structures.
7.3.2.7
Sources of further information
The US National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE) has
published a test method for evaluating coatings. TM01105-2005 ‘Test
Procedures for Organic-Based Conductive Coating Anodes for Use on
Concrete Structures’.
7.3.3
Thermal sprayed zinc
Given the early problems with conductive coatings in North America,
Caltrans looked for an alternative. They experimented with electric arc and
flame sprayed metals and found zinc to be most effective.
Many arc sprayed zinc systems have been applied. They are particularly
popular in marine substructure conditions where it is difficult to apply
other anodes. Florida Department of Transportation has applied several
such systems and Oregon DOT have sprayed several very large bridge
substructures over the past few years. The Yaquina Bay bridge has a
26,500 m2 system applied and Cape Creek is about 13,000 m2. The
electric arc sprayed system is preferred over arc spraying in North America
due to its rapid deposition rates. Figure 7.5 shows the arc spraying process
for a galvanic anode system in the Florida Keys.
One of the few impressed current zinc systems in the United Kingdom at
the time of going to press is shown in Figure 7.10. There has been some
concern about the rise in resistance seen on some systems. This may be due
to a build up of corrosion products between the zinc and the concrete, or
to treatment of the zinc after application to protect it from atmospheric
corrosion. Zinc, of course, is not inert and is consumed by corrosion from
the atmosphere and water impingement. The anodic reaction also consumes
the zinc and gives rise to the formation of oxides and sulphates at the
anode/concrete interface which may increase the electrical resistance
between anode and cathode.
The use of high temperature spraying gives a very porous, open coating
made up of small droplets of zinc metal. A properly applied coating has
excellent adhesion to the concrete. The zinc coating looks similar to
concrete and there is no need for extra protective or cosmetic coatings. 
 

The system is well established in the United States both as an impressed
current and as a galvanic anode (see Figure 7.5).
Among the highway agencies in North America there seems to be a
preference for arc sprayed zinc systems for protecting bridge substructures.
In Europe the preference is for conductive paints which have been applied
extensively to buildings as well as bridge substructures. One reason they
have been so successful in the United Kingdom on highway structures is
that guttering has been applied below leaking joints to minimize the
amount of water impinging directly on the coatings. This has extended their
life. In North America this has not been done in many cases so the paints
do not last as well as the zinc. Also the zinc can be applied to damp concrete
surfaces, making it suitable for marine applications, and where the water
continues to impinge on the concrete surface.
As zinc coatings are highly conductive electrical connection is made
via a metal plate fixed to the surface and the zinc is sprayed over it. Very few
connections are needed, but at least two should be applied in each zone.
7.3.3.1
Description of the anode
Pure zinc (99.99%) is sprayed using flame or electric arc. It is widely used in
the United States where conductive organic coatings were not found to be
successful (this is, probably due to a combination of poor surface prepara-
tion, lack of control of water leakage onto the coating and more extreme
thermal cycling). The zinc coating is far thinner than a conductive paint. The
concrete is left with a slight metallic grey sheen (see Figure 7.10).
160
Electrochemical repair techniques
Figure 7.10 Thermal sprayed zinc applied to the leaf piers of Golden Fleece
Interchange on the M6, UK. Probe anodes are applied to the cantilevered
ends, the bearing shelf and the diaphragms between the longitudinal steel.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
161
7.3.3.2
Variations on the basic description
The use of such anodes in galvanic mode is widespread on Florida coastal
bridges. A high solids spray applied zinc coating has been offered in the
United Kingdom but there is no experience of its application or
performance. Elsewhere in the corrosion industry it has been found that
solvent or water-based zinc coatings with a high enough zinc content to be
conductive have poor durability.
7.3.3.3
Installability
The material is non-proprietary. However, it requires specialist applicators
and spray equipment for external application (most metal spraying is done
in factories and workshops). Some is done on site to repair galvanizing. Few
UK applicators have experience of applying it to concrete. The spray is
more forgiving than organic coatings. As the zinc is a molten spray it can
tolerate colder conditions and damp concrete. As the coating is highly con-
ductive it cannot tolerate short circuits to the steel caused by tramp steel or
tie wires. However, a simple electrical circuit with an audible alarm can be
set up to warn of shorts between the reinforcement cage and the anode as
it is applied. It can still be difficult to precisely locate the short.
Zinc vapour can lead to ‘zinc flu’ if breathed in. Therefore, all operatives
must be suitably protected and the area shrouded to contain the zinc.
7.3.3.4
Suitability for particular locations
The coating is more tolerant of water after application than organic
coatings. However, it requires bulky equipment and cannot be applied in
any other way. There are also the health and safety issues to be considered.
7.3.3.5
Life and cost
According to HA BA 83/02 these anodes have a life of up to 25 years and
a cost of £60–£100/m2.
7.3.3.6
Impact on structure
Like a coating there is little visual or other impact. The grey colour means
it has limited acceptability on buildings.
7.3.3.7
Performance
According to HA BA 83/02 a typical life estimate is up to 25 years.
 

162
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.3.3.8
Extent of use
Several hundreds of thousands of square metres have been applied to
bridges in the USA. The largest installations have been in Oregon where a
number of historic landmark bridges were protected with this anode
applied to the substructure. There have been other large installations on
inland bridges elsewhere in the USA and Canada.
7.3.3.9
Sources of further guidance information
American Welding Society. Specification for thermal spraying zinc anodes on
reinforced concrete. AWS/ANSI Standard. 2002; AWS C2.20/C2.20M:2002.
7.3.4
Coated titanium expanded mesh in a 
concrete overlay
One of the most successful commercial anodes is the expanded titanium
mesh with an activated precious or mixed metal oxide coating. This
also comes in the form of an expanded titanium mesh, strips and other
configurations. It is fixed onto the surface, usually with plastic fixings and
a cementitious overlay applied.
For soffit or vertical surfaces sprayed concrete is normally used to overlay
the anode. As stated in the section on patch repairs, sprayed concrete
application requires considerable expertise to get a good bond between the
overlay and the parent concrete. This is done by preparing the original
surface (grit blasting scabbling or similar roughening and cleaning) and
standing the mesh off the surface so that concrete rebound from the anode
is minimized. The highest standards of ‘on site’ quality assurance and
control are needed to get 100% adhesion of the overlay.
The mesh has also been mounted in permanent form work and then
grouted up by pumping in concrete or mortar from above or below.
This avoids the quality control problems of sprayed concrete but gives
more engineering problems and can increase the cost of the permanent
form work.
Electrical connection is made to the anode with strips of titanium welded
to the mesh.
7.3.4.1
Description of the anode
This anode consists of an expanded titanium mesh with a catalytic mixed
metal oxide coating. The anode is fixed to the concrete surface and then
overlaid with concrete. This is usually dry spray shotcrete on vertical and
soffit surfaces or cast on top surfaces and decks. It is also available in a
number of mesh sizes and as a ribbon (described separately).
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
163
7.3.4.2
Installability
The main issue is the bond between overlay and parent concrete (see
Figure 7.11b). High QA/QC procedures and an experienced nozzle man 
are required. Delaminations have occurred within the overlay but do not
appear to have a major impact on the performance of the system or its
durability. The application is forgiving of moisture during application but
must avoid freezing temperatures during application and curing.
7.3.4.3
Suitability for particular locations
This anode system is one of the most durable and can be applied in any
condition from underground and underwater to dry atmospheric exposure
where the change in appearance, profile and dead load is acceptable. It has
been widely used on trafficked decks and on substructures, particularly in
marine exposure conditions.
7.3.4.4
Life and cost
According to HA BA 83/02 these anodes have a life of up to 120 years and
a cost of £60–£100/m2.
7.3.4.5
Impact on structure
The overlay must be about 25mm thick so it changes the profile, loading
and clearances as well as the appearance. Clearance may be an issue round
bearings. It is possible to get a reasonable appearance with sharp corners,
etc. by ‘flashing’ the surface.
7.3.4.6
Performance
This anode is used for long life, low maintenance applications especially in
aggressive environments. The main problems are with the overlay where
adhesion can be a problem (see Figure 7.11b)
7.3.4.7
Extent of use, etc.
This is probably the most widely used and robust of anodes when properly
applied. It accounts for about 50% of the half to one million square metres
of impressed current cathodic protection applied worldwide. It is widely used
on bridge decks, marine substructures and in any aggressive environment.
7.3.4.8
Sources of further information
There is a NACE Standard test method for testing embeddable impressed cur-
rent anodes. TM0294-2004. Testing of embeddable impressed current anodes
 

(a)
(b)
Figure 7.11 (a) A mixed metal oxide coated titanium mesh anode being overlaid on
a bridge in Baltimore MD. Courtesy Jack Bennett. (b) Extreme example
of an overlay failure on a titanium mesh anode. Oregon Inlet N. Carolina
USA.The whole bridge was swept away in a storm a few years after the
author took this photograph.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
165
for use in cathodic protection of atmospherically exposed steel-reinforced
concrete. This was developed to assess the performance of the coated titanium
equivalent to a 40 year life. It does not test the overlay.
7.3.5
Coated titanium expanded mesh ribbon mortared 
into slots chased into the concrete
7.3.5.1
Description of the anode
This anode consists of an expanded titanium mesh with a catalytic mixed
metal oxide coating. The anode is in the form of a ribbon about 13mm
wide. Slots are cut into the concrete typically on 300mm centres. These are
filled with mortar and the ribbon pushed into the slots as shown in
Figure 7.12(a).
7.3.5.2
Installability
The main requirement is for adequate cover to avoid short circuits or
excessive current drain. Slots can run round obstacles. The application is
forgiving of moisture during application but must avoid freezing
temperatures during application and curing.
7.3.5.3
Suitability for particular locations
This anode system is one of the most durable and can be applied in any
condition from underground and underwater to dry atmospheric exposure.
It is also widely used on buildings with steel frames behind brick or stone
façades where the ribbon can be inserted in the mortar joints as shown in
Figure 7.12(b).
7.3.5.4
Life and cost
According to HA BA 83/02 these anodes have a life of up to 120 years and
a cost of £40–£100/m2.
7.3.5.5
Impact on structure
Inevitably there is a ‘stripy’ appearance after installation on concrete struc-
tures, but no change to loadings, profiles or clearances. On brick or stone
building façades the new mortar may show depending on the extent of
repointing (Figure 7.12(b)).
 

(a)
(b)
Figure 7.12 (a) Ribbon anodes being applied to the underside of a jetty in Jersey.
Certain areas of the soffit, beams and all of the columns plus support
trestles were protected using ribbon anodes.The tide rises to near soffit
level and there is an 11m tidal range. (b) 55–57 St Martin’s Lane London
showing the front 2 zones on a brick building with steel columns after
installation of ribbon anode system the reference electrode locations are
indicated by Z1R1, etc.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
167
7.3.5.6
Performance
This anode has performed well in long life, low maintenance applications
especially in aggressive environments and steel framed masonry and brick
clad buildings and monuments.
7.3.5.7
Extent of use
The anode is used where increase in dead load, change in profile or
application of an overlay is undesirable but the durability of the titanium
mesh anode is required. It requires good cover to the steel and can be more
expensive to install than the shotcreted mesh anode. It is not as widely used
but there are several thousand square meters of application around the
world. It has been widely used in ‘cathodic prevention’ systems installed on
new or nearly new structures.
Ribbon anodes are also increasingly popular on historic steel framed
masonry or brick clad structures where they can be fitted in the mortar
joints (see Figure 7.12(b)).
7.3.5.8
Sources of further information
The NACE Standard test method for testing embeddable impressed current
anodes applies to this anode. TM0294-2004. Testing of embeddable
impressed current anodes for use in cathodic protection of atmospherically
exposed steel-reinforced concrete. This was developed to assess the perfor-
mance of the coated titanium equivalent to a 40 year life. It does not test
the grout that the ribbon is embedded in.
7.3.6
Coated titanium or conductive ceramic rods,
tubes, etc. in holes drilled into the concrete
7.3.6.1
Description of the anode
This anode consists rods or tubes of titanium with a catalytic mixed metal
oxide coating or conductive ceramic. Anodes are connected by titanium wires
in strings to form zones. Some anodes include an optional gas vent for installa-
tion below waterproofing layers or in water saturated conditions where gas
pressure might build up a ‘blow off’ pieces of concrete. Anodes come as rods and
tubes made of mixed metal oxide coated titanium or a proprietary conductive
ceramic. Different sizes and outputs are available. Sizes include a cylinder of
diameter ranging from 7 to 28mm and length from 100 to 600mm
(Figure 7.13(a)). Current outputs range from 2.0 to 50 mA. One proprietary
system incorporates a balance resistor in the anode head minimising the risk of
‘current dumping’. Other anodes of a simple cylinder of mixed metal oxide
coated titanium, rolled up mesh or short lengths of ribbon have also been used.
 

168
Electrochemical repair techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.13 (a) Ebonex mixed metal oxide coated conductive ceramic probe anodes
showing gas vent tubes. (b) Probe anodes on Golden Fleece Interchange.
In diaphragm and below bearing shelf. Square holes are shutter bolts
holes removed. Zinc anode below. See Figure 7.9(a) for probe anodes on
M4 and Figure 7.10 for general view of Golden Fleece.
7.3.6.2
Installability
In principle installation is simple. Holes are drilled into the concrete
and chases cut between holes. The holes and chases are filed with
cementitious grout. The anodes are inserted into the grout and wires
 

run between anodes in the chases. In practice there is a risk of hitting steel and
therefore having to re-drill some holes, particularly with congested steel.
7.3.6.3
Suitability for particular locations
Probe anodes have been most widely used on highway structures to provide
cathodic protection current to steel that cannot be reached from a surface
anodes. They have been applied to half joints and to provide current to two
faces of shear walls, etc. where the inside face is inaccessible (Figures 7.13(b),
7.10). They are also increasingly applied on historic steel framed masonry or
brick clad structures where they can be fitted in the mortar joints.
7.3.6.4
Life and cost
HA BA 83/02 says these anodes have a life of up to 50 years and a cost of
£40–£100/m2. Life can be extended by closer spacing of anodes running at
lower currents.
7.3.6.5
Impact on structure
The drilled holes and chases have an impact on the appearance but none on
the profile or clearances. The act of drilling holes could require a structural
evaluation although spacing of 300–500mm minimizes structural impact in
most cases. The chases between anodes for the wires can lead to a ‘join the
dots’ appearance (see Figures 1 and 5A). Placing anodes in mortar joins of
masonry or brick clad steel framed buildings gives minimal visual impact.
7.3.6.6
Performance
Has performed well in bridge substructures and steel framed masonry and
brick clad buildings and monuments.
7.3.6.7
Extent of use
Anodes not much used in United States but have found extensive use in
Europe on buildings, swimming pools, bridges and other structures. Very wide
use in historic masonry or brick clad steel framed buildings and monuments.
7.3.6.8
Sources of further information
The NACE Standard test method for testing embeddable impressed current
anodes applies to this anode. TM0294-2004. Testing of embeddable
impressed current anodes for use in cathodic protection of atmospherically
exposed steel-reinforced concrete. This was developed to assess the
performance of the coated titanium equivalent to a 40 year life. It does not
test the grout that the anode is embedded in.
Electrochemical repair techniques
169
 

170
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.3.7
Conductive cementitious overlay containing 
nickel plated carbon fibres
7.3.7.1
Description of the anode
This is a wet sprayed mortar containing nickel plated carbon fibres to
achieve conductivity (Figure 7.14). It requires a primary anode, usually
the titanium mesh ribbon. This is a proprietary anode and there are no
variations.
7.3.7.2
Installability
The usual caveats apply concerning any sprayed cementitious overlay.
However, if the correct spray equipment is used and properly set up, the
anode has excellent adhesion properties and delaminations are very rare.
The main problem is getting an acceptable finish.
Figure 7.14 Conductive mortar anode applied to a marine bridge substructure.
 

7.3.7.3
Suitability for particular locations
The anode is durable and has excellent adhesion but gives a poor surface
finish so requires a render or overlay for cosmetic purposes. Suitable for
hidden areas such as wharf substructures.
7.3.7.4
Life and cost
According to HA BA 83/02 these anodes have a life of up to 25 years and
a cost of £30–£60/m2.
7.3.7.5
Impact on structure
The overlay is typically 12mm thick. This has an impact on the profile and
clearances. The fibre concrete leaves a poor finish. However, the experience
and expertise of the applicator can mitigate this. The rough finished surface
can accumulate debris. It is also dark grey in colour. A rendered finish is
sometimes applied. This can lead to a very attractive finish but further build
up of the profile and dead load as well as further reduction on clearances.
7.3.7.6
Performance
Excellent adhesion of anode to concrete.
7.4
Cathodic protection system design
In the following discussion we do not intend to show the reader how to
design a cathodic protection system from scratch. We will show some of the
major processes that a qualified and experienced corrosion expert will go
through in designing a system, showing how decisions are arrived at
concerning the components and the system performance. Design should
always be undertaken by a suitably qualified and experienced expert.
7.4.1
Choosing your anode
If CP is the chosen rehabilitation methodology then the correct choice of
anode is vital. For applications where the life is less then 20 years and suit-
able anodes are available, galvanic cathodic protection. For longer lives,
impressed current systems are more likely to be suitable assuming that
power is available and maintenance will be conducted. When it comes to
individual anode choice then the Table in HA BA 83/02 summarizes the
merits and limitations discussed in Section 7.3.1 to 7.3.7.
If the structure is a wearing surface then coatings are usually excluded.
This usually leads to the use of one of the titanium configurations in an
overlay or titanium ribbons in slots.
Electrochemical repair techniques
171
 

The main restrictions on the overlay type systems are because of the
cementitious overlay:
●
they increase the dead load on the structure;
●
they change the profile and can reduce clearances;
●
the overlay can be difficult to apply in restricted areas or with
complicated geometries, especially when applied as a sprayed concrete
overlay.
For mainly dry substructures, buildings and other soffit or vertical
applications coatings are often used. These have a lower life than the
titanium-based systems but are easily maintained and are cheaper. They
are often more cosmetically attractive for buildings as masonry paint type
overcoats are supplied. The thermal sprayed zinc can be used instead of
the paint type coating. As the metal is sprayed hot it can dry out a damp
surface enabling it to bond, unlike the paint type coatings. It is therefore
preferred in marine or regularly wetted environments. The newer water-based
organic coatings are slightly more moisture tolerant than the solvent-based
coatings. However, they do not have the same track record.
The advantages of the coatings are:
●
negligible increase in dead load;
●
can be applied to any geometry;
●
choice of decorative finishes;
●
cheap and simple to repair or replace organic coatings.
Its restrictions are:
●
limited resistance to wear and moisture;
●
limited lifetime (about 15 years in most applications);
●
requires rigorous health and safety control (thermal sprayed zinc).
Galvanic anodes are extensively used in continuously wetted
environments. They need less maintenance than the impressed current
systems. One problem with the zinc system is the environmental impact of
the during spraying. If enclosure is required during spraying, the costs can
be very high.
The conductive ceramic and other tube or rod anodes can be used to
apply current locally to inaccessible areas in conjunction with other anodes
or they can be drilled into a series of holes running up a column or similar
structure. Their main problems are ensuring that the reinforcing steel does
not shield the current, making sure that the anodes do not contact the
reinforcing steel or overprotect it locally, and ensuring that the wiring to
series of anodes is not too complicated.
172
Electrochemical repair techniques
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
173
7.4.2
Transformer/rectifiers and control systems
This is another vital part of an impressed current system. The T/R must be
rugged and reliable with minimal maintenance requirements. It should be
easy to maintain with good instruction manuals, circuit diagrams for main-
tenance and easy access to fuses and other consumable and replaceable
components. Compared with pipeline or marine CP applications (steel piles,
etc.) the power demand is modest. Most steel in concrete needs less than 
10 mA.m2 to provide protection, usually at less than 10 V. The power for
a 100 watt light bulb will protect 10,000m2. This means that a single
phase, air cooled T/R will usually protect even the largest structure and
power consumption is rarely an economic concern.
The required output of the transformer/rectifier and of the anode can be
estimated from Figure 7.15 taken from Bennett and Turk (1994). Although
the work in the report was done to try to develop a simple constant current
criterion for cathodic protection, it has never been validated outside the
laboratory. It should also be remembered that the areas of highest corrosion
and highest chloride will have been repaired so the current demand will be
reduced in proportion to the area repaired.
There are two opposing directions of T/R design at the moment. The first
is to make a simple, rugged and reliable design with high quality compo-
nents. This is checked manually every one to six months and an annual
‘service’ carried out. The other is to attach a microprocessor that can
monitor and control the system. This means that data can be collected
remotely and in some designs the system can be adjusted without regular
site visits, requiring only an annual inspection as long as local personnel
carry out quick checks on the condition of the systems (loose wires, etc.).
The number of systems an organization has in operation is one factor in
choosing remote control. It becomes more cost effective to collect and struc-
tures increases. The sophistication of the client and his consultant is another
factor.
mA.m–2
Chloride % by wt of cement
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Figure 7.15 Cathodic protection current demand vs. chloride content at rebar depth
(based on Bennett and Turk, 1994).
 

174
Electrochemical repair techniques
The reliability of the microprocessor system has not been reported in the
technical press, although the author’s first few remote control systems
installed 1986/1987 worked until the structures were demolished, most of
those are installed inside buildings, in very benign environments. Some sys-
tems are comparatively simple and will only monitor on and off potentials,
current and voltage. It is not possible to change the current or voltage set-
tings on some of these systems. With modern microprocessors and the
internet it is possible to store data on line, and send alarms by email or text
message if the system malfunctions or exceeds defined limit values of cur-
rent, voltage or reference electrode potential. Systems have been developed
that will commission and operate a system according to BSEN 12696.
7.4.3
Monitoring probes
In order to measure the effect of the cathodic protection current on the rein-
forcement, probes are embedded in the concrete. The most common probe
is the embeddable half cell. A number of formulations have been used but
the most popular is the silver/silver chloride/calcium chloride (Ag/AgCl/KCl)
reference electrode (Figure 7.16). A proprietary manganese/manganese dioxide
electrode is also used extensively in Europe. Carbon, coated titanium and
lead, have been used a ‘relative’ or ‘pseudo’ references rather than ‘absolute’
references. They can be used for measuring potential shifts as long as they
are stable over the period of measurement. A review of reference electrodes
for concrete, their installation and relative potentials vs. the ASTM C876
criteria is given in NACE 11100 (2000).
Due to the perceived low reliability of half cells in North America
alternative probes were developed. These include the current pick up probe.
A section of steel is embedded in the concrete. This picks up a proportion
of the current and is used to gauge the effectiveness of the system.
Figure 7.16 Two embeddable Ag/AgCl/KCl reference electrodes 15mm and 25mm
diameter.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
175
The steel probe is sometimes embedded in an excessively salty patch.
With no current applied, a macrocell current flows from the probe to the
reinforcement if they are connected with an ammeter between them. As CP
current is applied, the current reduces and then reverses. This is called the
macrocell or null probe approach and is used to show that a very anodic
area has been made cathodic. It is therefore assumed that all of the rest of
the steel is cathodic too. However it is dependent upon the amount of salt
added to the patch, and if the salt diffuses away then it may no longer be
the most anodic area after a few years.
An alternative is to identify the most anodic area of the zone and to iso-
late a short section of steel to form a macrocell probe without disturbing
the concrete around the probe as discussed in SHRP-S-347 Bennett and
Schue (1993) and Bartholomew et al. (1993). This is more realistic than
embedding a probe in salty concrete but suffers the same problem with
chloride movement with time.
7.4.4
Zone design
One frequently asked question concerning cathodic protection systems is
‘what happens at the anode edge? Is there a risk of accelerated corrosion?’
This is a valid question and the risk is supported by the Pourbaix diagram
which shows areas of imperfect passivity, pitting and corrosion around the
immune and passive regions (Figure 7.2). However, the author knows of no
atmospherically exposed reinforced concrete structure that is totally
protected by cathodic protection. Most have anode zones that end before
the reinforced concrete does. No cases of accelerated corrosion have been
reported between zones or at the end of zones.
It is rare for a cathodic protection system to consist of one continuous
anode passing current from a single power supply. It is normal to divide the
structure or elements to be protected into zones that are powered and
controlled separately, and electrically separated by a gap of typically 25mm.
Zone design can be dictated by requirements for different anode types
(coatings on walls; mesh on floors probes in mortar joints around steel
beams, etc.) They can be based on different current requirements, with
high chloride areas divided into smaller zones to give each zone a fairly
uniform current demand. They can be designed around different steel
densities in different parts of beams or columns. In the United States,
cathodic protection designs on decks have had zones in the 500–1,000 m2
range, and bridge substructures 100–500 m2 (AASHTO, 1993). This
probably has more to do with geometry of deck slabs and substructures
than with variations in local current demand. Steel framed masonry
and brick clad structures are often designed with very small zones or
sub zones.
 

Table 7.2 Impressed current anode types and characteristics (see Notes 1–8) from haba 83/02 (2000). Courtesy of the Highways Agency
Anode typea
Long term
Long term
Supplier’s
Suitable
Suitable for
Dimensional
Other
Typical
anode current
current density
typical
for wet
running
and weight
performance
Installed
density per m2
per m2 concrete
anode life
structures
surfaces
impact/
queries
anode cost
of anode
estimateb
installation
(seek 
Inccl. surface
specialist
preparation
advice)
(2000 Costs)c–h
Conductive
20 mA/m2
20 mA/m2
Up to 
No
No
No
Some
£20–£40/m2
organic
max
15 years
Painted
unproven
coatings
products
Sprayed 
20 mA/m2
20 mA/m2
Up to 
Possibly
No
No
Limited UK
£60–£100/m2
zinc
max
25 years
Thermal
experience
spray
Health & 
Safety during 
application
Mixed metal
110–220
15–110 mA/m2
Up to 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overlay quality
£60–£100/m2
oxide coated
mA/m2
varying 
120 years
In
control
including
(MMO) 
grades
c.25 mm
overlay
titanium
overlay
(MMO Ti) 
mesh and grid 
in cementitious
overlay
Discrete Pt/Ti 
800 mA/m2
c.10–110
Up to 
Yes, not
Yes
No
£40–£100/m2
or MMO Ti
from
mA/m2 subject 
50 years
tidal
Placed
anodes, with 
carbonaceous
to distribution
predrilled
carbonaceous
surround
holes
surround
 

Discrete anodes
800 mA/m2
c.10–110
Up to 
Yes
Yes
No
£40–£100/m2
in cementitious
mA/m2
50 years
Placed into 
surround.
subject to 
holes or slots
MMO Ti or
distribution
Conductive
ceramic
Cementitious
20 mA/m2
20 mA/m2
UP to 
Yes, not
Yes, under
Yes
Limited
£30–£60/m2
overlay
max
25 years
tidal
wearing
Sprayed,
experience
incorporating
course
c.8 mm
nickel plated
thick
carbon fibre
strands
Notes
a Anode technology for reinforced concrete is rapidly evolving. The information reflects only those systems that have been relatively widely used in the United
Kingdom before Year 2002.
b The performance of each element of the complete anode system is as important as the durability of the anode itself. The latest literature and experienced 
specialists should be consulted when determining the life of any particular anode system for any particular application.
c Transformer-rectifier/manual monitoring and cabling costs are additional.Year 2000 costs can be budgeted as £1,000 to £2,000 £10 to £20/m2.
d Remote monitoring and control capital costs are additional,Year 2000 costs are up to £6000.
e Future operation monitoring and control costs are extra.
f Preliminaries, access, traffic management and concrete repair costs are not included.
g For a typical four zone cathodic protection system, manual performance assessment and simple reporting regime costs (in 2000) are £1,500–£2,500 per annum
which can be reduced to £1,000–£1,500 per annum by using remote monitoring and one visual inspection.
h All life and cost information is indicative.This information is for pre-budget assessments only. Full performance and cost details for individual systems and applica-
tions should be sought from specialists prior to selecting a particular system for a particular project.
 

178
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.5
Control criteria
At the beginning of Section 7.3 we saw that the T/R is typically designed to
deliver 10 to 20 mA.m2 of steel surface area. We have also seen that we must
minimize the anodic reaction to reduce acid attack at the anode/concrete
interface. This can reduce bond and thus increase the resistance of the circuit.
It is therefore essential that we apply enough current to stop corrosion but
only just enough. The control criteria for cathodic protection of atmospheri-
cally exposed concrete has been the subject of considerable debate.
We also saw in Section 7.3.9 and quoted from the appendix of 
BSEN 12696 that the current demand may range from 2 to 20 mA.m2 and
this is a function of the chloride content at the steel and the amount of new
concrete placed around the steel. In an investigation into these issues
Broomfield (2004) found that the actual current density on a bridge beam
was more accurately predicted by determining the chloride exposure of the
reinforcement and using Figure 7.15.
The problem for the cathodic protection engineer is that the system must
be designed and operated to achieve criteria in the national and international
standards that demonstrate that corrosion has been suppressed. These cri-
teria are not based on the current density on the steel but on the potential
of the steel or potential shifts measured by embedded reference electrodes.
At the beginning of the section on cathodic protection it was explained
that cathodic protection works by injecting so many electrons into the rein-
forcing network that the anodic reaction cannot occur so corrosion stops.
The question is, how can we show that this has happened? In cathodic
protection of steel in soil or water it is usual to do this by achieving a poten-
tial of 770 mV or 850 mV against a copper/copper sulphate half cell on
the surface as the system is switched off (the instant off potential). However,
these criteria are not appropriate for steel in atmospherically exposed
concrete for a number of theoretical and practical reasons. Two of the
practical reasons are the difficulty in accurately measuring an absolute
potential over a number of years when reference electrodes calibration may
drift, and the fact that if an absolute minimum (or maximum negative)
potential is achieved then some parts of the structure will be overprotected
as the corrosion environment varies so rapidly and severely across a high
resistance electrolyte like concrete.
In practice, the best control criterion is based on a potential shift. Theory
and experiment tell us that a shift in potential of 100–150mV will reduce
the corrosion rate by at least an order of magnitude. Field evaluations have
shown that this stops all further signs of corrosion damage in cathodically
protected structures.
This has lead to a number of criteria because of the practicalities of
measuring potential shifts. The potential shift can be measured when
switching on the system and switching it off. It must be measured as an
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
179
‘instant off’ potential when the system is on so that the CP current does not
interfere.
Also the system polarizes and depolarizes very slowly. However, the
potential is also susceptible to changes in the environment (temperature,
humidity), as well as the applied current, so reading must be taken within
a reasonable time period while the environment around the structure is
reasonably stable. This is particularly important for tidal zones of struc-
tures in marine exposure conditions where the polarization/depolarization
period should either be through a full tidal cycle or while the steel adjacent
to the reference electrode is fully exposed. The full tidal cycle (about 12h
20min) is preferred at the steel should be in the same condition at the
beginning and the end of the period while its condition will be changing
(drying out) during an exposure period
Therefore the 100–150mV shift in potential is often measured as a
100mV shift from instant off to a period typically four hours later. This is
measured at an actively corroding (anodic) location. Measurements are
made throughout the four hour period so that the depolarization curve can
be plotted. If depolarization continues at four hours then it is reasonable to
expect that the 100–150mV criterion has been achieved.
A number of things happen when cathodic protection is applied to steel
in concrete. The negatively charged chloride ions move away from the neg-
atively charged reinforcing steel and may be discharged at the anode and
hydroxide ions are generated. Figure 7.17 shows how the chloride profile
changes from an area subject to cathodic protection with the chlorides
severely reduced at the cathode and also at the anode where they can be
discharged as chlorine gas or may be washed away by surface water.
The movement of chloride and the generation of hydroxyl ions suppress
corrosion and rebuild the passive layer. This means that although the
100mV shift is lower than the optimum 150mV, the other factors are also
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Chloride % by wt cement
Depth in mm
0
10
20
30
40
50
No CP
CP applied
Figure 7.17 Comparison of chloride profiles in CP and non CP areas Yaqina Bay Bridge
soffit (Broomfield and Tinnea, 1992).
 

180
Electrochemical repair techniques
+
Power
supply
VCP
–
R1
R2
VIR =
VCP R2/(R1+R2)
Figure 7.18 Two-dimensional representation of the iR drop through concrete.While the
CP current is flowing, the voltmeter between the reference electrode and the
steel measures the steel/concrete potential plus the iR drop VIR which is a
function of the CP voltage VCP and the resistances between anode, reference
electrode and steel.
mitigating in our favour (see Glass et al., 2000 and references therein).
During the initial few months of energising and commissioning a cathodic
protection system it is not necessary to instantly provide total protection as
the ionic movements will build up with time. This is discussed further in the
sections on energizing and commissioning CP systems.
The 100–150mV criterion is straightforward to apply and is the most
universally agreed criterion. Other control criteria such as the plotting of
the applied current against the log of the potential (ElogI), absolute
potentials, macrocell or null probe current reversals and other potential
shifts have been used and are used by some cathodic protection specialists
but there is some controversy about their theory and practice.
7.5.1
The iR drop and instant off measurement
The iR drop is the additional voltage seen between the reference electrode
and the steel because a current is passing through concrete with a significant
resistance. Figure 7.18 shows a two dimensional illustration of how this
voltage occurs when the resistance from the anode to the reference electrode
is R1 ohms and the resistance from the reference electrode to the steel is R2
ohms. If the applied cathodic protection voltage is VCP then the potential
measurement between reference electrode and steel has an additional iR
component.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
181
7.6
Standards and guidance documents for cathodic
protection of steel in concrete
There are two major international standards on cathodic protection of steel
in concrete, RP0290:2000 from NACE international and BSEN12696:2000
from CEN which is discussed in the next section. Both were reaffirmed in
2005 although revised documents are being worked on. Both are aimed at
atmospherically exposed steel in concrete.
7.6.1
NACE standards
The NACE standard states explicitly in its title that it refers to atmospher-
ically exposed reinforced concrete. NACE also has a standard on cathodic
protection of prestressed concrete cylinder pipe RP0100-2000, also reaf-
firmed in 2005 and undergoing revision.
The NACE standard was the first to be produced (1990) and has been
revised since the original. Its scope states that it excludes prestressed con-
crete. There is a separate NACE report on cathodic protection of prestress
NACE 01102 (2000). This gives valuable information on applying CP to
prestressing but there has been no pressure to convert this to a standard. A
list of NACE recommended practice documents, test methods and reports
for all electrochemical techniques is given at the end of this chapter.
NACE RP290 It is a shorter document than BSEN 12696 and is specifically
concerned with control criteria which are at the front of the document in Sec-
tion 2. The first criterion mentioned is 100mV polarization development or
decay to be measured between the ‘rest’, ‘equilibrium’, or ‘natural corrosion’
potential and the instant off potential measured 0.1–1.0 seconds after switching
off the system. The instant off potential is required to remove the ‘iR drop’
Measurements are to be taken and the 100mV criterion achieved at the
most anodic location in each 50 m2 area or zone or at artificially 
constructed anodic sites ... provided its decayed potential or decayed off
potential is more negative than 200mV vs. copper/copper sulfate reference
electrode CSE.
This perhaps shows the origins of this standard which was written for
US and Canadian highway bridge decks which is where the 50m2 zone
and 200mV (ASTM C876) figures come from. A degree of interpretation
would be required for a building with many small zones of 5–10m2 and
with carbonated concrete where corrosion might occur at potentials more
positive than 200mV CSE in disagreement with ASTM C876.
There is also discussion of the E LogI criterion where a graph of poten-
tial versus the logarithm of the applied current is plotted. The transition of
the steel from anodic to cathodic condition is indicated by a break in the
curve. However, the existence of a break and its location can be subjective
and the shape of the curve changes with the scan rate. The RP suggests that
 

182
Electrochemical repair techniques
the method is used to determine the initial cathodic protection current
requirement.
The standard states that the maximum sustained current density between
the anode and the concrete should not exceed 108mA/m2 which is correct
for the anode types described but is exceeded in the manufacturers’ data
sheets for many probe anode designs (see Section 7.3.6) which allow far
higher current densities.
As stated in the anode descriptions earlier, there are also two NACE test
methods for cathodic protection anodes. These are TM 0294 on embeddable
anodes (mixed metal oxide coated titanium, mesh, ribbon, tubes, rods and
conductive ceramic tubes) and TM01105-2005 on organic-based conduc-
tive coating anodes. In addition there is a specification for applying thermal
sprayed zinc anodes to concrete American Welding Society (2002).
7.6.2
CEN Standard BSEN 12696
The CEN standard states in its scope that it refers to atmospherically
exposed normal reinforced and prestressed concrete as uncoated and organic
coated reinforcement. It is more detailed than the NACE standard (34 pages
vs. 12) with far more on the assessment and repair of the structure and
installation procedures. The criteria are buried in Section 8 of the standard.
There are very useful informative annexes on the principles of cathodic
protection in concrete, the design process, with recommendations for design
current densities discussed earlier in this section, and a brief description of
anode materials and systems.
The criteria (Section 8.6 of the standard) start with a requirement that no
(instant off) potential should exceed a limit of 1,100mV with respect to
Ag/AgCl/0.5M KCl for reinforced concrete and 900mV for prestressed
concrete. This is aimed at minimizing hydrogen evolution with a wider
margin for prestressed steel where the consequences could be more extreme
as discussed in Section 7.2.1.
Having defined an absolute limit on potential, the engineer is then offered
a choice of any one of three criteria to choose from to be met at ‘any
representative point’:
●
An instant off potential more negative than 720 mV vs.
Ag/AgCl/0.5M KCl – this criterion is the conventional one for buried
and submerged structures.
●
A potential decay over a maximum of 24h of at least 100mV from
instant off – this is very similar to the NACE depolarization criterion
but has a time period specified.
●
A potential decay over a period longer than 24h of 150mV – this was
discussed at the beginning of Section 7.4 and is based on the work of
Bennett and Broomfield (1997).
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
183
7.7
System installation
The installation of the different components of the cathodic protection
system is described later. The order given is logical but not necessarily the
one used on site where work may proceed in parallel or a different sequence
to fit in with other requirements of site work.
7.7.1
Patching for cathodic protection
Patching for cathodic protection is merely to ensure that there is ionic
continuity between the steel and the anode (Figure 7.1). This means that the
patch repair material must have the following properties:
1
It must conduct ionically not electronically. There must be no conduc-
tive filler such as carbon or a metal. Zinc is used in some patch
materials to minimize the incipient anode effect, they must not be used
for any electrochemical process repairs. Metals or carbon fibres must
not be used either.
2
Conductivity must be low enough to allow current to pass into the
steel. A resistivity of 15 kΩ.cm at 28 days under saturated conditions
has been specified by the United Kingdom DoT based on successful use
of materials of this resistivity on the Midland Links. There is some dis-
agreement about this specification but it is the only quantitative infor-
mation available. In the United States some applicators use salt in the
concrete to ‘even out’ the resistivity with the parent concrete. This
practice is rarely accepted elsewhere. BSEN 12696 (2000) states that
the concrete repair material shall be within 50–200% of the nominal
parent concrete electrical resistivity.
Some practitioners strongly feel that the quality of the patch repair is 
of far more important than the relative resistivities of the parent concrete
and patch repair material and that as long as metallic conductors (including
carbon) and epoxy concretes are excluded that repairs will do their job
while cathodic protection does its job.
Patching for CP only requires the removal of the corrosion damaged
cover, the cleaning of the rebar and its reinstatement. The lack of structural
implications and the comparative cheapness of the concrete patching
requirements are two important factors in choosing CP for repair. It must
be noted that good quality, low shrinkage materials must be used and well
applied. CP will not stop a badly applied patch from falling off or develop-
ing cracks if badly cured. The author is aware of plastic shrinkage problems
in repairs for cathodic protection projects but not of corrosion problems.
Excavated areas may be filled with the same material used to apply the
anode, for example, sprayed concrete on substructures or the concrete
 

184
Electrochemical repair techniques
Anode
End nearest anode
cathodiacally protected
End nearest anode
is a corroding anode
Concrete bars
+
Power
supply
VCP
–
Figure 7.19 Illustration of how an isolated piece of steel can be subjected to stray
current induced corrosion, as the current enters at the end nearest the
anode cathodically protecting it, and leaves at the end nearest the
cathodically protected steel, causing corrosion.
overlay on decks. In the case of the titanium mesh special fixings will hold
the anode in position as the concrete fills around it.
7.7.2
Rebar connections, electrical continuity of 
reinforcement and stray currents
Electrical connections may be made by self tapping screws, welding or
brazing. Extra bars may need to be welded in if continuity between bars is
inadequate. Connections are usually protected with epoxy glue applied over
them. Cabling may be run through the concrete overlay, over the anode or
from the back of the protected surface. Cables are run into junction boxes
for splicing and connections. There must be at least two connections per
zones for redundancy. There may be separate connections for the reference
electrodes.
Rebar continuity is essential to avoid stray currents that can accelerate
corrosion. Figure 7.19 shows how an isolated rebar between the anode and
the cathode will be cathodic where the current enters the steel and anodic
where it exits. This will accelerate corrosion at the anodic site. Although
there are few serious cases identified in cathodic protection systems, this is
a greater concern for realkalization and desalination systems where the
charge density is higher.
There is a CPA Technical paper on stray currents (CPA Monograph 10,
2002). These can arise from the effect of a cathodic protection system on
isolated steel in the protected structure. This can be trivial such as nails or
tie wire left in the concrete during casting. It can be more significant lengths
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
185
of rebar in lightly reinforced structures where corrosion of tie wire is
significant. The source of stray current can be external such as from DC
traction systems (trams, street cars, light rail). There is evidence from
cathodic protection of pipelines that alternating current can affect cathodic
protection systems by moving the potential to less negative values and
therefore not providing adequate protection to the steel.
Generally there is far less evidence of stray current induced corrosion
from external sources into atmospherically exposed reinforced concrete
structures compared to buried structures generally and far less evidence of
stray current induced corrosion in buried or submerged concrete compared
to buried or submerged steel, as concrete has much higher electrical resis-
tance. However, it can occur and can be tested for in the same manner as
for other metalwork. There is discussion of interference testing for stray
currents in NACE RP0169-2002 and in BSEN 13509:2000.
7.7.3
Monitoring probe installation
Reference half-cell electrodes should be installed in anodic sites without
disturbing the concrete around the steel to be measured. A method of instal-
lation is shown in NACE 11100 (2000). There should be at least one
electrode per zone and usually more. Other probes such as macrocell
probes, null probes or electrical resistance probes (Section 5.2.4) may also
be installed but usually in addition to half cells.
7.7.4
Anode installation
Anode installation should be done according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The anode must not come in direct electrical contact with the
reinforcing steel. There must be no metallic fixings into the anode.
The anode system may be a single component, such as flame sprayed
zinc, or multiple component such as a titanium mesh with a cementitious
overlay. It may consist of a single continuous anode such as mesh or
coatings, or multiple anodes connected together such as ribbon anodes or
the discrete rod anodes. All anodes require electrical connections to the
power supply. As for the rebar connections these should be duplicated for
redundancy.
The size and shape of the anode zone will be determined by a number of
factors including:
●
Steel surface area density and layout (beam soffits have higher steel
density than sides so may be separate zones).
●
Exposure conditions (tidal, splash and above splash zones may require
separate zones).
●
Different elements (beams versus decks even when beams are integral).
 

186
Electrochemical repair techniques
●
Uniform current distribution (minimizing the current range from the
largest to the smallest zone).
In some cases sub zones with adjustable resistors are used to subdivide a
zone without multiplying up the total number of current outputs. The
number of zones can range from a single zone on a small structure to over
100 zones on large complex structures.
7.7.5
Transformer rectifier and control system installation
The process of running mains power, installing the T/R and control system
and wiring up can be done as a single operation or in stages. All probes and
leads should be tested before being connected to the T/R and control system
and then tested once the system is installed. T/Rs are factory tested and
must comply with national electrical regulations and codes for safe and
efficient operation.
Lightning arrestors may be required on some atmospherically exposed
structures. This is a complex subject and some owners seem to expect them
to prevent any damage to the CP system. In fact the lightning arrestor
circuit will frequently be destroyed but the rest of the electronics survives
which means the circuit has done its job. The existence of a large sheet of
conducting material will make the cathodic protection system vulnerable to
lightning strikes and the performance of building lightning conductor/
arrestor systems should be checked on a structure known to be vulnerable
to lightning strikes.
7.7.6
Initial energizing
Anode durability can be strongly affected by the initial energizing and
commissioning process. This is particularly true of conductive coating
systems where the anode/concrete bond is crucial to the long-term durability
of the system. Passing too much current too quickly through the anode can
generate large amounts of acid at the anode as the chloride level is highest
there if chlorides are being transported into the concrete from the outside.
Acids are formed by reaction of the chlorides to form chlorine gas,
hydrochloric and hypochlorous acid. This will attack the concrete paste,
consume the anode and reduce the system lifetime, particularly for coating
anodes. The problem is less important for mesh and ribbon type anodes. It is
therefore recommended to energize the system as gently as possible consistent
with demonstrating that the system is fully effective and provides protection.
Another advantage of slow energization is that the lowest current level
consistent with adequate protection can be found while turning the current
up too high initially can make it very difficult to find the optimum current.
A series of checks should be carried out to ensure that all anodes and
probes are correctly wired. Energizing should be at very low current levels
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
187
initially and should be carried out after the anode system is fully cured and
ready according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
7.7.7
Commissioning
A series of commissioning tests should be agreed at the design stage. These
may be taken from the NACE or CEN standards. However, the issue of
anode durability is still important. A slow increase in current to achieve the
minimum required control criteria is recommended. As chlorides move
away from the rebar under the influence of the electric field, it is better to
underprotect in the first months rather than over protect. As long as the
system is seen to be capable of delivering adequate current and all test and
monitoring areas are polarizing in a sensible manner, with all anodes
passing current fairly uniformly, the system should be accepted as
functioning correctly.
The NACE 100mV polarization criterion is a very useful start up
criterion to avoid initial overprotection.
7.7.8
Operation and maintenance
It is essential that impressed current cathodic protection systems are
properly maintained. This usually means that a budget system of train-
ing for personnel and maintenance schedule is developed by the client, engi-
neer, corrosion specialist and contractor at the initial design and
specification stage.
The client may undertake maintenance himself or have an agent do it for
him. Even with remote control and monitoring a visual check on the system
should be undertaken every month or so and an annual inspection
conducted leading to repair and maintenance if required.
7.8
Cathodic protection of prestressed concrete
Extreme caution must be used when applying cathodic protection to
prestressing steel or to elements that include prestressing steel. This is for
two reasons:
1
Because of the risk that if the potential exceeds the hydrogen evolution
potential hydrogen embrittlement could occur with potentially
catastrophic failure of the steel.
2
Because if the prestressing steel has corrosion pits in it, those pits are
potential stress concentrators and there is a risk of either under
protection in the bottom of the pit which could lead to continued
corrosion and then to failure of the stressed strands, or of overprotection
leading to hydrogen embrittlement.
 

188
Electrochemical repair techniques
These issues are extremely well reviewed in NACE report 01102 (2002).
The report includes ‘qualification criteria’ for applying cathodic protection to
prestressing which depends upon susceptibility to hydrogen embrittlement,
checks on the degree of section loss and pitting. It is made clear in the report
that if cathodic protection is to be applied then the preference is to use a
galvanic system as the risk of exceeding the hydrogen evolution potential is
negligible. If impressed current cathodic protection is to be used then the
condition of the steel and the control criteria are of paramount importance.
The CEN standard BSEN 12696 gives criteria for controlling cathodic
protection systems applied to prestressing steel by keeping the potential
more positive than 900mV with respect to Ag/AgCl/0.5M KCl. NACE
RP0290 states in its scope that it does not apply to prestressed concrete
structures. NACE RP 0100–2000 gives a limit of 1000mV with respect to
CSE (approximately 900mV with respect to Ag/AgCl/0.5M KCl).
In Italy CP has been applied to new bridges to protect anchorages, rein-
forcing steel and exposed tendons in prestressed, post-tensioned bridges
Baldo et al. (1991). The important factor here is that cathodic protection is
applied from construction and therefore to uncorroded steel of low risk of
hydrogen embrittlement. The Italian approach is conservative as very mod-
est currents and potentials are needed to protect new structures. However,
applying CP to a new, undamaged structure is thought to admit poor
confidence in the initial design by many engineers unless the structure is
exposed to a very severe environment such as salt or brine containers. The
Italian choice was based on a lowest maintenance option as closing lanes on
elevated highways would require complex expensive traffic control, high
risk to site operatives and heavy traffic congestion.
In the United States trials of impressed current cathodic protection have
been conducted on pre-tensioned structures (Bennett and Schue, 1998).
Many pre-tensioned bridge piles have been cathodically protected in
Florida using galvanic anodes. This is unlikely to cause overprotection and
hydrogen evolution.
It has already been noted that a United Kingdom post-tensioned bridge
collapsed in Wales a few years ago. The bridge had no waterproofing on the
deck, the ducts were poorly grouted and salt got in between segments
directly onto the steel. The UKDoT has undertaken an extensive survey to
determine how many bridges are in a comparable condition in the UK. As
CP cannot protect the cables inside ducts on post-tensioned structures, it
has limited applicability for protecting such structures.
Thus it can bee seen that each prestressed structure must be evaluated to
determine the feasibility of cathodic protection current reaching the steel
that needs protection, whether galvanic cathodic protection can be applied
and if not using qualification criteria such as those in NACE 01102 (2002)
to determine if the structure is suitable for impressed current cathodic
protection.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
189
7.9
Cathodic protection of epoxy coated 
reinforcing steel
Because of the problems of corrosion of fusion bonded epoxy coated
reinforcing steel (FBECR) in Florida (Clear et al., 1995; Manning, 1995),
the Florida DoT and other US researchers have investigated methods of
cathodically protecting FBECR. The main problems are establishing the
continuity of the steel and the risk of pitting and undercutting corrosion
behind the epoxy coating.
A survey of the FBECR structures in Florida that have suffered from
corrosion has shown that many have a very high level of continuity. On a
survey of 10 bridges, there was an average of 27% readings showing
electrical continuity (Sagüés, 1994). This may be due to the use of uncoated
tie wire in early construction work cutting through the coatings and the
effect of squeezing bars together at ties.
In order to install cathodic protection, continuity can be established by
welding in extra rebars. However, at Florida DOT one approach has been
to expose bars in damaged areas, grit blast them clean and apply arc
sprayed zinc directly onto the steel and then across the steel surface. This
provides galvanizing directly on the steel and SACP to the steel embedded
in the concrete. Multiple continuity connections are established by the
sprayed zinc.
The problem of pitting and under coating corrosion is more difficult and
is well known in pipeline corrosion where fusion bonded epoxy coatings are
frequently applied to the outside of pipelines and then cathodic protection
applied to protect the pinholes that inevitably occur. However, these sys-
tems are applied from new so there is no corrosion established. The FBECR
structures are already corroding when CP is applied. It is therefore possible
for corrosion to be established under the coating where the cathodic
protection current cannot reach. The small driving voltage of a galvanic
anode system means even less protection or penetration of current than for
an impressed current system. In practice the risks of lack of continuity and
of under-film corrosion must be accepted. The galvanic sprayed systems
installed on prestressed concrete piles with FBECR have lasted 10–12 years
with no signs of further corrosion.
7.10
Cathodic protection of structures 
with ASR
Alkali-silica reactivity (ASR) is a condition where certain silicateous
aggregates are susceptible to the alkalinity in the concrete and react to form
silica gel. Silica gel is used as a desiccant because it absorbs moisture. As it
absorbs moisture it swells. ASR is characterized by ‘map cracking’, and weep-
ing of the gel as a white efflorescence from the cracks (BRE Digest 330, 1999).
 

190
Electrochemical repair techniques
One way of controlling ASR at the mix design stage is to limit the maximum
alkali content of the mix. This can be done by controlling the chemistry of
the cement powder or by blending the cement. In these cases marginally
susceptible aggregates can be used.
It has been shown earlier that cathodic protection creates hydroxyl
ions and will also attract positive ions such as sodium and potassium to
the steel. This will increase the alkalinity around the reinforcing bar. In
principle this could cause ASR or accelerate ASR in susceptible mixes.
This has been demonstrated in the laboratory. However, there are no
recorded cases of ASR being caused or accelerated by CP in field
structures. In a review of field structures by SHRP, a structure with ASR
showed no acceleration in the ASR in areas where CP was applied. The
issue is also discussed in Mietz (1998). In the European standard on
cathodic protection BSEN 12696(2000) Appendix A.5 states that
‘cathodic protection applied in accordance with this standard has been
demonstrated to have no influence on alkali silica reaction/alkali aggre-
gate reaction (ASR/AAR).’
7.11
Electrochemical chloride extraction
We have already determined that the chloride ion is a catalyst to corrosion
(Section 3.2.3). As it is negatively charged we can use the electrochemical
process to repel the chloride ion from the steel surface and move it towards
an external anode. This process, called electrochemical chloride extraction
(ECE), desalination or chloride removal, uses a temporary anode and a
higher electrical power density than CP, but is otherwise similar
(Figure 7.1). Preparation in terms of concrete repair, power supplies etc are
similar to those for impressed current cathodic protection except that the
power supply is temporary and may be from a temporary source such as a
generator. The output is larger, up to 50 V and 2 A.m2.
7.11.1
Anode types
The most popular anode is the same coated titanium mesh used for
impressed current cathodic protection. Instead of embedding it permanently
in a cementitious overlay a temporary anode system is used. A proprietary
system developed in Norway consists of shredded paper and water sprayed
onto the surface to form a wet ‘papier mâché’. The mesh anode is then fixed
to the surface on wooden batons and a final layer of papier mâché applied.
The system is kept wet for the operational period. Figure 7.20 shows an
early installation underway using a mild steel mesh anode. This is rarely
used now for ECE.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
191
Figure 7.20 Electrochemical chloride extraction being applied to the Burlington
Skyway Ontario, Canada 1989, using cellulose fibre over a mild steel
mesh. Acknowledgements Jack Bennett.
Alternatively a wetting system of a water baths or ponds have been
applied on bridge decks in the United States. An electrolyte solution
circulating system on vertical surfaces using ‘blankets’ has been used in the
SHRP trials on bridges in Florida, Ohio and New York and Ontario
(Figure 7.21). A system of surface mounted tanks or ‘cassettes’ has been
developed in the United Kingdom as shown in Figure 7.22. This can con-
tain mixed metal oxide coated titanium mesh or mesh ribbon anode.
7.11.2
Electrolytes
The electrolyte is the liquid in the cassette, cellulose fibre, blankets, ponds
or other containment system that transport the current from the anode to
the steel. Potable water is a suitable electrolyte but is liable to acidify and
promote the evolution of chlorine gas. Regular replacement will be required
 

Figure 7.22 Cassette type anode attached to a bridge abutment.Courtesy Makers Ltd.
Figure 7.21 Geotextile blanket anode system being installed on a bridle column in
the SHRP ECE trials (Bennett et al., 1993a, Acknowledgement
Transportation Research Board).
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
193
to maintain the pH at a suitable level. Concrete suffers serious acid attach
below pH 5 so the pH should not be allowed to drop below pH 6. Alkaline
electrolytes are generally beneficial to the performance of the system, to
minimize the risk of etching of the concrete surface and to minimize
chlorine gas evolution on inert anodes. The following alkaline solutions are
suitable.
●
Saturated calcium hydroxide with an excess of solid material to
maintain the saturation.
●
Lithium borate is suitable where there is concern about alkali-silica
reaction in the concrete.
●
Plain water is preferred by some designers to maximize chloride transport.
7.11.3
Operating conditions
The very first trials of this system were based on a rapid treatment period
of 12–24 hours. Trials were done in Ohio, United States, and lab tests
in Kansas Department of Transportation in 1976 (Morrison et al.,
1976, Slater et al., 1976). However, a more fundamental study carried
out by the Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP) in 1987–1992
(Bennett et al., 1993a,b) showed dangers in applying more than 4 A.m2 of
steel or concrete surface area. Current treatment times are now measured in
weeks rather than days.
Ontario Ministry of Transportation carried out a trial of the Norwegian
system on Burlington Skyway in 1989. The voltage was kept at about 40 V.
The total charge passed was 610 A·h.m2 of concrete surface area over 
55 days giving an average current density of 0.462 A.m2. This structure
had a low steel concentration so removal was patchy, very high over the
rebars but lower between the bars. They found 78–87% of the chloride
removed directly above the rebars and 42–77% of the chloride removed
between the rebars.
A trial was carried out in the United Kingdom on a section of crosshead
taken from the corroding substructure of a bridge. The section was
removed to a contractor’s depot and the sprayed cellulose fibre system
applied. The system ran for 92 days passing a total of about 19,565 A.h
charge through approximately 11m2 of steel surface. This gave a charge
density of 1,704 A.h.m2, an average current density of 0.77 A.m2 and a
power density of 25 W.m2.
This work was followed up by laboratory tests on concrete to rebar pull
out strength and is discussed later.
A typical system will run at no more than 4 A.m2 of steel surface area
for a period of 2–8 weeks.
 

194
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.11.4
End point determination
End point determination can be by several means:
i
Point of diminishing returns – resistance goes up, amount of chloride
removed goes down, when the current is small and the amount of
chloride removed is small, switch off. Switching off for about a week
will bring the system resistance down. How much more chloride is
removed by allowing ‘rest’ periods is not known.
ii
Direct measurement – take samples from the concrete and when an agreed
level is reached, stop. This may be a chloride level (typically less than
0.4% chloride by mass of cement within 25 mm of the reinforcement); or
a chloride/hydroxyl ratio of less than 0.6 (see Section 3.2.3). This assumes
that good sampling is possible and that samples are representative. 
A method of determining the chloride/hydroxyl ratio of concrete pore
water is given in Cáseres et al. (2006).
iii
Indirect measurement – sample the anode system or electrolyte. When
chloride level is either at a plateau or an agreed level, stop. This
assumes good sampling.
iv
Experience of charge density needed – measure charge passed (amp
hours per square metre) and when an agreed limit is reached, switch
off. The present consensus is that the steel current density should be a
minimum of 600 A.h.m2 and should not exceed 1,500 A.h.m2 based
on Bennett and Schue (1993) and many subsequent applications of
ECE. This is likely to be the conclusion of a NACE standard
recommended practice, presently in draft form.
Sohanghpurwala (2003), re-evaluated the specimens and structures
treated in the SHRP work (Bennett and Schue, 1993; Bennett et al., 1993a)
and found the onset of corrosion after 10.25 years on specimens that had
been treated at 600 A.h.m2.
In practice a combination of criteria are used. Experienced engineers and
contractors will know the charge density needed and a trial may give a more
definite value for a given structure (or element within the structure).
Sampling directly and indirectly will show that the system is responding in
the expected manner. The point of diminishing returns should be reached
soon after the other thresholds.
It is impossible to remove all the chlorides from the concrete by electrical
means. The area immediately around the rebar is left almost chloride free
but further away there is less effect. This is particularly true behind the steel
and for widely spaced bars. Chloride removal will deplete the amount of
chloride immediately in contact with the steel and will replenish the passive
layer. Somewhere between 50 and 90% of the chlorides are removed. Field
data show that this is effective for at least 15 years but for how much longer
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
195
is uncertain. The results now suggest a minimum of 15 years if ECE is well
applied and subsequent ingress of chloride is controlled. The Burlington
Skyway system is now 17 years old and shows no sign of corrosion 
re-initiating despite the fact that the chloride content between bars remains
high (Pianca et al., 2003 and private correspondence 2006).
If large amounts of chloride have penetrated beyond the steel or were cast
uniformly into the concrete, then chloride removal will only affect the chlo-
ride level in the cover concrete. The large reserves of chlorides in the bulk of
the concrete may then diffuse back around the steel and the removal process
may be very short lived. SHRP experiments on a marine substructure were
discouraging (Bennett et al., 1993a). UK trials on marine piles demonstrated
similar problems although a system on the deck soffit of the wharf was suc-
cessful as it stayed out of the water (Armstrong and Grantham, 1996).
However, research shows that the most important aspect of the chloride
removal process is the generation of hydroxyl ions, the rebuilding of the
protective passive film, infilling of voids and the steel/concrete interface and
the removal of the chlorides immediately around the rebar. SHRP research
showed that even with a modest total charge passed and only 50–80%
chloride removal, and with chloride levels still above the corrosion thresh-
old, treatment will give a very low corrosion rate and very passive half-cell
potentials which last more than five years without reactivation (Bennett
et al., 1993c). If this is true then we should perhaps call the process ‘elec-
trochemical chloride mitigation’ and avoid requirements to remove more
than 90% of the chloride, as this may not be necessary. Glass et al. (2003)
have shown how important these effects are.
7.11.5
Possible effects
Passing large amounts of electricity through concrete can have effects upon
its chemistry and therefore its physical condition. Brown staining around
the rebar has been observed on specimens when high currents (in excess of
4 A.m2) are used. This is an effect on the concrete, not the steel. Current
levels are therefore maintained at less than 2 A.m2 (usually in the range
0.5–1 A.m2).
There are two known side effects of ECE. The first is the acceleration of
alkali-silica reactivity (ASR) and the other is reduction in bond at the steel
concrete interface.
A third issue is hydrogen evolution. This is inevitable with ECE and so
this process must not be used on prestressing steel.
7.11.6
Alkali-Silica Reactivity
Research at Aston University in England, and by Eltech Research in the
United States under the SHRP program shows that ASR can be induced by
 

196
Electrochemical repair techniques
the cathodic reactions ((7.2) and (7.3)) that generate excess alkali at
the steel surface. This is exacerbated by the movement of alkali metal ions
(Na and K) to the steel surface under the influence of its negative charge.
Some researchers in Japan have suggested that the pH can be so high
that the silica gel dissolves, stopping the expansive process (Sergi and
Page, 1992).
SHRP undertook a field trial in collaboration with Ontario to see if ASR
can be controlled by the application of lithium ions in the electrolyte. These
ions (Li) move towards the rebar under the influence of the ECE electric
field. Lithium is known to reduce or stop ASR and has proved effective in
lab tests. If a corroding structure is made with aggregates susceptible to
ASR, a detailed investigation of its likely reaction to ECE will be required.
There have been no published reports of its current condition.
It has been suggested that if a structure is suffering from ASR and
corrosion then corrosion should be the first priority as corrosion will cause
the most damage most rapidly. That decision can only be made on a case by
case basis.
7.11.7
Bond strength
The effect of current on bond strength of steel in concrete has been a subject
for discussion in the technical literature for many years. This is usually with
reference to cathodic protection but no effects have been observed in the
field on the many hundreds of CP systems in service for up to twenty years
now (Virmani and Jones, 1988). In most practical applications the major
part of the bond is supplied by the ribbing on the bars so the details of the
performance of the steel/concrete interface is irrelevant.
A laboratory study was undertaken to investigate the effect of pull out
strength for the application of ECE to the Tees Viaduct, a long bridge struc-
ture in the North of England (Buenfeld and Broomfield, 1994). Smooth
rebars were used in its construction due to steel shortages at the time of
construction. Some earlier, unpublished tests had shown that ECE can
reduce bond strength by as much as 50%. However, careful review of the
laboratory data showed that a large amount of charge was passed to get this
drop in bond. About five times as much as is used normally in a ECE treat-
ment. A very high current density was also used. Figure 7.23 shows the
effect of different levels of charge (current 	 time) on the pull out strength
of smooth bars from cylinder specimens.
These experiments show that bond strength increases as the specimen
corrodes (effectively prestressing the concrete by expansive oxide
formation). The ECE current appears to eliminate this prestressing effect,
although the pull out strength does not fall below the level of control
(Figure 7.23).
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
197
If this is in fact the mechanism then the long-term effect must be
considered. If corrosion has occurred over a period of 5– 10 years, then
the concrete may creep to accommodate some of the stresses generated by
corrosion. If the ECE current then removes the stress it will not be possible
for the concrete to revert elastically. Therefore these is a risk of a plane or
cylinder of weakness developing around the bar, leading to a reduction of
pull out strength.
7.11.8
Results after treatment: beneficial effects 
of passing currents through concrete
Comparisons of corrosion rates before and after treatment have consistently
showed significant reductions. In the Tees Viaduct field measurements of
corrosion rates were in the range 0.33–1.66 A.cm2 with a mean of 
0.377 A.cm2. On a block that was treated with ECE, a year later readings
ranged from 0.0005 to 0.094 with a mean of 0.0028 A.cm2. Although no
direct ‘before and after’ measurements were made at the same locations, this
shows a two order of magnitude difference in corrosion rate between treated
and untreated steel in concrete (Broomfield, 1995).
Resistivity measurement showed large increases after treatment, to over
200 k cm in the field and 5 k cm on untreated lab specimens to 30 k cm
after treatment on specimens vacuum saturated with distilled water.
Petrographic microscopy showed the treatment to block pores, espe-
cially close to the steel reducing transport of water, oxygen and chloride
ions. This is possibly due to redistribution of calcium hydroxide. There
was also an improvement in freeze/thaw resistance (Buenfeld and
Broomfield, 1994).
Pull out load (kN)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Treatment period (weeks)
kN
1.5% Chloride
Zero Chloride
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Figure 7.23 Maximum pull out load vs.time at 0.75A m2 (Buenfeld and Broomfield,1994).
 

198
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.12
Realkalization
In equations (3.1) and (3.2) we saw how carbon dioxide reacts with water
to form carbonic acid which then reacts with calcium hydroxide to form
calcium carbonate. This removes the hydroxyl ions from solutions and the
pH drops so that the passive layer is no longer maintained and corrosion
can be initiated.
The cathodic reaction (7.2) showed that by applying electrons to the steel
we can generate new hydroxyl ions at the steel surface. This regenerates the
alkalinity and pushes the pH back up to around 12.
The anodes used are the same sprayed cellulose or tank anode systems
developed to apply chloride removal. In addition to generating hydroxyl
ions, the developers claim that by using a sodium carbonate electrolyte they
make the treatment more resistant to further carbonation. The patent
claims that sodium carbonate will move into the concrete under electro-
osmotic pressure. A certain amount will then react with further incoming
carbon dioxide. The equilibrium is at 12.2% of 1M sodium carbonate
under atmospheric conditions.
Na2CO3  CO2  H2O →2NaHCO3
The method by which the sodium carbonate enters the concrete is con-
tentious with some researchers seeing clear evidence of electro-osmosis
Banfill (1994) while others seeing no effect or stating the mechanism to be
by diffusion and capillary action Mietz (1998).
In laboratory tests the patent authors have shown that it is very diffi-
cult if not impossible for a treated specimen to carbonate again. From
the licensor’s figures, over 200,000m2 of concrete surface area have
been treated on structures around the world from 1987 to 1999. The
treatment is faster than chloride removal only requiring a few days of
treatment.
7.12.1
Anode types
Anode types are similar to those used for ECE. The sprayed cellulose is used
by the owners of the patented system with a steel or coated titanium mesh.
The steel is more likely to be used here as the treatment time is shorter and
the steel is less likely to be completely consumed.
7.12.2
Electrolytes
As stated earlier sodium carbonate solution is the preferred electrolyte to
give long lasting protection against further CO2 ingress. However,
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
199
introducing sodium ions can accelerate ASR so in some cases potassium
carbonate or plain tap water is used.
7.12.3
Operating conditions
In one case a current density of 0.3–0.5 A.m2 was applied (at 12 V) to
2,000m2 of a building in Norway with a treatment time of 3–5 days. In
another case 10–22 V was applied to give a current density of 0.4–1.5
A.m2 in 12 days on 300m2 of a bridge control tower in Belgium. A further
section of 140m2 was treated in nine days with a current of 1–2A.m2. All
figures are for concrete surface area. The steel to concrete surface ratio was
not given. The CEN Technical Specification for electrochemical realkaliza-
tion (CEN/TS 14038-1, 2004) states that a minimum of 100 A.h.m2 shall
be applied.
7.12.4
End point determination
This is easy for carbonation. A simple measurement of carbonation depth
will show when it has been reduced to zero. However, it has been pointed
out that the phenolphthalein indicator turns from clear to pink as the pH
rises above about nine. This is still an unpassivated condition. Miller (1989)
recommends ensuring that the indicator is bright pink. Universal indicator
or an indicator with a colour change closer to 12 may be required to be sure
that alkalinity has been fully restored.
7.12.5
Possible effects
As there is a smaller charge density applied compared to ECE the risks of
damage are lower than for chloride removal. As mentioned earlier ASR may
be a risk if sodium carbonate is used as the electrolyte. Sodium carbonate
can also cause short-term efflorescence and the high alkalinity after
treatment can attack some coatings. Sodium carbonate will attack oil-based
paints, varnishes and natural wood finishes. It should also be noted that
carbonated concrete does not promote ASR as the pH has dropped
and sodium bicarbonate does not put the pH up to the same level as
uncarbonated concrete so the risk of aggravating ASR with realkalization is
lower than for ECE.
7.13
Standards and guidance for electrochemical
chloride extraction and realkalization
There is a CEN standard on electrochemical realkalization (CEN TS
14038-1, 2004). There is a proprietary specification for ECE and
 

200
Electrochemical repair techniques
realkalization (Fosroc, 1996). NACE has produced state-of-the-art reports
on both ECE and realkalization NACE 01101-(2001) and NACE 1104
(2004) respectively The latter is a joint document with the UK Corrosion
Prevention Association, Technical Paper No 9 (2004). At the time of writing
(2006) NACE is finalizing a standard recommend practice for both ECE
and realkalization.
7.14
Electro-osmosis
The phenomenon of electro-osmosis has already been mentioned in
connection with electrochemical realkalization (Section 7.8). It is well
known that when a porous medium like concrete contains a solution, then
an electric current applied between an anode and a cathode will move the
water from the anode to the cathode. This leads to drying of anodes for
pipelines in soils. The basis of the phenomenon is that when a compound
dissolves, water molecules attach themselves to it. This happens more for
positively charged metal ions than for negatively charged ions. Therefore
more water is carried by the positive ions towards the negative cathode.
It is claimed to be the reason for the transport of the sodium or potassium
carbonate from the anode to the cathode in realkalization treatments as
discussed in the previous section.
Figure 7.24 A system consisting of wire anodes and cathodes is shown on a bridge in the
UK. There are also rod cathodes in the ground drawing water away.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
201
There is therefore proprietary technology for applying this methodology
to concrete. The proprietary part is the use of pulses to reduce the build
up of charged ions at the electrodes which would increase the electrical
resistance. The system works by the installation of cathodes in areas where
the water can be discharged and anodes in areas where water must be
removed.
The technology is described by McInerney et al. (2002, 2004).
Figure 7.24 shows a trial system installed in the Unite Kingdom with
horizontal wire anodes and cathodes across the leaf piers and cathodes in
the ground to draw water away. The aim of the system was to reduce the
relative humidity in the concrete to a level which would not sustain
corrosion below say 60% RH (see Section 4.12.4 and Lambert, 1997).
The main problem that the author is aware of with such systems is that
the anode is heavily stressed if there is water ingress or run down. Very high
current densities can occur on the anodes. This can lead to them failing. It
is therefore likely that anodes are in need of further development before the
technology can be considered fully developed for external applications
where random wetting events cannot be avoided.
In addition, the pulsing process requires sophisticated electronics which
must prove durable over many years. They are likely to be less reliable than
transformer rectifier systems providing straight DC for impressed current
cathodic protection.
Although electro-osmosis systems for drying building materials 
(e.g. concrete or masonry block basements) are well known technology, at
the time of writing (2006) this technology is in its infancy for corrosion con-
trol of reinforced concrete structures.
7.15
Comparison of techniques
It is possible to summarize the advantages and limitations of the techniques
so that they can be compared. This is done more thoroughly in Chapter 8
where Figures 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 give a breakdown of how to select repairs
but the headings below summarize the issues with respect to the electro-
chemical techniques discussed in this chapter.
7.15.1
Advantages of all electrochemical techniques
1
They treat a large area of a structure, not just patch up immediately
corroding areas.
2
They do not give rise to ‘incipient anode’ problems.
3
Concrete repair to damaged areas is cheaper and easier than for con-
ventional repairs.
 

202
Electrochemical repair techniques
7.15.2
Disadvantages of all electrochemical techniques
1
They require specialist knowledge.
2
They must be used with great care and careful selection on pre-stressed
structures, those with ASR, those with epoxy coating, epoxy injections
or those with poor electrical continuity of the reinforcement.
7.15.3
Impressed current cathodic protection
1
Advantages: should last 20–50 years or even more with proper mainte-
nance. Proven technology (20 years  and 20–50 year life on anodes),
good specifications and standards both for system installation
and operation and for embedded and conductive coating anodes
(Section 7.4.2)
2
Disadvantages: requires permanent power supply and requires regular
maintenance and monitoring and constant power supply.
7.15.4
Galvanic cathodic protection
1
Advantages: very low maintenance, no power supply, no electronics,
no wiring. Installation is simplified with no concerns about short
circuits from anode to reinforcement. Can be applied to prestressed
structures.
2
Disadvantages: no control to ensure that protection is maintained,
limited anode life (say 155 years), no published standards other than
impressed current criteria which require installation of monitoring
equipment and circuitry. Anodes intrusive either thermal sprayed zinc,
anodes in repairs or cored holes.
7.15.5
Electrochemical chloride extraction
1
Advantages: treatment is completed in six to eight weeks with no further
maintenance. Temporary power supply can be used, no mains required.
2
Disadvantages: few standards or specifications available yet. Higher
charge density can cause more problems than cathodic protection.
Lifetime of treatment not well defined yet.
7.15.6
Realkalization
1
Advantages: treatment completed in two to four weeks with no further
maintenance. Temporary power supply can be used, no mains required.
European standard published.
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
203
2
Disadvantages: few standards or specifications available yet. Higher
charge density can cause more problems than cathodic protection.
Lifetime of treatment not well defined yet.
7.15.7
Costs
It is difficult to give definite cost information as this varies from job
to job and country to country. Summaries of costs for cathodic protec-
tion are given in HA BA 83/02 (2002) for the United Kingdom and in
Bennett et al. (1993b) for the USA. These techniques are generally only
specified if they offer a cost saving to the owner of the structure over its
lifetime (Unwin and Hall, 1993). Currently in the United Kingdom costs of
ECE and realkalization exceed those of impressed current cathodic
protection. A more recent comparison of United Kingdom costs is given at
http://projects.bre.co.uk/ rebarcorrosioncost/ and will be discussed in
Chapter 8.
References
AASHTO-AGC-ARTBA (1993). Guide Specification for Cathodic Protection of
Concrete Bridge Decks, Task Force 29, Federal Highway Administration,
Washington, DC.
American Welding Society (2002). Specification for Thermal Spraying Zinc
Anodes on Reinforced Concrete. AWS/ANSI Standard. AWS C2.20/C2.20M:
2002.
Armstrong, K. and Grantham, M.G. (1996). Desalination of Victoria Pier, Jersey.
Construction Repair; Jul 1996 Aug 31. 
Baldo, P., Mason, A., Tettamenti, M. and Reding, J. (1991). Cathodic Protection of
Bridge Viaduct in the Presence of Prestressing Steel: An Italian Case History,
Paper 119, Corrosion 91, NACE International Houston, TX.
Banfill, P.F.G. (1994). Features of the Mechanism of Re-Alkalisation and
Desalination Treatments for Reinforced Concrete. Corrosion and Corrosion
Protection of Steel in Concrete, Sheffield.
Bartholomew, J., Bennett, J., Turk, T., Hartt, W.H., Lankard, D.R, Sagues, A.A. and
Savinell, R. (1993). Control Criteria and Materials Performance Studies for
Cathodic Protection of Reinforced Concrete, SHRP-S-670 Strategic Highway
Research Program, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Bennett, J., Kuan, F.F. and Schue, T.J. (1993a). Electrochemical Chloride
Removal and Protection of Concrete Bridge Components: Field Trials,
Strategic Highway Research Program, SHRP-5-669, National Research Council,
Washington, DC.
Bennett, J., Schue, T.J., Clear, K.C., Lankard, D.L., Hartt, W.H. and Swiat, W.J.
(1993c). Electrochemical Chloride Removal and Protection of Concrete Bridge
Components: Laboratory Studies, Strategic Highway Research Program Report,
SHRP-5-657, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
 

204
Electrochemical repair techniques
Bennett, J.E. (1993). Cathodic Protection of Reinforced Concrete Bridge Elements:
A State-of-the-Art Report, Strategic Highway Research Program, SHRP-S-337,
National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Bennett, J.E. and Broomfield, J.P. (1997). Analysis of Studies on Cathodic
Protection Criteria for Steel in Concrete. Materials Performance, 36(12): 
16–21.
Bennett, J.E. and Schue, T.J. (1993). Chloride Removal Implementation Guide,
Strategic Highway Research Program, SHRP-S-347, National Research Council,
Washington, DC.
Bennett, J.E. and Schue, T.J. (1998). Cathodic Protection Field Trials on Prestressed
Concrete Components, Final Report. FHWA Report. FHWA-RD-97-153.
Bennett, J.E. and Turk, T. (1994). Technical Alert: Criteria for Cathodic Protection
of Reinforced Concrete Bridge Elements, Strategic Highway Research Program,
SHRP-S-359, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Bennett, J.E., Bartholomew, J.J., Bushman, J.B., Clear, K.C., Kamp, R.N. and 
Swiat, W.J. (1993b). Cathodic Protection of Concrete Bridges: A Manual of
Practice, Strategic Highway Research Program, SHRP-S-372, National Research
Council, Washington, DC.
Bennett, J.E., Bushman, J., Noyce, P. and Costa, J. (2000). Field Application of
Performance Enhancing Chemicals to Metallized Zinc Anodes. Corrosion 2000.
Paper No. 790.
BRE Digest 330 (1999). Parts 1–4, Alkali-Silica Reaction in Concrete, Publ. CRC
Ltd, London.
Broomfield, J.P. (1995). ‘Field measurements of the corrosion rate of steel in
concrete using a microprocessor controlled guard ring for signal confinement’, In
N.S. Berke, E. Escalante, C. Nmai and D. Whiting (eds), Techniques to Assess the
Corrosion Activity of Steel Reinforced Concrete Structures, American Society of
Testing and Materials, STP 1276, Philadelphia, PA.
Broomfield, J.P. (March, 2004). A Case History of Cathodic Protection of a Highway
Structure in the UK. Proc. Corrosion 2004. Paper 04344. NACE International
Houston, TX.
Broomfield, J.P. and Tinnea, J.S. (1992). Cathodic Protection of Reinforced
Concrete Bridge Components, Strategic Highway Research Program, SHRPC/
VWP-92-l. 618, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Broomfield, J.P., Langford, P.E. and McAnoy, R. (1987). ‘Cathodic protection of
reinforced concrete: its application to buildings and marine structures’, Corrosion
of Metals in Concrete, Proceedings of Corrosion/87, NACE, Houston, TX,
pp 222–235.
BSEN/TS 14038-1 (2004). Electrochemical Realkalization and Chloride Extraction
Treatments for Reinforced Concrete – Part 1: Realkalization. British Standards
Institute, London.
BSEN12696 (2000). Cathodic Protection of Steel in Concrete. British Standards
Institute, London.
BSEN13509 (2000). Cathodic Protection Measurement Techniques. British
Standards Institute, London.
Buenfeld, N.R. and Broomfield, J.P. (1994). ‘Effect of chloride removal on rebar
bond strength and concrete properties’, in Swamy, R.N. (ed.), Corrosion
 

Electrochemical repair techniques
205
and Corrosion Protection of Steel in Concrete, Sheffield Academic Press.
Sheffield, UK.
Cáseres, L., Sagüés, A.A., Kranc, S.C. and Weyers, R.E. (2006). ‘In situ leaching
method for determination of chloride in pore water’, Cement and Concrete
Research, 36: 492–503.
Clear, K.C., Hartt, W.H., McIntyre, J. and Seung, K.L. (1995). Performance of
Epoxy-Coated Reinforcing Steel in Highway Bridges, NCHRP Report 370,
National Cooperative Research Program, Transportation Research Board,
National Research Council, Washington, DC.
CPA Monograph 10 (2002). ‘Stray current’, Corrosion Prevention Association,
Farnham Surry.
Fosroc. (1996). Norcure – Electrochemical Treatment for Reinforced Concrete
Specifiers Guide. Publ Fosroc Tamworth, UK.
Geoghegan, M.P., Das, S.C. and Broomfield, J.P. (1985). Conductive Coatings in
Relation to Cathodic Protection, Transport Research Laboratory Report 
No. P8512100 TRL, Crowthorne, Berkshire, UK.
Glass, G., Taylor, J., Roberts, A. and Davison, N. (2003, Mar.). The Protective Effects
of Electrochemical Treatment in Reinforced Concrete. NACE Corrosion 2003. Paper
No. 03291 NACE International, Houston, TX.
Glass, G.K., Hassanein, A.M. and Buenfeld, N.R. (2000). CP Criteria for
Reinforced Concrete in Marine Exposure Zones. Journal of Materials in Civil
Engineering, 12(2): 164–171.
Highways Agency (2001). Cathodic Protection for Use in Reinforced Concrete
Highway Structures HABA83/02. Design Manual for Roads and Bridges. Volume 3 –
Highway Structures: Inspection and Maintenance (Section 3 Repair, Part 3).
Hime, W.G. (1994). Chloride-Caused Corrosion of Steel in Concrete: A New 
Historical Perspective. Concrete International, 15(5): 56–61.
Kessler, R.J., Powers, R.G. and Lasa, L.R. (1995). Update on Sacrificial Anode
Cathodic Protection of Steel Reinforced Concrete Structures in Seawater.
Corrosion 95, Paper 516, NACE International, Houston, TX.
Kessler, R.J., Powers, R.G. and Lasa, I.R. (2002). An Update on the Long Term Use
of Cathodic Protection of Steel Reinforced Concrete Marine Structures. NACE
Corrosion 2002. Paper No. 02254.
Lambert, P. (1997). Controlling Moisture. Construction Repair, 11(2): 29–32.
McInerney, M.K., Cooper, S.C., Hock, V.F. and Morefield, S.W. (2004).
Measurements of Water and Ion Transport in Concrete via Electro-Osmosis. Proc.
Corrosion 2004. Paper 04351. NACE.
Manning, D.G. (1995). Corrosion Performance of Epoxy Coated Reinforcing 
Steel: North American experience. Construction and Building Materials,
10(5): 433.
Mears, R.B. and Brown, R.H. (1938). ‘A theory of cathodic protection’, Trans.
Electrochemical Society, 74: 519–531.
Michael, M., Sean, M., Sondra, C., Phillip, M., Charles, W., Matthew, B., Jonathan, T.
and Vincent, F.H. (2002). Electro-Osmotic Pulse (EOP) Technology for Control
of Water Seepage in Concrete Structures. ERDC/CERL TR-02.
Mietz, J. (1998). Electrochemical Rehabilitation Methods for Reinforced
Concrete Structures – A State of the Art Report. 24 ed. London: European
 

206
Electrochemical repair techniques
Federation of Corrosion. Publication/Institute of Materials. ISBN: ISSN
1345–5116.
Miller, J.B. (1989). Note on the Use of Phenolphthalein as a pH-indicator for
Carbonated Concretes. Norwegian Concrete Technologies Paper No. 7.
Morgan, T.D.B. (1990). ‘Some comments on reinforcement corrosion in
stagnant saline environments’, in Page, C.L., Treadaway K.W.J. and Bamforth
P.B.
(eds), Corrosion of Reinforcement in Concrete, Elsevier Applied
Science, London for the Society of Chemical Industry, pp 29–38.
Morrison, G.L., Virmani, Y.P., Stratton, F.W. and Gilliland, W.J. (1976). Chloride
Removal and Monomer Impregnation of Bridge Deck Concrete be Electro-osmosis.
Kansas DoT Report. FHWA-Ks-RD. 74–1.
NACE International Publication 01105 Sacrificial Cathodic Protection of
Reinforced Concrete Elements A State-of-the-Art Report. 2005; Item No. 24224. 
NACE RP0169 Control of External Corrosion on Underground or Submerged Metallic
Piping Systems.
NACE RP0100-2000 Cathodic Protection of Prestressed Concrete Cylinder
Pipelines. NACE Standard Recommended Practice. 2000 March.
NACE RP0290-2000. Impressed Current Cathodic Protection of Reinforcing Steel
in Atmospherically Exposed Concrete Structures. NACE Standard Recommended
Practice. 2000 Jun.
NACE Standard (2001). TM0294-2004.Testing of Embeddable Impressed Current
Anodes for Use in Cathodic Protection of Atmospherically Exposed Steel-
Reinforced Concrete. 
NACE Standard Test Method (2005). TM105-2005(21247). Test Procedures for
Organic-Based Conductive Coating Anodes for Use on Concrete Structures.
Pianca, F., Schell, H., Lai, D. and Raven, R. (2003). The Ministry of Transportation
of Ontario’s Experience with Electrochemical Chloride Extraction (ECE)
1989–2002. NACE Corrosion 2003. Paper No. 3293.
Pourbaix, M. (1973). Lectures on Electrochemical Corrosion, Plenum Press,
New York.
Sagüés, A.A. (1994). Corrosion of Epoxy Coated Rebar in Florida Bridges, Final
Report to Florida DOT, WPI No. 0510603, College of Engineering, University of
South Florida.
Sergi, G. and Page, C.L. (1992). The Effects of Cathodic Protection on Alkali-Silica
Reaction in Reinforced Concrete, Contractor Research Report 310, Transport
Research Laboratory, Crowthorne, Berkshire, UK.
Slater, J.E., Lankard, D.R. and Moreland, P.J. (1976). Electrochemical Removal
of Chlorides from Concrete Bridge Decks. Materials Performance, 15(11):
21–25.
Society for the Cathodic Protection of Reinforced Concrete (1995). Status Report:
The Cathodic Protection of Reinforced Concrete, Society for the Cathodic
Protection of Reinforced Concrete, Leighton Buzzard, UK.
Sohanghpurwala, A.A. (2003). Long-Term Effectiveness of Electrochemical
Chloride Extraction on Laboratory Specimens and Reinforced Concrete Bridge
Components. NACE Corrosion 2003. Paper No. 3293.
Stratfull, R.F. (1974). Experimental Cathodic Protection of a Bridge Deck.
Transportation Research Record, 500, Transportation Research Board,
Washington, DC.
 

Unwin, J. and Hall, R.J. (1993). ‘Development of maintenance strategies for elevated
motorway structures’, in M.C. Forde (ed.), Structural Faults and Repair 93,
University of Edinburgh, Engineering Technics Press, 1: 23–32.
Virmani, Y.P. and Jones, W.R. (1988). Analysis of Concrete Cores from a Cathodically
Protected Bridge Deck. Public Roads, 51(4): 123–127.
Electrochemical repair techniques
207
 

Chapter 8
Rehabilitation methodology
One of the major issues facing any consultant or owner of a structure
suffering from chloride or carbonation induced corrosion is what form of
repair to undertake. As we have seen from the previous sections there are
coatings, sealants, membranes and enclosures, specialized patch repair
materials, options for total or partial replacement, impressed current and
galvanic cathodic protection, electrochemical chloride removal, realkaliza-
tion, electro-osmosis and corrosion inhibitors. These can be applied to
structures suffering different degrees of corrosion due to chloride attack or
carbonation or a combination of these two. Each treatment will have
implications for the future maintenance requirements, time to next major
intervention and ultimate service life of the structure.
The practical solution for most owners of individual corroding structures
will be to take advice from a civil engineering consultant or corrosion special-
ist who has extensive experience of working on the durability problems of
atmospherically exposed concrete structures. Advice may also be sought from
materials suppliers and applicators about their own particular systems and a
consensus will be reached about the most effective repair to the structure based
on local knowledge, experience and availability of materials and systems.
Many owners of large structures and large inventories of structures will
have developed in-house knowledge. They will have consulted widely and
may develop a systematic approach to corrosion rehabilitation. Bridge
management systems, although no longer in their infancy and are still not
specifically geared to detailed corrosion assessment or its management, par-
ticularly for reinforced concrete bridge elements.
The SHRP program developed a manual and a computer program aimed
at providing highway agencies with a way of carrying out life cycle cost
analysis for corrosion rehabilitation of reinforced concrete bridges (Purvis
et al., 1994). The approach makes many assumptions based on the knowl-
edge and experience of the authors and has been developed further by
FHWA but it has found limited acceptance. However, it was probably the
first comprehensive systematic attempt to select a rehabilitation method
based on engineering judgement rather than subjective judgement.
 

Rehabilitation methodology
209
8.1
Technical differences between repair options
Different repair options are suitable for different applications, however,
these overlap to such an extent that a clear methodology for making a deci-
sion on technical or cost grounds is difficult as each structure and type of
structure is different. What is acceptable on a bridge deck is not applicable
and acceptable on a substructure or a building. Costs of access vary widely
as do the implication of noise, vibration and dust.
Table 8.1 gives indications of the compatibilities of different repair
approaches on decks and vertical surfaces based on the different require-
ments of the different systems. Giving global information is difficult
because there are different approaches in the United States and Europe to
concrete repair and the requirements of each structure and each location
and microclimate must be assessed individually.
A simplified table of technical issues that may exclude some repair
options is also given later. This lists some issues such as the design of the
structure and other problems that may eliminate certain options or may
severely increase the cost of using them.
A repair methodology is given in the three figures. They require first, an
evaluation of the structure using techniques as discussed in Chapter 4, then
a choice between the available options. In all cases there is the ‘do nothing’
option. This says that corrosion is not too severe and the benefits of wait-
ing outweigh the benefits of repairing or rehabilitating now. This option can
be attractive for very short times but the structural and safety implications
of ongoing corrosion must be fully assessed and understood. Which ever
strategy is chosen, its merits and limitations should be examined as done in
Chapters 6 and 7. European and US Standards, specifications and guidance
documents for the techniques have been given in each chapter.
Chapter 9 will discuss how we can evaluate the current condition,
develop a condition index and extrapolate forwards and backwards to pre-
dict future deterioration.
8.2
Repair costs
Providing general cost guidance is difficult especially as cost information is
difficult to find for a generalized approach. Even on a specific project,
comparing costs for different repair options is difficult if not impossible.
This is further complicated in making allowance for inflation effects and
life-cycle costing. The normal US practice is to use a factor of about 3% as
the normal difference between inflation and interest rates. However, in the
United Kingdom the Treasury requires a 7% discount rate as the difference
between inflation and the cost of a commercial loan (Unwin and Hall,
1993). This has a highly distorting effect on all life-cycle costing for UK
highway structures.
 

Table 8.1a Decks – Bridge, car park, jetty and so on
Problem
Overlay
Waterproof
Patching
ICCP
GCP
ECE/realk
Comments
Dead load or
Difficult
Difficult (needs
Ok
Ribbon, probe
Ok
Ok
Overlays add
clearance
overlay)
anodes or
dead weight
problems
soffit anode
and cut
clearance
Overlay exists
Replace
Replace (with
With
Soffit or mesh
Presently
Need to 
Working
asphalt)
replacement
plus overlay
experimental
remove and replace
through
overlay
overlays is
difficult
Polymer
Ok
Ok
Ok
Not possible
Not Possible
Not possible
Treatment
injection exists
cannot reach
reinforcement
No mains
Ok
Ok
Ok
Only possible
Ok
Ok with
ICCP requires
electricity
with alternative
temporary
permanent
power supply
power
power
Poor rebar
Ok
Ok
Ok
Could be
Ok – not ideal
Could be
Electrochemical
continuity
expensive
expensive
techs require
rebar continuity
ASR problems
Watch alkali
Ok
Ok
Ok
Ok
Test for
Increase of
content of
problem and
alkali could
overlay
use LiBO4
exacerbate ASR
Prestressing
Ok
Ok
Ok
Difficult
Ok
Very difficult
ICCP cathodic
reactions risk
hydrogen
embrittlement
 

Table 8.1b Walls, façades, columns
Problem
Overlay/enclose
Waterproof/coat/
Patching
ICCP
GCP
ECE/realk
Reason
impregnate
Historic façade
Unlikely to be
Unlikely to be
Difficult
Suitable anodes
Unlikely, but
Ok
Issues of
acceptable
acceptable could
cosmetic
are ribbon,
could place
aesthetics and
use silane or
matching short
probe or placed
inside
removal of
silicate
and long term
on inside
fabric
Noise,
Could use
Good as repair
Good as repair
vibration, dust
hydrojetting to
is minimized
is minimized
and so on 
minimize
Marine
Unlikely to be
Unlikely to be
OK (short life
Ok
Ok
Unlikely to
Aggressive
successful
successful
without
work (sea water
marine
additional
distributes
exposure
protection)
current away
from rebar)
 

212
Rehabilitation methodology
Corrosion
spotted
Preliminary
survey
Analye
results
Analyse
results
Is
corrosion
the problem
?
Yes
Yes
Go to chlorides
Go to carbonation
unless both present
then go to chlorides
Yes
Carbonation
?
Chlorides
?
No
Exit
No
Desk
study
Specifiy
principal survey
Principal
survey
Figure 8.1 Flow diagram for evaluation of a corroding structure prior to repair selection.
The most coherent set of comparative data was developed by the SHRP
research on repair methods (Gannon et al., 1993). A series of field rehabil-
itation projects on US bridges was investigated and the data presented in a
series of graphs and polynomial equations. In the United Kingdom a 
web-based model for evaluation of structures, selection of repair options
and comparative life-cycle costing. The model is available for use at
http://projects.bre.co.uk/rebarcorrosioncost/. This includes a comprehensive
set of cost tables for galvanic and impressed current cathodic protection,
 

Rehabilitation methodology
213
electrochemical chloride extraction, electrochemical realkalization, surface
coatings, patch repair and permanent corrosion monitoring at 2000 prices
and includes a simple engine for generating life cycle costs from calculated
repair costs and repair life times.
8.3
Carbonation options
For carbonation the usual options are patch repairing usually with a
suitable anticarbonation coating applied afterwards (Section 6.3.1) and
realkalization (Section 7.11). Realkalization is very difficult in the presence
of prestressing. The latest evidence is that ASR is not a significant problem.
Realkalization (and all electrochemical techniques) becomes less cost effec-
tive if there are large number of unconnected rebars. Realkalization is most
Patch chapter 6 
Possibly coat 6.3 
Monitor chapter 5
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Short
life
?
Much
rebar
active
?
Rebar
continuity
Ok?
Consider
electrochemical
?
Re-
consider
Prestressed
?
Electricity
available at
reasonable cost
?
Life
cycle coast
analysis
Electrochemical
chloride
extraction
Section 7.11
Life
cycle cost
anaysis
Galvanic
cathodic
protection
Sections 7.7.2, 7.23
Impressed current
cathodic
protection
Sections 7.3–7.7
Figure 8.2 Flow diagram for selecting treatment for chloride induced corrosion.
 

214
Rehabilitation methodology
cost effective for larger surface areas and structures requiring long times to
the next major intervention.
A third option is now available in the form of corrosion inhibitors. These
can be applied to the concrete surface, to the broken out area to be patch
repaired and in the patch repair material. However, there is still considerable
ambiguity in the literature as to their effectiveness as discussed in Section 6.6.
The rest of this section will discuss the options of patching and coating,
realkalization and inhibitor application for carbonation repairs.
8.3.1
Patching and coating
Patching and coating is used for repairing carbonation and chloride induced
corrosion damage. They are generally more successful for carbonation as
was shown in a recent study by Seneviratne (2000) and Sergi (2000).
Patch Chapter 6 
Possibly coat 6.3 
Monitor Chapter 5
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Short
life
?
Much
rebar
active
?
Rebar
continuity
Ok?
Consider
electrochemical
?
Re-
consider
Prestressed
?
Electricity
available at
reasonable cost
?
Life
cycle coast
analysis
Electrochemical
Realkalization
Section 7.12
Life
cycle cost
anaysis
Galvanic
cathodic
protection
Sections 7.7.2, 7.2.3
Impressed current
cathodic
protection
Sections 7.3–7.7
Figure 8.3 Flow diagram for selecting treatment for carbonation induced corrosion.
 

The effect of moisture reduction was studied by Tuutti (1982) and is
discussed in Section 4.12.4. He found a ‘critical degree of saturation’ for
carbonated concrete, where the corrosion rate jumped by almost an order
of magnitude. This was at 85% RH. The corrosion rate then rose by two
more orders of magnitude to peak at about 95% RH. This implies that
if the relative humidity stays below 85% (or 80% for a margin of safety),
then the corrosion rate will be low (0.001–0.001 A cm2). For chloride
ingress, the curves are less clear but suggest a significant level of corrosion
above 60% RH, peaking nearer 90% RH.
Patching is far more effective for carbonation than for chlorides. This is
because restoring the alkalinity is all that is necessary to stop corrosion in
carbonated concrete and an anticarbonation coating will then slow
carbon dioxide ingress as well as reducing the moisture content. The
discussion in Section 6.2 on patching shows how the ‘incipient anode effect’
can actually accelerate corrosion around a patch. This phenomenon is
usually observed in chloride conditions rather than carbonation, which is
another reason why patching is more effective in carbonated rather than
chloride contaminated structures. Contaminated or carbonated concrete
must be removed from all around the steel. In some cases temporary
structural support may be needed during the repair process.
An accurate bill of quantities is needed for accurate price quotations and
estimates. It is therefore important to define the areas and volume of repair
accurately. One of the biggest problems encountered in carrying out patch
repairs is that the amount of patching is underestimated. This is usually for
two reasons, the inaccuracy of the ‘sounding’ technique for delimiting areas of
delamination and the growth of those areas in the time between surveying and
the repair contractor carrying out the work. Chapter 9 discusses how the
estimate can be revised with time, especially if there are excessive delays.
8.3.2
Why choose realkalization?
As stated earlier, patching and applying an anticarbonation coating is much
more effective than patching and coating for chloride attack. It was the only
repair option for carbonated structures until the early 1990s. The problems of
continued outbreaks of corrosion that had led to the development of cathodic
protection for chloride contaminated structures had not manifested them-
selves for carbonated structures. However, in the late 1980s realkalization was
developed and it is a recognized alternative method of rehabilitating structures
where carbonation is a significant and recognized problem (Section 7.12).
The extent to which carbonation has reached the rebar and the
requirements for patch repairing to restore alkalinity will determine
whether realkalization is preferred either because it is more economic or in
other cases to avoid the noise, dust and vibration required for extensive
patch repairing. As the patches can be quite shallow (see Figure 6.1),
Rehabilitation methodology
215
 

216
Rehabilitation methodology
temporary structural support may be avoided as the concrete behind the
steel is not removed. The technique is becoming popular in Europe and the
Middle East. In North America very little attention is paid to carbonation.
Whether this is a difference in climate, concrete or perception is not clear.
The amount of attention dedicated to the chloride problem on highway
bridges may have led to the minimizing of the perception of the problem of
carbonation in North America.
Figure 8.4 shows the growth in realkalization treatment from the
development of the patented process in 1987–1999. The figures for chloride
removal have been included but are a very small proportion of the totals in
the period shown.
If realkalization is as effective as claimed then the choice between
realkalization and patching and coating is a question of convenience and cost,
together with a realistic appraisal of the effectiveness of anticarbonation
coatings.
The patentees and the licensees of the realkalization system claim that:
●
It is financially competitive with the alternatives.
●
Vibration and noise are greatly reduced during the (shortened) concrete
repair phase.
●
All the surface is treated.
●
Guarantees are offered.
●
In many cases a fixed price can be offered with no increase of the final
bill for extra repair work.
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
ECE
Realkalization
Figure 8.4 Annual figures for the treatment of reinforced concrete by ECE and realkalization.
Courtesy Fosroc (UK) Ltd.
 

Rehabilitation methodology
217
The main questions to be asked when considering this option are:
●
How long will it last? Is that time compatible with the service life
requirements of the structure?
●
Is repeat treatment feasible and acceptable if carbonation resumes at
the end of the service life of the treatment (say after 10 years)?
●
Are there any problems with my structure that could interact with the
realkalization process?
The main requirements for realkalization are:
●
electrical continuity of the steel;
●
reasonable level and uniformity of conductivity of the concrete when wet;
●
no metallic (electronic) short circuits to the anode are present;
●
no risk of causing or accelerating alkali-silica reactivity;
●
no risk of hydrogen embrittlement of prestressing steel;
●
availability of electrical power for the treatment period;
●
no electrically insulating layers between the surface and the reinforcing
steel.
These requirements can be checked as an extension of the condition
surveyor as a specific feasibility survey/study. If there are problems with
continuity or shorts or high resistance patch repairs then these can often be
dealt with but the cost should be analysed to ensure that the process is still
cost effective.
The problem of hydrogen embrittlement and prestressing steel has been
discussed in Section 7.8 for cathodic protection, and Section 7.11.5 for
realkalization. The realkalization process applies 20–50 V DC between the
anode and the steel. It must therefore send the steel potential well beyond
the level needed for hydrogen evolution.
Great care must therefore be exercised when applying realkalization to
structures containing prestressing steel under load. Very careful monitoring
must be carried out to ensure that the steel is completely shielded from the
risk of hydrogen evolution or the steel must be carefully tested to ensure
that it has no susceptibility to embrittlement from nascent hydrogen. These
issues are discussed in Miller (1994).
Due to the problems with prestressing steel, realkalization would probably
not be used as the alternative of patch repairing and coating would provide
more cost effective solutions. In any case, it would be unusual for carbona-
tion to take place in prestressed structures due to the high cement contents
and high cover in such elements. If carbonation had reached prestressing steel
in such structures there would probably be concerns about the strength of the
concrete.
 

218
Rehabilitation methodology
8.4
Chloride options
If chlorides are the cause of corrosion then patching (including overlaying
and encasement), cathodic protection and electrochemical chloride extrac-
tion are the three most likely options. As discussed previously all techniques
have different merits and limitations. This section explores them and gives
some comparisons.
8.4.1
Patching and sealing
Some degree of patching will probably be required whatever other repair is
required. The merits and limitations of patch repairs and coatings are
different for chloride contaminated structures compared to carbonated
structures. If chloride ingress is limited and effective patch repairs can be
undertaken, removing chlorides to below the corrosion threshold and con-
trolling moisture and chloride ingress then they can give cost effective life
extension. However, while coatings have been shown to control corrosion
in carbonated structures, this has not been observed for structures where
corrosion is due to chlorides Seneviratne (2000) and Sergi (2000).
Since the pores in concrete contain significant amounts of water and air,
sealing it to stop corrosion is unlikely to be effective once chlorides have
penetrated the concrete. There is also a hygroscopic effect where chlorides
in concrete form salts that absorb moisture. Figure 4.19 shows the curve
of corrosion rate vs. chloride content, the curve is less clear than 4.20 for
carbonation but suggests a significant level of corrosion above 60% RH,
peaking nearer 90% RH. This suggests that coatings will not control
chloride induced corrosion in most environments where chloride ingress
is a problem as ambient relative humidities are above 60% (London UK
humidity ranges from 56% to 87% with an average of 72% RH).
In the case of chlorides, patch repairs are only effective if chloride ingress
is local and the chlorides can all be removed. Just patching up damaged
areas is a short-term palliative not a long-term rehabilitation. This is due to
the incipient anode effect discussed in Section 6.2.1. It was found from cor-
rosion monitoring of bridges with sealers and pore blockers or even just
sealed joints after years of chloride ingress that there was an increase in
resistivity and a move towards more passive half cell potentials for beams
where sheltered under the deck.
There are two exceptions to the requirement for patch repairing as part
of the rehabilitation process:
1
Chlorides have been detected and a preventive treatment such as
cathodic protection is to be applied before delamination starts.
2
The level of cracking and spalling is acceptable and cathodic protection
or chloride removal is to be applied as a ‘holding’ treatment to prevent
further deterioration.
 

Rehabilitation methodology
219
The amount of patch repairing necessary and its underestimation are
discussed in the previous section and above under carbonation repairs.
8.4.2
Why choose impressed current cathodic protection?
This technique has now been around for 30 years with the first trials
reported over 40 years ago (Stratfull, 1959). Anode systems are still
developing while many commercially available systems have track
records of some 20 years. No deleterious effects have been found over
that 20 year period apart for one anode system that failed after about 5
years and is no longer marketed for concrete applications. Cathodic pro-
tection has been applied to concrete bridges in the United States since
1973 (Stratfull, 1985) and in the United Kingdom to buildings and other
structures since 1985 (Broomfield et al., 1987). It has been stated by the
US Department of Transportation that cathodic protection is the only
method of stopping corrosion across the whole structure regardless of
chloride content.
There are now many national, international and proprietary specifica-
tions for impressed current cathodic protection for steel in concrete. It can
only be applied with great care if there is prestressing in the structure.
Careful investigation is recommended in the presence of ASR. There are
additional installation costs if there are large numbers of electrically uncon-
nected reinforcing bars.
The main advantages of impressed current cathodic protection for chloride
attack are as follows:
●
It prevents corrosion damage across the whole of the area where the
cathodic protection system is applied.
●
Corrosion should not recur throughout the life of the system.
●
It has a long (20 year) track record of successful application to bridges
and other reinforced concrete structures above ground, with hundreds
of structures and thousands of square metres treated.
●
There are established, non-proprietary specifications for its application.
●
There are anode systems suitable for most applications.
●
Competitive tendering is routine in most countries.
●
Life-cycle cost analysis has shown it to be cost effective for a wide range
of structures and conditions.
The following checklist should be considered for cathodic protection and
is similar to that given above for realkalization:
●
Is there electrical continuity of the steel?
●
Is there reasonable level and uniformity of conductivity of the concrete?
●
Is there a risk of causing or accelerating alkali-silica reactivity?
●
Is there a risk of hydrogen embrittlement of prestressing steel?
 

220
Rehabilitation methodology
●
Is electrical power available for the life of the structure?
●
Is there a management system in place for monitoring and controlling
the system.
Continuity can be remedied prior to installation if necessary.
8.4.3
Why choose galvanic cathodic protection?
Galvanic cathodic protection has its own advantages and disadvantages
relative to impressed current cathodic protection and the other electro-
chemical and conventional rehabilitation techniques. The different anode
systems also have their own merits and limitations.
The main advantages of galvanic cathodic protection are:
●
It does not require power.
●
It does not require monitoring, control or maintenance.
●
It can be applied to prestressing and in the presence of ASR.
●
There is no problem of short circuiting anodes.
●
It can be installed as an ‘add on’ to a patch repair.
Its limitations are:
●
It cannot be guaranteed to achieve the control criteria of BSEN12696
or NACE RP0290 which ensure corrosion is controlled.
●
It can be expensive to install some anode types.
●
It can dry out in some locations and microclimates.
●
Anodes have unknown and uncontrolled lifetimes.
8.4.4
Why choose chloride removal?
Cathodic protection has been described as the only solution to chloride
induced corrosion that can stop (or effectively stop) the corrosion process.
The problems with cathodic protection are its requirement for a permanent
power supply, regular monitoring and maintenance.
Similarly, chloride removal can stop corrosion across the whole structure
and has the advantage that, like a patch repair, it is a one off treatment. 
A generator can be brought in for the duration of the treatment so mains
power is not essential. There is no long-term maintenance need but the
system does treat the whole structure.
The disadvantage is its unknown duration of effectiveness. We cannot
remove all the chlorides from the concrete. If we can stop further chloride
ingress then the system may be effective for many years (10–20). If chlorides
are still impinging on the structure then the time to re-treatment will be
shorter (or may require a coating or sealant).
 

Rehabilitation methodology
221
Chloride removal cannot be applied to prestressed structures due to the
risk of hydrogen embrittlement. The use of lithium-based electrolytes
suggests that ASR can be controlled. As stated earlier for impressed current
cathodic protection, there must be electrical continuity within the rein-
forcement network for any of the electrochemical techniques to be applied.
We do not know how long the treatment process will last but a range of
5–20 years is likely, depending upon conditions.
The main advantages of chloride removal are as follows:
●
It prevents corrosion damage across the whole of the area treated.
●
There are a number of different anode systems suitable for different
applications.
●
Life cycle cost analysis has shown it to be cost effective for a wide range
of structures and conditions.
●
It does not require a permanent power supply. A diesel generator or
other temporary source can be used.
●
It does not require regular monitoring (although checks on reinitiation
of corrosion may be needed on a yearly or two yearly basis).
The following checklist should be considered for chloride removal and is
similar to that given above for realkalization and cathodic protection:
●
Electrical continuity of the steel.
●
Reasonable level and uniformity of conductivity of the concrete.
●
No metallic (electronic) short circuits to the surface are present.
●
No risk of causing or accelerating alkali-silica reactivity.
●
No risk of hydrogen embrittlement of prestressing steel.
8.4.5
Other chloride repair options
The other chloride repair options include:
●
Inhibitors (see Section 6.6).
●
Concrete Overlays (used on North American highway bridges accord-
ing to specifications developed by highway agencies).
●
Sealers (more appropriate before corrosion is initiated).
●
Waterproofing membranes (used before corrosion has initiated).
●
Coatings, barriers and deflection systems.
The last three systems are best applied well before corrosion has initiated.
As the chloride profile within the concrete approximates to a square root
relationship, there will be considerable reserves of chloride in the cover
concrete to push the concentration at rebar level above the corrosion
 

222
Rehabilitation methodology
threshold even if the supply is completely cut off. It may be advisable to
calculate the redistribution of chlorides to see if and when redistribution
will lead to depassivation.
Total enclosure in an ‘indoor’ environment will control chloride induced
corrosion as long as the relative humidity is maintained below 60%
(Figure 4.19). The exact threshold requires further research and the rela-
tionship between RH and chloride content.
8.5
Standards and guidance for selection of repairs
We have seen that the selection of a suitable rehabilitation can be based on
technical considerations and cost (preferably whole life costing rather than
just initial installation cost). The technically unacceptable can be excluded
and a short list of suitable rehabilitations can be drawn up. Life cycle cost
analysis techniques have been used to calculate the optimum time and the
optimum repair on bridges but are based on a number of assumptions and
estimates, including cost estimates for different repair strategies. A direct
comparison of quotations for a given structure is probably the best present
state of the art although it is important to accurately define the corrosion
conditions so that accurate bills of quantities can be drawn up.
A major European standard for repair methods, selection specification
and installation is nearing completion with the publication of EN1504
parts 1–10. These documents are designed to meet the harmonized
products directive and are principally concerned with the materials used
in non-electrochemical concrete repair, their testing prior to use and the
site application. Table 8.2 lists the standards. From the point of view of
selection and application of repairs parts 9 and 10 are key parts of
this standard.
In part 9, structural repairs and corrosion repairs are covered separately.
The corrosion methodology is summarized in Table 2 Principles and Methods
Relating to Reinforcement Corrosion. This is reproduced as Table 8.3.
A systematic method of using EN1504 would be as follows:
●
EN1504-9 summarizes the evaluation process covering both structural
and reinforcement corrosion issues. The corrosion evaluation is covered
in Chapter 4 of this book and a flow diagram is given in Figure 8.1.
●
EN1504-9 summarizes the options. These are covered in Chapters 5, 6
and 7 and flow diagrams Figures 8.2 and 8.3 summarize the approach.
EN1504-9 discusses:
–
‘Do Nothing’ option, with or without monitoring (see Chapter 5).
–
Structural issues (beyond the scope of this book).
 

Rehabilitation methodology
223
Table 8.2 Products and systems for the protection and repair of concrete structures –
definitions, requirements, quality control and evaluation of conformity
Part
Name
Comment
1
Definitions
Published 2005
2
Surface protection 
Publ 2004 lists the following applications for
systems for concrete
surface protection: protection against ingress,
moisture control, physical resistance/surface
improvement, resistance to chemicals and
increasing resistivity by limiting moisture content.
Lists treatments as impregnation, hydrophobic
impregnation or coating and lists performance
requirements to achieve the above
3
Structural and non-
Publ 2005 covers mortars and concrete applied by
structural repair
hand, recasting, spraying, overlaying and patching.
Requirements covered include thermal
compatibility, elastic modulus, skid resistance,
coefficient of thermal expansion and capillary
absorption. Materials are divided into structural
and non-structural based on compressive strength
adhesion and elastic modulus
4
Structural bonding
Publ 2004 covers plate bonding, us of precast units
and adhesives for bonding fresh concrete to existing
concrete
5
Concrete injection 
Publ 2004 materials for filing cracks, voids,
interstices for strengthening, waterproofing or
protection against ingress
6
Anchoring of reinforcing 
Draft form (2006) covers strengthening structures
steel bar
by casting new parts with bars anchored in original
structure
7
Reinforcement corrosion
Early draft – no information available 2006
prevention
8
Quality control and 
Sets out the requirements for materials producers to
evaluation of conformity
marking comply with the standard and achieve CE
marking
9
General principles for 
Publ 1997 as ‘Draft for Development’, see
the use of products and 
following table and text for full description
systems
10
Site application of products Covers both the requirements for the specification
and systems and quality
of material works and for their application on site.
control of the works
Includes surface preparation, compatibility of material
and substrate and between materials, application
conditions and achievement of specified properties
–
Prevention or reduction of further deterioration (see Section 6.3).
–
Improvement strengthening or refurbishment of all or part of the
structure (see Chapters 6 and 7).
–
Full or partial reconstruction (generally beyond the scope of this
book but see Section 6.1 on concrete removal).
 

224
Rehabilitation methodology
●
EN1504-9 then lists a series of factors to be considered when choosing
a rehabilitation option
–
intended use of structure;
–
performance characteristics (e.g. water tightness, fire resistance);
–
repair life time;
–
opportunities for additional repair and monitoring;
–
life-cycle costing throughout the residual life of the structure;
–
performance and properties of the existing substrate;
–
final appearance.
Table 8.3 BSEN DDENV 1504-9:1997 Products and systems for the protection and repair
of concrete structures – definitions, requirements, quality control and evaluation
of conformity 
Principle
Principle and definition
Examples of methods based on the principle
No.
7 [RP]
Preserving or restoring
7.1 Increase cover to reinforcement with
passivity
additional cementitious mortar or concrete
7.2 Replacing contaminated or carbonated
Creating chemical
concrete
conditions in which the
7.3 Electrochemical realkalization of
surface of the 
carbonated concretea
reinforcement is
7.4 Realkalization of carbonated concrete by
maintained in or is 
diffusion
returned to a passive
7.5 Electrochemical chloride extractiona
condition
8 [IR]
Increase resistivity
8.1 Limiting moisture content by surface
treatments, coatings or sheltering
Increasing the electrical
resistivity of the concrete
9 [CC]
Cathodic control creating
9.1 Limiting the oxygen content (at the cathode)
conditions in which 
by saturation or surface coatingb
potentially cathodic areas 
of reinforcement are 
unable to drive an anodic
reaction
10 [CP]
Cathodic protection
10.1 Applying an electrical potentiala
11 [CA]
Control of anodic areas
11.1 Painting reinforcement with coatings
containing active pigments
11.2 Painting reinforcement with barrier 
coatings
11.3 Applying inhibitors to the concretea,b
Source: Part 9 General principles for the use of products and systems Table 2:Principles and Methods
Relating to Reinforcement Corrosion.
Notes
a These methods may use products and systems not covered in the EN1504 series.
b Inclusion of methods in this prestandard does not imply their approval.
 

●
There are additional issues such as
–
health and safety;
–
environmental impact;
–
appropriateness of the selected option(s);
–
conformity with the standard.
●
The concrete rehabilitation materials for non-electrochemical techniques
can then be listed and the required properties selected from Table A-1 in
the informative annex to EN1504-9. This lists tests to achieve the
required characteristics (bond strength, shrinkage, elasticity, strength,
etc.) from EN1504 parts 2 to 7.
●
The production of a specification and application conditions and meth-
ods are given in EN1504-10. The most useful information being in the
informative annexes.
●
Finally EN1504-9 requires the compilation of a record of the works
and an inspection and maintenance procedure.
●
Use Figure 8.1 and Chapter 4 determine the cause of deterioration.
●
Use Figures 8.2 or 8.3 to short list suitable rehabilitation techniques
(see also Table 8.1).
●
Use sections 8.3 and 8.4 EN1504-9 Table 2 (Table 8.3) to narrow down
options.
●
If selected options are electrochemical and are not covered by EN1504
then go to the relevant European Standard as given in Chapter 7 (or use
a NACE national or government agency standard or specification if
more relevant of if a suitable EN document does not exist).
●
If the repair option falls within EN1504 then use EN1504-10 to deter-
mine the relevant properties of the materials to be applied.
References
Broomfield, J.P., Langford, P.E. and McAnoy, R. (1987). Cathodic Protection for
Reinforced Concrete: Its Application to Buildings and Marine Structures NACE.
Corrosion of Metals in Concrete. San Francisco. Houston, TX: NACE; 1987,
pp. 222–235.
BSEN12696 (2000). Cathodic Protection of Steel in Concrete. British Standards
Institute, London.
CEN. (2004). Electrochemical Realkalization and Chloride Extraction Treatments
for Reinforced Concrete – Part 1: Realkalization. CEN/TS 14038-1:2004 (E).
EN1504-1 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 1 Surface Protection Systems for Concrete.
EN1504-10 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 10 Site Application of Products and Systems and Quality
Ccontrol of the Works.
EN1504-2 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Rehabilitation methodology
225
 

226
Rehabilitation methodology
Conformity: Part 2 Surface Protection Systems for Concrete EN1504-3 – Products
and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete Structures – Definitions,
Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of Conformity: Part 3 Structural
and Non-structural Repair.
EN1504-4 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 4 Structural Bonding.
EN1504-5 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 5 Concrete Injection.
EN1504-6 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 6 Anchoring of Reinforcing Steel Bar.
EN1504-7 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 7 Reinforcement Corrosion Prevention.
EN1504-8 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 8 Quality Control and Evaluation of Conformity.
EN1504-9 – Products and Systems for the Protection and Repair of Concrete
Structures – Definitions, Requirements, Quality Control and Evaluation of
Conformity: Part 9 General Principles for the Use of Products and Systems.
Gannon E.J., Cady, P.D. and Weyers, R.E. (1993). Concrete bridge protection and
rehabilitation: chemical and physical techniques, price and cost information, Strategic
highway research program, SHRP-S-664 National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Miller, J.B. (1994) Structural spects of high powered electrochemical treatment of
reinforced concrete, in Swamy R.N. (ed.), Corrosion and corrosion protection of
steel in concrete, 2: 1499–1511, Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield, UK.
NACE RP0290-2000. Impressed Current Cathodic Protection of Reinforcing Steel
in Atmospherically Exposed Concrete Structures. NACE Standard Recommended
Practice. 2000 Jun.
Purvis, R.L. Babaei, K., Clear, K.C. and Markow, M.J. (1999). Life cycle lost analy-
sis for protection and rehabilitation of concrete bridges relative to reinforcement
corrosion. SHRP Published Report. SHRP-S-377. National Research Council,
Wastington, DC.
Seneviratne, A.M.G., Sergi, G. and Page, C.L. (2000). ‘Performance characteristics
of surface coatings applied to concrete for control of reinforcement corrosion’,
Construction and Building Materialsm, 14: 55–9.
Sergi, G., Seneviratne, A.M.G., Maleki, M.T., Sadegzadeh, M. and Page, C.L.
(2000). ‘Control of reinforcement corrosion by surface treatment of concrete’,
Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs., Structures & Buildings, 140(1): 85–100.
Stratfull, R.F. (1959). ‘Progress report on inhibiting the corrosion of steel in a
reinforced concrete bridge’, Corrosion, 15(6): 331t–334t.
Stratfull, R.F. (1985). Eleven Years of Success for Coke Breeze C.P. Pavement.
Cathodic Protection of Reinforced Concrete Bridge Decks. pp. 66–81.
Tuutti, K. (1982). Corrosion of Steel in Concrete. Publ. Swedish Cement &
Concrete Research Institute, Stockholm.
Unwin, J. and Hall R.J. (1993). Development of Maintenance Strategies for Elevated
Motorway Structures. Structural Faults and Repair 93. (Ed. Forde, M.C.), 1: 23–33
 

Chapter 9
Modelling and calculating
corrosion, deterioration and 
life cycle costing of reinforced
concrete structures
Corrosion of steel in concrete can be modelled as a three-stage process. The
first, usually called the initiation stage, is the diffusion of CO2 or chlorides
to the steel to cause depassivation. The second stage is the ‘activation stage’.
This is a less clear cut phenomenon as more of the rebar network starts to
corrode, and the rust products are formed. The third stage is deterioration
as cracking and spalling occurs. Eventually a situation is reached which is
defined as limit state or the end of the functional life and rehabilitation
must take place by that point. The process is illustrated in Figure 9.1 using
an exponential function and a simple linear fit.
9.1
Activation time T0 carbonation
induced corrosion
Carbonation and chloride induced corrosion are both generally considered
to be diffusion-based phenomena. The rate of progress of carbonation is
given by the equation:
d  Atn
(9.1)
where d  carbonation depth in mm, A is a coefficient, t is time in years
and n is an exponent, usually  1/2. This is a simple derivation of the dif-
fusion law that says the rate of diffusion is proportional to the thickness
being diffused through:
where x is the thickness and t is time. Therefore dt  kx · dx by integration
t  kx2  k0.
dx
dt  1
kx
 

In Scandinavia, the constant of integration ko is used to reflect any initial
maltreatment that can lead to initial carbonation. For instance an average
quality concrete that was deshuttered too early and may have had slight
surface freezing can give k0  10 mm. A properly treated concrete has
ko  1 mm (Miller, 1995).
Assuming that there is no carbonation at time zero x  AT1/2. This is
based on the assumptions of steady state, that is, constant CO2 content at
the surface and constant, with uniform conditions within the concrete.
Equation (9.1) is a very simple equation to use if we can derive a value for
the constant. However, there are deviations from the parabolic relationship.
These include changing conditions such as humidity and temperature will
change the coefficient, giving apparent deviation from the t1/2 behaviour.
Also the concrete quality changes with depth so the difficulty of diffusion
will be variable. This leads to the generalized equation:
X  Atn
where 0  n  1
A number of empirical calculations have been used to derive values of 
A and n based on such variables as exposure conditions (indoors and out-
doors, sheltered, unsheltered), 28 day strength and water cement ratio. 
A wider range of empirically derived equations is given in Table 3.1. These
cover different exposure conditions, curing and concrete properties. 
The easiest solution for a given structure is to take some measurements of
carbonation depth, assume n  1/2 and calculate A. This can be used to
predict the rate of progression of the carbonation front. The time taken 
to reach the steel can then be estimated and the rate of depassivation
calculated.
228
Modelling and calculating corrosion
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time (years)
% deteriorated (to limit state)
S(t) = 100/(1+100 exp(–.25t))
S(t) = 6(t –12) +12 for 12<t < 26
Figure 9.1 Deterioration curves and condition indices.
 

9.1.1
Determination of carbonation rates
As stated in the previous section, the easiest way to predict the carbonation
rate of an existing structure is to measure the carbonation depths at repre-
sentative locations and use equation (9.1) to calculate the coefficient A,
assuming n  1/2 or a chosen value. A simple spreadsheet programme for
doing this can be found at http://projects.bre.co.uk/rebarcorrosioncost/ and
is described in Trend (2000) et al. (2001).
However, when there is no structure and life cycle modelling is required,
two approaches are possible, one is described in Parrott and Hong (1991)
and Parrott (1994a,b). This calculates the corrosion rate based on air
permeability of the concrete or of a trial mix of the concrete.
Parrott analysed the literature (Parrott, 1987), see Section 3.1.1, and
suggested that the carbonation depth D at time t is given by:
D  ak0.4 tn – C0.5
where k is air permeability (in units of 1016 m2), C is the calcium oxide
content in the hydrated cement matrix for the cover concrete, a  64. k can
be calculated from the value at 60% relative humidity by the equation:
k  mk60
where m  1.6  0.00115r  0.0001475r2
or
m  1.0 if r  60, n  0.5
for indoor exposure but decreases under wetter conditions to:
n  0.02536  0.01785r  0.0001623r2
To measure the concrete cover depth required to prevent carbonation
from reaching the steel it is therefore necessary to measure the air
permeability and the relative humidity, and then calculate D. This can be
done with a proprietary apparatus developed by Parrott and available
commercially. Gas and air permeability measurements are discussed in
Kropp and Hilsdorf (1995).
An alternative approach is to be found in Bamforth (2004). This model
will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 10. At this point we can say that
by analysing the literature Bamforth found that the key parameters affect-
ing the carbonation rate were:
1
the buffering capacity of the concrete (relative to a benchmark Portland
cement concrete);
2
the C3A content of the concrete;
3
equivalent period of wet curing;
4
mean relative humidity of the environment.
Modelling and calculating corrosion
229
 

The relevant parameters for polynomial curves relating a specific concrete
mix to a ‘standard’ concrete mix were derived for a range of blended and
composite cements and developed into a model for predicting carbonation
rates for new construction. A spreadsheet programme is provided on CD
ROM with published copies of Bamforth (2004).
9.2
Chloride ingress rates (initiation)
For chloride ingress life is more complex as we are dealing with atmos-
pherically exposed structures that are exposed to variable chloride contents.
Also, we are not dealing with a front that moves through the concrete but
a chloride profile that builds up in the concrete.
The usual form of the diffusion equation used is Fick’s second law:
where [Cl] is the chloride concentration at depth ‘x’ at time ‘t’ and Dc is
the diffusion coefficient (usually of the order 1010 m2/sec).
The exact solution to this equation is:
(9.2)
where u is the concentration ratio for each depth d below the maximum
concentration Cmax at or near the surface, Cmin is the background level of
cast in chloride (assumed to be evenly distributed) and erf( ) is the error
function of the value of the argument in brackets.
In atmospherically exposed concrete there is no easy initial or surface
concentration as the chlorides at the surface can vary from zero to 100%
depending upon wetting, drying, evaporation, wash off, etc. It is therefore
common practice to discard the first 5–10 mm of a chloride profile sample
and take the next increment, around the 10 mm depth, as a constant initial,
pseudo surface concentration. If this is done then diffusion calculations
must use the depth from the sampling depth, not from the surface.
9.2.1
The parabolic approximation
A simplified method of calculating the initiation time for chloride attack
is to look at the progress of the ‘chloride threshold’ through the concrete.
By taking samples with depth it is possible to fit a parabolic curve to the
chloride concentration (or more simply to fit a straight line to a plot of
depth vs. the square root of chloride concentration) and to find the depth
Cmax  Cd
Cmax  Cmin
 erf
(x)
({4Dct}1/2)  u
d[Cl]
dt
 Dc
d2[Cl]
dx2
230
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

at which the concentration is 0.4% chloride by weight of cement (or 1 lb
per cubic yard or whatever threshold is chosen). Its rate of progress through
the concrete can then be predicted using the simple diffusion equation (9.1).
Estimates of the time to reach the rebar can then be made (or the more com-
plex equation (9.2) can be used). However, any background concentration
of chloride must be allowed for.
However, an additional complication comes from the observation that
the diffusion constant changes with time. It is therefore important to only
take measurements on ‘mature’ concrete as the diffusion rate may be higher
in the first few years.
A more sophisticated approach to using the parabolic approximation
was developed by Poulsen (1990) who pointed out that within defined
mathematical limits the error function expression for the diffusion
coefficient can be approximated to the simple parabolic function. He used
the following expression for Fick’s second law:
C(x, t)  Ci  (Cs  Ci)erfc[x/(4tD0)1/2]
where C(x, t) is the chloride concentration at time t and depth x (the profile),
Ci is the initial chloride concentration, Cs is the surface chloride concentration,
erfc(z) is the error function complement and D0 is the diffusion constant.
By using the approximation erf(z)  (1  z/3)2
C(x, t)  Ci  (Cs  Ci)[l  x/(12tD0)1/2]2
(9.3)
for 0  x  (12tD0)1/2 y, and for x  (12tD0) y, then C(x, t)  0. The
equation (9.3) is in the form y  mx  c. It can therefore be solved by
simple graphical techniques.
If a series of incremental drillings is taken, then a plot of square roots of
the concentration change (Cs – Ci) vs. distance into the concrete can be
made. A straight line can be fitted, ignoring any surface effects due to
washing out of chlorides or concentration due to evaporation of water
leaving excessively high levels of chloride behind. The error limits are a very
useful check to exclude extreme values and ensure that the values are on a
parabolic curve approximating to a diffusion curve.
The straight line graph can be used to calculate the diffusion coefficient
and the rate of movement of any required chloride threshold in mm yrl.
The process is recommended for use by Germann Instruments with their
RCT profile grinder (see Section 4.10 and Figure 4.10). It is fully described
with examples in their instruction and maintenance manual (Germann
Instruments, 1994).
Modelling and calculating corrosion
231
 

9.2.2
Sampling variability for chlorides
Inevitably an inhomogeneous material like concrete will show variation in
the chloride content unless very large samples are taken due to the variation
in the ratio of paste to aggregate. There will also be some variation due to
the local ability of the matrix to resist chlorides. Further, in many
atmospherically exposed structures there will be very large differences in
chloride content due to the differences in exposure. For instance, on a
bridge substructure there will be areas of water rundown that are exposed
to very high levels of chlorides while adjacent areas are comparatively
unaffected. Chloride laden water may pond at some sites (e.g. on the top of
beams, especially if they are horizontal). At the bottom of the beam the
water may evaporate leaving the chloride behind.
This can make it very difficult to sample consistently or identify typical
environments. It is made even more difficult if intervention has started, for
example, by applying gutters under the joints, building up concave cross
heads, etc. where water had previously ponded. These early interventions
can prevent easy identification of areas susceptible to high or low chloride
ingress.
The minimum recommended sample size for chloride analysis is 25 g of
sample. CBDG (2002) recommends that if drilled samples are being taken
then a 25 mm diameter drill bit is used to collect samples at 25 mm
increments. Concrete Society (2004) suggests using two nominal 20 mm
diameter holes 30–40 mm apart and combining the samples. Sampling vari-
ability and the taking and grinding of core samples is discussed in Section
4.10 and illustrated in Figure 3.2(b).
9.2.3
Mechanisms other than diffusion
It is important to recognize that diffusion is not the only transport
mechanism for chlorides in concrete, particularly in the first few millimetres
of cover. There may be several mechanisms moving the chlorides including
capillary action and absorption as well as diffusion. Rapid initial absorption
occurs when chloride laden water hits very dry concrete. In many circum-
stances these will only affect the first few millimetres of concrete. If so then
the expedient of ignoring the first few millimetres of drillings and then cal-
culating diffusion profiles will work. If the cover is low, the concrete cycles
between very dry and wet or the concrete quality is low then the alternative
transport mechanisms may overwhelm diffusion, at least to rebar depth.
This rapid initial absorption of chlorides may help to explain the over
estimate of the diffusion rate often made when predicting future chloride
contamination rates from data collected in the first few years of service.
Both carbonation and chloride diffusion rates are functions of temperature.
As seasonal and daily variations are rapid compared with diffusion 
of chlorides or carbon dioxide, these are assumed to average out. 
232
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

The environments in northerly and southerly latitudes change in temperature,
relative humidity and exposure condition so separating out temperature
effects is difficult. A full discussion of all transport mechanisms is given in
Kropp and Hilsdorf (1995).
9.3
Rate of depassivation (activation)
We have treated the problem as one dimensional so far, considering the time to
depassivation at one particular location. Carbonation depths, chloride profiles
and rebar depths are not uniform so the spatial distribution of depassivation
or initiation must be included in the calculation unless the ranges are small or
the time from depassivation to damage is large. We know that all the concrete
cover will not spall off at once so there must be a distribution of depassivation
times and of time from depassivation to spalling. We must have realistic esti-
mates of the time from the first spall to end of functional service life.
By looking at the distribution of diffusion coefficients and the cover
distribution it should be possible to calculate T0 for the first 1, 10, 20%, etc.
of the structure. It may also be important to differentiate between different
locations due to variations in exposure. This will include moving up a
column from the sea level, areas of salt water run off on substructures,
zones facing salt spray, etc.
9.4
Activation time T1
The diffusion models work reasonably well for predicting the initiation time.
The chloride profile and the carbonation depth can be measured in the field
or from cores in the laboratory. However, it is far more difficult to look at
the next step in our model. Corrosion rate measurements are now being
taken in the field with linear polarization instruments and empirical esti-
mates have been made with different instruments for the time to spalling.
The following broad criteria for corrosion have been developed from field
and laboratory investigations with the sensor controlled guard ring device
(Feliu et al., 1995):
Passive condition
Icorr  0.1 A/cm2
Low to moderate corrosion
Icorr 0.1 to 0.5 A/cm2
Moderate to high corrosion
Icorr 0.5 to 1 A/cm2
High corrosion rate
Icorr  1 A/cm2.
The device without sensor control has the following recommended
interpretation (Clear, 1989):
No corrosion expected
Icorr  0.2 A/cm2
Corrosion possible in 10 to 15 years
Icorr 0.2 to 1.0 A/cm2
Corrosion expected in 2 to 10 years
Icorr 1.0 to 10 A/cm2
Corrosion expected in 2 years or less
Icorr  10 A/cm2.
Modelling and calculating corrosion
233
 

The relative sensitivities of the two instruments are discussed in the section
on corrosion rate measurement. These measurements are affected by tem-
perature and R.H., so the conditions of measurement will affect the inter-
pretation of the limits defined earlier. The measurements themselves should
be considered accurate to within a factor of two (Feilu et al., 1995).
For carbonation it seems that the rate of corrosion falls rapidly as the
relative humidity in the pores drops below 75%, and rises rapidly to an R.H.
of 95% (Tuutti, 1982). There is also approximately a factor of 5–10 reduc-
tion in corrosion rate with 10°C reduction in temperature (see Section 4.12).
The calculation of corrosion rates is therefore critically dependent upon
having measurements at different times of year and under different (repre-
sentative) conditions to derive a realistic typical or average corrosion rate.
The corrosion currents given earlier can be directly equated to section
loss 
by 
Faraday’s 
law 
of 
electrochemical 
equivalence, 
where 
1 A·cm2  11.5 m section loss/year.
Various efforts have been made to estimate the amount of corrosion that
will cause spalling. It has been shown that cracking is induced by less than
0.1 mm of steel section loss, but in some cases far less that 0.1 mm have
been needed. This is a function of the way that the oxide is distributed 
(i.e. how efficiently it stresses the concrete), the ability of the concrete to
accommodate the stress (by creep, plastic or elastic deformation) and the
geometry of rebar distribution that may encourage crack propagation by
concentrating, stresses, etc., for example, in a closely spaced series of bars
near the surface, or at a corner where there is less confinement of the
concrete to restrain cracking.
What we refer to as ‘Rust’ is a complex mixture of oxides, hydroxides and
hydrated oxides of iron having a volume ranging from twice to about six
times that of the iron consumed to produce it (see Figure 2.2). This assumes
100% density of the product. Any porosity will increase the volume further.
If we assume a volume increase of three on average (or four allowing for
the 1:1 replacement of the consumed steel) then the corrosion rates above
translate as follows:
0.1 A·cm2  1.1 m/year section loss  3 m/year rust growth
1.0 A·cm2  11.5 m/year section loss  34 m/year rust growth
5.0 A·cm2  57.5 m/year section loss  173 m/year rust growth
10.0 A·cm-2  115 m/year section loss  345 m/year rust growth.
From the corrosion rate measurements it would appear that about 10 m
section loss or 30 m rust growth is sufficient to cause cracking.
A number of theoretical and empirical methods for calculating the time
to cracking have been derived these are compiled from a Table 9.1 taken
from Aligizaki (2006). Other authors have used finite element analysis
models (Tabatabai and Lee, 2006).
234
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

Table 9.1 Equations published in the past from researchers regarding time to concrete
cracking due to corrosion of embedded reinforcement.The equations have been
modified from the original papers for uniformity in presentation (Aligizaki,2006).
Researchers
Equation derived
Comments
Bazant (1979)
Theoretical 
model
Ravindrarajah 
Impressed
and Ong (1987)
current, one
quality of
concrete,
iron loss is
not Qcr
Wang and 
Laboratory
Zhao (1993)
experiments and
finite element
analysis
Morinaga et al.
Impressed 
current
(1994)
Rodriguez et al.
Impressed
(1994)
where dcr  d0  d
current,
one concrete 
quality, chlorides
in the initial mix
Torres-Acosta 
Experimental
and Sagüés (1998)
Notes
CR  Corrosion rate
MR  Mass loss rate
Qcr  Amount of corrosion to cause cracking
c  Cover thickness
d0  Initial diameter of steel bar
d  Final diameter of steel
daggr  Size of aggregates
ft,sp  Splitting tensile strength of concrete
fc  Cube compressive strength of concrete
L  Length of corroding bar
s  Spacing of steel bars
t2  Propagation period
M  Mass loss of iron
dcr  Reduction of steel diameter due to corrosion to cause concrete cracking
t  Increase in bar diameter
1  Coefficient that depends on type of corrosion
ox  Density of the oxide
st  Density of steel.
dcr  14.4 	 104·
c
L  1
1.48
c
d0
0.87
daggr
dcr  1·1013·83.8  7.4·
c
d  22.6·ft,sp
Qcr  0.6021  2c
d0
0.85
d0
t
dcr/2  0.33·
d0
c
0.565
fc
1.436
M  0.487(2c  d0)·d0
c  21.7
t2  cor
d0·t
s·MR, cor 
1
ox 
0.583
st 
1
2
 

9.5
The Clear/Stratfull empirical calculation
Stratfull developed an empirical equation to determine the time to first distress
of reinforced concrete in sea water with a know, constant chloride content.
Clear modified this to be used for atmospherically exposed structures.
(9.4)
where T  time to first cracking (years); d is the depth of cover in mm or
depth of cover minus depth of near surface chloride measurement (Z); t is
the age at which Z was measured and P is the water/cement ratio. One
difficulty with using this model is knowing when it is no longer valid as it
is empirically based on US interstate bridge structures. Other variations on
this equation exist (Purvis et al., 1992). It is very difficult to compare
models although much work is going on in developing them.
9.6
Corrosion without spalling and high 
corrosion rates
A different situation exists when high levels of water saturation and low
levels of oxygen lead to the ‘black rust’ that is deposited in the concrete
without exerting stresses (see Section 2.2). In this case the corrosion rate
measurement can be taken as showing a section loss that will eventually
lead to failure. However, it is very difficult to extrapolate an instantaneous
measurement of corrosion rate to a total section loss measurement. If we
can make a series of corrosion rate measurements at different locations and
we can come up with a compensation for variations in relative humidity
and temperature we can estimate the average corrosion rate. We also have
to estimate the original time to corrosion, and assume that the corrosion
rate has either been constant or increased in some sensible manner (say
linear or logarithmic) to the present condition.
It is also very difficult to measure corrosion rates in these situations as
they are usually underwater or under waterlogged conditions such as a
failed membrane.
If an investigation reveals pits then one assumption is that the corrosion
rate is about five times that measured with an accurate linear polarization
device. There is wider discussion of this issue in Section 4.12.4.
9.7
Cracking and spalling rates, condition indexes 
and end of functional service life
We can predict the initiation time, and the time to cracking and spalling and
give a distribution of that time to show how corrosion damage will spread
T 
(0.052 d1.22 t0.21)
(Z0.24P) 
0.83
236
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

with time and location across our structure. In order to decide at what
point it must be repaired we must define an ‘end of service life condition’.
This is not an easy definition. It is often subjective and will vary from
structure to structure. It will also vary from engineer to engineer. In a
SHRP study of service life estimates where 60 North American highway
engineers were questioned about their bridges it was found that bridge
decks had reached the end of their functional service life when 5–14%
of the deck was spalled, delaminated or patched with temporary asphalt
patches. For substructures it was found that about 4% cracking,
spalling and delamination represented end of functional service life (Weyers
et al., 1994).
In a separate SHRP study (Purvis et al., 1994) a condition index S was
derived:
(9.5)
where Cl is percentage of bars with chloride above the corrosion threshold,
Delam is the percentage of surface with hidden delaminations and Spall is
the percentage of surface with visible deterioration.
No attempt was made to define an end of service life as this was used as
part of a life-cycle cost analysis study where repair or rehabilitation was
conducted according to the minimum cost criterion. It was suggested that
the condition index should never exceed 45%.
Some engineers will define the end of functional service life or the limit
state as the time to first spall as this is the point at which remedial action
will be undertaken. From a safety point of view this may be relevant but it
may not be cost effective depending upon the importance of the appearance
of the structure and the feasibility of containing and controlling concrete
debris. Obviously a spall on a deck is of less concern than one from the top
of a multi-storey building.
The link between cracking and spalling is difficult to define. However, it
may be possible to look at the cracking rate and suggest that if 5% of
bars have cracks above then this will lead to 1% spalling. The condition
index equation (9.5) earlier suggests a 3:1 ratio of cracking to spalling. The
SHRP researchers suggested that the percentage delamination is four times
the spalling percentage for most concrete decks, eight times for decks with
25 mm concrete overlays and for most substructures and 16 times for
substructures with 25 mm concrete jackets or shotcrete.
The authors also suggested that chloride contamination (percentage
above the corrosion threshold) increases linearly from 0 at condition index
0–100% at condition index 20.
S  [Cl  2.5(Delam)  7.5(Spall)]
8.5
Modelling and calculating corrosion
237
 

In the SHRP study the condition index was calculated as a function of
time by fitting it to a curve of the form:
(9.6)
This is an ‘S’ shaped curve that approximates to the two straight lines for
T0 and T1 in Figure 9.1. The curve could therefore be calculated if there
are two sets of data. These can be derived from two sets of measurements
of cracking, spalling and chloride content separated by several years, or
taking one set of measurements at the present time tp and back calculating
data for an earlier time te. This may be to the time of the first spall or a
back calculation of the time to depassivation from the chloride profiles
(approximately T0). We can therefore derive values for A and B. These can
be used to project forward the delamination rate and show how costs will
escalate if work is deferred or how repair quantities will increase between
the survey and the start of patch repair work.
9.8
Summary of methodology to determine 
service life
When presented with a corroding structure we can determine its condition
by measuring the chloride profiles, carbonation depths and cover depths.
From this we can calculate diffusion rates of the carbonation front or the
chloride threshold and estimate the initiation time T0. Both an average and
a distribution of T0 values can be derived.
By measuring corrosion rates over a period of time we can estimate the
time to cracking and knowing the distribution of corrosion rates, cover
depths, etc. a cracking rate can be established by adding the time to crack-
ing to the initiation time. An empirical condition curve can be calculated
and the time taken to reach an unacceptable level can be determined.
9.9
Diffusion models proposed in literature
As stated earlier, there are a number of models for corrosion of steel in
concrete. Some are designed for use in new construction and are computed
from data from construction details and environment, predicting time to first
and subsequent repairs and life cycle costs for a new structure to compare
durability options such as changing cement types, adding corrosion inhibitors,
changing the concrete cover or changing bar types. Others are for projecting
present data forward from existing structures to estimate time to damage.
Bazant developed a complete physical-mathematical model which
describes the corrosion process in submerged concrete exposed to sea
water (Bazant, 1979). A complete set of equations has been derived for the
transport of oxygen and chloride ions through the concrete cover, the mass
St 
100
[1  A exp(  Bt)]
238
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

sources and sinks of oxygen and corrosion products, the cathodic and
anodic electric potential, and the flow of ionic current through the concrete
electrolyte. This model is largely based on theoretical assumptions and
is completed by formulating the problem as an initial-boundary value
problem which can be solved by using the finite element method. In order
to arrive at numerical solutions, the spatial distribution and geometry of
anodic and cathodic areas on the reinforcing bars have to be assumed. This
model has been applied to several illustrative numerical examples. The
results obtained show that for submerged concrete diffusivities for chloride
ions and oxygen, not only at the anodic (rusting) area, but also, and mainly
at, cathodic areas, usually are the controlling factors. The model takes
into account all relevant chemical and physical processes involved in rein-
forcement corrosion, but several processes are not adequately addressed.
Moreover, the polarization behaviour of the anodic and cathodic reactions
has not been fully described. Despite these imperfections and the lack of
experimental data, the model results in an improved understanding of the
complex nature of the problem.
Similar models based on the same relationships, but expressed in more
simplified forms, have been presented for example by Noeggerath (1990),
Naish et al. (1990) and Raupach and Gulikers (1998). All these models
have been applied to certain conditions showing that these analytical
electrochemical approaches lead to suitable results for the specific corrosion
problems to be analysed.
In November 1998, a workshop sponsored by the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST), the American Concrete Institute
(ACI), and the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), was
held to discuss the different existing models for predicting service life of
reinforced concrete exposed to chlorides and for estimating the life cycle
cost of different corrosion protection strategies. The main outcome of that
workshop was the decision to attempt to develop a ‘standard’ model under
the authority of the existing ACI committee 365. A consortium was then
established under the Strategic Development Council (SDC) of ACI. The
consortium was established to develop an initial life cycle model based on
the existing service life model developed at the University of Toronto
(Boddy et al., 1999). The life cycle model provides insight into the durabil-
ity of a given construction practice, thereby allowing designers to ascertain
the impact of additives to concrete and corrosion prevention strategies
applied to new construction on the long-term durability of the concrete
element. In October 2000, Life-365 version 1.0 software was released and
version 1.1 followed in December 2001. Work is currently progressing
towards releasing version 2.0. In Life-365 software, the analyses are divided
into four steps: prediction of initiation period, prediction of propagation
period, determining repair schedule after the first repair and estimating life
cycle costs based on initial construction and future repair costs.
Modelling and calculating corrosion
239
 

The Life-365 software predicts the initiation period assuming ionic
diffusion to be the dominant mechanism. This software differs from other
diffusion models in that it accounts for the variability of the diffusion
coefficient with age and with temperature. It also attempts to model the
impact of various additives. For additives such as silica fume and fly ash it
reduces the diffusion coefficient to reflect the lower permeability and for
corrosion inhibitors it raises the chloride threshold required to initiate
corrosion. To include the impact of sealers and membranes it reduces the rate
of accumulation of the surface chloride concentration. The rate of accumula-
tion and the maximum accumulation of surface chloride in this program
are based on the type of structure, geographic location and exposure. ACI
Committee 365 has also published a state-of-the-art report on service life
prediction which is in the process of being updated (ACI 365.1R-00 (2000)).
The Sagüés’s diffusion model, to predict the future performance of existing
structures, has been validated on marine piles of several structures (Sagüés et al.,
1998; Sohanghpurwala and Diefenderfer, 2002). Initially, Sagüés used spe-
cialized software to calculate the diffusion coefficient from field cores and the
solution to the error function to evaluate marine piles of two structures
(Sagüés et al., 1998). Later, Sohanghpurwala developed a methodology
to perform the modelling in a standard spreadsheet program and validated
the model on marine piles of another structure (Sohanghpurwalla and
Diefenderfer, 2002). The Sagüés approach obtains probability distribution
information on diffusion coefficient, clear concrete cover, and surface chlo-
ride ion concentration from the existing structure. It subdivides the concrete
element into finite elements and determines the time to corrosion initiation
for each finite element using the error solution to Fick’s second law of
Diffusion. To calculate the time to corrosion initiation (Ti) for each finite
element, values of diffusion coefficient, clear concrete cover and surface
chloride concentration are required. These are obtained from the probability
distributions defined for each variable. The time for propagation (T0) is
assumed to be three to six years.
A similar software program has been developed in the United Kingdom.
The diffusion coefficient is calculated from data taken from concrete blocks
exposed to a marine tidal/splash zone environment, interpolated with labo-
ratory data, and is used to estimate time to initiation (Bamforth, 1999). The
time to failure is obtained from the Rodriguez formulae discussed earlier.
Similarly, Broomfield et al. (2001) used the method of collecting chloride
profiles from the structure under investigation to estimate the apparent
diffusion coefficient. The effective chloride diffusion coefficient was calcu-
lated using a parabolic approximation to the error function equation. From
the individual sets of measurements, time to corrosion can be predicted.
This is based on the actual diffusion and exposure characteristics of the
measurement location. The Rodriguez equations are then used in a separate
module of the program to predict time to cracking. The chloride diffusion
240
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

model was validated against field data in one case where surveys were
conducted approximately nine years apart. The earlier data set agreed with
the later survey predictions of time to corrosion 2 years in 5 out of 6 cases
where the initial prediction was greater than 10 years. In another 7 out of 9
cases they agreed corrosion was imminent in both cases but at the point of
measurement there was no damage. The latest model is one developed by
Sohanghpurwala (2005), which was developed for chloride induced corro-
sion of black steel and FBECR bridge superstructure elements. It also
includes a generalized deterioration model that could apply to carbonation
induced corrosion.
References
Aligizaki, K.K. (2006). Concrete Cover Cracking as a Function of Rebat Corrosion:
Theoretical and Experimental Studies. NACE 2006 Proceedings. 2006; paper 
No. 06334.
Bamforth, P. (2004). Enhancing Reinforced Concrete Durability. Concrete Society
Technical Report 61.
Bamforth, P.B. (1999). The Derivation of Input Data from Modeling Chloride
Ingress from Eight Year UK Coastal Exposure Trials, in Magazine of Concrete
Research.
Bazant, Z.P. (1979). ‘Physical model for steel corrosion in concrete sea structures –
application,’ Journal of the Structural Division, American Society of Civil
Engineers, 105(ST6): 1155–1166.
Boddy, A.B.E., Thomas, M.D.A. and Hooton, R.D. (1999). ‘An overview and
sensitivity study of a multi-mechanistic chloride transport model’, Cement and
Concrete Research, 29: 827–837.
Broomfield, J.P.C. (2001). Trend 2000, BRE and Risk Review Ltd. Evaluation of Life
Performance and Modeling. Building Research Establishment: Garston, UK.
Clear, K.C. (1989). Measuring Rate of Corrosion of Steel in Field Concrete
Structures, Transportation Research Record, Transportation Research Board,
Washington, DC. 
Concrete Society/Institute of Corrosion (2004). Electrochemical Tests for
Reinforcement Corrosion. Concrete Society Technical Report 60.
Concrete Bridge Development Group Technical Guide 2 (2002). Guide to Testing
and Monitoring the Durability of Concrete Structures. Publ. The Concrete Society
Camberley, UK.
Feliu, S., Gonzalaz, J.A. and Andrade, C. (1994). Errors in the On-site
Measurements of Rebar Corrosion Rates Arising from Signal Unconfinement.
Concrete Bridges in Aggressive Environments. ACI SP-151 (ed. Richard E.W.):
183 to 191. Publ American Concerte Institute.
Feliu, S., Gonzalez, J.A. and Andrade, C. (1995). Electrochemical Methods for on-
site Determination of Corrosion Rates of Rebars, in Symposium on Techniques to
Assess the Corrosion Activity of Steel in Reinforced Concrete Structures,
December 1994, American Society for Testing and Materials.
Germann Instruments (1994). AlS RCT Profile Grinder Mark II Instruction and
Maintenance Manual, Germann Instruments, Denmark.
Modelling and calculating corrosion
241
 

Kropp, J. and Hilsdorf, H.J. (eds) (1995). Performance Criteria for Concrete
Durability Rilem Report 12, Publ. E&FN Spon.
Morinaga, S., Irino, K., Ohta, T. and Arai, H. (1994). Life Prediction of Existing
Reinforced Concrete Structures Determined by Corrosion. Corrosion and
Corrosion Protection of Steel in Concrete, Proceedings of International
Conference held at the University of Sheffield, 24–28 July, 1994, R.N. Swamy
(ed.), Sheffield Academic Press, 1994, pp 603–618.
Naish, C.C., Harker, A. and Carney, R.F.A. (1990). Concrete Inspection:
Interpretation of Potential and Resistivity Measurements. Corrosion of
Reinforcement in Concrete, International Symposium. Wishaw, Warwickshire, UK.
Noeggerath, J. Zur Makroelementkorrosion von Stahl in Beton: Potential- und
Stromverteilung in Abhangigkeit vershiedener Einflubgroben. 1990, Zurich:
Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule, Diss.
Parrott, L.J. (1987). A Review of Carbonation in Reinforced Concrete, C and CA
Report for Building Research Establishment, Watford, UK.
Parrott, L.J. (1994a). ‘Moisture conditioning and transport properties of concrete
test specimens’, Materials and Structures, 27: 460–468.
Parrott, L.J. (1994b). Carbonation-Induced Corrosion, Paper presented at the Institute
of Concrete Technology Meeting, Reading, 8 November, Geological Society, London.
Parrott, L. and Chen, Z.H. (1991). ‘Some factors influencing air permeation
measurements in cover concrete’, Materials and Structures, 24: 403–408.
Poulsen, E. (1990). The Chloride Diffusion Characteristics of Concrete:
Approximate Determination by Linear Regression Analysis, Nordic Concrete
Research No. 1, Nordic Concrete Federation.
Purvis, R.L., Graber, D.R., Clear, K.C. and Markow, M.J. (1992). A Literature
Review of Time-Deterioration Prediction Techniques, Strategic Highway
Research Program, National Research Council, SHRP-C/UFR-92-613.
Purvis, R.L., Babaei, K., Clear, K.C. and Markow, M.J. (1994). Life-Cycle Cost
Analysis for Protection and Rehabilitation of Concrete Bridges Relative to
Reinforcement Corrosion, Strategic Highway Research Program, National
Research Council, SHRP-S-377.
Raupach, M. and Gulikers, J. (1998). Determination of Corrosion Rates Based on
Macrocell and Microcell Models – General Principles and Influencing Parameters.
in EUROCORR 98 – Event No. 221. Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Ravindrarajah, R. and Ong, K. (1987). Corrosion of Steel in Concrete in Relation
to Bar Diameter and Cover Thickness. ACI SP-100 Concrete Durability-
Katherine and Bryant Mather International Conference. J.M. Scanlon (ed.),
American Concrete Institute, 1987, pp 1667–1677.
Rodriguez, J., Ortega, L.M. and Garcia, A.M. (1994). Assessment of Structural
Elements with Corroded Reinforcement. Corrosion and Corrosion Protection of
Steel in Concrete, Proceedings of International Conference held at the University
of Sheffield, 24–28 July, 1994, R.N. Swamy (ed.), Sheffield Academic Press,
pp 171–185.
Sagüés, A.A., Scannell, W.T., Soh, F.W. and Sohanghpurwala, A.A. (1998). Assessment
of Rehabilitation Alternatives for Bridge Substructure Components. Florida DOT.
Sohanghpurwala, A.A. (2005). Manual On Service Life of Corrosion Damaged
Reinforced Concrete Bridge Superstructure Elements. NCHRP 18-06A Final
Manual.
242
Modelling and calculating corrosion
 

Sohanghpurwala, A.A. and Diefenderfer, B. (2002). Project Development and
Environmental Study SR64 from SR789 to East of Anna Maria Bridge. Florida
DOT.
Tabatabai, H. and Lee, C.-W. (2006). Simulation of Bridge Deck Deterioration
Caused By Corrosion. Proc. NACE Corrosion. Paper No. 06345.
Torres-Acosta, A.A. and Sagüés, A.A. (1998). Concrete Cover Cracking and
Corrosion Expansion of Embedded Reinforcing Steel. Rehabilitation of
Corrosion Damaged Infrastructure, Chapter IV: Modeling, Methods, Techniques
and Technologies, P. Castro, O. Troconis and C. Andrade (eds), pp 215–229.
Trend (2000). BRE; J Broomfield Consultants and Risk Review Ltd. Evaluation of
life performance and modelling. Corrosion of Steel in Concrete – Report D29.
2001 Dec; DTI DMI 5.1 (Report 2).
Tuutti, K. (1982). Corrosion of Steel in Concrete, CBI Swedish Cement and
Concrete Institute, Stockholm.
Wang, X.M. and Zhao, H.Y. (1993). ‘The residual service life prediction of R.C.
structures.’ Procedding of the 6th International Conference on Durability of
Building Materials and Components, S. Nagataki, T. Nireki and F. Tomosawa
(eds), Omiya, Japan, October 25–29.
Weyers, R.E., Fitch, M.G., Larsen, E.P., Al-Qadi, I.L., Chamberlin, W.P. and
Hoffman, P.E. (1994). Concrete Bridge Protection and Rehabilitation: Chemical
and Physical Techniques – Service Life Estimates, Strategic Highway Research
Program, SHRP-S-668, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Modelling and calculating corrosion
243
 

Chapter 10
Design for durability
10.1
Cover, concrete and design
Figure 10.1 shows what can happen in cases of inadequate design and
maintenance of structure subject to chloride attack (Simon, 2004). Car
parks are particularly vulnerable to corrosion. After several failures in the
UK Guidance document has been produced on the inspection, maintenance
and management of parking structures (Institute of Civil Engineers, 2002).
The first requirement for maximum durability against corrosion is low
permeability concrete, with a high cement content, a minimal chloride con-
tent and good cover to the reinforcing steel. Good concrete and good cover
should be designed in and enforced during construction regardless of other
requirements and additional protection. Good cover and low water/cement
Figure 10.1 Collapse of the cantilevered section of a multi-storey car park in
Syracuse, New York State due to deicing salt induced corrosion (Simon,
2004). Courtesy NACE International 2004.
 

Design for durability
245
ratios will increase the time taken for chlorides and carbonation to reach
the reinforcing steel. All the major national and international design codes
have tables specifying the cover and water/cement ratios needed for dura-
bility in different environments. Several years ago Bamforth (1994) stated
that ordinary unblended Portland cements are inadequate for the most
severe environments.
Additives and cement replacement materials such as pulverized fuel ash
(fly ash), ground granulated blast furnace slag, silica fume (micro silica) and
other materials can reduce the pore size and block pores enhancing durability
further. However, proper curing may be vital to get the required performance
with these blended cements.
The British Standard on design of concrete bridges, BS5400, Part 4, gives
guidance on durability and environment, particularly concerning chloride
environments. The nominal cover requirements for different corrosion envi-
ronments are given for different concrete grades. However, the document
Design for Durability (Department of Transport, 1994) increases these
requirements by 10 mm. This specified increase may be due to the difference
between nominal and actual cover. To ensure that 95% of the bars achieve an
actual cover of 75 mm it may be necessary to specify a nominal cover of
85 mm. The document also notes that such high cover can lead to shrinkage
cracking which may need to be controlled by adding fibres to the concrete.
The British Standards for construction are now superseded by the
European Standard EN206 and its complementary British Standard
BS8500. It is beyond the scope of this book to go into the details of the
design codes and standards for reinforced concrete. The new EN206 is a
complex document intertwined with several other documents. An overall
guidance document for EN206-1 and BS8500 is available (BSI, 2004). One
interesting aspect of the new European standard is the exposure classes
which are broken down into the classes given in Table 10.1.
This division of environments might have usefully been employed in
BSEN1504-9 (see Section 8.6), rather than or in addition to the addressing
of anodic, cathodic and moisture control. In North America ACI 222.3R-03
(2003) ‘Design and construction practices to mitigate corrosion of rein-
forcement in concrete structures’ is a more succinct document that summa-
rizes the design guidance in ACI 318 and the AASHTO bridge
specifications. It also goes far wider than just mix design and cover,
discussing corrosion inhibiting and other admixtures, coated and uncoated
reinforcement, embedding other metals in concrete such as aluminium,
lead, zinc, stainless steel, chrome, nickel and cadmium (coated steel). It also
discusses steel placement, concrete consolidation, curing, coatings and
barriers. It goes as far as discussing cathodic protection (sometimes referred
to cathodic prevention when referring to its application to new structures),
and ECE, which would only be applied to new structures if chlorides had
been cast in by mistake.
 

246
Design for durability
Table 10.1 Exposure classes from EN206-1
Class
Environment
Example
X0
Concrete with no
Concrete in buildings with very low
embedded metal (except
humidity, mass concrete
at risk of freeze/thaw,
abrasion or chemical attack 
or reinforced but very dry
Carbonation risk
XC1
Dry or permanently wet
Concrete in buildings with very low
humidity, permanently submerged
XC2
Wet, rarely dry
Many foundations
XC3
Moderate humidity
External sheltered concrete
XC4
Cyclic wet and dry
External exposed surfaces
Corrosion induced by chlorides other than sea water
XD1
Moderately humid
Exposed to airborne chlorides
XD2
Wet, rarely dry
Swimming pools, exposed to
industrial water containing chlorides
XD3
Cyclic wet and dry
Bridges, car park slabs exposed to
deicing salts
Corrosion induced by chlorides from sea water
XS1
Exposed to airborne chlorides
Coastal buildings, etc.
XS2
Permanently submerged
Parts of marine structures
XS3
Tidal splash and spray zones
Parts of marine structures
Freeze thaw
XF1
Moderate water saturation 
Vertical surfaces exposed to rain
without deicing agents
and freezing
XF2
Moderate water saturation 
Vertical surfaces exposed to rain,
with deicing agents
freezing and salt spray (e.g. bridge
columns)
XF3
High water saturation 
Horizontal surfaces exposed to rain
without deicing agents
and freezing
XF4
High water saturation 
Horizontal surfaces exposed to rain
with deicing agents
deicing salts and freezing,for example
bridge decks, marine splash zone
There is also a NACE Standard Recommended Practice RP0187. The 1987
edition has been re-issued in 2006 while undergoing revision at the time of
writing. It mentions stray current induced corrosion and corrosion monitor-
ing systems which the other standards do not and has short paragraphs
covering the same topics as ACI 222.3R-03.
When designing a structure, detailing and awareness of the climate and
microclimate can avoid long-term problems. Installing waterproofing mem-
branes on decks (in bridges and car parks), applying coatings or cladding to
areas subjected to spray from vehicles or sea water will all delay the ingress
of moisture and chlorides.
 

Design for durability
247
The designer should also make it as easy as possible to assess and repair
the structure. One problem with post-tensioning is that there is no easy way
to assess the condition of the tendons in the ducts. Even if we find corrosion
how do we repair it? In the United Kingdom a committee was set up to
answer the questions of design for durability, assessment and repair of post-
tensioned, ducted concrete bridges. Their report has been published
(Concrete Society, 1996). It deals with design, construction and quality
systems for building new durable bonded post-tensioned structures. The prob-
lem of assessing the hundreds of existing structures that may be suffering from
corroded tendons is now being undertaken by the Highways Agency.
The UK DoT Design for Durability Advice Note and Standard (1994)
give clear guidance on minimizing the amount of reinforcement available
for corrosion, maximizing access, improving drainage and minimizing
runoff of salt laden water. Use of drips and proper guttering to control
runoff is also discussed.
For structures with a very long lifetime requirement such as tunnels and
other major civil engineering structures it is possible to carry out calculations
to predict the likely time to initiation of corrosion for different concrete
cover, mix designs and protective system (see Chapter 9). The chloride
concentration at the surface can be predicted or estimated from structures in
similar conditions. If special concrete mixes are being designed then the
diffusion constant can be calculated according to the equations in Chapter 9
and the time for the corrosion threshold to reach the steel can be calculated.
Calculating the consequences of reduced cover is also possible.
Other methods are available for enhancing durability by protecting the
concrete surface, adding further protection to the concrete and protecting
the steel. These are all discussed later. Another interesting issue is the instal-
lation of cathodic protection on new structures. This is also discussed at the
end of the chapter. One problem with the standard discussed earlier is that
there is no attempt to give the advantages and limitations of each protection
system. The models in Chapter 9 will give life cycle cost information but not
the pros and cons.
10.2
Fusion bonded epoxy coated rebars
The protection system of choice on highway bridges in North America for
aggressive chloride conditions continues to be fusion bonded epoxy coated
reinforcement (FBECR). It was first installed in a bridge deck in Philadelphia
in 1973 (Manning, 1996). It was estimated by the FHWA that 100 million
square feet (10 million m2) of bridge deck on the US federal-aid highway sys-
tem contains epoxy coated rebar up to 1889 (Virmani and Clemena, 1998).
There are several reasons for FBECR becoming the protective system of
choice in the United States and Canada for reinforcing steel exposed to chlo-
ride attack. One is the reluctance to use waterproof membranes on bridge
 

248
Design for durability
decks as they are difficult to install properly and to monitor both for correct
installation and for performance after installation. The preference for a very
low maintenance bridge deck led most state DOTs and the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) to look for alternative protective systems on all
bridges exposed to chlorides from the sea or from deicing salt.
In 1982 a panel consisting of David Manning (Ontario DOT), Ed Escalante
(National Bureau of Standards) and the late David Whiting (Construction
Technology Labs/Portland Cement Association) reviewed the performance of
galvanized reinforcing steel. They recommended that it was not likely to give
the long-term performance required (more than 40 years). This lead to the US
recommendation of FBECR over galvanized rebar (Manning et al., 1982).
Although the corrosion inhibitor admixture calcium nitrite has been inves-
tigated and was considered acceptable by the FHWA its performance in tests
was deemed to be not as good as FBECR. The lack of competitive tender due
to the patent being owned by a single manufacturer may also make states
reluctant to specify it. Problems of flash setting and freeze-thaw damage
have also been of concern when using nitrite inhibitors if the mix design is
not adequately thought out. However, after their problems with FBECR
(Manning, 1996) the Florida DoT is looking at micro silica concrete and cal-
cium nitrite admixtures to achieve corrosion resistance along the coast line.
By a process of elimination as well as design, this has led to the preeminence
of FBECR as the main protection of reinforcing steel from chloride attack in
North American highway bridges, car parks and marine structures. In some
Canadian provinces both waterproof membranes and FBECR are used. There
is ongoing discussion in some state highway agencies about whether FBECR
is the most cost-effective solution to bridge deck corrosion (Manning, 1996;
Weyers et al., 2002) but most states and provinces still use it for bridge decks
exposed to deicing salts.
In Europe comparatively little FBECR is used, except in dowel bars for
concrete pavements, where they have performed well for several years.
They are also used for electrical isolation in tram and light railway system
and for power transmission systems.
Compared with North America very few plants exist in Europe for
manufacturing FBECR. The extensive use of waterproof membranes had
minimized the problem of potholes on bridge decks. However, massive deck
and joint repairs have been necessary over the last few years on many elevated
sections of UK motorways due to chloride penetration through and round the
ends of membranes. The first major European project to specify FBECR was
the Great Belt Tunnel. This application is described in the next section.
10.2.1
How does epoxy coating work?
Epoxy coatings are applied to reinforcing steel in a factory process. The bar
is grit blasted clean, it may then be pretreated and it is then heated in an
 

Design for durability
249
induction furnace and passed into a coating unit that sprays a fine epoxy
powder at the bar. The powder fuses onto the hot bar, is cured and
quenched before passing out of the process (Figure 10.2(a)).
The important property of the fusion bonded epoxy coating is that it is a
dielectric, and charged species such as the chloride ion cannot pass through
it. It also has excellent adhesion, properties to the steel and is not easily
undercut by corrosion at defects. It must also be flexible to allow the
straight bars to be bent during fabrication on a special mandrill to protect
the coating from damage (Figure 10.2(b)).
An alternative method of applying and using epoxy coated rebar has been
used on the Great Belt Bridge/Tunnel lining segments in Denmark 
(Ecob et al., 1995) and also the tunnel lining for the St Claire tunnel
between the United States and Canada. In these projects the rebar cages are
fabricated and the bars welded together. Instead of the coating being applied
in a linear production line process the prepared cages are dipped in a fluidized
bed of epoxy powder (Figure 10.3). Immediately after coating the cages can
then be cast into the concrete with least risk of damage to the coating.
Defects are inevitable in any coating process. These come from several
sources. There are pinholes in the coating after application because rein-
forcing steel is not smooth and has deformations on it. Small amounts of
damage are done to the coating during handling and fabrication (bending)
in the manufacturing plant. Some damage is inevitable during transportation
to site, and during the assembly of the reinforcement cages. Finally, the act
Figure 10.2 (a) An epoxy coating plant in action. Courtesy Allied Bar Coaters (now closed
down). (b) Bar bending in epoxy coating plant. Courtesy Allied Bar Coaters
(now closed down).
(a)
(b)
 

250
Design for durability
of pouring wet concrete over the reinforcement and then vibrating it may
cause further damage to the coating. The aim of all current standards on
epoxy coated reinforcement is to keep the number and size of defects low
and to repair them when possible. By keeping the number low, the size
small and the separation high with a coating that minimizes undercutting
corrosion there should be effective separation of anodes and cathodes (see
Chapter 2). This increases the resistance in the corrosion cell and decreases
the corrosion rate (Figure 10.4).
Epoxy coated rebars will corrode eventually if the chloride level builds up
to a high enough level at the rebar surface and there is moisture and oxy-
gen to fuel the corrosion reaction. However, they should take longer to start
corroding than uncoated reinforcing steel and then should corrode more
slowly than uncoated rebars.
10.2.2
Problems with epoxy coating
The problems found in the Florida Keys were first identified in the late
1980s. The Keys bridges were built in the late 1970s with FBECR. Routine
inspection revealed localized corrosion in 1986 on V pier struts. Further
corrosion was identified on a total of five bridges in subsequent inspections.
Figure 10.3 A prewelded reinforcing cage emerging from the dipping tank on the
Stoebelt bridge/tunnel prefabrication plant. Courtesy Mott MacDonald.
 

Design for durability
251
The author visited the Keys in 1989 and saw extensive delamination in the
tidal and splash zones with severe corrosion of the rebar exposed when
delaminated concrete was removed with a hammer.
The following points should be noted when reviewing the Keys bridge
corrosion problems.
1
Corrosion was localized to the splash and tidal zones.
2
There was no clear relationship between low cover and corrosion.
3
Although chloride levels were high, they were no higher than in non-
corroding bridges in the Keys and elsewhere in Florida.
4
The other bridges in the Keys and 10 bridges elsewhere in Florida con-
taining FBECR have been examined and are not yet showing corrosion
problems. At least 20 bridges have been examined in detail.
It is now believed that poor handling practice with excessive exposure of
coated bars to ultraviolet light, salt and mechanical damage had a role to
play in the failures.
There is, however, a fundamental concern about the adhesion of the
coating to the steel. FBECR is corrosion resistant because the epoxy coating
is a dielectric film that stops charged ions (chloride) from passing through it.
The other option of the ion is to go round it, for example, at defects or hol-
idays in the coating. At these locations the ion should not be able to get
under the coating to form a pit (see Chapter 2). A new, good quality FBECR
shows excellent adhesion of the coating to the steel and cannot be peeled off.
O2 + H2O + 2e– = 2OH–
Ionic current
Electrons
Current
Fe = Fe2+ + 2e–
–1
2
Figure 10.4 Schematic of corrosion at anodic defect with ionic and electronic current
flow to cathodic defect.
 

However, many bars in the Keys bridges, both those showing corrosion
and those still in good condition, had poor adhesion and the coating could
be peeled off the steel. There were also problems on new bars. An immediate
programme of tightening application practice was undertaken. One major
problem for adhesion is any deposits left on the surface after grit blasting
and before coating. Salt is a particular problem as bars are often exposed
to road and sea salt during transport to the coating plant and once in the
grit used to clean the bars and provide a good key for the coating it can
redeposit on the bar surface as the grit is recycled.
Even with good initial adhesion there was a loss of adhesion for concrete
specimens exposed to regular or continuous wetting. Adhesion testing on the
deformed surface of a rebar is difficult to perform quantitatively and there is
some disagreement over whether the loss of adhesion when wet is permanent,
fully or partially recovered if the bar dries out. Even if it is temporary, the bar
is more susceptible to corrosion and under-film attack at defects while wet
and once corrosion has started it will not recover adhesion.
Major research programmes have been undertaken in the United States and
in other countries to find out whether the loss of adhesion is a fundamental
problem in the durability of FBECR. If it allows extensive under-film corro-
sion such as that seen on the Florida Keys bridges then FBECR may not be a
cost-effective solution to enhanced durability. The latest results are given in
Clear et al. (1995), Virmani (1997) and Virmani and Clemena (1998).
All studies have shown that FBECR outperforms bare steel and galvanized
steel in the laboratory and in the field. However, its detractors have
suggested that the improved durability of field structures is associated with
the reduced water:cement ratio of the concrete and increased cover that
were implemented on all structures when using FBECR. For the foreseeable
future it is likely that most North American highway departments will con-
tinue to specify FBECR and most European departments will not. Further
tightening of specifications to avoid damage and to get the highest possible
quality of coatings and coating adhesion have been implemented and may
be improved further over the next few years. There is also research on how
much damage occurs to the coating between leaving the coating plant and
casting into concrete.
The position is changing and alternative corrosion protection methods
such as the use of micro silica and calcium nitrite are being considered by
Florida DOT and may spread to other major North American users of
FBECR.
The use of prefabricated fusion dipped reinforcement cage should have
long-term durability as the bending of the bars after coating has been seen
to reduce adhesion and increase coating damage. It can be cost effective on
large scale special projects. This was first used on the Great Belt
Bridge/Tunnel in Denmark as described earlier. It has also been applied to
the St Claire Railroad Tunnel between the United States and Canada. As the
252
Design for durability
 

Design for durability
253
owners are looking for an almost indefinite life out of the structure,
concrete mix designs were developed to minimize chloride diffusion.
10.2.3
Advantages and limitations of fusion bonded 
epoxy coated rebars
There are certain disadvantages to using epoxy coated rebars. Their insulating
properties mean that they inhibit the use of electrical and electrochemical tech-
niques. Taking reference electrode potential measurements on epoxy coated
rebar is very difficult. This is partly due to the electrical isolation of bars from
each other as mentioned earlier, and partly because the steel is only exposed at
small defects. The exposed steel at defects is not necessarily in an alkaline
environment (either with or without chlorides) so interpretation of half cell
potentials is difficult (see Section 4.7). It is therefore very difficult to interpret
the measurements. For corrosion rate measurements with the linear polariza-
tion technique it is impossible to calculate the area of corrosion. For effective
corrosion rate measurement the surface area must be known. If corrosion is
only occurring at a few defects it may be impossible to determine the area of
corrosion and therefore turn the corrosion current into an effective corrosion
rate per unit surface area (see Section 4.11). Attempts have been made to take
reference electrode measurements with some success, see for instance
Hededahl and Manning (1989) and Ramniceanu et al. (2006).
There are problems with applying cathodic protection, chloride removal
and realkalization to FBECR because the rebars are electrically isolated.
Special care must be taken to connect each rebar together. This problem
does not arise with the welded cages where each cage is continuous. The
issues of repairing structures containing FBECR once they reach their limit
state is described in Sohanghpurwala et al. (2002).
An important advantage of FBECR is that it is a comparatively low cost
approach to corrosion protection. It is easily understood by site operatives
and is now a routine technology in North America and some parts of the
Middle East. If good quality rebars are cast into the concrete then there
should be negligible maintenance requirements compared to waterproofing
membranes or other surface coatings. There is no major impact for the bridge
design other than an increase in lap lengths to take account of the reduced
pull out strength of a bar with a deformable coating on it.
Special handling techniques must be used at the fabrication plant, in tran-
sit to the site and during handling and storage on site. It is essential that
damage to the coating is minimized.
10.3
Waterproofing membranes
Waterproofing membranes are routinely applied to new bridge decks in the
United Kingdom and much of Europe. Several DOTs in the Northern 
 

United States and Canada also apply them. Membranes come as two main
types, a liquid that solidifies in place, and a sheet that is stuck to the concrete
(see Section 5.3.3). The main problem with waterproof membranes is similar
to that of epoxy coating rebars; they must be applied without defects.
Defects can occur as blow holes, penetrations or mechanical damage to the
liquid applied types, or cuts, tears, bad joins or perforations in the sheets.
Either type of membrane can be damaged by the overlay of asphalt, either
by its heat or mechanical damage from the aggregate particles.
Careful detailing is needed to avoid water and chlorides getting under the
edges of the membrane. It is also essential to ensure that the deck and mem-
brane drain properly, with adequate waterproofing around drains and with
no ponding. The drainage system from the deck must not then dump salt
laden water onto the substructure.
Many bridges in the United Kingdom (e.g. the Midland Links flyover and
the Tees viaduct) have required extensive concrete repai to the bridge decks
where membranes have failed to stop water and chloride ingress. The repair
problems are worse at joints, where the membrane ends. The sealing of
joints and making membranes continuous across them is a popular solution
to this problem. Modern bridge design requires the minimizing of the number
of joints in a bridge deck. There must be adequate detailing and proper atten-
tion to ensuring that the water does not accumulate and that membranes run
into drains and over concrete edges where salt might accumulate. A synthesis
report ton bridge deck joint performance in the United States has recently been
undertaken by Purvis (2005).
Problems are also found at curbs, around drains and other places where
the salt water can get under the membrane.
Waterproofing membranes have a life of about 15 years and then must be
replaced. At that time it is good practice to survey for corrosion and
chloride penetration after the membrane has been exposed. One problem
with membranes is determining whether they even exist under the asphalt
wearing course, or whether they are still working. It is sometimes possible
to flood the deck with water and measure for electrical continuity between
the surface and the reinforcing steel. This is difficult and will not find the
defect. SHRP carried out research on using pulse velocity to define a
condition rating for an asphalt overlaid membrane. This showed promise
but needs further research before it can be developed into an accurate test.
The use of waterproofing membranes requires careful detailing of a struc-
ture at the design stage with good drainage and effective prevention of salt
laden water getting under the membrane. This must be carried through to the
construction site. A good finish must be established for the membrane to be
applied successfully without debonding. Application of membranes requires
a specialist to ensure there are no defects and that the membrane is
adequately bonded to the concrete and sealed at the edges. The asphalt
wearing course must be carefully placed to prevent damage to the membrane.
254
Design for durability
 

Design for durability
255
The complete design of the structure must take into account the extra dead
load and clearance required for the asphalt.
Some waterproofing membranes on car parks do not require asphalt
concrete overlays. The extra wear on these membranes, especially from
scuffing of tyres as cars manoeuvre in and out of parking spaces, means that
they have shorter lifetimes and need more regular monitoring and mainte-
nance if they are to keep the deicing salts out of the concrete.
10.3.1
Advantages and limitations of waterproofing 
membranes
If membranes fail, detecting the failure is difficult as they are overlaid with
an asphalt wearing course. Leakage can occur through thinner slabs such as
those on car parking structures, and traffic will degrade the asphalt overlay
which will require replacement at regular intervals. There can be particular
problems in car parks due to the manoeuvring of cars into parking spaces
and round tight corners displacing the asphalt and damaging the mem-
brane. Car park membranes often combine the waterproofing layer and the
wearing course in one. Where a car park is built over offices or shopping
malls leaking membranes can cause considerable problems.
Membranes have given good service on European bridges and in the New
England states and other North American agencies where they are routinely
used. They have reduced or eliminated the problems of potholing on bridge
decks but at the price of a higher regular maintenance requirement com-
pared with epoxy coated rebars in bridge decks.
Until recently membranes were not considered compatible with cathodic
protection as the anode would have to be under the membrane to pass cur-
rent, and the anode generates gases that must escape. Membranes and
cathodic protection have been used in car parks on thin slabs with some
success. Some of the newer probe anodes have venting tubes and so they can
be used under membranes. Galvanic anodes can be used as they do not
generate gasses electrochemical chloride removal (or realkalization) could
be done before the replacement of the membrane.
10.4
Penetrating sealers
Several European DOTs specify the application of penetrating sealers to
exposed concrete on bridges exposed to salt spray or run off. These are
discussed in Section 6.3. They have very particular application requirements.
In the United States sealers are also used on bare concrete bridge decks.
Their effectiveness on trafficked surfaces has not been fully investigated.
The advantage of silane type penetrating sealers is that they are inexpensive
compared with cathodic protection, epoxy coated rebars or other preventative
or active treatment methods. If penetration is good then there is no maintenance
 

and a long lifetime (in theory) as the silane forms a hydrophobic layer inside
the concrete pores. There is no impact on the design or performance of the
structure. The disadvantages are the problem of ensuring adequate application
of a colourless liquid, and knowing that it has penetrated the structure.
Applying cathodic protection or chloride removal through penetrating
sealers if necessary is usually possible.
10.5
Galvanized rebar
As stated in Section 10.2, early US research generally showed galvanizing to
be an inferior option to fusion bonded epoxy coated reinforcement when
faced with chloride attack. The FHWA memorandum (Manning et al., 1982)
suggested a 15-year life for galvanized rebar in good quality concrete. Their
conclusions are supported by Andrade et al. (1995) with respect to chloride
attack. Galvanized bars may be more effective against carbonation. However,
a recent re-appraisal of field structures suggests that it is more durable than
previously thought in marine and other chloride environments. Yeomans
(2004) gives numerous examples suggesting an increase in corrosion thresh-
old from the range 0.2–1.0% for black steel to 1.0–2.0% for galvanized steel,
reaching the 50 year life to first repair that the FHWA were looking for.
Galvanizing has one principal advantage over FBECR; it will accept
damage in handling as the coating corrodes sacrificially and defects are not
as important as for FBECR. Its main disadvantage is the risk of accelerated
galvanic corrosion of the coating if galvanized reinforcement is linked to
uncoated black steel.
Galvanized rebar is used successfully in structures where carbonation is
a risk such as cladding panels. Galvanizing can easily be carried out in most
countries although the quality and composition of the coating can affect its
durability. It suffers from fewer problems when handled roughly because
the coating is sacrificial and protects bare areas.
Accelerated depletion of the galvanizing can occur if galvanized rebars are
mixed with ungalvanized bars. If they are being used in the same structure
(for instance on a bridge deck but not the substructure or vice versa), then
care should be taken to ensure complete electrical isolation of the galvanized
and ungalvanized bars.
It may be very risky to apply electrochemical treatments to galvanized
reinforcing steel. Very severe pitting can result. NCT, the patent holders on
the realkalization and desalination techniques, do not recommend their use
on structures containing galvanized rebar (Miller, 1995).
10.6
Stainless steel reinforcement
Stainless steel rebar has been applied in special circumstances but it is a very
expensive option. A clad stainless steel with a mild steel core and stainless
256
Design for durability
 

Design for durability
257
outer 1–2 mm is presently being commercialized, which is still relatively
expensive, but about half the price of pure stainless steel reinforcing bar.
Stainless steels can be susceptible to pitting attack, so the correct 
grade of stainless steel must be used. There appear to have been problems of
quality control and assurance of the manufacturing process (Pianca, 2001).
The problem of mixing metals applies to stainless steel with mild steel as
with galvanized and ungalvanized steel in the section earlier. The galvanic cou-
pling of mild steel and stainless steel will accelerate corrosion of the mild steel.
This problem has been observed on balconies and facades (Miller, 1995).
However, the latest guidance documents on stainless steel by the Concrete
Society (1998) and the European Federation of Corrosion by Nürnberger
(1996) indicate that as stainless steels are poor cathodes the galvanic effect is
minimal and there is little acceleration of the corrosion rate. It is obviously
good design practice to ensure that the mild steel reinforcement has a very low
risk of exposure to chlorides if being mixed with stainless steel bars.
10.7
Corrosion inhibitors
Calcium nitrite is the principal corrosion inhibitor available to stop
corrosion that is compatible with concrete in the casting process. As stated
in Section 10.2, it is accepted by FHWA as an alternative to FBECR for
protection against chloride induced corrosion. FHWA research shows that
if sufficient nitrite is added to the concrete mix to ensure a chloride to
nitrite ratio of less than 1.0 at rebar depth, then the nitrite will prevent cor-
rosion. Obviously this is feasible in marine conditions where the chloride
level is known (and assuming no concentration effects) but may be more
difficult in other situations.
Compared to FBECR an inhibiting admixture has the advantage that
there is electrical continuity of the reinforcing cage so electrochemical meth-
ods can be used to measure for corrosion measurements (reference electrode
potential measurements and corrosion rate) and to treat for corrosion
(cathodic protection and chloride removal). Its major drawback is that with
a good quality, dense concrete (Florida DoT now specifies micro silica in
the concrete) and good cover, the inhibitor should not be needed for at least
20 years. Will it still be there and will it still be effective 20 years after being
put in the concrete mix?
The advantage of calcium nitrite is that it can be added to the mix and
has no serious effects on the design, construction and performance of the
structure other than its effect as a set accelerator. Mix design may require
adjusting to include a retarder. Its disadvantage is that there must be enough
to stop corrosion and it is consumed with its exposure to chlorides. It is there-
fore important to calculate the chloride exposure for the life of the structure
and add sufficient inhibitor. It does not inhibit the application of cathodic
protection or chloride extraction in later life of the structure if necessary.
 

Other proprietary corrosion inhibiting admixtures, mainly amine based,
are also available although there is much discussion about longevity and
effectiveness. Some of these issues are covered in Elsener (2001). As an addi-
tive to the concrete mix, inhibitors can be used along side other protective
measures such as coated reinforcement.
10.8
Installing cathodic protection in 
new structures
There are two reasons for installing cathodic protection from new. One is
to energize it initially as a ‘cathodic prevention system’. The other reason is
to have it there for use at a future date.
The first approach has been pioneered on Italian Autostrada bridges in the
mountainous areas of Northern Italy (Pedeferri, 1992). Previous construction
experience had shown that it was very difficult to prevent chloride ingress.
Therefore cathodic protection anodes were either built into the deck or
applied as part of the construction process. The bridges were post-tensioned
segmental construction with tendons in grouted ducts.
Cathodic protection was applied at a very low level to avoid any risk of
hydrogen evolution. As chlorides had not entered the structure the aim was
to apply a small level of current to polarize the steel and effectively repel the
chlorides. These systems were installed in the late 1980s and early 1990s. If
properly maintained they should give excellent life as the anodes will be
used at a very low rating. Another case of installation from new was a salt
silo or chamber with a reinforced concrete floor. This was known to be at
high risk from chloride penetration. Further examples are a palace in the
United Arab Emirates (Funahashi, 1995) and a petrochemical plant in
Saudi Arabia (Chaudhary, 2004).
The installation of anodes and rebar connections during construction for
later use has been discussed on a number of structures. While positive
efforts to ensure rebar continuity at the construction stage are to be wel-
comed, it is generally considered that anode design and types will change
over the next decade so improved systems may be available by the time that
protection is required. If corrosion is local then the application of small,
local anodes at the time of corrosion may be more cost-effective than
designing in anodes to protect the whole of the structure. Also if there are
inaccessible locations that are at risk on a high value structure where access
or outage costs are high then installing cathodic prevention may be a worth-
while precaution. The author has been involved in such an installation on
a desalination plant and other seawater intakes where shut down costs
would be prohibitive.
Experience has also shown that connection leads get damaged and
destroyed or may not be in the correct location for future use. If an impressed
current cathodic protection system is to be installed from new then it should
258
Design for durability
 

be commissioned and energized before hand over to ensure that it is working
and to ensure that the system is fully operational and documented.
10.9
Durable buildings
Most of this chapter has discussed bridges, with peripheral comments about
other civil engineering structures. This is partly because most of the emphasis
in the field of durability has been problems with bridges caused by chloride
attack. Many of the discussions are relevant to all reinforced concrete
structures. However, buildings are constructed to withstand less severe
environments and conditions than bridges. There are also lower life expecta-
tions on buildings which may become obsolete before serious deterioration
occurs.
The trend towards covering up concrete with coatings and cladding
increases the durability of the concrete by retarding chloride and carbon
dioxide ingress. Buildings rarely use FBECR, micro silica, sealers or
inhibitors, but they rarely suffer from severe chloride exposure.
If sufficient attention is paid to ensuring the specified cover and water
cement ratio, most buildings in relatively benign environments will perform
well throughout their normal lifetimes. In aggressive environments such as
many countries in the Middle East or where exposed to sea salt spray, then
designers should consider the durability codes for bridges rather than those
for buildings.
Adequate maintenance and maintainability are also important. If leaks
develop on the flat roof of a building exposed to the sea then chlorides can
concentrate and cause damage. If drainage is well designed and maintain
then problems will be minimized.
10.10
Conclusions
There are many methods of ensuring that reinforced concrete structures do
not suffer from corrosion problems. The most important is ensuring that
the concrete quality is high, with a low permeability, and the cover is good.
Additional protection can be achieved by keeping chlorides away by design,
such as removing joints in decks where they can allow chlorides to leak on
to substructures or applying coatings or cladding to facades of buildings
exposed to sea salt spray. Further options are offered in the way of surface
barriers, coatings, membranes and sealers. These can be used for a variety
of applications to protect specific elements or specific areas at risk.
Additional protection can be found in the form of blended cements with
pozzolanic additives that can retard ingress, such as micro silica, PFA 
(fly ash), etc. The addition of corrosion inhibitors to the mix can be
included in this category, although it bridges the distinction between a barrier
to corrodents and a technique offering corrosion protection to the steel.
Design for durability
259
 

Table 10.2 Methods of improving durability (Adapted from Broomfield, 2004)
Method
How it works
Advantages
Limitations
Where used
Increase cover over
Increases time for chlorides 
Low cost, included in codes
Requires very good quality assurance, increased risk 
Everywhere
reinforcement
or carbonation to reach steel
of cracking giving Cl and CO2 more rapid ingress
Decrease water/
Reduces concrete porosity
Low cost, in codes
Makes concrete less workable and more prone to poor
Everywhere
cementitious ratio
to increase time for
consolidation, higher cement content increases heat
corrodents to reach steel
of hydration. Plasticizers add to cost
Ground granulated
Reduces concrete porosity
Modest cost, increasingly in
Makes concrete less workable and more prone to poor 
Marine Structures and other 
blast furnace slag,
to increase time for
codes to achieve durable
consolidation, costs and availability can be problematical
severe exposure
microsilica, fly ash
corrodents to reach steel
concrete in marine exposure
lower cement content 
decreases heat of hydration
Corrosion inhibitors Protective chemical layer on 
Modest cost, can be used
Needs to work after 20 years or more, may be washed
Marine structures, car parks 
steel
with other techniques
out in marine environment. Dosage must reflect exposure
and other severe exposure
Coatings and
Increases time for chlorides
Low cost, easy maintenance
Changes appearance requires maintenance.Application
Bridges, car parks
penetrating sealers
or carbonation to reach steel
of sealers weather dependent
Membranes and
Increases time for chlorides
Ideal for bridge, car park
Requires maintenance, can hide problems. Changes profile Bridge and car park decks
barriers
or carbonation to reach steel
decks etc.
and dead load 
Fibre reinforced
Corrosion resistant
Theoretical very long life.
Needs new design codes, unknown deterioration rates
Experimental
polymer
Easy handling, may reduce
and mechanisms over 50y life or more
reinforcement
concrete specification
Stainless steel
Corrosion resistant
If correct grade is used,
High first cost. Clad bar production QA/QC still in
High value long life structures
reinforcement
reinforcement
indefinite life. Scrap value 
development
or elements
(solid or clad)
of solid bar
Cathodic prevention Makes steel cathodic and
Theoretically up to 100y
High first cost, high maintenance,
High value high chloride 
therefore corrosion resistant
life of anodes. Codes avaiable
technically complex
exposed structures
Epoxy coated
Coating prevents chloride
Easy low cost use in North
Durability problems in some highway structures in Florida Bridge decks, etc. in North
reinforcement
access to steel surface
America
and Ontario. Handling damage during transportation
America and Arabian Gulf area
and placement
Galvanized
Higher chloride tolerance
Widely available, design,
Advantages reduce in poor concrete and high chloride.
Everywhere
reinforcement
and resistance to carbonation
handle and use as black 
Risk of accelerating corrosion if coupled to black steel
delays corrosion, sacrificial
steel
protection
 

Design for durability
261
The earlier techniques were concerned with stopping chlorides and
carbonation reaching the surface of the steel. The next category is making
the steel corrosion resistant. These include epoxy coating, galvanizing and
stainless steel bars. The problems with the former are performance. The
problem with the latter is cost. Coatings such as epoxy or zinc impede our
ability to assess and repair damage when it does occur. Finally there is
cathodic protection that can be applied from new and is being used on sev-
eral new structures to stop chlorides reaching the bar and to stop the bar
from corroding if the corrodents reach it. Table 10.2 summarizes the
techniques and their pros and cons.
References
Andrade, C., Hoist, J.D., Nürnberger, N., Whiteley, J.J. and Woodman, N. (1995).
Protection Systems for Reinforcement, Prepared by Task Group VII/8 of
Permanent Commission, VII CEB.
Bamforth, P. (1994). ‘Admitting that chlorides are admitted’. Concrete, 28(6): 18–21.
Broomfield, J.P. (2004). Galvanized Steel Reinforcement: A
Consultant’s
Perspective, Chapter 9 in Yeomans (ed.). Galvanized Steel Reinforcement in Con-
crete. Publ. Elsevier, Oford UK, pp 276–279.
BSI (2004). ‘Standards for fresh concrete’, BIP 2001 British Standards Institute,
London.
Chaudhary, Z., Bairamov, A.K., Rodel, F. and Al-Mutlaq, F. (2004). ‘Cathodic
protection of reinforced concrete seawater structures in petrochemical Plants’.
Materials Performance, 43(12): 26–29.
Clear, K.C., Hartt, W.H., McIntyre, J. and Seung, K.L. (1995). Performance of
Epoxy Coated Reinforcing Steel in Highway Bridges, National Cooperative
(Highway Program, Report 370, National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Concrete Society (1996). Durable Bonded Post-Tensioned Concrete Bridges,
Technical Report No. 47.
Concrete Society (1998). Guidance on the Use of Stainless Steel Reinforcement.
Concrete Society Technical Report, 51.
Department of Transport (1994). Design for Durability, Departmental Advice Note.
BA 57/94.
Ecob, C.R., King, E.S., Rostam, S. and Vincentsen, L.J. (1995). Epoxy Coated
Reinforcement Cages In Precast Concrete Segmental Tunnel Linings – Durability.
Corrosion of Reinforcement, in Concrete. C.L. Page, K.W.J. Treadaway,
P.B. Bamforth (eds), 1990; Published for the Society of Chemical Industry by
Elsevier Applied Science, London and New York, pp 550–558.
Elsener, B. (2001). Corrosion Inhibitors for Steel in Concrete. European Federation
of Corrosion Publications, Institute of Materials, London, p 35.
Funahashi, M. (1995). ‘Cathodic protection systems for new RC structures’.
Concrete International, 17(7): 28–31.
Hededahl, P. and Manning, D.G. (1989). Field Investigation of Epoxy-Coated
Reinforcing Steel. Ontario MTO Report. MAT-89-02.
Institute of Civil Engineers (2002). Recommendations for the inspection,
Maintenance and Management of Car Park Structures. ISSN: 0 7277 3183 1.
 

262
Design for durability
Manning, D.G. (1996). Corrosion performane of epoxy-coated reinforcing steel:
North America Experience. Construction and Materials, 10(5): 349–365.
Manning, D.G., Escalante, E. and Whiting, D. (1982). Panel Report – Galvanized
Rebar as a Long-Term Protective System. FHWA- DTFH61-82-300-30041-2/3.
Miller, J. (1995). Personal Communication. 
Nürnberger, U. (1996). Stainless Steel in Concrete – State of the Art Report.
London: Institute of Materials for EFC; ISBN: ISSN 1354-5116.
Pedeferri, P. (1992). Cathodic Protection of New Concrete constructions, in
International Conference on Structural Improvements through Corrosion
Protection of Reinforced Concrete, Documentation E7190, IBC Technical
Services, London, VK.
Pianca, F. (2001). Assessment of Stainless Steel Clad Reinforcement for Ministry
Use. TRB Presentation. Protection Systems for Reinforcement, Prepared by Task
Group VII/8 of Permanent Commission VII CEB.
Purvis, R. (2005). Bridge Deck Joint Performance. NCHRP Synthesis 319.
Ramniceanu, A., Weyers, R.E., Anderson-Cook, C. and Brown, M.C. (2006).
Measuring the Field Corrosion Activity of Bridge Decks Built with Bare and
Epoxy Coated Steel. Journal of ASTM International.
Richard, E.W., Prof. Brown, M.C., Kirkpatrick, T.J., Weyers, R.M., Mokarem, D.W.
and Sprinkel, M.M. (2002). Field Assessment of the Linear Cracking of Concrete
Bridge Decks and Chloride Penetration. Transportation Research Board 81st
Annual Meeting CD ROM. 81st Annual meeting proceedings. Paper No. 3654.
Simon, P. (2004). Improved Current Distribution due to a Unique Anode Mesh
Placement in a Steel Reinforced Concrete Parking Garage Slab CP System. NACE
Corrosion 2004. Paper No. 04345.
Sohanghpurwala, A.A., Scannel, W.T. and Hartt, W.H. (2002). Repair and
Rehabilitation of Bridge Components Containing Epoxy-coated Reinforcement.
NCHRP Web Document 50 (Project 10-37C) Contractor’s Final Report.
Virmani, Y.P. (1997). Corrosion Protection Systems for Construction and Rehabilita-
tion of Salt-contaminated Reinforced Concrete Bridge Members. Proceedings of
the International Conference on Repair of Concrete Structures – From Theory to
Practice in a Marine Environment, Svolvær, Norway, pp 107–122.
Virmani, Y.P. and Clemena, G.G. (1998). Corrosion Protection – Concrete Bridges.
FHWA Report. FHWA-RD-98–088.
Yeomans (ed.) (2004). Galvanized Steel Reinforcement in Concrete. Publ. Elsevier,
Oxford, UK.
 

Chapter 11
Future developments
About 10 years ago the author wrote the corresponding chapter in the 
first edition of this book. It is interesting to see what was predicted in 
that first edition, what has actually transpired and what we might expect to
transpire over the next decade or two compared with the last.
As stated at the beginning of the book, concrete is man’s most ubiquitous
invention, with more concrete-made than any other man-made material. It
is not surprising therefore to read of new alternatives to concrete made
from oil residue, a rapid carbonating concrete to ‘mop up’ carbon dioxide
and other variations to challenge the supremacy of Portland cement
concrete and its related hydraulic cement.
The construction industry is a conservative one compared to others such
as microprocessors and computers. However, with a design life of a few
years, hardware and software is mass produced, upgraded and rapidly
superseded. The construction industry does not have that luxury. Our prod-
ucts are expected to last many decades and in many cases for centuries,
often with little thought of ultimate durability in the original design and
construction. As stated in Chapter 1, concrete is man’s most ubiquitous
invention. Applications range from simple paths and blocks to the tallest
buildings in the world and environments ranging from the most benign
indoor exposure to offshore platforms in the North Sea. Therefore, it is not
surprising to read of new alternatives to concrete made from oil residue, a
rapid carbonating concrete to ‘mop up’ carbon dioxide and other variations
to challenge the supremacy of Portland cement concrete and its related
hydraulic cement. Some may have niche applications but it seems unlikely
that a new concrete will come along to challenge the durability, cost effec-
tiveness and compatibility of Portland cement-based concrete.
In the first edition we suggested that admixtures to enhance the durability
of concrete would continue to be developed. The major one that is having
an impact on new construction seems to be superplasticizers which are
eliminating the problems of consolidation around the reinforcement and
producing dense, high quality concrete even in the most complex formwork
and reinforcement design both in new construction and in repairs.
 

The use of corrosion inhibitors as additives to new construction is growing
steadily. The mixed results for its use for rehabilitation as discussed in
Section 6.6 have slowed development in this field.
The issue of the environment and environmental impact does not seem to
have moved on much in the past 10 years for many parts of the construction
industry. Highway agencies continue to move forward using recycled mate-
rials and waste products in concrete. Concrete repair itself could be viewed
as an environmentally friendly approach as the alternative would be new
construction with the transportation of large amounts of material both for
demolition and reconstruction as well as the impact of manufacturing the
new cement, and steel and quarrying and crushing the aggregates. Waste dis-
posal in landfill sites is increasingly discouraged, at least in the United
Kingdom, so prices of disposal rise, encouraging life extension and recycling.
The issue of coated and corrosion resistant reinforcement presently seems
to be moving in the direction of stainless steel and stainless steel clad rein-
forcement. The high price of metals on the international markets has held
back wider use of stainless steel at the time when its use was starting to be
more widely considered. The move to develop new organic coatings for
reinforcement seems to have diminished as no clear improvement to fusion
bonded epoxy coating has yet emerged.
The experiments with alternatives to steel reinforcement continue, such
as glass fibre composites but these require major changes to codes so are
unlikely to make a major impact quickly. Carbon fibre and other compos-
ite wraps are increasingly being used in strengthening repairs. The author is
concerned that they are also being mooted for corrosion control, despite the
potential hazard of failure without warning seen for conventional concrete
jacketing as shown in Figure 6.5.
The electrochemical techniques continue to develop as predicted 10 years
ago. Galvanic cathodic protection is now a commercial reality and new
anode systems are in development. There are suggestions that impressed
current and galvanic systems may be combined with a short burst of initial
impressed current and then leaving the galvanic anodes to maintain
polarization (Davison et al., 2006). The range of impressed current anodes
for cathodic protection continues to grow along with interest in wider
application of the technology such as steel framed buildings. Surprisingly
realkalization and ECE have not expanded in the same way as cathodic
protection. Electro-osmosis is in its infancy as a corrosion control technology.
It will either continue to develop or find its niche over the next decade.
In North America the market for impressed current cathodic protection
of bridge decks has diminished (Russell, 2004). High-performance concrete
overlays, full and partial deck replacement are preferred due to the cost of
maintenance.
Also as predicted 10 years ago there has been little change in deicer
technology. Some US states are using calcium chloride instead of sodium
264
Future developments
 

chloride and there is concern about the environmental impact of runoff into
water courses in sensitive areas so there is more use of grit alone or mixed
with salt.
Corrosion monitoring systems (Chapter 5) are gaining acceptance and
use around the world with the continued reduction cost of electronics and
the increase in computing power it is easier to collect and analyse data.
There is considerable research on wireless systems in the United States.
The issue of the durability of prestressed structures has not gone away.
Although the United Kingdom has now published its guidance document on
durable prestressing (Section 10.1), there are now problems in Florida with
bleed water from the grout accumulating at the anchorages and leading to
corrosion (Sagüés et al., 2005). This is likely to lead to further research and
developments of grouts of post-tensioning and of anchorage design.
There has been a huge growth in models for corrosion of steel in concrete
with the ability to do whole life costing on new structures incorporating
different durability options and on repair options for existing structures
(Chapter 9). This has the big advantage of codifying our approach to
durability. Although all such models should be considered comparative
rather than absolute in their output the client can now be presented with
engineering judgement rather than prejudice and preference for known and
tried techniques, some of which may not be very good. It will be interesting
to see whether models converge or diverge and whether we can extend the
limited amount of validation that has been carried out on the models
developed so far and the new ones as they come along.
Perhaps the biggest growth area over the past 10 years and for the next
10 is the growth of codes and standards. The European Union’s attempts to
generate a common market with common standards has driven some of
that, although in the USA NACE has 14 committees writing and revising
reports and standards for corrosion control of reinforced concrete. There is
a need for codification of the techniques we use although they are no
substitute of intelligent design and engineering of a structure. As stated
10 years ago manufacturers need performance standards and specifications
so that they have fixed goal posts for the properties and performance of the
products they develop.
We will always need to build structures in corrosive environments. We will
therefore need new techniques to deal with the problems that ensue. 
We will also continue to refine the techniques that we have. We will con-
tinue to need engineers and corrosion specialists with knowledge and
experience of dealing with the problems as they are the most important
resource in the fight against corrosion. Good undergraduate and post grad-
uate courses on corrosion are needed as well as research projects to train
young engineers in the theory and practice of corrosion of steel in concrete.
Perhaps the biggest challenge is to ensure that those responsible for the
design of new structures ensure that there is sufficient understanding of
Future developments
265
 

durability in the design team so that many of the problems we see today are
designed out of the structures of tomorrow.
References
Davison, N., Glass, G. and Roberts, A. (2006). Inhibiting Chloride Induced
Reinforcement Corrosion. Proceeding NACE Corrosion. Paper No. 06353.
Russell, H.G. (2004). Concrete Bridge Deck Performance: A synthesis of Highway
Practice. NCHRP Synthesis. 333.
Sagüés, A.A., Wang, H. and Powers, R.G. (2005). Corrosion of the Strand –
Anchorage System in Post-Tensioned Grouted Assemblies. NACE Corrosion
2005. Paper No. 05266.
266
Future developments
 

Appendix
Sources of information on 
corrosion of steel in concrete
Bodies involved in the corrosion of steel in concrete
American Association of State Highway & Transportation Officials
444 North Capitol Street N.W., Suite 249 Washington, DC 20001, USA
Phone: 1 202 624-5800
Fax: 1 202 624-5806
Web: http://www.transportation.org
Publishes AASHTO/ARTBA/AGC Guide Specifications for reinforced
concrete construction and repair of highway structures
American Concrete Institute (ACI)
38800 Country Club Dr. Farmington Hills, MI 48331, USA
Phone: 1 248-848-3700
Fax: 1 248-848-3701
Web: www.aci-int.org
Publishes guidance documents on reinforced durability, modelling and
repair. Annual Conference training and certification in concrete construc-
tion. Journals ACI Journal and Concrete International.
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, USA
Phone: 1 610 832-9585
Fax: 1 610 832-9555
Web: www.astm.org
Publishes test standards for concrete and corrosion, seminars and conferences.
Australasian Corrosion Association
PO Box 112, Kerrimuir, Victoria 3129, Australia
Phone: 61 3 9890 4833
Fax: 61 3 9890 7866
Web: http://www.corrosion.com.au
Annual conference on corrosion. Training and certification courses in corrosion
 

British Standards Institute
Publishes British and European standards on corrosion, concrete and
concrete repair.
Corrosion Prevention Association (CPA)
CPA, Association House, 99 West Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7EN, UK
Tel: 44 1252 739144
Fax: 44 1252 739140
Web: http://www.corrosionprevention.org.uk/
Collaborate with Concrete Society and ICorr on Concrete Society Reports,
Technical reports on repair techniques, particularly electrochemical.
Concrete Society
Riverside House, 4 Meadows Business Park, Station Approach, Blackwater,
Camberley, Surrey GU17 9AB, UK
Tel:  44 1276 607140
Fax: 44 1276 607141
Web: www.concrete.org.uk
Publishes ‘Concrete’ and ‘Concrete Engineering International’. Annual
Conference, Concrete Society Technical Reports
Concrete Repair Association (CRA)
Association House, 99 West Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7EN, UK
Tel: 44 1252 739145
Fax: 44 1252 739140
Email: cra@associationhouse.org.uk
Web: www.cra.org.uk
Guidance document. Website information on EN1504
European Federation of Corrosion (EFC)
Web: http://www.efcweb.org
Annual Conference, publishes reports on corrosion of steel in concrete via
IOM3
Institute of Corrosion
Corrosion House, Vimy Court, Leighton Buzzard, LU7 1FG, UK
Tel: 44 1525 851771
Fax: 44 1525 376690
Web: www.icorr.org
Publishes report on corrosion of stel in concrete, ofen in collaboration with
the Concrete Society and recently with CPA.
Training and certification courses in corrosion
The Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3)
1 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5DB, UK
268
Appendix
 

Tel: 44 20 7451 7300
Fax: 44 20 7451 7319
Web: http://www.iom3.org
Published EFC documents
International Concrete Repair Institute
1323 Shepard Dr, Suite D, VA 20164-4428
Tel: 703 450 0116
Fax: 703 450 0119
Email: info@icro.org
Web: www.icri.org
Annual conference, reports and guidance documents for concrete repair
NACE International
(National Association of Corrosion Engineers)
1440 South Creek Drive
Houston, Texas 77084-4906 USA
Toll Free Number (USA): 1-800-797-NACE (6223)
Main Phone: 1 281-228-6200
Main Fax: 1 281-228-6300
Web: www.nace.org
Annual Conference reports and standards on corrosion in concrete and
concrete repair Corrosion and Materials Performance Journals, Training
and certification courses in corrosion
Transportation Research Board (TRB)
Keck Center of the National Academies
Transportation Research Board
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: (202) 334-2934
Fax: (202) 334-2003
Web: www.trb.org
Annual Conference, National Cooperative Highway Research Program
conducts corrosion and concrete repair related research, NCHRP and
Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP) reports available online or
through website. Transportation Research Record annual publication of
selected conference papers
RILEM
RILEM Secretariat General
157 rue des Blains
F-92220 Bagneux, FRANCE
Tel : 33 1 45 36 10 20
Fax : 33 1 45 36 63 20
Appendix
269
 

Web: www.rilem.org
Publishes reports and monthly Materials and Structures – Matériaux et
Constructions Journal
WTA e.V.
WTA-Publications
Edelsbergstr. 8
80686 München
Germany
Tel: 49 (0)89 578 69727
Fax: 49 (0)89 578 69729
Web: www.wta.de
Wissenschaftlich-Technische Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Bauwerkserhaltung
und Denkmalpflege, or International Association for Science and
Technology of Building Maintenance and Monuments Preservation.
German language conferences, seminars, expert discussions, proceedings,
books and recommendations. WTA publishes the International Journal for
Technology and Applications in Building Maintenance and Monument
Preservation (which is part of the membership package).
270
Appendix
 

Glossary and index
These definitions are not full, accurate scientific or dictionary definitions and may
be incomplete if used outside the context of the subject of corrosion of steel
in concrete.
acid
A solution that (among other things) attacks steel and other metals and
reacts with alkalis, forming a neutral product (a salt) and water.
acid 6, 10–11, 16, 46, 57–63, 142–143, 153, 178, 186, 191, 197
alkali
A solution that (among other things) protects steel and other metals from
corrosion and reacts with acids, forming a salt and water.
alkali 8, 16–19, 21, 28, 55, 96, 113, 117, 124, 142–143, 154–155, 190–191, 193,
198–200, 210, 215
alkali silica reaction (ASR) 37, 85, 113, 141, 189–190, 193, 195–196, 198, 199,
201, 204, 206, 210, 213, 219, 220, 221
anode
1. The site of corrosion in an aqueous corrosion cell (a combination of anodes and
cathodes).
2. An external component introduced into a cathodic protection system to be the
site of the oxidation (q.v.) reaction and prevent corrosion of the metal object to
be protected.
3. The positive pole of a simple electrical cell (battery).
anode 8, 9, 13, 14, 24, 26, 50, 62, 95, 107, 108, 114, 120–210, 215–221, 255,
258, 264
conductive mortar 170–171
conductive organic coating 131, 156–159, 161, 182
current density 182, 185
discrete 167–170
electrochemical chloride extraction 190–194
incipient see incipient anode
mesh 130, 146, 147, 148, 153, 162–164, 165, 167, 170, 175, 176, 182, 184,
185, 186, 190, 191, 198, 210
reaction 142–143, 178–179, 186
realkalization 198–199
Ribbon 165–167
titanium 162, 165, 167
bacterial corrosion 10–11, 15
binding (of chlorides see also chloroaluminates) 3, 24, 29, 58–59, 61, 86, 101
 

bond strength
coating 156, 172, 225
membranes 127
reinforcement 195–196
repairs 113–114, 119–121, 162, 225
sprayed concrete 130, 162–163
carbonation
The process by which carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere reacts
with water in concrete pores to form carbonic acid and then reacts with the
alkalis (q.v.) in the pores, neutralizing them. This can then lead to the corrosion
of the reinforcing steel.
carbonation 2, 7, 10, 16–21, 25, 28, 29–30, 31, 33, 35, 36, 42, 45, 50, 51,
55–57, 59, 62, 69, 70, 76, 77, 99, 100, 113, 123–125, 133, 135, 142, 197–200,
213–217, 218, 224, 227–230, 232–234, 238, 241, 246, 256, 260–261, 263
cathode
1. The site of a charge balancing reaction in a corrosion cell.
2. The protected metal structure in a cathodic protection system.
3. The negative pole of a simple electrical cell (battery).
cathodic protection
A process of protecting a metal object or structure from
corrosion by the installation of a sacrificial anode (q.v.) or impressed current system
that makes the protected object a cathode (q.v.) and thus resistant to corrosion.
criteria 30, 49, 74, 101, 143, 154, 178, 203, 205, 241
cathodic protection anode
A cathodic protection anode for steel in concrete can
be a conductive paint or other conductive material that will adhere to concrete,
or a metal mesh or other conductive material that can be embedded in a concrete
overlay on the surface or in chases or holes cut in the concrete of the structure to
be protected. Anodes may be impressed current or galvanic.
cathodic protection
anode (see anode)
cement (paste)
Portland cement is a mixture of alumina, silica, lime, iron oxide
and magnesia ground to a fine powder, burned in a kiln and ground again.
Cement paste is the binding agent for mortar and (Portland cement) concrete
after hydration.
chloride
The negative ion (q.v.) in salt (sodium chloride), found in sea salt,
deicing salt and calcium chloride admixture for concrete. Chloride ions promote
corrosion of steel in concrete but are not used up by the process so they can
concentrate and accelerate corrosion.
chloroaluminates
Chemical compounds formed in concrete when chlorides
combine with the tricalcium aluminates (C3A) in the hardened cement paste.
These chlorides are no longer available to cause corrosion. Sulphate resisting
cements have a low C3A content and are more prone to chloride induced
corrosion than normal Portland cement based concretes.
chloroaluminates (see also binding) 29, 58, 229
coating 100, 123–128, 137, 156, 159, 206, 260
concrete
Ordinary Portland cement concrete is a mixture of cement (q.v.), fine
and coarse aggregates and water. The water reacts with the cement to bind the
aggregates together.
concrete 1, 244, 263
272
Glossary and index
 

corrosion
The process by which a refined metal reverts back to its natural state
by an oxidation reaction with the non-metallic environment (e.g. oxygen and
water).
corrosion
localised 10, 12–13, 51, 74, 78, 108–9, 128, 250–251
rate of 17, 27–28, 35, 42, 45–46, 50–51, 63, 64, 67, 68, 70–83, 96–67,
103–111, 128–131, 133–135, 143, 178, 195, 197, 215, 218, 229, 233–238,
250, 253, 257
theory 6–15
cost
of cathodic protection 150, 152–153, 155, 158, 161, 163, 165, 169, 171, 172,
173, 176–177, 219, 258
of corrosion 1–3
of electrochemical chloride extraction 202–203, 221
of inspection 36, 41, 95, 104
life cycle 104, 135, 208–209, 212–14, 222, 224, 227–241, 248, 252–253, 260,
263–265
of realkalisation 198, 216
of repair 33, 209–213, 115, 118, 123, 128, 130 209, 212–14
cover 35, 42–44, 98, 235, 241, 242, 243, 244
depth 20, 55, 199
meter 35, 42–44
deicing 1, 3, 20, 21, 26, 27, 38, 79, 104, 121, 150–151, 244, 246, 248
delamination 28, 33, 35–43, 80, 85–92, 104, 113–114, 117–118, 128–130, 156,
163, 170, 215, 218, 237–238, 251
diffusion 18, 19, 20, 21, 57, 60, 63, 79, 83, 84, 125, 198, 224, 227, 228, 230,
231, 232, 233, 238, 240, 247, 253
electrochemical chloride extraction 4, 51, 54, 58, 59, 140, 190, 191, 199–200,
202, 213, 218, 257
criteria 193–195
embedded reference electrode 140, 178
epoxy coated reinforcement (see fusion bonded epoxy coated reinforcement)
extraction 204, 206, 225
fusion bonded epoxy coated reinforcement 96–98, 247
galvanic action
The consequence of coupling together two dissimilar metals in a
solution. The most active one will become an anode and corrode. A current will
pass between them. Galvanic action drives electric batteries (single cells). It is
used to stop corrosion by applying zinc to steel (galvanizing), and in galvanic
(sacrificial anode) cathodic protection.
galvanic action 45, 70, 81, 105, 107–108
galvanic cathodic protection
A system of cathodic protection that uses a more
easily corroded metal such as zinc, aluminium or magnesium to protect a steel
object from corrosion. No power supply is required, but the anode (q.v.) is
consumed.
galvanic cathodic protection 143–151
Glossary and index
273
 

half cell (see reference electrode)
impressed current cathodic protection
A method of cathodic protection that uses
a power supply and an inert (or controlled consumption) anode (q.v.) to protect
a metallic object or structure by making it the cathode (q.v.).
impressed current 26, 72, 120, 140, 141, 143, 144, 151, 152, 153, 159, 163, 167,
169, 171, 172, 173, 187, 188, 189, 190, 201, 202, 203, 208, 212, 219, 220,
221, 264
incipient anode
An area of steel in a corroding structure that was originally cathodic
due to the action of a local anode (q.v.). When the local anode is treated by patch
repairing, the incipient anode is no longer protected and starts to corrode.
incipient anode 120–122, 130, 183, 201, 215, 218
infra-red (see thermography)
ion
An atom or molecule with electrons added or subtracted. Ionic compounds
like salt (sodium chloride) are composed of balanced ions (NaClNa  Cl).
Some ions are soluble (e.g. Na, Cl, Fe2) which can be important for transport
through concrete.
ionic current
An electric current that flows as ions through an aqueous medium
(e.g. concrete pore water), as opposed to an electronic flow of electrons through
a metal conductor.
ionic current 8, 12, 48, 64, 70, 152, 154, 180, 183, 239, 251
iR drop
Electrical current passing through a solution of finite resistance generates
a voltage. This is superimposed on the half cell (q.v.) potential and must be
subtracted to get accurate readings in linear polarization and in cathodic
protection. This is most easily done by ‘instant off’ measurements of potentials
taken within a few seconds of switching off the current.
iR drop 67, 71, 180
macrocell 12, 13, 24, 26, 70, 81, 82, 83, 105, 175, 180, 185
membrane 126
microcell 25, 82
monitoring 99, 100, 101, 104–111, 137, 139, 141, 174, 185
osmosis 200, 205
overlay 128–130, 176, 210, 211
oxidation
The process of removing electrons from an atom or ion. The process:
Fe →Fe2  2e
Fe2 →Fe3  e
is the oxidation of iron to its ferrous (Fe2) and ferric (Fe3) oxidation
state. Oxidation is done by an oxidizing agent, of which oxygen is only one
of many.
passivation The process by which steel in concrete is protected from corrosion by
the formation of a passive layer due to the highly alkaline environment created
by the pore water. The passive layer is a thin, dense layer or iron oxides and
hydroxides with some mineral content, that is initially formed as bare steel is
exposed to oxygen and water, but then protects the steel from further corrosion
274
Glossary and index
 

as it is too dense to allow the water and oxygen to reach the steel and continue
the oxidation process.
passivation, passivity 6, 7, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 45, 50, 56, 58, 59, 61,
68, 69, 75, 78, 81, 113, 124, 142, 175, 179, 194, 195, 197, 218, 224, 233
pH
A measure of acidity and alkalinity based on the fact that the concentration
of hydrogen ions [H~} (acidity) times hydroxyl ions [0H1 (alkalinity) is 10W’
moles/i in aqueous solutions:
i.e. a strong acid has pH1 (or less), a strong alkali has pH  14 (or more), a
neutral solution has pH  7. Concrete has a pH of 12 to 13. Steel corrodes at
pH 10 to 11.
pH 6, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 29, 50, 51, 56, 57, 58, 110, 113, 143, 144, 191,
196, 198, 199, 205
phenolphthalein 17, 18, 55, 56, 57, 199
pitting 10, 12–13, 51, 74, 78, 108–109, 128, 250–251
pore (water)
Concrete contains microscopic pores. These contain alkaline oxides
and hydroxides of sodium, potassium and calcium. Water will move in and out
of the concrete saturating, part filling and drying out the pores according to the
external environments. The alkaline pore water sustains the passive layer if not
attacked by carbonation or chlorides (q.v.).
pore 16, 59, 138
water 59
post-tensioning
is a form of prestressing concrete by casting ducts and/or anchors
into the concrete. After the concrete has hardened and developed sufficient
strength, cables in the ducts or attached to the anchors are tensioned and secured
to the anchors. Ducts may be filled with cement grout (bonded) or with
protective grease (unbonded). The grouting process is vital to the corrosion
protection of the post-tensioning cables.
potential 47, 52, 53, 242
Pourbaix (Diagram) 143, 144, 175, 206
power supply (cathodic protection) 141 (see also transform rectifier)
prestressing
The process of applying compressive stress to concrete using steel rods,
wires or bars to make stronger elements than by conventional reinforcement. There
are two forms of prestressing; pretensioned and post-tensioned. Pretensioned
structures and elements are made by applying a load to the steel, casting the
concrete around it and then, when it has hardened and developed sufficient
strength, releasing the load on the steel which is then taken up by the concrete.
prestress 181
cathodic protection of electrochemical 87
chloride extraction of 195
failures 26, 97
pH  pOH  14
pH   log[H]
[H] 	 [OH]  1 	 1014
Glossary and index
275
 

radiography 93, 97
realkalization 190–199, 202, 204, 207, 213, 214, 216, 224, 225
reduction
Chemically this is the reverse of oxidation (q.v.). The incorporation of
electrons into a nonmetal oxidizing agent when a metal is oxidized. When
oxygen (O2) oxidizes iron (Fe) to Fe2 it receives the electrons that the iron gives
up and is itself reduced:
are reduction reactions.
reference electrode
Usually, a pure metal in a solution of (fixed) concentration.
The half reaction of the metal ions dissolving and reprecipitating creates a steady
potential when linked to another half cell. Two half cells make an
electrochemical cell that can be a model for corrosion or be used to generate
electricity (a single cell, often called a battery). Reference half cells are connected
to reinforcing steel to measure ‘corrosion potentials’ that show the corrosion
condition of the steel in the concrete.
reference electrode 14, 15, 33, 36, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 65, 68,
71, 72, 74, 75, 78, 96, 103, 104, 105, 106, 110, 111, 143, 155, 166, 174, 178,
179, 180, 253, 257
reinforced concrete
Concrete containing a network of reinforcing steel bars to
make a composite material that is strong in tension as well as in compression.
Smaller volumes of material can therefore be used to make beams, bridge spans,
etc. compared with unreinforced concrete, brick or masonry.
remote monitoring 103–111, 177
repair cost 209
resistivity 30, 35, 63–69, 74, 99, 101, 102, 109, 197, 242
resistivity probe 109–110
rust
The corrosion product of iron and steel in normal atmospheric conditions.
Chemically it is hydrated ferric oxide Fe2O3·H2O. It has a volume several times
that of the iron that was consumed to produce it.
rust 10, 234
sacrificial anode cathodic protection (see galvanic cathodic protection)
service life 243 (see also cost)
SHRP
The Strategic Highway Research Program. A $150 million research effort
that spent about $10 million on corrosion of reinforced concrete bridges
suffering from chloride induced corrosion. SHRP produced about 40 reports
covering assessment, repair and rehabilitation methodology. All reports can be
downloaded from the www.trb.org website
sprayed concrete 130
steel
An alloy of iron with up to 1.7% carbon to enhance its physical properties.
stray current 10–12, 48, 50, 54, 148, 184–185, 204, 246
2e  H2O 
1
2O2→2OH
O2  4e→2O2
276
Glossary and index
 

thermography 98
transformer rectifier 141, 153–155, 173–175 186
tunnel 105, 106, 248, 249, 252, 261
visual survey 36–38
waterproofing membrane 126, 127, 221, 253, 254
zinc 13, 148, 159, 161, 168, 183, 203, 204
zones (cathodic protection) 149, 160, 66, 167, 175, 177, 181, 184–186
Glossary and index
277
 

