Cost-Benefit Analysis
Concepts and Practice
Boardman   Greenberg   Vining   Weimer
Fourth Edition

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Concepts and Practice
Boardman   Greenberg   Vining   Weimer
Fourth Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-02191-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-02191-1

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
1. Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
1
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
2. Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
27
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
3. Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
53
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
4. Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
81
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
5. Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
119
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
6. Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
137
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
7. Dealing with Uncertainty: Expected Values, Sensitivity Analysis, and the Value of Information
171
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
8. Option Price and Option Value
207
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
9. Existence Value
231
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
10. The Social Discount Rate
247
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
11. Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
285
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
12. Valuing Impacts From Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi-Experiments
301
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
13. Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
335
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer

II
14. Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
357
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
15. Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
389
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
16. Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
427
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
17. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
449
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
18. Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
475
Anthony Boardman/David Greenberg/Aidan Vining/David Weimer
493
Index

Introduction to Cost-Benefit
Analysis
In the Affair of so much Importance to you, wherein you ask my Advice, I cannot
for want of sufficient Premises, advise you what to determine, but if you please I
will tell you how. When those difficult Cases occur, they are difficult, chiefly
because while we have them under Consideration, all the Reasons pro and con are
not present to the Mind at the same time;but sometimes one Set present themselves,
and at other times another, the first being out of Sight. Hence the various Purposes
or Inclinations that alternately prevail, and the Uncertainty that perplexes us.
To get over this, my Way is, to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two
Columns; writing over the one Pro, and over the other Con. Then during three
or four Days Consideration, I put down under the different Heads short Hints
of the different Motives, that at different Times occur to me, for or against the
Measure. When I have thus got them all together in one View, I endeavor to
estimate their respective Weights; and where I find two, one on each side, that
seem equal, I strike them both out. If I find a Reason pro equal to some two
Reasons con, I strike out the three. If I judge some two Reasons con, equal to
some three Reasons pro, I strike out the five; and thus proceeding I find at
length where the Balance lies; and if after a Day or two of farther consideration,
nothing new that is of Importance occurs on either side, I come to a
Determination accordingly. And, tho’ the Weight of Reasons cannot be taken
with the Precision of Algebraic Quantities, yet, when each is thus considered,
separately and comparatively, and the whole lies before me, I think I can judge
better, and am less liable to make a rash Step; and in fact I have found great
Advantage from this kind of Equation, in what may be called Moral or
Prudential Algebra.
—B. FRANKLIN, LONDON, SEPTEMBER 19, 17721
INDIVIDUAL VERSUS SOCIAL COSTS AND BENEFITS
Benjamin Franklin’s advice about how to make a decision illustrates many of the im-
portant features of cost-benefit analysis (CBA).These include a systematic cataloguing
of impacts as benefits (pros) and costs (cons), valuing in dollars (assigning weights),
Form Chapter 1 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
1

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
and then determining the net benefits of the proposal relative to the status quo (net
benefits equal benefits minus costs).
When we as individuals talk of costs and benefits, we naturally tend to consider
only our own costs and benefits, generally choosing among alternative courses of
action according to whichever has the largest individual net benefits. Similarly, in evalu-
ating various investment alternatives, a firm tends to consider only those costs (expen-
ditures) and benefits (revenues) that accrue to it. In CBA we try to consider all of the
costs and benefits to society as a whole, that is, the social costs and the social benefits.
For this reason, some experts refer to CBA as social cost-benefit analysis.
CBA is a policy assessment method that quantifies in monetary terms the value of
all consequences of a policy to all members of society.Throughout this book we use the
terms policy and project interchangeably. More generally, CBA applies to policies, pro-
grams, projects, regulations, demonstrations, and other government interventions. The
aggregate value of a policy is measured by its net social benefits, sometimes simply re-
ferred to as the net benefits. The net social benefits, NSB, equal the social benefits, B,
minus the social costs, C:
(1)
Stated at this level of abstraction, it is unlikely that many people would disagree
with doing CBA. In practice, however, there are two types of disagreements. First, so-
cial critics, including some political economists, philosophers, libertarians, and social-
ists, have disputed the fundamental utilitarian assumptions of CBA that the sum of
individual utilities should be maximized and that it is possible to trade off utility gains
for some against utility losses for others. These critics are not prepared to make trade-
offs between one person’s benefits and another person’s costs. Second, participants in
the public policy-making process (analysts, bureaucrats, and politicians) may disagree
about such practical issues as what impacts will actually occur over time, how to mone-
tize (attach a dollar value to them), and how to make trade-offs between the present
and the future.
In this chapter we provide a nontechnical but reasonably comprehensive overview
of CBA. Although we introduce a number of key concepts, we do so informally.
Therefore, this chapter is best read without great concern about definitions and techni-
cal details.
TYPES OF CBA ANALYSES AND THEIR PURPOSES
The broad purpose of CBA is to help social decision making and to make it more
rational. More specifically, the objective is to have more efficient allocation of society’s
resources.Where markets work well, individual self-interest leads to an efficient allo-
cation of resources. Consequently, government analysts and politicians bear the bur-
den of providing a rationale for any governmental interference with private choice.
Economists lump these rationales under the general heading of market failures.
Where markets fail, there is a prima facie rationale for government intervention.
However, and this is important to emphasize, it is no more than that. One must be
NSB = B - C
2

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
able to demonstrate the superior efficiency of a particular intervention relative to
the alternatives, including the status quo. For this purpose, analysts use CBA.
There are two major types of cost-benefit analysis. Ex ante CBA, which is just
standard CBA as the term is commonly used, is conducted while a project or policy is
under consideration, before it is started or implemented. Ex ante CBA assists in the
decision about whether resources should be allocated by government to a specific
project or policy or not. Thus, its contribution to public policy decision making is di-
rect, immediate, and bureau-specific. Ex post CBA is conducted at the end of a pro-
ject. At this time, all of the costs are “sunk” in the sense that they have already been
used up to do the project. The value of ex post analyses is broader but less immediate
as they provide information not only about the particular intervention but also about
the “class” of such interventions. In other words, they contribute to “learning” by gov-
ernment managers, politicians, and academics about whether particular classes of pro-
jects are worthwhile.
Some CBA studies are performed during the course of the life of a project, that
is, in medias res. Like ex ante analyses, in medias res analyses have the potential of di-
rectly influencing a decision—whether or not to continue the project. They also pro-
vide information that can be used to predict costs and benefits in future ex ante
analyses.
There is also a fourth type of CBA—one that compares an ex ante CBA with an
ex post (or in medias res) CBA of the same project. This comparative type of CBA is
most useful to policy makers for learning about the efficacy of CBA as a decision-
making and evaluative tool. Unfortunately, there are only a few disinterested pub-
lished examples of this type of CBA. The scarceness of this type of CBA is not as
surprising as it may appear because there is relatively little demand for ex post or in
medias res CBAs and, even if one of these studies is done, there may not be an ex ante
CBA to compare it to.
It is useful to elaborate on the uses of these four types of CBAs. Table 1 summa-
rizes the important ways that these four types of cost-benefit analyses aid government
decision making.
Project-Specific Decision Making
Ex ante analysis is most useful for deciding whether resources should be allocated to a
particular project or program that is under consideration. An in medias res analysis of
an ongoing project can also be used for decision-making purposes where it is poten-
tially feasible to shift resources to alternative uses.Although such an analysis may lead
to discontinuation of service-orientated programs (e.g., government-funded training
programs), it will rarely lead to termination of a physical investment project nearing
completion, such as a dam or bridge, because a large share of the costs will likely have
been incurred, and benefits subsequent to the analysis will usually exceed the remaining
costs. However, it can happen. For example, a Canadian Environmental Assessment
Panel recommended the decommissioning of a just-completed dam on the basis of an
in medias res analysis which showed that, with use, future environmental costs would
exceed future benefits.2 Because ex post analysis is conducted at the end of the project,
3

TABLE 1
Value of Different Classes of CBA
Class of Analysis
Value
Ex Ante
In Medias Res
Ex Post
Ex Ante/Ex 
Post or Ex Ante/
In Medias Res
Comparison
Resource 
allocation 
decision for 
this project.
Yes—helps 
to select best
project or make
“go” versus
“no-go”
decisions, if 
accurate.
If low sunk 
costs, can still 
shift resources.
If high sunk 
costs, usually 
recommends 
continuation.
Too late—the
project is over.
Same as in 
medias res
or ex post
analysis.
Learning about
actual value of
specific project.
Poor estimate—
high uncertainty
about future
benefits and
costs.
Better—reduced 
uncertainty.
Excellent—
although some 
errors may 
remain. May 
have to wait 
long for study.
Same as in 
medias res
or ex post
analysis.
Contributing 
to learning
about actual
value of similar 
projects.
Unlikely to 
add much.
Good—contribution
increases as 
performed later.
Need to adjust 
for uniqueness.
Very useful—
although may 
be some errors 
and need to 
adjust for 
uniqueness. May 
have to wait 
long for project 
completion.
Same as in 
medias res
or ex post
analysis.
Learning 
about omission,
forecasting,
measurement 
and evaluation 
errors in CBA.
No
No
No
Yes, provides 
information 
about these 
errors and 
about the 
accuracy of 
CBA for 
similar projects.
Source: Anthony E. Boardman,Wendy L. Mallery, and Aidan R.Vining,“Learning from Ex Ante/Ex Post
Cost-Benefit Comparisons:The Coquihalla Highway Example,” Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 28(2),
1994, 69–84,Table 1, p. 71. Reprinted with kind permission from Elsevier Science Ltd.,The Boulevard,
Langford Lane, Kidlington OX5 1GB, UK.
Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
it is obviously too late to reverse resource allocation decisions with respect to that par-
ticular project.
Learning about the Net Social Benefits of a Specific Project
In the early stages of a project there is considerable uncertainty about its actual impacts
and, consequently, about the true net social benefits. As time goes by, more is known
about the impacts, and CBA studies conducted later can estimate the net benefits of the
4

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
project more accurately. In general, ex post studies are more accurate than in medias res
studies, which in turn are more accurate than ex ante studies.
Learning about the Potential Benefits of Similar Projects
Ex post analyses provide information not only about a particular policy intervention
but, more importantly, about future similar interventions as well. Ex post analyses (and
in medias res analyses) potentially contribute to learning by political and bureaucratic
decision makers, as well as policy researchers, about whether particular kinds of pro-
jects are worthwhile.This potential depends crucially on the extent to which the partic-
ular project being assessed is being replicated or can serve as a generic model for other
projects.3 CBAs of experiments involving the efficacy of new surgical procedures or
new pharmaceutical products usually can be generalized to larger populations. Lessons
from other experiments, however, may not be as easily generalized. For example, if the
proposed intervention is several orders of magnitude bigger than the experiment,
there may be unknown nonlinear scale effects. Also, if the proposed program has a
more extended time frame than the experiment, behavioral factors may affect costs or
benefits unpredictably.
Learning about the Efficacy of CBA
Comparison of an ex ante study with either an in medias res or an ex post analysis is
most useful for learning about the value of CBA itself. Most importantly, a comparison
CBA provides information about the accuracy of the earlier ex ante CBA which, in
turn, provides guidance about the accuracy of future ex ante analyses. One study has as-
sessed the accuracy of U.S. regulatory cost estimates (although not of benefits) and
found that total costs tend to be overestimated.4 Information about the predictive abil-
ity of CBA is useful for decision-making purposes. Also, comparison studies help ana-
lysts understand the reasons for any divergence between predicted and actual benefits
or costs. Understanding the reasons for these errors helps to reduce them in the future.
THE BASIC STEPS OF CBA: COQUIHALLA HIGHWAY EXAMPLE
CBA may look intimidating and complex. To help make the process of conducting a
CBA more manageable, we break it down into nine basic steps, which are listed in
Table 2. We describe and illustrate these steps using a relatively straightforward
example—the construction of a new highway. For each step, we also point out some
practical difficulties.
Imagine that in 1986 a cost-benefit analyst, who works for the Province of British
Columbia, Canada, is asked to perform a CBA of a proposed highway between the
town of Hope in the south-central part of the Province and Merritt, which is more or
less due north of Hope. This highway would be called the Coquihalla Highway. The
5

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 3
Coquihalla Highway CBA (1986 $ Million)
No Tolls
With Tolls
A 
Global
Perspective
B 
Provincial
Perspective
C 
Global
Perspective
D 
Provincial
Perspective
Project Benefits:
Time and Operating Cost Savings
389.8
292.3
290.4
217.8
Horizon Value of Highway
53.3
53.3
53.3
53.3
Safety Benefits (Lives)
36.0
27.0
25.2
18.9
Alternative Routes Benefits
14.6
10.9
9.4
7.1
Toll Revenues
—
—
—
37.4
New Users
0.8
0.6
0.3
0.2
Total Benefits
494.5
384.1
378.6
334.7
Project Costs:
Construction
338.1
338.1
338.1
338.1
Maintenance
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.6
Toll Collection
—
—
8.4
8.4
Toll Booth Construction
—
—
0.3
0.3
Total Costs
345.7
345.7
354.4
354.4
Net Social Benefits
148.8
38.4
24.2
–19.7
Source: Adapted from Anthony Boardman,Aidan Vining, and W. G.Waters II,“Costs and Benefits through
Bureaucratic Lenses: Example of a Highway Project,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(3)
1993, 532–555,Table 1, p. 537.
analyst’s CBA is presented in Table 3.5 How did the analyst get these results? What
were the difficulties? We will go through each of the nine steps.
1. Specify the set of alternative projects.
Step 1 requires the analyst to specify the set
of alternative projects.In this example,the provincial government required the analyst to
consider only two alternative four-lane highways, one with tolls and one without. The
provincial department of transportation decided that the toll, if applied, would be $40 for
large trucks and $8 for cars.Thus,the analyst has a tractable set of alternatives to analyze.
TABLE 2
The Major Steps in CBA
1. Specify the set of alternative projects.
2. Decide whose benefits and costs count (standing).
3. Identify the impact categories, catalogue them, and select measurement indicators.
4. Predict the impacts quantitatively over the life of the project.
5. Monetize (attach dollar values to) all impacts.
6. Discount benefits and costs to obtain present values.
7. Compute the net present value of each alternative.
8. Perform sensitivity analysis.
9. Make a recommendation.
6

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
In practice, however, there are often difficulties even at this stage. For many pro-
jects, including this one, the number of potential alternatives is huge. This highway
could vary on many dimensions including the following:
Road surface: It could be surfaced in bitumen or concrete.
Routing: It could take different routes.
Size: It could have two, three, four, or six lanes.
Tolls: The tolls could be higher or lower.
Wild animal friendliness: The highway could be built with or without “elk tunnels.”
Timing: It could be delayed until a later date.
Changing the highway on just a few these dimensions would greatly increase the number
of alternatives. For example, with four dimensions, each with three possible values, there
would be 81 alternatives! Neither decision makers nor analysts can cognitively handle
comparisons among such a large number of alternatives. Resource and cognitive con-
straints mean that analysts typically analyze only a few (less than six) alternatives.6
CBA compares the net social benefits of investing resources in one or more partic-
ular potential projects with the net social benefits of a project that would be displaced
if the project(s) under evaluation were to proceed.The displaced project is often called
the counterfactual. Usually, the counterfactual is the status quo, which means there is
no change in government policy (i.e., in this case, no new highway). In Table 3 the
analyst computes the benefits, costs, and net social benefits if the highway were built
(with or without tolls) relative to the benefits, costs, and net social benefits if the high-
way is not built (the status quo). Thus, one can interpret these benefits, costs, and net
benefits as incremental amounts.
Sometimes the status quo is not a viable alternative. If a project would displace a
specific alternative, then it should be evaluated relative to the specific displaced alterna-
tive. Thus, if government has committed resources to either a highway project or a rail
project, and there is no possibility of maintaining the status quo, then the highway pro-
ject should be compared with the rail project, not the status quo.
This CBA example pertains to a specific proposed highway. There is no attempt to
compare this highway project to alternative highway projects in British Columbia, al-
though one could do so.Rarely does the analyst compare a highway project to completely
different types of projects,such as health care,antipoverty,or national defense projects.As
a practical matter, full optimization is impossible. The limited nature of the comparisons
sometimes frustrates politicians and decision makers who imagine that CBA is a deus ex
machina that will rank all policy alternatives. On the other hand, the weight of CBA evi-
dence can and does help in making broad social choices across policy areas.
2. Decide whose benefits and costs count (standing).
Next, the analyst must decide
who has standing; that is, whose benefits and costs should be included. In this example,
the analyst’s superiors in the provincial government wanted the CBA to be done from
the provincial perspective, but asked the analyst to also take a global perspective. The
provincial perspective measures only the benefits and costs that affect British
Columbian residents, including costs and benefits borne by the British Columbian gov-
ernment. The global perspective includes the benefits and costs that affect everyone,
7

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
irrespective of where they reside. Thus, it includes benefits and costs to Americans,
Albertans, and even tourists from the United Kingdom. Combining these two perspec-
tives on standing with the no-tolls and with-tolls alternatives gives the four columns in
Table 3 labeled A through D.
The issue of standing is sometimes contentious.While federal governments usually
take only national costs and benefits into account, critics argue that many issues should
be analyzed from a global perspective. Environmental issues that fall into this category
include ozone depletion, global climate change, and acid rain. At the other extreme,
local governments typically want to consider only benefits and costs to local residents
and to ignore costs and benefits that occur in adjacent municipalities or are borne by
higher levels of government. Our highway example deals with this issue by analyzing
costs and benefits from both the global and the British Columbian perspectives.
3. Identify the impact categories, catalogue them, and select measurement indicators.
Step 3 requires the analyst to identify the physical impact categories of the proposed
alternatives, catalogue them as benefits or costs, and specify the measurement indicator
of each impact category. We use the term impacts broadly to include both inputs (re-
quired resources) and outputs. For this proposed highway, the anticipated benefit im-
pact categories are time saved and reduced vehicle operating costs for travelers on the
new highway (“Time and Operating Cost Savings” in Table 3); the value of the highway
at the end of the discounting period of 20 years (“Horizon Value of Highway”); acci-
dents avoided (including lives saved) due to drivers switching to a shorter, safer new
highway (“Safety Benefits”); reduced congestion on alternative routes—the old road
(“Alternative Routes Benefits”); revenues collected from tolls (“Toll Revenues”); and
benefits accruing to new travelers (“New Users”). The cost impact categories are con-
struction costs (“Construction”), additional maintenance and snow removal
(“Maintenance”), toll collection (“Toll Collection”), and toll booth construction and
maintenance (“Toll Booth Construction”).
Although this list of impact categories appears comprehensive, current critics might
argue that some relevant impacts were omitted. At the time of the analysis, health im-
pacts from automobile emissions, impacts on the elk population and other wildlife, and
changes in scenic beauty were not considered. Also, the cost of the land was excluded.
From a CBA perspective, analysts are interested only in project impacts that affect
the utility of individuals with standing. Impacts that do not have any value to human
beings are not counted. (The caveat is that this applies only where human beings have
the relevant knowledge and information to make rational valuations.) Politicians often
state the purported impacts of projects in very general terms. For example, they might
say that a project will promote “community capacity building.” Similarly, politicians
have a strong tendency to regard “growth” and “regional development” as beneficial
impacts. CBA requires analysts to identify explicitly the ways in which the project
would make some individuals better off through, for example, improved skills, better
education, or higher incomes. Of course, analysts should also include the negative envi-
ronmental and congestion impacts of growth.
Put another way, in order to treat something as an impact, we have to know there is
a cause-and-effect relationship between some physical outcome of the project and the
utility of human beings with standing. For some impacts, this relationship is so obvious
8

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
that we do not think about it explicitly. For example, we do not question the existence of
a causal relationship between motor vehicle usage and motor vehicle accidents.For other
impacts, however, the causal relationships may not be so obvious.What, if any, is the im-
pact of exhaust fumes from additional vehicle usage on residents’ morbidity and mortal-
ity? How is this offset by fewer airplane flights? Demonstrating such cause-and-effect
relationships often requires an extensive review of scientific and social science research.
Sometimes the evidence may be ambiguous. For example, controversy surrounds the
effect of chlorinated organic compounds in bleached pulp mill effluent on wildlife.
Although a Swedish study found such a link, a later Canadian study found none.7
Analysts should be on the lookout for impacts that different groups of people view
in opposite ways. Consider, for example, flooded land. Residents of a flood plain gen-
erally view floods as a cost because they damage homes, while duck hunters regard
them as a benefit because they attract ducks. Even though opposing valuations of the
same impact could be aggregated in one category, it is usually more useful to have two
impact categories—one for damaged homes and another for recreation benefits.
Specification of impact measurement indicators usually occurs at the same time as
specification of the impact categories. There are no particular difficulties in specifying
measurement indicators of each impact in this illustration. For example, the number of
lives saved per year, the number of person-hours of travel time saved, and the dollar
value of gasoline saved are reasonably intuitive indicators. If environmental impacts
had been included, then the choice of indicator would have not been so straightfor-
ward. For example, the analyst might have to decide whether to use tons of various pol-
lutants or the resultant health effects (e.g., changes in mortality or morbidity).
The choice of measurement indicator depends on data availability and ease of mone-
tization. For example, an analyst may wish to measure the number of crimes avoided due
to a policy intervention but may not have any way to estimate this impact. However, the
analyst may have access to changes in arrest rates or changes in conviction rates and may
be able to use one or both of these surrogates to estimate changes in crime.8 Bear in mind,
however, that all surrogate indicators involve some loss of information. For example, the
conviction rate might be increasing while there is no change in the actual crime rate.
4. Predict the impacts quantitatively over the life of the project.
The proposed high-
way project, like almost all projects, has impacts that extend over time.The fourth task
is to quantify all impacts in each time period. The analyst must make predictions for
the no-tolls and with-tolls alternatives, for each year, and for each category of driver
(trucks, passenger cars on business, passenger cars on vacation) about
• the number of vehicle-trips on the new highway,
• the number of vehicle-trips on the old roads, and
• the proportion of travelers from British Columbia.
With these estimates, knowing the highway is 195 kilometers long and with other infor-
mation, the analyst can estimate
• the total vehicle operating costs that users save,
• the number of accidents avoided, and
• the number of lives saved.
9

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
For example, the analyst estimated the new highway would save 6.5 lives each year:
Shorter distance:
Safer (4-lane versus 2-lane):
= 3.0 lives/year
313 vkm * 0.027 lives lost per vkm * 0.33
= 3.5 lives/year
130 vkm * 0.027 lives lost per vkm
Total lives saved9
 6.5 lives/year
Lives would be saved for two reasons. First, the new highway will be shorter than
existing alternative routes. It is expected that travelers will avoid 130 million vehicle-
kilometers (vkm) of driving each year, and evidence suggests that, on average, there
are 0.027 deaths per million vehicle-kilometers.The shorter distance is expected, there-
fore, to save 3.5 lives per year on the basis of less distance driven. The new highway is
also predicted to be safer per kilometer driven. It is expected that 313 million vehicle-
kilometers will be driven each year on the new highway. Based on previous traffic
engineering evidence, the analyst estimated that the new highway would lower the
fatal accident rate by one-third. Consequently, the new highway is expected to save
3.0 lives per year due to being safer. Combining the two components suggests 6.5 lives
will be saved each year.
In practice, predicting impacts is very important and very difficult! Prediction is es-
pecially difficult where projects are unique, have long time horizons, or relationships
among variables are complex. Many of the realities associated with doing steps 3 and 4
are brilliantly summarized by Kenneth Boulding’s poem on dam building in the Third
World, presented in Exhibit 1. Many of his points deal with the omission of impact cat-
egories due to misunderstanding or ignorance of cause-and-effect relationships and to
prediction errors. He also makes points about the distribution of costs and benefits,
which we discuss later.
5. Monetize (attach dollar values to) all impacts.
The analyst next has to monetize
each of the impacts.To monetize means to value in dollars. In the highway example, the
analyst has to monetize each unit of time saved, lives saved, and accidents avoided. For
this, the analyst needs the monetary value of an hour saved by each type of traveler, the
value of a statistical life saved, and the value of an avoided accident. Ideally, these esti-
mates should be specific to British Columbia in 1986. Some of the dollar values used in
this CBA were
• leisure time saved per vehicle (25 percent of gross wage times the average num-
ber of passengers) 
per vehicle-hour,
• business time saved per vehicle 
per vehicle-hour,
• truck drivers’ time saved per vehicle 
per vehicle-hour, and
• value of a life saved 
per life.
These estimates were based on studies conducted prior to 1986. Research over the last
twenty years suggests the value of a statistical life saved is much higher.
= $500,000
= $14
= $12
= $6.68
10

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
A BALLAD OF ECOLOGICAL AWARENESS
The cost of building dams is always underestimated,
There’s erosion  of the delta that the river has created,
There’s fertile soil below the dam that’s likely to be looted,
And the tangled  mat of forest that has got to be uprooted.
There’s the breaking up of cultures with old haunts’ and habits’ loss,
There’s the education programme that just doesn’t come across,
And the wasted fruits of progress  that are seldom much enjoyed 
By expelled subsistence farmers who are urban unemployed.
There’s disappointing yield of fish, beyond the first explosion;
There’s silting up, and drawing down, and watershed erosion.
Above the dam the water’s lost by sheer evaporation;
Below, the river scours, and suffers dangerous alteration.
For engineers, however good, are likely to be guilty
Of quietly forgetting that a river can be silty,
While the irrigation people too are frequently forgetting
That water poured upon the land is likely to be wetting.
Then the water in the lake, and what the lake releases,
Is crawling with infected snails and water-borne diseases.
There’s a hideous locust breeding ground when water level’s low,
And a million ecologic facts we really do not know.
There are benefits, of course, which may be countable, but which
Have a tendency to fall into the pockets of the rich,
While the costs are apt to fall upon the shoulders of the poor.
So cost-benefit analysis is nearly always sure
To justify the building of a solid concrete fact,
While the Ecologic Truth is left behind in the Abstract.
—KENNETH E. BOULDING
Reprinted with the kind permission of Mrs. Boulding.
EXHIBIT 1
Sometimes, the most intuitively important impacts are difficult to value in mone-
tary terms. Valuing environmental impacts is especially contentious. In CBA, the
value of an output is typically measured in terms of “willingness-to-pay.”Where mar-
kets exist and work well, willingness to pay can be determined from the appropriate
market demand curve. Naturally, problems arise where markets do not exist or do
not work well. Obtaining values for such impact categories can be a life’s work.
Scholars have spent many person-years trying to determine the appropriate value of
a statistical life saved. In practice, most CBA analysts do not reinvent these wheels but
11

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
instead draw upon previous research: they use “plug in” values whenever possible.
Although catalogues of impact values are not comprehensive, considerable progress
has been made in this regard.
If no person is willing to pay for some impact, then that impact would have zero
value in a CBA. For example, if construction of a dam would lead to the extermination
of a species of small fish, but no one with standing is willing to pay a positive amount to
save that species, then the extermination of this fish would have a value of zero in a
CBA of the dam.
Some government agencies and critics of CBA are unwilling to attach a monetary
value to life or to some other impact.This forces them to use an alternative method of
analysis, such as cost-effectiveness analysis or multigoal analysis.
6. Discount benefits and costs to obtain present values.
For a project that has im-
pacts that occur over years, we need a way to aggregate the benefits and costs that
arise in different years. In CBA, future benefits and costs are discounted relative to
present benefits and costs in order to obtain their present values (PV). The need to
discount arises for two main reasons. First, there is an opportunity cost to the re-
sources used in a project. Second, most people prefer to consume now rather than
later. Discounting has nothing to do with inflation per se, although inflation must be
taken into account.
A cost or benefit that occurs in year t is converted to its present value by dividing
it by 
where s is the social discount rate. Suppose a project has a life of n years
and let 
and 
denote the benefits and costs in year t, respectively. The present
value of the benefits, PV(B), and the present value of the costs, PV(C), of the project
are, respectively:
(2)
(3)
In this highway example the analyst used a real (inflation-adjusted) social dis-
count rate of 7.5 percent. The choice of the appropriate social discount rate is con-
tentious and is, therefore, a good candidate for sensitivity analysis. For government
analysts, the discount rate is usually mandated by a government agency with author-
ity (e.g., the Office of Management and Budget, or the General Accountability
Office in the U.S., or the Ministry of Finance or the Treasury Board). For most pro-
jects that do not have impacts beyond 50 years (it is intragenerational), we recom-
mend a real social discount rate of 3.5 percent. If the project is intergenerational,
then we recommend time-declining discount rates.10
PV(C) = a
n
t=0
Ct
(1 + s)t
PV(B) = a
n
t=0
Bt
(1 + s)t
Ct
Bt
(1 + s)t,
12

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
7. Compute the net present value of each alternative.
The net present value (NPV) of
an alternative equals the difference between the PV of the benefits and the PV of the
costs:
(4)
The basic decision rule for a single alternative project (relative to the status quo) is
simple: adopt the project if its NPV is positive. In short, the analyst should recommend
proceeding with the proposed project if its   
that is, if its
benefits exceed its costs:
When there is more than one alternative to the status quo and all the alternatives
are mutually exclusive, then the rule is slightly more complicated: select the project with
the largest NPV. This rule assumes implicitly that at least one NPV is positive. If no
NPV is positive, then none of the specified alternatives are superior to the status quo,
which should remain in place.
Earlier we emphasized the net social benefits of a project. The NPV of a project or
policy is identical to the present value of the net social benefits:
(5)
Thus, selecting the project with the largest NPV is equivalent to selecting the project
with the largest PV of the net social benefits.
In the highway example, the no-tolls alternatives (columns A and B) have higher
NPVs than the with-tolls alternatives (columns C and D).Thus, if the analyst were confi-
dent in these NPVs,she should recommend that the highway should be constructed with-
out tolls. However, it is important to remember that these NPVs are estimates and that
sensitivity analysis (step 8) should be conducted before making a final recommendation.
Before turning to sensitivity analysis, we discuss decision making in a bit more de-
tail. In fact, there is some confusion about the appropriate decision rule. Both the
internal rate of return, and the benefit-cost ratio, have also been proposed as decision
rules. This is one area with more heat than light. The appropriate criterion to use is the
NPV rule. Other rules sometimes give incorrect answers; the NPV rule does not.
An obvious caveat about the NPV criterion is that it applies only to the actual al-
ternatives specified. Other alternatives might conceivably be better. While the NPV
criterion results in a more efficient allocation of resources, it does not necessarily rec-
ommend the most efficient allocation of resources. This point is illustrated in Figure 1.
Consider a set of proposed projects that vary according to the amount of output (Q),
which in turn depends on the scale of the project. The benefits and costs associated
with alternative scales are represented by the functions B(Q) and C(Q), respectively.
The benefits increase as the scale increases, but at a decreasing rate. In contrast, costs
increase at an increasing rate. A small-scale project (for example,
) has positive net
benefits relative to the status quo,
. As the scale increases, the net benefits increase
Q0
Q1
NPV = PV(NSB)
PV(B) 7 PV(C)
NPV = PV(B) - PV(C) 7 0;
NPV = PV(B) - PV(C)
13

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
up to the optimal scale,
11 As the scale increases beyond 
the net benefits de-
crease. Net benefits are positive as long as the benefit curve is above the cost curve,
they are zero where the cost curve and benefit curve intersect, and they are negative for
larger-scale projects.
Suppose that the analyst evaluates only two alternative projects (those with
output levels,
and 
). Clearly, output level 
is preferred to output level 
which, in turn, is preferred to the status quo,
The analyst would therefore rec-
ommend 
However, as the figure shows, net social benefits are maximized at out-
put level 
This optimal output level was not recommended because it was not
among the set evaluated. As this example illustrates, use of the NPV criterion leads
to a more efficient outcome than the status quo, not necessarily the most efficient 
outcome.
The analyst may not have included the optimum output level in the set of alterna-
tives for a number of reasons. The optimum output level may not have been known,
even approximately, until after the analysis was performed. Cognitive capacity limita-
tions, often summarized as bounded rationality problems, may have hindered the ana-
lyst from considering the optimal alternative.12 Additionally, budgetary or political
constraints may have limited the range of alternatives considered.
Q*.
Q2.
Q0.
Q1,
Q2
Q2
Q1
Q*,
Q*.
FIGURE 1
CBA Seeks More Efficient Resource Allocation
Optimum—most
efficient resource
allocation
More efficient
resource allocation
Maximum net
benefits
Output (Q)
Q0
Q1
Q2
Q*
Q3
Benefits (B)
Cost (C)
C(Q)
B(Q)
14

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
8. Perform sensitivity analysis.
As the foregoing discussion emphasizes, there may be
considerable uncertainty about both the predicted impacts and the appropriate mone-
tary valuation of each unit of the impact. For example, the analyst may be uncertain
about the predicted number of lives saved and about the appropriate dollar value to
place on a statistical life saved. The analyst may also be uncertain about the appropri-
ate social discount rate and about the appropriate level of standing. Sensitivity analysis
attempts to deal with such uncertainties. As shown in Table 3, the analyst performed
sensitivity analysis on the standing issue by computing the NPVs from both the global
perspective and the provincial perspective.
There are practical limits to the amount of sensitivity analysis that is feasible.
Potentially, every assumption in a CBA can be varied. In practice, one has to use judg-
ment and focus on the most important assumptions.Although this can mean that CBA
is vulnerable to the biases of the analyst, carefully thought-out scenarios are usually
more informative than a mindless varying of assumptions.
9. Make a recommendation.
Generally, the analyst should recommend adoption of
the project with the largest NPV. In the highway example, three of the alternative pro-
jects had positive NPVs and one had a negative NPV. The latter indicates that from the
British Columbian perspective it would be more efficient to maintain the status quo
and not build the Coquihalla highway than to build it and charge tolls. As discussed
earlier, the no-tolls alternatives are superior to the with-tolls alternatives. This result
gives a flavor of the possibly counterintuitive recommendations that CBA can support.
In this case, tolls lower the NPV because they deter people from using the highway, and
so fewer people enjoy the benefits.13
As we have emphasized, however, the NPVs are estimated values. Sensitivity
analysis, which we have not shown in detail, might suggest that the alternative with the
largest expected NPV is not necessarily the best alternative in all circumstances.
Finally, it is important to note that analysts make recommendations, not deci-
sions. CBA concerns how resources should be allocated; it is normative. It does not
claim to be a positive (i.e., descriptive) theory of how resource allocation decisions are
actually made. Such decisions are made in political and bureaucratic arenas. CBA is
only one input to this political decision-making process—one that attempts to push it
toward more efficient resource allocation. CBA does not always succeed. Politicians
are often reluctant to be persuaded by economic arguments. Indeed, the highway was
built with tolls, although they were removed in 2008.
BUREAUCRATIC AND POLITICAL “LENSES”14
Thus far, we have assumed that CBA is not influenced by bureaucratic or political
processes.This approach is appropriate given that CBA concerns how resources should
be allocated. In practice, however, CBA frequently gets distorted when bureaucrats or
politicians become involved with it. Bureaucrats have a tendency to see “costs” and
“benefits” differently depending on their position and their agency. Bureaucrats’ roles
have a strong influence on what they think CBA is, or should be, about. Specifically,
their perceptions of what constitutes “benefits” and “costs” are based on whether they
15

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
are analysts, spenders, or guardians.15 These labels are indicative of three different per-
spectives (lenses) bureaucrats bring to project evaluation in government.The analysts’
perspective is standard CBA, which we have already illustrated in Table 3. Guardians
and spenders have quite different perspectives.
Most government bureaucrats have not taken, and will not take, formal courses in
cost-benefit analysis.They believe that what they think is CBA is, in fact, CBA, even if
it is not. This section describes the perspectives of guardians and spenders, and shows
how these perspectives differ from CBA. This helps clarify what CBA actually is, in
contrast to what one may think it is. This section also identifies many of the common
mistakes in CBA. These mistakes often vary systematically according to one’s back-
ground and experiences. Even those trained in CBA may modify their orientation to-
ward those of guardians or spenders as a consequence of the immediacy of their daily
bureaucratic roles. If you are in a government job, you should make sure that you are
not unconsciously adopting a guardian or spender perspective. We also hope that by
understanding these different perspectives, analysts may be better able to communi-
cate with guardians and spenders. Also, guardians and spenders may be better able to
communicate with each other. Finally, this section helps students understand better
why decisions are often not consistent with CBA—they are often made by guardians
or spenders, not analysts.
These bureaucratic lenses are archetypes. In practice, a bureaucrat may not exhibit
all of the characteristics associated with a particular lens. From time to time, bureau-
crats exhibit schizophrenic tendencies, sometimes adopting one cognitive perspective,
sometimes another. Guardians in line agencies are prone to cognitive dissonance be-
cause they have dual allegiances. They are likely to be unsure whether they are
guardians, spenders, or both. In practice, though, most bureaucrats recognize that they
have a tendency to adopt one perspective or another.
Guardians
Guardians are often found in central budgetary agencies, such as the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, and in controllership or accounting functions within line
agencies. They tend to have a bottom-line budgetary orientation. Their natural ten-
dency is to equate benefits with revenue inflows to their agency or other governmental
coffers (at the same jurisdictional level) and to equate costs with revenue outflows
from their agency or other governmental coffers (at the same level).Thus, they engage
in revenue-expenditure analysis.16 Guardians have a natural tendency to regard actual
CBA as naive, impractical, and, worst of all in their eyes, a tool whereby spenders can
justify whatever it is they want to do.
The conceptual lens of “pure” provincial-based guardians can be illustrated by the
way they tend to look at the costs and benefits of the Coquihalla Highway, which is
shown in Table 4. These evaluations of the no-tolls and with-tolls alternatives can be
compared to the analyst’s evaluations that appear in columns B and D of Table 3,
respectively.
To guardians, all toll revenues are regarded as benefits, whether paid by the ju-
risdiction’s residents (in this case, the province) or by nonresidents. Construction
costs are a cost, because they require an outlay by the provincial government.
16

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
Because guardians seek to minimize net budgetary expenditures, their preference,
not surprisingly, is for the with-tolls alternative. Indeed, their gut reaction is to con-
sider raising tolls, irrespective of its effect on levels of use or its impact on social
benefits.
How does the guardian’s perspective differ from CBA? Most importantly,
guardians ignore nonfinancial social benefits, in this case $384.1 million for the no-tolls
alternative and $297.3 million for the with-tolls alternative. In general, they ignore im-
pacts valued by consumers and producers such as time saved and lives saved. When
guardians are in control of a government service, it is easy to understand why one has
to wait so long for the service. Neither your time nor anyone else’s figures into their
calculations! Similarly, guardians tend to ignore nonfinancial social costs, such as con-
gestion and pollution.
In the Coquihalla Highway example, all social costs happen to represent govern-
mental budgetary costs, and so there is no difference between the CBA cost figures and
the guardians’ cost figures. In other situations, however, there might be considerable
differences between the correct social costs and guardians’ costs. Consider, for exam-
ple, the cost of labor in job-creation programs. Guardians would treat the full financial
remuneration to labor as a cost, while CBA analysts would consider only the opportu-
nity cost (such as lost leisure time). Another manifestation of the same mistake con-
cerns the treatment of resources currently owned by the government, such as offices or
land. Guardians tend to treat these resources as free because using them for a project
does not entail additional budgetary outlay.They ignore the value of these resources in
other uses.
Guardians ignore costs not borne by their government. Thus, they ignore the loss
suffered by British Columbians from paying tolls and treat all toll revenues as a bene-
fit. In CBA tolls are a transfer from travelers to the government: offsetting costs and
benefits result in net benefits of zero. On the other hand, provincial guardians
TABLE 4
Coquihalla Highway from a Provincial Guardian’s Perspective 
(1986 $ Million)
No Tolls
With Tolls
Revenues (“Benefits”):
Toll revenues from British Columbia residents
0
112.1
Toll revenues from non–British Columbia residents
0
37.4
0
149.5
Expenditures (“Costs”):
Construction
338.1
338.1
Maintenance
7.6
7.6
Toll collection
—
8.4
Toll booth construction
—
0.3
345.7
354.4
Net Revenue-Expenditure “Benefits”
345.7
204.9
Source: Adapted from Anthony Boardman,Aidan Vining, and W. G.Waters II,“Costs and Benefits through
Bureaucratic Lenses: Example of a Highway Project,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12(3)
1993, 532–555,Table 2, p. 539.
17

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 5
Coquihalla Highway from a Provincial Spender’s Perspective 
(1986 $ Million)
No Tolls
With Tolls
Constituency “Benefits”:
Project Costs (from CBA)
345.7
354.4
Project Benefits (from CBA)
384.1
334.7
729.8
689.1
Constituency “Costs”:
Toll Revenues from British Columbia Residents
—
112.1
Net Constituency “Benefits”
729.8
577.0
Source: Adapted from Anthony Boardman,Aidan Vining, and W. G.Waters II,“Costs and Benefits through
Bureaucratic Lenses: Example of a Highway Project,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12(3)
1993, 532–555,Table 3, p. 542.
automatically treat subsidies from the federal government as a benefit because they
are revenue inflows to their level of government. However, if the federal government
has earmarked a certain amount of money to transfer to British Columbia and if
funds used for one purpose reduce the amount available for other purposes, then
federal funds for this highway should not be treated as a benefit from the provincial
perspective.
Finally, guardians generally want to use a high social discount rate. Because of
their financial background or their agency’s culture, they naturally prefer to use a fi-
nancial market rate, which is generally higher than the appropriate social discount rate.
They also know that using a high discount rate will make it more difficult to justify
most projects because costs usually occur before benefits.Thus, they can limit spenders
who, in their view, overestimate benefits, underestimate costs, and generally use money
less efficiently than the private sector.
Spenders
Spenders are usually in service or line departments. Some service departments, such
as transportation, are involved with physical projects, while social service depart-
ments, such as health, welfare, or education, make human capital investments. Some
service departments, such as housing, make both types of expenditures. The views of
spenders are somewhat more varied than those of guardians because the con-
stituencies of particular agencies are more varied. Nevertheless, there are several
commonalities.
Most importantly, spenders have a natural tendency to regard expenditures on
constituents as benefits rather than as costs. For example, they typically see expendi-
tures on labor as a benefit rather than a cost. Spenders regard themselves as builders or
professional deliverers of government-mandated services. As spenders focus on pro-
viding projects or services to particular groups in society, we characterize them as en-
gaging in constituency-support analysis. Table 5 summarizes how spenders in the
provincial highway department view the no-tolls and with-tolls alternatives.
18

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
Spenders treat social benefits and monetary payments received by their con-
stituents (residents of British Columbia in this example) as benefits. Thus, time saved,
lives saved, and vehicle operating costs saved by British Columbians are benefits.
However, they also treat wages received by construction workers who build the high-
way as a benefit. Thus, spenders think of both project benefits and project costs as
benefits. With this method of accounting, both the with-tolls and no-tolls highway
alternatives generate huge net constituency benefits. In general, spenders tend to sup-
port any alternative rather than the status quo (no project). Thus, the mistrust of
spenders by guardians is perfectly understandable. Guardians and spenders almost
always oppose one another in terms of project alternative ranking.
Spenders view monetary outlays by British Columbian highway users (also their
constituents) as costs; for example, they treat tolls paid by British Columbians as costs.
Table 5 shows that spenders favor the no-tolls alternative primarily because a toll is a
cost for some of their constituents. Indeed, spenders normally do not favor user fees,
unless their agency keeps the toll revenue within its own budget or the payers are not
constituents. If spenders could collect and keep the tolls, then they would face a
dilemma: tolls would reduce constituency benefits, but would increase the agency’s
budget. Thus, they would face a trade-off between constituency-support maximization
and their budget maximization.17
In general, as Robert Haveman and others have pointed out, politicians prefer
projects that concentrate benefits on particular interest groups and camouflage costs
or diffuse them widely over the population.18 Spenders have similar preferences. They
tend to weight each impact category by the strength of the connection that constituents
make between the impact and their agency.They focus on impacts for which their con-
stituents will give them a lot of credit and ignore others. Because people almost always
notice expenditures on themselves, such “benefits” are invariably weighted more heav-
ily than social benefits.19 Thus, for example, construction jobs are more heavily
weighted than diffuse social benefits.
Spenders are also similar to politicians in their determination to finish partially
completed projects. Congress, for example, decided to complete the Tellico Dam when
it was 90 percent complete, even though the incremental costs exceeded the incremen-
tal benefits.20 Presumably, the politicians believed that continuation of the project
would bring ongoing political support. Even though sunk costs are, by definition, sunk
and it may not be efficient to finish a partially completed project, spenders tend to be-
lieve that there are positive constituency-support benefits from completion of projects.
Spenders treat some inputs as neither benefits nor costs. Currently owned govern-
ment assets may simply be ignored. In support of the Tellico Dam, for example, the
Tennessee Valley Authority argued that “since the farm land behind the dam had al-
ready been purchased, the value of this land should be considered a sunk cost, even
though the land has yet to be flooded and could be resold as farm land if the project
was not completed.”21
Spenders tend to favor large, irreversible, capital-intensive projects, such as
urban rail systems, over reversible, less capital intensive projects, such as buses.There
are immediate, significant construction job creation benefits. Also, once the infra-
structure is in place, it cannot be easily redeployed to other uses, so the system will
almost certainly remain in operation, and constituents are guaranteed to receive
19

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
some benefits. Furthermore, the normally lower operating costs for such projects
allow for lower prices and relatively high usage levels, thereby further increasing
constituency benefits.
The perspective of spenders concerning market efficiency has a bearing on the
way they view many aspects of CBA. To spenders, markets are almost always ineffi-
cient. Spenders act as if unemployment is high in all labor markets. They believe that
unemployment will be reduced by the number of people used on a government pro-
ject. Even if some workers switch from other employment, these workers’ vacated
jobs will be filled by unemployed workers. Thus, even if the job created did not go di-
rectly to an unemployed worker, there would eventually be a job created somewhere
in the economy for an unemployed worker. Spenders do not recognize that project re-
sources are diverted from other potentially productive uses that might also involve
the creation of jobs.
Furthermore, spenders believe there are indirect benefits of creating jobs and
making other project expenditures, which are called multiplier effects.22 In the ex-
treme, spenders have a “Midas touch” view of project evaluation: first declare the
expenditures (costs) to be a “benefit” and then increase these benefits by a multi-
plier. As a result, any government project would be seen as producing benefits
greater than costs.
Spenders generally favor using a low (even zero) social discount rate. For some,
this is because they are not familiar with the concept of discounting. For others, they
know this tends to raise the project’s NPV and, therefore, the probability of its
adoption. Other ways spenders generate support for their projects is to choose a
poorly performing counterfactual (a straw man), to lowball cost projections, or to over-
estimate project usage.23
THE DEMAND FOR CBA
CBA was initially used in the U.S. in the 1930s. The Flood Control Act of 1936 re-
quired the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to conduct CBAs for flood control and
harbor deepening projects. A big impetus to the use of CBA was given by the
Bureau of Budget’s Circular A-47 of 1952 and academic work by Otto Eckstein,
John Krutilla, and others.24 In the mid 1960s it was picked up and promoted by
Barbara Castle when she was Minister of Transport in the UK. By the end of the
1960s it had spread around the world and was used in both developed and developing
countries. Now, CBA is used in many different contexts for many different purposes.
Many government agencies require CBA of regulatory changes. Other actual or po-
tential uses of CBA include the courts, various progressive interest groups and pri-
vate corporations.
Government
The U.S. federal government first mandated the general use of CBA in Executive
Order 12291, issued by President Reagan in early 1981.This order requires a regulatory
impact analysis (RIA) for every major regulatory initiative. (An RIA is essentially a
20

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
cost-benefit analysis that also takes into account distributional and fairness consider-
ations.) President Clinton confirmed the federal government’s commitment to CBA
in Executive Order 12866 in 1994. Quite a few U.S. federal laws, such as the Unfunded
Mandates Reform Act and the Government Performance and Results Act, specifi-
cally mandate some form of ex ante analysis.
Nearly all other Western industrialized countries have similar protocols covering
broad ranges of programs or specific program areas. For example, Canada’s
Regulatory Policy requires a CBA of changes to any regulation.
The demand for ex post analysis is generally not so explicit; there are usually no
mandatory requirements that it be done. However, on occasion, the U.S. Congress does
explicitly mandate ex post CBA. The Clean Air Act Amendments (1990), for example,
require the Environmental Protection Agency to assess the overall benefits and costs
of the first 20 years of the Act.The Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Act (1996)
also requires retrospective analysis.
Despite the little explicit demand for ex post analyses, resource allocation deci-
sions often draw heavily on these analyses. For example, President Clinton’s 1993 State
of the Union Address emphasized the relationship between ex post analyses of specific
Head Start programs (i.e., educational programs for low-income preschool children)
and his intention to increase funding and expand the scope of such programs.The U.S.
federal government has also explicitly induced a form of ex post learning by sponsoring
and requiring evaluation of a variety of “pilot tests,” “demonstration projects,” and
“social experiments” including, for example, various welfare reform demonstrations
that were conducted by different states during the 1980s and 1990s.25 On a number of
occasions the weight of the evidence has led to a policy change.26 For example, CBAs
in the 1960s and 1970s of industry-specific economic regulations showed that the costs
of regulation often exceeded the benefits, thereby paving the way for deregulation ini-
tiatives in the trucking, airline, and telecommunications industries.27
As public officials face citizen resistance to raising taxes or pressure to reduce
taxes, they are increasingly forced to ensure that government works more efficiently
and effectively. In practice, this provides an impetus toward the increased use of CBA
and related methods. Such trends are contemporaneous with greater concern for the
environment, which calls for the inclusion of environmental and other social impacts,
in addition to government expenditures.
The Courts
Courts of law use CBA or CBA methods in a variety of ways. Perhaps the most notori-
ous has been the use of CBA in the assessment of damages in the Exxon Valdez disas-
ter. Quantitative valuation of the environmental impacts relied heavily on contingent
valuation analysis. The lawsuits continued into 2009, more than 20 years after the dis-
aster itself.
CBA is also used in antitrust cases. Section 9b of the Canadian Competition Act
explicitly prohibits the Competition Tribunal from intervening in a merger if the effi-
ciency gains to the merging firms are greater than the potential anticompetitive effect.
In effect, this requires determining whether or not the merger is allocatively efficient
(i.e., has positive net social benefits).
21

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
Environmental and Other Progressive Groups
As mentioned above, the U.S. government and the courts have used CBA extensively
to set environmental, health, and safety regulations. However, many environmentalists
and other progressive groups prefer to make their arguments on emotional and ethical
grounds and are reluctant to conduct CBAs. Recently, Richard Revesz and Michael
Livermore argue that such groups will be more effective if they do not “give up on ra-
tionality” and perform CBAs. The authors argue that this is necessary if we truly want
to protect our natural environment.28
CBA, Sustainability, Corporate Social 
Responsibility, and the Triple Bottom Line
Most private-sector corporations are now paying attention to sustainability or their “triple
bottom line” (i.e.,their “social,economic,and environmental”impact),and are being more
transparent about such impacts. For a longer time, many companies have been concerned
about corporate social responsibility (CSR).These terms are not well-defined but overlap
considerably. Basically, they mean that firms consider their “social bottom line” and their
impact on future generations. In practice, however, firms engage in idiosyncratic behavior
and use all sorts of different criteria to measure their “social bottom line.” They may mea-
sure their carbon footprint, their emissions of carbon and other gasses, or their recycling
efforts. Other firms measure different impacts.There are a host of different ways of mea-
suring CSR. However, the basic goal of CSR is to improve the welfare of society as a
whole.Since the goal of CBA is to improve net social benefits,this has led some authors to
argue that corporations should engage in CBA to measure their CSR.29They would likely
be for specific projects, rather than on an annual basis, but it would mean the application
of a consistent set of principles, instead of the current ad hoc approach.
THE COST OF DOING CBA
Although the demand for CBA is increasing, we should keep in mind that it takes
many resources (time, skill, and money) to do CBA well, especially where projects are
large, complex, and have unique features. The costs of conducting CBA can be very
large. For example, Thomas Hopkins reported in 1992 that a CBA of reducing lead in
gasoline cost the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) roughly $1 million.30 On
average, the EPA spent approximately $700,000 for major CBA projects in the 1980s,
that is, for the analysis of projects with compliance cost in excess of $100 million annu-
ally.31 Large-scale evaluations of welfare-to-work programs, of which CBA is one com-
ponent, often ran into millions of dollars.
READERS OF THIS BOOK
This book is primarily for people who want to know how to do CBA. Second, it is for
people who want to know how to interpret CBA—in other words, for clients of CBA.
Clients can be helped in two ways. In the narrow sense, clients should be well enough in-
formed to judge whether or not a specific CBA has been conducted well. Evidence sug-
gests that U.S. federal agencies, even with extensive budgets, have difficulty performing
CBA well. This is certainly also true for other governments with less analytic capacity
22

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
and smaller budgets. Clients need to be well enough informed to avoid endorsing
flawed analysis because there is a growing trend for oversight agencies and external
critics to point out and publicize analytic errors.32
In the broad sense, clients may have to evaluate CBA studies well enough to have
a sense of the weight of evidence in specific policy areas, such as employment training
or environmental regulation. In order to do this well, one has to understand the basic
principles of CBA.
CONCLUSION
This chapter provides a broad overview of many of the most important issues in CBA.
Our aim was to give you a taste of the practical realities.
CBA is often taught in a way that is completely divorced from political reality.We
wish to avoid this mistake. CBA is a normative tool, not a description of how political
and bureaucratic decision makers actually make decisions. Because CBA disregards
the demands of politicians, spenders, guardians, and interest groups, it is not surprising
that there are tremendous pressures to ignore it or, alternatively, to adapt it to the de-
sires of various constituencies or interest groups. In practice, correct CBA is no more
than a voice for rational decision making.
EXERCISES
1.
Imagine that you live in a city that currently does not require bicycle riders to wear helmets.
Furthermore, imagine that you enjoy riding your bicycle without wearing a helmet.
a.
From your perspective, what are the major costs and benefits of a proposed city ordi-
nance that would require all bicycle riders to wear helmets?
b.
What are the categories of costs and benefits from society’s perspective?
2.
The effects of a tariff on imported kumquats can be divided into the following cate-
gories: tariff revenues received by the treasury ($8 million), increased use of resources to
produce more kumquats domestically ($6 million), the value of reduced consumption by
domestic consumers ($13 million), and increased profits received by domestic kumquat
growers ($4 million). A CBA from the national perspective would find costs of the tariff
equal to $19 million—the sum of the costs of increased domestic production and forgone
domestic consumption ($6 million  $13 million). The increased profits received by
domestic kumquat growers and the tariff revenues received by the treasury simply reflect
higher prices paid by domestic consumers on the kumquats that they continue to con-
sume and, hence, count as neither benefits nor costs. Thus, the net benefits of the tariff
are negative ($19 million). Consequently, the CBA would recommend against adoption
of the tariff.
a.
Assuming the Agriculture Department views kumquat growers as its primary con-
stituency, how would it calculate net benefits if it behaves as if it is a spender?
b.
Assuming the Treasury Department behaves as if it is a guardian, how would it calculate
net benefits if it believes that domestic growers pay profit taxes at an average rate of
20 percent?
23

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
3.
(Spreadsheet recommended) Your county is considering building a public swimming pool.
Analysts have estimated the present values of the following effects over the expected useful
life of the pool:
PV
(million dollars)
State grant:
2.2
Construction and maintenance costs:
12.5
Personnel costs:
8.2
Revenue from county residents:
8.6
Revenue from nonresidents:
2.2
Use value benefit to county residents:
16.6
Use value benefit to nonresidents:
3.1
Scrap value:
0.8
The state grant is only available for this purpose. Also, the construction and maintenance
will have to be done by an out-of-county firm.
a.
Assuming national-level standing, what are the social net benefits of the project?
b.
Assuming county-level standing, what are the social net benefits of the project?
c.
How would a guardian in the county budget office calculate net benefits?
d.
How would a spender in the county recreation department calculate benefits?
NOTES
1. “Letter to Joseph Priestley,” in Benjamin Franklin:
Representative Selections, with Introduction,
Bibliography and Notes, Frank Luther Mott and
Chester E. Jorgenson (New York:American Book
Company, 1936), pp. 348–49.
2. Federal Environmental Assessment Review
Office, Oldman River Dam: Report of the
Environmental Assessment Panel, Ottawa,
Ontario, May 1992.
3. Of course, other criteria may determine whether
evaluative research actually gets used. For a
review of evaluative research utilization in policy
analysis, see David H. Greenberg and Marvin B.
Mandell,“Research Utilization in Policymaking:
A Tale of Two Series of Social Experiments,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 10(4)
1991, 633–656.
4. Winston Harrington, Richard D. Morgenstern,
and Peter Nelson,“On the Accuracy of
Regulatory Cost Estimates,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 19(2) 2000, 297–322.
See also Henry J.Aaron,“Seeing Through the
Fog: Policymaking with Uncertain Forecasts,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(2)
2000, 193–206.
5. This example is based on W. G.Waters II and
Shane Myers,“Benefit-Cost Analysis of a Toll
Highway: British Columbia’s Coquihalla,”
Journal of Transportation Research Forum 28(1)
1987, 434–443.This study was not, in fact, con-
ducted at the request of the B.C. government.
6. In practice, individuals can only focus on approx-
imately four to seven alternatives, at best. G.A.
Miller,“The Magical Number Seven, Plus or
Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for
Processing Information,” Psychological Review
65(1) 1956, 81–97.
7. These studies are discussed by Robert
Williamson,“Pulp Cleanup May Be Waste of
Money,” Toronto Globe and Mail, December 23,
1992, pp.A1,A6.
8. Remember that valuation of the impact at step 5
should be consistent with the chosen measure-
ment indicator. For example, the valuation of an
arrest should be lower than the valuation of a
conviction so that the analyst would obtain simi-
lar estimates of the benefits of reduced crime
from using either indicator.
9. Of course, some additional deaths will occur as
a result of more people traveling by road. This
24

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
additional cost is netted out against the gener-
ated traffic benefits.
10. These values are based on those laid out in
Mark A. Moore, Anthony E. Boardman, Aidan
R. Vining, David L. Weimer, and David H.
Greenberg, “Just Give Me a Number! Practical
Values for the Social Discount Rate,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 23(4) 2004,
789–812.
11. Note that at the optimum output level, marginal 
benefits equal marginal costs:
One can
see that the slope of the benefit curve at 
equals
the slope of the cost curve at 
12. For the seminal writing on this topic, see Herbert
A. Simon, Models of Man (New York:Wiley,
1957).Although this problem is unlikely to be of
major importance in situations similar to that de-
picted in Figure 1, cognitive factors become an
increasingly important issue when (1) project
benefits and costs vary simultaneously on many
dimensions, (2) the benefit and cost functions are
discontinuous or complex (for example, with
interaction terms), or (3) there is uncertainty
about the interactions or the functional forms.
13. In contrast, tolls on congested highways generally
increase net social benefits.
14. This section draws heavily from Anthony
Boardman,Aidan Vining, and W. G.Waters II,
“Costs and Benefits through Bureaucratic Lenses:
Example of a Highway Project,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 12(3) 1993, 532–555.
15. This terminology was introduced by Sanford
Borins and David A. Good,“Spenders,
Guardians and Policy Analysts:A Game of
Budgeting Under the Policy and Expenditure
Management System,”Toronto, Case Program in
Canadian Administration, Institute of Public
Administration of Canada, 1987 (revised 1989).
16. Revenue-expenditure analysis is similar to cash
flow analysis and budget impact analysis. Cash
flow analysis and budget impact analysis are very
helpful for certain purposes, but a problem arises
when an analyst does this type of analysis while
thinking that she is performing CBA.
17. See, for example,William A. Niskanen,
“Bureaucrats and Politicians,” Journal of Law
and Economics 18(3) 1975, 617–643; and André
Q*.
Q*
dB
dQ = dC
dQ.
Blais and Stéphane Dion, eds., The Budget-
Maximizing Bureaucrat:Appraisals and Evidence
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1991). For various reasons, senior spenders may
be more interested in the discretionary budget or
“budget shaping” than in budget maximizing; see
Patrick Dunleavy, Democracy, Bureaucracy and
Public Choice (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1992).They may, therefore, be willing to
support projects that involve considerable
“contracting out” and other activities that may
not be budget maximizing per se.
18. Robert H. Haveman,“Policy Analysis and the
Congress:An Economist’s View,” Policy Analysis
2(2) 1976, 235–250.
19. Barry R.Weingast, et al. refer to this phenome-
non as the “Robert Moses effect” after the fa-
mous New Yorker who exploited it so effectively.
See Barry R.Weingast, Kenneth A. Shepsle, and
Christopher Johnsen,“The Political Economy of
Benefits and Costs:A Neoclassical Approach to
Distributive Politics,” Journal of Political
Economy 89(4) 1981, 642–664, at 648.
20. R. K. Davis,“Lessons in Politics and Economics
from the Snail Darter,” in Environmental
Resources and Applied Welfare Economics:
Essays in Honor of John V. Krutilla, Vernon K.
Smith, ed. (Washington, D.C.: Resources for the
Future, 1988), 211–236.
21. Robert D. Behn,“Policy Analysis and Policy
Politics,” Policy Analysis 7(2) 1981, 199–226, at
213, n. 27.
22. One reason why some bureaucrats attach so
much importance to multipliers is because they
have a basic grounding in input-output analysis,
but they do not clearly understand the funda-
mental distinction between impact analysis and
evaluation analysis; see W. G.Waters II,“Impact
Studies and the Evaluation of Public Projects,”
Annals of Regional Science 10(1) 1976, 98–103.
23. See, for example, Bent Flyvbjerg Mette Skamris
Holm, and Soren Buhl,“Underestimating Costs
in Public Works Projects: Error or Lie?” Journal
of the American Planning Association 68(3) 2002,
279–293; and Linda R. Cohen and Roger G. Noll,
eds., The Technology Pork Barrel (Washington,
D.C.:The Brookings Institution, 1991).
24. For a very brief discussion of the origins of CBA
see D.W. Pearce, Cost-Benefit Analysis (London:
MacMillan, 1971).
25

Introduction to Cost-Benefit Analysis
25. For summaries of the welfare-to-work evaluations,
see Daniel Friedlander, David H. Greenberg, and
Philip K. Robins,“Evaluating Government
Training Programs for the Economically
Disadvantaged,” Journal of Economic Literature
35(4) 1997, 1089–1855; and Karl Ashworth,
Andreas Cebulla, David Greenberg, and Robert
Walker,“Meta-Evaluation: Discovering What
Works Best in Welfare Provision,” Evaluation
10(2) 2004, 193–216.
26. See Martha Derthick and Paul J. Quirk, The
Politics of Deregulation (Washington, D.C.:The
Brookings Institution, 1985); and Carol H.Weiss,
“Evaluation for Decisions: Is Anybody There?
Does Anybody Care?” Evaluation Practice 9(1)
1988, 5–20.
27. See Robert Hahn and John A. Hird,“The Costs
and Benefits of Regulation: Review and
Synthesis,” Yale Journal of Regulation 8(1) 1991,
233–278.
28. Richard Revesz and Michael Livermore, Retaking
Rationality: How Cost Benefit Analysis Can Better
Protect the Environment and Our Health (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2008).
29. Anthony E. Boardman,“Using Social Cost-
Benefit Analysis to Measure Corporate Social
Responsibility,” Infogas 5(15) 2009, 6-13 (in
Spanish).
30. Thomas D. Hopkins,“Economic Analysis
Requirements as a Tool of Regulatory Reform:
Experience in the United States,” Statement pre-
sented to the Sub-Committee on Regulations
and Competitiveness Standing Committee on
Finance, House of Commons, Ottawa, September
15, 1992, p. 10.
31. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA’s
Use of Benefit-Cost Analysis: 1981–1986, EPA-
230-05-87-028, Office of Policy, Planning and
Evaluation,August 1987, pp. 1–3.
32. See, for example, General Accounting Office
(GAO), Regulatory Reform:Agencies Could
Improve Development, Documentation, and
Clarity of Regulatory Economic Analyses, Report
to the Committee on Governmental Affairs, U.S.
Senate, GAO/RCED-98-142, May 1998; and
Robert W. Hahn, Jason K. Burnett,Yee-Ho I.
Chin, Elizabeth A. Mader, and Petrea R. Moyle,
“Assessing Regulatory Impact Analyses:The
Failure of Agencies to Comply with Executive
Order 12,866,” Harvard Journal of Law & Public
Policy 23(3) 2000, 859–885.
26

I
t seems only natural to think about the alternative courses of action we face as in-
dividuals in terms of their costs and benefits. Is it appropriate to evaluate public
policy alternatives in the same way? Even if analysts can measure costs and benefits
satisfactorily, evaluating alternatives solely in terms of their net benefits may not al-
ways be appropriate. An understanding of the conceptual foundations of CBA pro-
vides a basis for determining when CBA can be appropriately used as a decision rule,
when it can usefully be part of a broader analysis, and when it should be avoided.
The goal of allocative, or Pareto, efficiency provides the conceptual basis for CBA.
In this chapter we provide a nontechnical introduction to Pareto efficiency. We then
explain its relationship to potential Pareto efficiency, which provides the practical
basis for actually doing CBA. Our exploration of the roles of Pareto efficiency and po-
tential Pareto efficiency in CBA provides a basis for distinguishing it from other ana-
lytical frameworks. It also provides a basis for understanding the various philosophi-
cal objections commonly made against the use of CBA for decision making.
CBA AS A FRAMEWORK FOR MEASURING EFFICIENCY
CBA can be thought of as providing a framework for measuring efficiency.1 Though we
develop a more formal definition of efficiency in the following section, it can be
thought of as a situation in which resources, such as land, labor, and capital, are de-
ployed in their highest valued uses in terms of the goods and services they create. In sit-
uations in which analysts care only about efficiency, CBA provides a method for mak-
ing direct comparisons among alternative policies. Even when goals other than
efficiency are important, CBA serves as a yardstick that can be used to provide infor-
mation about the relative efficiency of alternative policies. Indeed, analysts rarely en-
counter situations in which efficiency is not one of the relevant goals. Critical evalua-
tion of these assertions requires a more precise definition of efficiency.
Pareto Efficiency
A simple and intuitively appealing definition of efficiency, referred to as Pareto effi-
ciency, underlies modern welfare economics and CBA. An allocation of goods is
Conceptual Foundations 
of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Form Chapter 2 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
27

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Pareto efficient if no alternative allocation can make at least one person better off with-
out making anyone else worse off. An allocation of goods is inefficient, therefore, if
an alternative allocation can be found that would make at least one person better off
without making anyone else worse off. One would have to be malevolent not to want
to achieve Pareto efficiency—why forgo gains to persons that would not inflict losses
on others?
Figure 1 illustrates the concept of Pareto efficiency in a simple situation involv-
ing the allocation of a fixed amount of money between two persons. Imagine that
the two persons will receive any total amount of money of up to $100 if they agree
on how to split it between themselves. Assume that if they do not agree, then each
person receives just $25. The vertical axis measures the amount of money received
by person 1, and the horizontal axis measures the amount of money received by per-
son 2. The point labeled $100 on the vertical axis represents the outcome in which
person 1 receives the entire $100. Similarly, the point labeled $100 on the horizontal
axis represents the outcome in which person 2 receives the entire $100.The line con-
necting these two extreme points, which we call the potential Pareto frontier, repre-
sents all the feasible splits between the two persons that allocate the entire $100.
Splits involving less than $100 lie within the triangle formed by the potential Pareto
frontier and the axes. The one labeled ($25, $25) is such a point. This point repre-
sents the status quo in the sense that it gives the amounts the two persons receive if
they do not reach an agreement about splitting the $100. The segment of the poten-
tial Pareto frontier that gives each person at least as much as the status quo is called
the Pareto frontier.
Status quo
point
Potential Pareto frontier
 Pareto frontier
Pareto improvements
over status quo
Payment to
person 2
Payment to
person 1
$100
$25
0
$25
$100
FIGURE 1
Pareto Efficiency
28

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
The lightly shaded triangle formed by the lines through the status quo point and
the Pareto frontier represents all the alternative allocations that would make at least
one of the persons better off than the status quo without making the other worse off.
The existence of these points, which are feasible alternatives to the status quo that
make at least one person better off without making the other worse off, means that the
status quo is not Pareto efficient. Movement to any one of these points is called a
Pareto improvement. Any Pareto improvement that does not lie on the potential
Pareto frontier would leave open the possibility of further Pareto improvements and
thus not provide a Pareto-efficient allocation. Only on the potential Pareto frontier is
it impossible to make a feasible reallocation that makes one person better off without
making the other person worse off.
It should be clear that the segment of the potential Pareto frontier that guarantees
at least $25 to each person represents all the Pareto efficient allocations relative to the
status quo. Each of these points makes a Pareto improvement over the status quo and
leaves no opportunity for further improvements. The segment of the potential Pareto
frontier that represents actual Pareto improvements depends upon the status quo. In
other words, implicit in the concept of Pareto efficiency are the initial starting positions
of the members of society.We return later to the significance of the difference between
the potential and actual Pareto frontiers in our discussion of criticisms of CBA.
Net Benefits and Pareto Efficiency
The link between positive net social benefits (henceforth, net benefits) and Pareto ef-
ficiency is straightforward: if a policy has positive net benefits, then it is possible to find
a set of transfers, or “side payments,” that makes at least one person better off without
making anyone else worse off. A full understanding of this link requires some reflec-
tion on how one measures benefits and costs in CBA. In particular, as illustrated in
Figure 2, it requires one to consider willingness to pay (WTP) as the method for valu-
ing the outputs of a policy and opportunity cost as the method for valuing the re-
sources required to implement the policy. The simple introductions that follow pro-
vide the basis for understanding the link between net benefits and Pareto efficiency.
Net benefits
Policy
Opportunity cost 
  Inputs 
Willingness to pay 
Outputs
FIGURE 2
Categorization of Net
Benefits of Projects
29

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Willingness to Pay.
Consider a proposed policy that would produce outputs of rele-
vance to three people. Assume that these people make honest revelations of their
assessments of the values of the outputs. Through a series of questions, we elicit the
payments that each person would have to make or to receive under the policy so that
he would be indifferent between the status quo and the policy with the payments. So,
for example, imagine that person 1 honestly reveals that she would be indifferent be-
tween the status quo and paying $100 to have the policy implemented. Similarly, per-
son 2 might say that he is indifferent between the status quo and paying $200 to have
the policy implemented. These values are the WTP of persons 1 and 2 for the policy.
Unlike persons 1 and 2, assume that person 3 does not like the impacts of the proposed
policy and would have to receive a payment of $250 if the policy were implemented to
feel just as well off as he did under the status quo; this $250 is the amount that would
have to be given to the person in conjunction with the proposed policy so that he is in-
different between it and the status quo.The negative of this amount ($250) would be
the WTP of person 3 for the policy. As the policy in effect takes something away from
person 3, the amount is called the person’s willingness to accept. In this stylized example,
the distinction between willingness to pay and willingness to accept is purely semantic.
However, the distinction has substantive importance when one actually seeks to mea-
sure WTP through survey methods, because people often demand larger payments to
accept small decrements in some good than they are WTP to obtain small increments
of exactly the same size. For now, we use WTP inclusively, assuming that its elicitation
appropriately takes account of whether people perceive policies as giving them some-
thing or as taking away something.
The algebraic sum of these willingness-to-pay values is the appropriate measure of the
net benefits of the impacts of the policy. In this example, the willingness-to-pay amounts
can be divided into $300 of benefits ($100  $200) accruing to persons 1 and 2 and $250 of
costs ($250) accruing to person 3.The net benefits are thus positive and equal to $50. If
these were the only three persons affected by the policy, and if the policy required no re-
sources to implement,then the $50 would be the appropriate measure of net benefits from
the perspective of CBA. Simple implementation of the policy would not be Pareto effi-
cient because person 3 would be made worse off with respect to the status quo.
Yet, we can easily imagine altering the policy so that it would be Pareto efficient.
For example, imagine that person 3 receives $75 from person 1 and $175 from person 2
as part of the policy. Now person 1 is better off than the status quo ($100 of benefits
minus $75 given to person 3), person 2 is better off ($200 of benefits minus $175 given
to person 3), and person 3 is no worse off ($250 of costs from the policy minus $250 of
benefits in the form of compensation from persons 1 and 2).
The key point is that if, and only if, the aggregate net benefits of the policy as
measured by the WTP of all affected individuals are positive, then there exist sets of
contributions and payments that would make the policy a Pareto improvement over
the status quo.
Opportunity Cost.
The implementation of policies almost always requires the use of
some inputs that could be used to produce other things of value. For example, imple-
menting a policy to build a bridge across a river would require the use of labor, steel,
concrete, construction machinery, and land that could be used to produce other things
30

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
of value to people. The concept of opportunity cost is used in CBA to place a dollar
value on the inputs required to implement policies. The opportunity cost of using an
input to implement a policy is its value in its best alternative use. Opportunity cost mea-
sures the value of what society must forgo to use the input to implement the policy.
Return to the example of the three persons whose aggregate WTP for the policy
was $50. Imagine that the policy requires inputs that have an opportunity cost of $75.
That is, if the policy were implemented, then some other members of society would
have to give up goods valued at $75. In this case, the policy does not generate enough
net benefits to the three persons to allow them to compensate those who must forgo
the $75 of goods—the net benefits to society as a whole are negative $25 ($50 of net
benefits to the three persons minus $75 in opportunity costs to the rest of society).
Thus, the policy could not be made Pareto efficient because it does not produce
enough benefits to permit all those who bear costs to be compensated fully. If the op-
portunity cost were only $20 instead of $75, then net benefits to society would be $30
and it would be possible to compensate all those who bear costs so that no one is made
worse off, and some people are made better off, by the policy. In general, if the net ben-
efits of a policy are positive, then it is potentially Pareto improving.
USING CBA FOR DECISION MAKING
The connection between net benefits and Pareto efficiency should now be clear. As
long as analysts value all impacts in terms of willingness to pay and value all required in-
puts in terms of opportunity costs, then the sign of the net benefits indicates whether it
would be possible to compensate those who bear costs sufficiently so that no one is made
worse off and at least one person is better off. Positive net benefits indicate the potential
for compensation to make the policy Pareto efficient; negative net benefits indicate the
absence of this potential.
One could imagine the following decision rule for CBA: adopt only policies that
are actually Pareto efficient. In other words, only policies that yield positive benefits
after providing full compensation to all those who bear costs would be adopted so
that there would be no losers, only winners. Although conceptually this is appealing,
such a rule would be extremely difficult to apply in practice for a number of reasons.
First, it would place great informational burdens on analysts not just to measure ag-
gregate costs and benefits, which can often be inferred from observing prices and
quantities in markets, but also to measure costs and benefits for each person, a task
that would generally render CBA too costly to use. Second, once the distribution of
costs and benefits at the individual level were known, the administrative costs of ac-
tually making specific transfers for each government policy would almost certainly
be high. Third, it is difficult to operate a practical system of compensation payments
that does not distort the investment and work behavior of households. Fourth, the re-
quirement that everyone be fully compensated would create a strong incentive for
people to find ways to overstate the costs and understate the benefits that they ex-
pect to receive from policies, complicating the already difficult task of inferring how
much each person is willing to pay for the outputs produced by the policy. The “ac-
tual Pareto efficiency” principle in practice would thus result in society forgoing
31

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
many policies that offer positive net benefits and the diversion of much effort toward
the seeking of unjustified compensation.
Potential Pareto Efficiency
CBA utilizes an alternative decision rule with somewhat less conceptual appeal, but
much greater feasibility, than the actual Pareto efficiency rule. It is based on what is
known as the Kaldor-Hicks criterion: a policy should be adopted if and only if those
who will gain could fully compensate those who will lose and still be better off.2 The
Kaldor-Hicks criterion provides the basis for the potential Pareto efficiency rule, or,
more commonly, the net benefits criterion: adopt only policies that have positive net ben-
efits.As long as net benefits are positive, it is at least possible that losers could be com-
pensated so that the policy potentially could be Pareto improving. In terms of Figure 1,
any point on the potential Pareto frontier would pass the potential Pareto efficiency
rule, while only those points on the potential Pareto frontier that guarantee at least $25
to each person (the heavily shaded segment of the potential Pareto frontier) pass the
actual Pareto efficiency rule.
In practice, the assessment of whether particular policies increase efficiency de-
pends on whether they represent potential Pareto improvements. That is, do the poli-
cies provide sufficient net gains so that all losers could be compensated? Potential
Pareto efficiency is achieved only when all potential Pareto improvements have been
exhausted.
Several justifications, aside from feasibility, are commonly offered in defense of
the potential Pareto efficiency rule. First, by always choosing policies with positive net
benefits, society maximizes aggregate wealth.This indirectly helps those who are worse
off in society because richer societies have greater capability for helping their poorest
members and, if redistribution is a normal good (that is, other things being equal, people
want more of it as their wealth increases), members of society have a greater willing-
ness to help.3 Second, it is likely that different policies will have different sets of win-
ners and losers. Thus, if the rule is consistently applied to government activity, then
costs and benefits will tend to average out across people so that each person is likely to
realize positive net benefits from the full collection of policies. Third, as we discuss
later in this chapter, the rule stands in contrast to the incentives in representative polit-
ical systems to give too much weight to costs and benefits that accrue to organized
groups and too little weight to costs and benefits that accrue to unorganized interests.
Its use in public discourse may thereby reduce the chances that Pareto-inefficient poli-
cies will be adopted. Fourth, if a more equal distribution of wealth or income is an
important goal, then it is possible to address it directly through transfers after a large
number of efficiency-enhancing policies have been adopted. In other words, redistrib-
ution, at least in theory, can be done “wholesale” with a single redistribution program
rather than “retail” in each particular program.
Application of the Decision Rule in Practice
Two polices can be thought of as independent if the adoption of one does not influence
the costs and benefits of the other. When all relevant projects are independent, the
CBA decision rule is simple: adopt all policies that have positive net benefits. A more
32

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
general version of the rule applies in situations involving multiple policies that may en-
hance or interfere with each other: choose the combination of policies that maximizes
net benefits. Physical, budgetary, and other constraints may limit the combinations of
policies that are feasible.
Consider the list of projects in Table 1. Interpret the costs and benefits as being ex-
pressed in terms of present values, so that they can be directly compared with dollars of
current consumption. Note that projects C and D are shown as synergistic. That is, the
net benefits from adopting both together exceed the sum of the net benefits from
adopting each one independently. Such might be the case if project C were a dam that
created a reservoir that could be used for recreation as well as hydroelectric power and
D were a road that increased access to the reservoir. Of course, projects can also inter-
fere with each other; for instance, the dam might reduce the benefits of a downstream
recreation project. The important point is that care must be taken to determine inter-
actions among projects so that the combinations of projects providing the greatest net
benefits in aggregate can be readily identified.
Suppose we could choose any combination of projects; then we should simply choose
all those with positive net benefits—namely, projects A, B, and combination C and D.
Suppose now the policies are mutually exclusive. For example, we cannot drain a
swamp to create agricultural land and simultaneously preserve it as a wildlife refuge.
When all the available policies are mutually exclusive, efficiency is maximized by
choosing the one with the largest net positive benefits—project B, with net benefits of
$20 million.Assume, however, that all projects are mutually exclusive, except C and D,
which can be built together to obtain synergistic gains. By taking the combination of C
and D to be a separate project, we can consider all the projects on the list to be mutu-
ally exclusive. Looking down the column labeled “Net Benefits,” we see that project B
still offers the largest net benefits and therefore should be the one selected, but the
combination of C and D offers the next highest net benefits.
Analysts often compare programs in terms of benefit-cost ratios. Note that project B,
which offers the largest net benefits, does not have the largest ratio of benefits to 
TABLE 1
Choosing Efficient Projects and the Use of Net Benefits versus Benefit-
Cost Ratios
Costs 
(millions 
of dollars)
Benefits 
(millions 
of dollars)
Net Benefits 
(millions 
of dollars)
Benefits/Costs
No project
0
0
0
—
Project A
1
10
9
10
Project B
10
30
20
3
Project C
4
8
4
2
Project D
3
5
2
1.7
Projects C and D
7
21
14
3
Project E
10
8
2
0.8
(1) No constraints: Choose A, B, and combination C and D (net benefits equal $43 million).
(2) All projects mutually exclusive: Choose B (net benefits equal $20 million).
(3) Total costs cannot exceed $10 million: Choose A and combination C and D (net benefits equal $23 million).
Source: Adapted from David L.Weimer and Aidan R.Vining, Policy Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 5th ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011), Figure 16.2.
33

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
costs. Project A has a benefit-cost ratio of 10, while project B has a benefit-cost ratio of
only 3. Nevertheless, project B should be selected because it offers larger net benefits
than project A. This comparison shows how the benefit-cost ratio can sometimes con-
fuse the choice process when the projects under consideration are of different scale
(that is, project B involves substantially higher costs than project A). Furthermore, the
benefit-cost ratio is sensitive to whether negative WTP (willingness to accept)
amounts are subtracted from benefits or added to costs. For example, imagine that the
cost of $10 million for project B was opportunity costs and the benefits of $30 million
consisted of $40 million for one group and $10 million for another. Treating the nega-
tive WTP as a cost rather than as a negative benefit would leave the net benefits un-
changed but lower the benefit-cost ratio from 3 to 2. Thus, benefit-cost ratios are sub-
ject to manipulation. For these reasons, we recommend that analysts avoid using
benefit-cost ratios and rely instead on net benefits to rank policies.
Return to Table 1 and interpret the listed costs as public expenditures exactly
equal to opportunity costs and the listed benefits as the willingness-to-pay values for
all project effects. Now assume that, while none of the projects are mutually exclusive
in a physical sense, total public expenditures (costs) cannot exceed $10 million because
of a budget constraint that is binding for political reasons. If project B is selected, then
the budget constraint is met, and net benefits of $20 million result. If project A and the
combination of projects C and D are selected instead, then the budget constraint is also
met, but net benefits of $23 million result. No other feasible combination offers larger
net benefits.Thus, under the budget constraint, net benefits are maximized by choosing
projects A and the combination of C and D.
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES RELATED TO WILLINGNESS TO PAY
Three sets of fundamental issues arise with respect to the interpretation of WTP as
a measure of benefits in the assessment of the efficiency of policies. First, a theoret-
ical limitation in the aggregation of willingness-to-pay amounts across individuals
opens the possibility that the net benefits criterion will not lead to fully satisfactory
rankings of policies. Second, normative issues arise because of the dependence of
WTP on the distribution of wealth in society. Third, normative issues also arise with
respect to the issue of standing, which concerns whose WTP counts in the aggrega-
tion of benefits.
The Theoretical Limitation of Willingness to Pay 
as Basis for Social Orderings
Although using net benefits as a basis for choosing efficient public policies is intu-
itively appealing, its implementation through the aggregation of the willingness-to-pay
amounts of the members of society confronts a fundamental theoretical limitation:
ranking policies in terms of net benefits does not guarantee a transitive social ordering
of the policies.
A transitive ordering requires that if X is preferred to Y, and Y is preferred to Z,
then X is preferred to Z. The logic of transitivity seems so clear that it is usually taken
as an axiom of rationality in the preferences of individuals. We would certainly be
34

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
skeptical about the mental state of someone who tells us she prefers apples to oranges,
and she prefers oranges to peaches, but she prefers peaches to apples.This violation of
transitivity implies a cyclical, and therefore ambiguous, ordering of the alternatives.
Clearly, transitivity is a desirable property of any preference ordering.
If every member of a society has transitive preferences, does it follow that reason-
able procedures for aggregating their preferences will always produce a transitive so-
cial ordering? An example makes clear that the answer is no. Consider a common ag-
gregation procedure: majority rule voting over pairs of alternatives. Imagine that
society consists of three voters who have preferences over three alternatives, X, Y,
and Z, as displayed in Table 2. Specifically, voter 1 prefers X to Y to Z, voter 2 prefers
Z to X to Y, and voter 3 prefers Y to Z to X. If the voters express their sincere prefer-
ences in each round of voting, then we would find that given the choice between X and
Y, voters 1 and 2 (a majority) would vote for X because they each prefer it to Y.
Similarly, given the choice between Y and Z, a majority would vote for Y. Yet in a
choice between X and Z, a majority would vote for Z.Thus, the implied social ordering
is intransitive because X is preferred to Y, Y is preferred to Z, but Z is preferred to X!
Is the possibility of obtaining an intransitive social ordering peculiar to the use of
pairwise majority rule voting to produce rankings alternatives? Surprisingly, it can re-
sult from any rule for creating a social ordering that satisfies certain minimal require-
ments.We cannot expect any rule for creating a social ranking of policy alternatives to
be fully satisfactory. In 1951, Kenneth Arrow proved that any social choice rule that sat-
isfies a basic set of fairness conditions can produce an intransitive social ordering.4
Arrow’s theorem applies to any rule for ranking alternatives in which two or more per-
sons must rank three or more alternatives. It requires any such scheme to satisfy at
least the following conditions to be considered fair: First, each person is allowed to
have any transitive preferences over the possible policy alternatives (axiom of unre-
stricted domain). Second, if one alternative is unanimously preferred to a second, then
the rule for choice will not select the second (axiom of Pareto choice). Third, the rank-
ing of any two alternatives should not depend on what other alternatives are available
(axiom of independence). Fourth, the rule must not allow any one person dictatorial
power to impose his or her preferences as the social ordering (axiom of nondictator-
ship). Arrow’s theorem states that any fair rule for choice (one that satisfies the four
previous axioms) will not guarantee a transitive social ordering of policy alternatives.
That is, it is possible that individual preferences are such that the social ordering will be
TABLE 2
Cyclical Social Preferences under
Pairwise Majority Rule Voting
Preference Ordering
Voter 1
Voter 2
Voter 3
First Choice
X
Z
Y
Second Choice
Y
X
Z
Third Choice
Z
Y
X
(1) Pairwise Voting Outcomes: X versus Y, X wins; Y versus Z,
Y wins; X versus Z, Z wins.
(2) Implied Social Ordering: X is preferred to Y,Y is preferred
to Z, but Z is preferred to X!
35

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
cyclical. Thus, unless the net benefit rule, which is a social choice rule, violates one of
the axioms, it cannot guarantee a transitive social ordering of policies.
In order to ensure that the use of WTP in the implementation of the net benefit
rule will produce a transitive social ordering of policies, some restrictions, violating the
axiom of unrestricted domain, must be placed on the preferences that individuals are
allowed to hold.5 Economic models commonly assume that individual preferences are
represented by utility functions (numerical representations of preference orderings)
that exhibit positive but declining marginal utility; that is, other things equal, incremen-
tal consumption of any good increases utility but not by as much as the previous incre-
mental unit. Unfortunately, this relatively weak restriction of the domain of prefer-
ences (it rules out preferences that cannot be represented by such utility functions) is
not enough to guarantee that the net benefit rule based on WTP will always produce a
transitive social ordering.Two additional restrictions are required: (1) The utility func-
tions of individuals must be such that the individual demand curves that they imply can
be aggregated into a market demand curve with the sum of individual incomes as an
argument, and (2) all individuals must face the same set of prices.6 The first restriction
is quite strong in that it requires each individual’s demand for each good to increase
linearly with increasing income and have the same rate of increase for each individual.
The second restriction, generally satisfied when all goods are traded in markets, may be
violated when policies allocate quantities of goods to individuals who cannot resell
them in markets.
The necessity of restricting the allowed preferences of individuals to guarantee a tran-
sitive social ordering from the use of WTP in the implementation of the net benefits crite-
rion makes clear that it is an imperfect criterion for assessing the relative efficiency of al-
ternative policies.7 Of course,analysts can avoid this theoretical problem by assuming that
the preferences of individual consumers conform to restrictive assumptions consistent
with the existence of an appropriate aggregate demand function. Alternatively, analysts
can avoid it by assuming that policies affect the price of only a single good. Indeed, ana-
lysts seeking to estimate WTP typically work with an aggregate,or market,demand sched-
ule for a single good,implicitly assuming away price effects in the markets for other goods.
Despite its theoretical imperfection as a measure of efficiency, WTP is an intu-
itively appealing and practical concept for guiding the implementation of the net ben-
efits criterion.As discussed next, however, its dependence on the distribution of wealth
raises a serious normative concern about its use.
Dependence of Willingness to Pay on the Distribution of Wealth
The willingness of a person to pay to obtain a desired policy impact will tend to be
higher the greater the wealth that she or he has available. Consequently, the sum of the
willingness of persons to pay, the benefit measure in CBA, depends on their levels of
wealth. If the distribution of wealth in society were to be changed, then it would be
likely that the sum of individuals’ willingness-to-pay amounts would change as well,
perhaps altering the ranking of alternative policies in terms of their net benefits.
The dependence of net benefits on the distribution of wealth would not pose a
conceptual problem if losers from adopted policies were actually compensated so that
36

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
the adopted polices would produce actual, rather than potential, Pareto improvements.
From a utilitarian perspective, Pareto improvement guarantees that the sum of utilities
of individuals in society increases. In application of the potential Pareto principle, how-
ever, it is possible that an adopted policy could actually lower the sum of utilities if
people with different levels of wealth had different marginal utilities of money.8 As an
illustration, consider a policy that gives $10 of benefits to a person with high wealth and
inflicts $9 of costs on a person with low wealth. If the low-wealth person’s marginal
utility of money is higher than that of the high-wealth person, then it is possible that
the utility loss of the low-wealth person could outweigh the utility gain of the high-
wealth person. Thus, while the Pareto principle allows us to avoid interpersonal utility
comparisons by guaranteeing increases in aggregate utility for policies with positive
net benefits, the potential Pareto principle does not do so.
The implication of the dependence of WTP on wealth is that the justification for
the potential Pareto principle weakens for policies that concentrate costs and benefits
on different wealth groups. Policies with positive net benefits that concentrate costs on
low-wealth groups may not increase aggregate utility; moreover, policies with negative
net benefits that concentrate benefits on low-wealth groups may not decrease aggre-
gate utility. However, if the potential Pareto principle is consistently applied and
adopted policies do not produce consistent losers or winners, then the overall effects of
the policies taken together will tend to make everyone better off. Hence, concerns
about reductions in aggregate utility would be unfounded.
Critics of CBA sometimes question the validity of the concept of Pareto efficiency it-
self because it depends on the status quo distribution of wealth. Returning to Figure 1,
note that the location of the Pareto frontier would change if the location of the status quo
point were changed. Some have advocated the formulation of a social welfare function
that maps the utility,wealth,or consumption of all individuals in society into an index that
ranks alternative distributions of goods.9 In this broader framework incorporating distrib-
utional values, an efficient policy is one that maximizes the value of the social welfare
function. But how does society determine the social welfare function? Unfortunately,
Arrow’s theorem, as well as practical difficulties in obtaining needed information, pre-
cludes the formulation of a social welfare function through any fair collective choice pro-
cedure.10 In practice, it must therefore be provided subjectively by the analyst.11 We be-
lieve that it is usually better to keep the subjective distributional values of analysts explicit
by comparing policies both in terms of efficiency and the selected distributional criteria,as
illustrated in the discussion of multigoal analysis and distributionally weighted CBA later
in this chapter. As an alternative, analysts can report net benefits by wealth or income
group as well as for society as a whole.
Dependence of Net Benefits on Assumptions About Standing
The question of whose WTP should count in the aggregation of net benefits has come
to be known as the issue of standing.12 It has immediate practical importance in at
least three contexts: the jurisdictional definition of society, the exclusion of socially
unacceptable preferences, and the inclusion of the preferences of future generations.
A recognition of social constraints, rights, and duties often helps answer the question
of standing.
37

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Jurisdictional Definition of Society.
The most inclusive definition of society encom-
passes all people, no matter where they live or to which government they owe alle-
giance. Analysts working for the United Nations or some other international organiza-
tion might very well adopt such a universalistic, or global, perspective.Yet for purposes
of CBA, most analysts define society at the national level. The basis for this restriction
in jurisdiction is the notion that the citizens of a country share a common constitution,
formal or informal, that sets out fundamental values and rules for making collective
choices. In a sense, they consent to being a society. Furthermore, they accept that the cit-
izens of other countries have their own constitutions that make them distinct polities.
The distinction between universal and national jurisdiction becomes relevant in
the evaluation of policies whose impacts spill over national borders. For example, if
U.S. analysts adopt the national-level jurisdiction as defining society, then they would
not attempt to measure the willingness of Canadian residents to pay to avoid pollution
originating in the United States that exacerbates acid rain in Canada. Of course, the
willingness of U.S. citizens to pay to reduce acid rain in Canada should be included in
the CBA, though in practice, it would be very difficult to measure.
A similar issue arises with respect to subnational units of government. As an il-
lustration, consider a city that is deciding whether to build a bike path. Assume that
a CBA from the national perspective (giving standing to everyone in the country)
predicts that the project will generate $1 million in benefits (which all accrue to city
residents) and $2 million in costs (which are also borne by city residents), thereby re-
sulting in negative $1 million in net benefits (or $1 million in net costs).Also assume,
however, that through an intergovernmental grants program the national govern-
ment will repay the city’s $2 million of costs resulting from this particular project.
The grant appears to the city residents as a $2 million benefit offsetting $2 million in
local costs. Thus, from the perspective of the city, the bike path generates $1 million
in net benefits rather than $1 million in net costs.
One can make an argument that the city should treat its residents as the relevant
society and, hence, should not give standing to nonresidents.The city government has a
charter to promote the welfare of its residents. The city by itself can do relatively little
to affect national policy—even if it does not take advantage of all the opportunities of-
fered by the national government, other cities probably will. Furthermore, analysts
who do not adopt the city’s perspective, but instead employ only the broader national
perspective, risk losing influence, a possibility of special concern to analysts who earn
their living by giving advice to the city.
Adopting the subnational perspective, however, makes CBA a less valuable decision
rule for public policy. We believe that analysts should ideally conduct CBA from the na-
tional perspective.They may, of course, also conduct a parallel CBA from the subnational
perspective as a response to the narrower interests of their clients. If major impacts spill
over national borders, then the CBA should be done from the global as well as the na-
tional perspective.
Jurisdictional Membership.
Deciding the jurisdictional definition of society leaves
open a number of questions about who should be counted as members of the jurisdic-
tion. For example, almost all analysts agree that citizens of their country, whether living
38

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
domestically or abroad, should have standing. With respect to noncitizens in their
country, most analysts would probably give standing to those who were in the country
legally. Less consensus exists with respect to the standing of other categories of people:
should illegal aliens have standing? What about the children of illegal aliens?
One source of guidance for answering these types of questions is the system of
legally defined rights.13 For example, a ruling by the courts that the children of illegal
aliens are entitled to access publicly funded education might encourage the analyst to
give these children standing in CBA. Reliance on legally defined rights to determine
standing, however, is not always morally acceptable. It would not have been right to
deny standing in CBA to slaves in the antebellum United States, nonwhites in apartheid
South Africa, or Jews in Nazi Germany simply because they lacked legal rights.
Therefore, legal rights alone cannot fully resolve the issue of standing in CBA. They
provide a presumption, but one that analysts may sometimes have an ethical responsi-
bility to challenge. Democratic regimes usually provide mechanisms for challenging
such presumptions, but often with personal cost to individual analysts.
One other issue of membership deserves brief mention. CBA is anthropocentric.
Only the willingness of people to pay counts. Neither flora nor fauna have standing.
That is not to say that their “interests” have no representation. Many people are willing
to pay to preserve a species, and some are even willing to pay to preserve individual an-
imals or plants. It is conceptually correct within the CBA framework to take account of
these willingness-to-pay amounts, though doing so  effectively is very often beyond our
analytical reach.
Exclusion of Socially Unacceptable Preferences.
People sometimes hold preferences
that society seeks to suppress through widely supported legal sanctions. For instance, al-
though some people would be willing to pay for the opportunity to have sexual relations
with children, most countries attempt to thwart the expression of such preferences
through strict criminal penalties. Should such socially unacceptable preferences be
given standing in CBA?
One approach to answering this question adds duties and prohibitions to legal
rights as sources of guidance about social values.Together they can be thought of as so-
cial constraints that should be taken into account in CBA just as the analyst takes into
account physical and budgetary constraints.14 Clear and widely accepted legal sanc-
tions may help identify preferences that should not have standing.
An important application arises in estimating the net benefits of policies that are
intended to reduce the amount of criminal behavior in society. Some analysts count re-
ductions in the monetary returns to crime as a cost borne by criminals, offsetting the
benefits of reduced criminal activity enjoyed by their victims.15 As the returns from
crime are illegal and widely viewed as wrong, however, the social constraint perspec-
tive argues against treating them in this manner.
The issue of the standing of preferences can be especially difficult for analysts to re-
solve when they are dealing with foreign cultures. Consider, for instance, the CBA of a
program to bring water to poor communities in Haiti.16Analysts found that husbands had
negative willingness to pay amounts for the time that their wives saved from easier access
to water. By contemporary standards in most urban settings, people would generally re-
gard these preferences as unworthy.Yet in the cultural context of rural Haiti at the time,
39

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
they were consistent with prevailing norms. Should these preferences of husbands have
standing? In practice, lack of data to estimate willingness-to-pay amounts for this sort of
impact usually spares analysts from having to answer such difficult questions.
Inclusion of the Preferences of Future Generations.
Some policies adopted today,
such as the disposal of nuclear wastes or the restoration of wilderness areas, may have
impacts on people not yet born. Though we believe that these people should have
standing in CBA, there is no way to measure their WTP directly because they are not
yet here to express it.17 How serious a problem does this pose for CBA?
The absence of direct measures of the willingness of future generations to pay for
policy impacts generally poses few problems for two reasons. First, because few poli-
cies involve impacts that appear only in the far future, the WTP of people alive today
for the effects during their lifetimes can be used to some extent to predict how future
generations will value them. Second, as most people alive today care about the well-
being of their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, whether born or yet to
be born, they are likely to include the interests of these generations to some extent in
their own valuations of impacts. Indeed, because people cannot predict with certainty
the place that their future offspring will hold in society, they are likely to take a very
broad view of future impacts.
CONCERNS ABOUT THE ROLE OF CBA IN THE POLITICAL PROCESS
The most vocal critics of CBA fear that it subverts democratic values. Some see the
monetizing of impacts as a profane attempt to place a price on everything. Others see
CBA as undermining democracy. Though these fears are largely unfounded, they de-
serve explicit consideration by advocates of CBA.
Does CBA Debase the Terms of Public Discourse?
A number of objections have been raised to the effort made in CBA to value all policy
impacts in terms of dollars: Pricing goods not normally traded in markets—for example,
life itself—decreases their perceived value by implying that they can be compared to
goods that are traded in markets; pricing such goods reduces their perceived value by
weakening the claim that they should not be for sale in any circumstance; and pricing
all goods undercuts the claim that some goods are “priceless.”18 The language and con-
ceptual frameworks that people use almost certainly affect the nature of debate to
some extent. It is not clear, however, how influential the technical concepts of economics
are in actually shaping public discourse. In any event, the correct interpretation of how
nonmarket goods are monetized largely undercuts the charge that CBA debases pub-
lic discourse.
Consider the issue of the monetization of the value of life. On the surface it may
appear that economists are implying that a price can be put on someone’s life. A
closer look indicates that the value of life estimated by economists is a measure of
how much people are willing to pay to reduce their risk of death; in other words, it is
40

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
the value of a statistical life, the WTP to avoid risks that will result in one less death in
a population.Although it may not be appropriate to place a dollar value on the life of
any particular person, it is appropriate to use the value of a statistical life in assessing
proposed policies that change the risk of death that people face.
Every day people voluntarily make trade-offs between changes in the risk of death
and other values: driving faster to save time increases the risk of being involved in a
fatal traffic accident; eating fatty foods is pleasurable but increases the risk of fatal
heart disease; skiing is exhilarating but risks fatal injury. Is it inappropriate to take ac-
count of these preferences in valuing the impacts of public policies? Most economists
would answer no. Indeed, valuing statistical lives seems less problematic than attempt-
ing to place a dollar value on a specific person by estimating the person’s forgone fu-
ture earnings, the procedure employed by courts in cases of wrongful death.
Does CBA Undermine Democracy?
Some critics of CBA charge that it undermines democracy by imposing a single goal, effi-
ciency, in the assessment of public policies.Their charge would be justified if the appropri-
ate comparison were between a world in which public policy is determined solely through
democratic processes that gave equal weight to all interests and a world in which public
policy is determined strictly through the application of CBA. But this is an inappropriate
comparison for two reasons. First, actual governmental processes fall far short of “ideal
democracy.” Second, at most, CBA has modest influence in public policy making.19
Does wealth produce happiness? Surveys con-
ducted within countries consistently find that
rich people (say those in the top quarter of the
income distribution) on average report being
happier than poorer people (say those in the
bottom quarter of the income distribution).
Yet, if one looks at either of these groups over
time, one discovers that its absolute level of
happiness is roughly constant despite the fact
that economic growth has made it richer.
Similarly, comparing the happiness of the rich
(or poor) across countries generally shows sim-
ilar levels of happiness despite substantial dif-
ferences in the overall levels of wealth between
the countries. What explains this puzzle?
Richard Layard suggests two psychological ef-
fects that move up the norm to which people
EXHIBIT 1
compare their own circumstances as societies
become wealthier: habituation and rivalry.
Habituation involves getting used to things we
have—an initial feeling of happiness from ac-
quisition tends to evaporate as we get used to
having the good. Rivalry involves comparing
one’s situation to those in a reference group—
happiness depends on relative position.
These phenomena raise concerns about in-
terpreting changes in social surplus as changes
in aggregate happiness. A policy that increased
everyone’s income would certainly pass the net
benefits test. Yet extreme habituation might
quickly return everyone to their initial levels of
utility, or extreme rivalry would result in no
utility gains at all because no one’s relative po-
sition changes!
Source: Adapted from Richard Layard,“Happiness: Has Social Science a Clue?” Lionel Robbins Memorial Lectures,
London School of Economics, Lecture 1: Income and Happiness: Rethinking Economic Policy, March 3, 4, and 5, 2003.
41

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
The interests of vocal constituencies, often those who can organize themselves in
anticipation of obtaining concentrated benefits or avoiding concentrated costs, typi-
cally receive great attention from those in representative governments who wish to be
reelected or advance to higher office. Less vocal constituencies usually have their in-
terests represented less well. The interests of many of these less vocal constituencies
are often better reflected in CBA. For example, CBA takes account of the individually
small, but in aggregate large, costs borne by consumers because of government price-
support programs that raise prices to the benefit of a small number of well-organized
agricultural producers. But CBA rarely serves as the decisive decision rule for public
policy. Indeed, it is difficult to identify important public policies selected solely on the
basis of CBA.
A realistic assessment of representative democracy and the current influence of
CBA should allay concerns that the latter is subverting the former. To the extent it is
influential, CBA probably contributes to more democratic public policy by paying at-
tention to diffuse interests typically underrepresented in a representative democracy.
It would have to become much more influential before it could possibly be viewed as
undermining democratic processes. Despite our hopes that the readers of this book will
help make the use of CBA more prevalent, we have no concerns about it being too in-
fluential in the near future.
LIMITATIONS OF CBA: OTHER ANALYTICAL APPROACHES
It is important for analysts to realize the limitations of CBA. Two types of circum-
stances make the net benefits criterion an inappropriate decision rule for public policy.
First, technical limitations may make it impossible to quantify and then monetize all
relevant impacts as costs and benefits. Second, goals other than efficiency are relevant
to the policy. For example, some policies are intended to affect the equality of out-
comes or opportunity. Nevertheless, even when the net benefits criterion is not appro-
priate as a decision rule, CBA usually provides a useful yardstick for comparing alter-
native policies in terms of efficiency along with other goals.
Technical Limitations to CBA
CBA in its pure form requires that all impacts relevant to efficiency be quantified and
made commensurate through monetization. Only when all the costs and benefits are
expressed in dollars can the potential Pareto principle be applied through the calcula-
tion of net benefits. Limitations in theory, data, or analytical resources, however, may
make it impossible for the analyst to measure and value all impacts of a policy as com-
mensurate costs and benefits. Nonetheless, it may still be desirable to do a qualitative
cost-benefit analysis or, if all but one important effect can be monetized, to switch from
CBA to cost-effectiveness analysis. A brief description of each of these alternative ap-
proaches follows.
Qualitative CBA.
In conducting qualitative CBA, the analyst typically monetizes as
many of the impacts as possible and then makes qualitative estimates of the relative
42

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
importance of the remaining costs and benefits. Consider, for instance, a program to
plant trees along an urban highway.The cost of the program, which consists only of the
expenditures that must be made to hire a contractor to plant and to maintain the trees,
can be directly monetized. The benefits, however, include a number of effects that are
likely to be difficult to monetize: the visual pleasure the trees give to motorists, the re-
duction of noise in adjoining neighborhoods, and the filtering of pollutants from the
air. With sufficient resources, the analyst would be able to monetize these benefits
through a variety of techniques such as surveys of motorists and comparisons with the
effects of other noise-reduction programs on property values. But because the program
involves relatively small costs, it is unlikely that such efforts would be justified. Instead,
a reasonable approach would be to list these benefits with rough estimates of their
order of magnitude.
Analysts who lack the time, data, or other resources needed to value all relevant
impacts directly may be able to make use of estimates found in other cost-benefit
analyses or economic research. For example, most analysts doing CBA do not directly
estimate people’s WTP for reductions in mortality risk. Instead, they rely on econo-
metric studies investigating how people trade such things as changes in wages for
changes in levels of risk.
When possible, analysts should quantify the impacts of the policy; that is, they
should estimate the numeric values of the nonmonetized impacts. For example, consider
analysis of a proposed regulation to restrict commercial fishing practices so that fewer
dolphins will be killed per ton of tuna harvested.The regulation produces a benefit be-
cause some people have a positive willingness to pay for dolphin deaths avoided.
Actually monetizing, that is, measuring the WTP, is a difficult task that might not be fea-
sible for the analyst conducting the CBA. Even if monetization is infeasible, however, it
is useful to attempt to predict the number of dolphins saved by the regulation. Doing so
increases the usefulness of the qualitative CBA for others by conveying the magnitude
of the impact of the regulation. Additionally, the client or other users of the analysis
may be able to provide estimates of the willingness of people to pay for each dolphin
saved so that (fully monetized) CBA becomes feasible.
Analysts often face a more complicated choice than simply whether to quantify a
category of costs or benefits. Empirical measures can have varying degrees of accuracy,
ranging from precise estimates in which we have great confidence to imprecise esti-
mates in which we have little confidence. The decision to quantify, and with what de-
gree of effort, should reflect the value of the increased precision that can be obtained
and the costs of obtaining it. In other words, we should make such decisions within a
CBA framework!
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.
Analysts can often quantify impacts but not monetize
them all. If the analysts are unable or unwilling to monetize the major benefit, then cost-
effectiveness analysis may be appropriate. Because not all of the impacts can be mone-
tized, it is not possible to estimate net benefits. The analysts can, however, construct a
ratio involving the quantitative, but nonmonetized, benefit and the total dollar costs. A
comparison allows the analyst to rank policies in terms of the cost-effectiveness criterion.
However, unlike the net benefits criterion of CBA, it does not directly allow the analysts
to conclude that the highest-ranked policy contributes to greater efficiency.
43

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Return to the qualitative CBA of the fishing regulation discussed earlier. Suppose
that, except for the benefit from avoided dolphin deaths, all the impacts could be mon-
etized to a net cost of c dollars. If the number of avoided dolphin deaths were nd, then
the analyst could construct an effectiveness-cost ratio for the regulation, nd>c, which
can be interpreted as the average number of dolphins saved per dollar of cost borne.
(Alternatively, the analyst could construct the cost-effectiveness ratio as c>nd, which
can be interpreted as the average dollar cost per dolphin saved.) Now imagine a num-
ber of alternative regulations, each of which involves different net costs and a different
number of dolphins saved. A cost-effectiveness ratio can be calculated for each of
these programs to facilitate comparison across alternative regulations.
Using cost-effectiveness analysis for decision making usually requires that some
additional information be brought to bear. If the objective is to save as many dolphins
as possible at a net cost of no more than c*, then the analyst should select the most ef-
fective regulation from among those with net costs of less than c*. Alternatively, if the
objective is to save at least nd* dolphins, then the analyst should select the regulation
with the lowest cost from among those regulations saving at least nd*.This is not neces-
sarily the alternative with the best cost-effectiveness ratio. For example, if nd*  1,000,
one would choose a regulation that saved 1,000 dolphins at a cost of $1 million ($1,000
per dolphin saved) over an alternative regulation that saved 500 dolphins at a cost of
$50 thousand ($100 per dolphin saved).
Analysts often encounter situations in which they or their clients are unable or un-
willing to monetize impacts such as human lives saved, injuries avoided, and the acres
of old-growth forest preserved.
The Relevance of CBA when Goals Other than Efficiency Matter
One goal, efficiency, underlies CBA. The general public, politicians, and even econo-
mists, however, very often consider goals reflecting other values to be relevant to the
evaluation of public policies proposed to solve social problems.Although efficiency al-
most always is one of the relevant goals in policy analysis, other goals, such as equality
of opportunity, equality of outcome, expenditure constraints, political feasibility, and
national security, for instance, may be as, or even more, important.When goals in addi-
tion to efficiency are relevant, as well as when efficiency is the only goal, but relevant
impacts cannot be confidently monetized, multigoal analysis provides the appropriate
framework. In the special case in which efficiency and equality of outcome are the only
relevant goals, distributionally weighted CBA may be an appropriate technique.
Multigoal Analysis.
The most general analytical framework is multigoal analysis. At
the heart of multigoal analysis lies the notion that all policy alternatives should be com-
pared in terms of all the relevant goals. Though multigoal analysis can be prescribed as
a number of distinct steps,20 three of its aspects are especially important. First, the ana-
lyst must move from relevant social values to general goals to specific impact categories
that can be used as yardsticks for evaluating alternative policies. For example, the value
44

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
of human dignity may imply a goal of improving equality of opportunity, which might be
expressed as quantifiable impacts such as increasing participation in higher education
and expanding workforce participation. Second, the analyst must evaluate each alterna-
tive policy, including the status quo, with respect to each of the impacts.Third, as no pol-
icy alternative is likely to dominate the others in terms of improvement in all the goals,
the analyst usually can only make a recommendation to adopt one of the alternatives by
carefully considering and making a subjective judgment concerning the trade-offs in the
achievement of goals it offers relative to the other alternatives.
As a simple example, consider a multigoal analysis of alternative income transfer
policies intended to help poor families. The analyst might construct the worksheet
shown in Table 3 as a checklist for keeping track of the relevant goals. Increasing effi-
ciency and improving the quality of life of poor families are both appropriate substan-
tive goals. The former captures the aggregate gain or loss to society from transfers; the
latter captures that portion of the gain or loss accruing to the poorest families.The goal
of achieving political feasibility might be added to take account of the fact that a con-
sensus on the relative importance of the substantive goals among politicians is unlikely.
In this example, it can be thought of as an instrumental goal that is valuable not for its
own sake but because it helps achieve the substantive goals. The major efficiency im-
pacts are likely to be work disincentives for the recipients of aid and the real resource
costs of administering the aid policy. If both of these impacts could be monetized, then
the criterion for measuring efficiency would simply be the sum of the net benefits of
these two impacts as measured in CBA. If either one of them could not be monetized,
however, then efficiency would be stated in terms of the two impacts. The goal of im-
proving the quality of life of poor families would probably be expressed in terms of such
impacts as reducing the number of families below the poverty line, reducing the number
of one-parent families, and increasing the educational achievement of family members.
TABLE 3
Evaluation Matrix Worksheet for Alternative Family Aid Policies
Policy Alternatives
Goals
Impact Categories
Policy A 
(status quo)
Policy B
Policy C
Efficiency
Labor earnings
Investment in 
human capital
Administrative 
costs
Quality of life 
of poorest families
Number of fami-
lies below poverty line 
Number of 
one-parent families 
Educational 
achievement of family 
members
Political
feasibility
Probability of adoption
of required 
legislation
45

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
The impact associated with the additional goal of political feasibility might be the
change in the probability of passage of legislation required to implement the policy.
Before selecting among the alternative policies, the analyst should fill in all the
cells of a matrix like the one shown in Table 3. Each cell would contain a prediction of
the effect of a particular policy in terms of a particular impact category. By filling in all
the cells, the analyst seeks to gain a comprehensive comparison of the alternatives
across all the impact categories, and hence across their related goals.
Note that one can think of CBA, qualitative CBA, and cost-effectiveness analysis
as special cases of multigoal analysis. In the case of CBA, there is one goal (efficiency)
with one criterion (net benefits) so that the evaluation matrix has only one row, and the
choice among alternatives is trivial (simply select the policy with the largest net bene-
fits). In the case of qualitative CBA, there is also one goal, but because all relevant im-
pacts cannot be monetized, it corresponds to several criteria, one for each impact. In
the case of cost-effectiveness analysis, the goal of efficiency is often combined with
some other goal such as satisfying a constraint on monetary costs or achieving some
target level of reduction in the quantified but nonmonetized impact.
Distributionally Weighted CBA.
If both efficiency and equality of income are rele-
vant goals and their relative importance can be quantified, then distributionally
weighted CBA provides an alternative decision rule to the maximization of net bene-
fits. Instead of considering aggregate net benefits as in standard CBA, net benefits are
calculated for each of several relevant groups distinguished by income, wealth, or some
similar characteristic of relevance to a distributional concern. The net benefits of each
group are multiplied by a weighting factor, selected by the analyst to reflect some dis-
tributional goal, and then summed to arrive at a number that can be used to rank alter-
native policies.
The major problem analysts encounter in doing distributionally weighted CBA is
arriving at an appropriate and acceptable set of weights. One general approach, which
takes as a desirable social goal increasing equality of wealth, involves making the
weights inversely proportional to wealth (or income) to favor policies that tend to
equalize wealth (or income) in the population.21 Another general approach, which
takes as a desirable social goal the raising of the position of the least advantaged in so-
ciety, involves placing a higher weight on the net benefits of those with incomes or
wealth below some threshold levels than on those with incomes or wealth above the
threshold. As reasonable arguments can be made in support of each of these ap-
proaches, the absence of a consensus about appropriate weights is not surprising.22
Obviously, developing weights that allow a single quantitative criterion for rank-
ing alternative policies makes the choice among policy alternatives easier. Yet this
ease is achieved only by making an assumption that forces efficiency and equality of
outcomes to be fully commensurate. Dissatisfaction with the strong assumption re-
quired to do this has led a number of analysts to suggest that distributionally weighted
CBA should always be done in conjunction with standard CBA to make clearer the
efficiency implications of the selected weights.23 In doing so, the study becomes, in effect,
a multigoal analysis, raising the question of whether an explicit treatment of efficiency
and equality as separate goals might not be a more appropriate framework when both
efficiency and distributional concerns are important. Cost-effectiveness analysis
46

A study by the Congressional Budget Office
to assess three alternatives for reducing U.S.
consumption of gasoline listed the following
criteria:
This study weighs the relative merits of tightening
CAFE standards, raising the federal gasoline tax,
and creating a cap-and-trade program against
several major criteria:
Cost-Effectiveness. Reducing gasoline con-
sumption would impose costs (both monetary
and nonmonetary) on various producers and con-
sumers. A cost-effective policy would keep those
costs to a minimum.
Predictability of Gasoline Savings. How reli-
ably would the policy bring about the desired re-
duction in gasoline consumption?
Effects on Safety. How would the policy alter
the number and severity of traffic accidents?
Effects on Other External Costs Related to
Driving. Reducing gasoline consumption would
affect not only the United States’ energy security
and carbon emissions but other driving-related
Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
EXHIBIT 2
might also provide a more reasonable approach than distributionally weighted CBA
by posing the question in terms of achieving the most desirable redistribution possible
for some fixed level of net cost.24
CONCLUSION
CBA is a method for determining if proposed policies could potentially be Pareto im-
proving: positive net benefits make it possible, in the sense of making available re-
sources to compensate those who bear costs so that some people are made better off
without making anyone else worse off.Willingness to pay and opportunity cost are the
guiding principles for measuring costs and benefits.
external costs (ones whose full weight is borne by
society at large rather than by an individual).
Those external costs include traffic congestion,
the need for highway construction and mainte-
nance, and emissions of air pollutants besides car-
bon dioxide.
In addition to those factors, the three policy
options would have other implications that poli-
cymakers may care about—such as their effects
on people at different income levels and in differ-
ent parts of the country and their impact on the
amount of revenue collected by the federal gov-
ernment. (Summary, p.1)
One could imagine turning the analysis into a
CBA by monetizing the effects on safety and
the effects on other external costs related to dri-
ving and treating predictability of gasoline sav-
ings through sensitivity analysis. As monetizing
the distributional concerns would be difficult, a
multigoal analysis with the CBA assessing effi-
ciency and a separate treatment of distribu-
tional impacts could be useful.
Source: Adapted from Congressional Budget Office, Reducing Gasoline Consumption:Three Policy Options, November
2002 (www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/39xx/doc3991/11-21-GasolineStudy.pdf).
47

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
EXERCISES
1.
Many experts claim that,although VHS came to dominate the video recorder market,Betamax
was a superior technology.Assume that these experts are correct,so that,all other things equal,
a world in which all video recorders were Betamax technology would be Pareto superior to a
world in which all video recorders were VHS technology.Yet it seems implausible that a policy
that forced a switch in technologies would be even potentially Pareto improving. Explain.
2.
Let’s explore the concept of willingness to pay with a thought experiment. Imagine a spe-
cific sporting, entertainment, or cultural event that you would very much like to attend—
perhaps a World Cup match, the seventh game of the World Series, a Rolling Stones concert,
or a Kathleen Battle performance.
a.
What is the most you would be willing to pay for a ticket to the event?
b.
Imagine that you won a ticket to the event in a lottery.What is the minimum amount of
money that you would be willing to accept to give up the ticket?
c.
Imagine that you had an income 50 percent higher than it is now, but that you didn’t
win a ticket to the event.What is the most you would be willing to pay for a ticket?
d.
Do you know anyone who would sufficiently dislike the event that they would not use
a free ticket unless they were paid to do so?
e.
Do your answers suggest any possible generalizations about willingness to pay?
3.
How closely do government expenditures measure opportunity cost for each of the follow-
ing program inputs?
a.
Time of jurors in a criminal justice program that requires more trials.
b.
Land to be used for a nuclear waste storage facility that is owned by the government
and located on a military base.
c.
Labor for a reforestation program in a small rural community with high unemployment.
d.
Labor of current government employees who are required to administer a new program.
e.
Concrete that was previously poured as part of a bridge foundation.
4.
Three mutually exclusive projects are being considered for a remote river valley: Project R,
a recreational facility, has estimated benefits of $10 million and costs of $8 million; project F,
a forest preserve with some recreational facilities, has estimated benefits of $13 million and
48

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
costs of $10 million; project W, a wilderness area with restricted public access, has estimated
benefits of $5 million and costs of $1 million. In addition, a road could be built for a cost of
$4 million that would increase the benefits of project R by $8 million, increase the benefits
of project F by $5 million, and reduce the benefits of project W by $1 million. Even in the
absence of any of the other projects, the road has estimated benefits of $2 million.
a.
Calculate the benefit-cost ratio and net benefits for each possible alternative to the sta-
tus quo. Note that there are seven possible alternatives to the status quo: R, F, and W,
both with and without the road, and the road alone.
b.
If only one of the seven alternatives can be selected, which should be selected accord-
ing to the CBA decision rule?
5.
An analyst for the U.S. Navy was asked to evaluate alternatives for forward-basing a de-
stroyer flotilla. He decided to do the evaluation as a CBA. The major categories of costs
were related to obtaining and maintaining the facilities. The major category of benefit was
reduced sailing time to patrol routes. The analyst recommended the forward base with the
largest net benefits. The admiral, his client, rejected the recommendation because the CBA
did not include the risks to the forward bases from surprise attack and the risks of being un-
expectedly ejected from the bases because of changes in political regimes of the host coun-
tries.Was the analyst’s work wasted?
6.
Because of a recent wave of jewelry store robberies, a city increases police surveillance of
jewelry stores. The increased surveillance costs the city an extra $500,000 per year, but as a
result, the amount of jewelry that is stolen falls. Specifically, without the increase in surveil-
lance, jewelry with a retail value of $1 million would have been stolen. This stolen jewelry
would have been fenced by the jewelry thieves for $600,000. What is the net social benefit
resulting from the police surveillance program?
7.
(Spreadsheet recommended.) Excessive and improper use of antibiotics is contributing to
the resistance of many diseases to existing antibiotics. Consider a regulatory program in the
United States that would monitor antibiotic prescribing by physicians.Analysts estimate the
direct costs of enforcement to be $40 million, the time costs to doctors and health profes-
sionals to be $220 million, and the convenience costs to patients to be $180 million (all an-
nually). The annual benefits of the program are estimated to be $350 million in avoided re-
sistance costs in the United States, $70 million in health benefits in the United States from
better compliance with prescriptions, and $280 million in avoided resistance costs in the rest
of the world. Does the program have positive net benefits from the national perspective? If
not, what fraction of benefits accruing in the rest of the world would have to be counted for
the program to have positive net benefits?
NOTES
1. Unless otherwise stated, we intend efficiency to
mean allocative efficiency, as defined in this sec-
tion.A broader interpretation of efficiency,
which we discuss in a later section, is the maxi-
mization of a specific social welfare function that
explicitly ranks alternative allocations.
2. Nicholas Kaldor,“Welfare Propositions of
Economics and Interpersonal Comparisons of
Utility,” Economic Journal 49(195) 1939,
549–552; and John R. Hicks,“The Valuation of
the Social Income,” Economica 7(26) 1940,
105–124.The principle can also be stated as sug-
gested by Hicks:Adopt a policy if and only if it
would not be in the self-interest of those who
will lose to bribe those who will gain not to
adopt it.
3. Those who are worse off in society may or may
not have been the ones who have borne the net
costs of public policies.This argument thus shifts
the focus from fairness with respect to particular
policies to the relative position of those in society
who are worse off for whatever reason.
49

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
4. Kenneth Arrow, Social Choice and Individual
Values, 2nd ed. (New Haven, CT:Yale University
Press, 1963). For a treatment that can be fol-
lowed with minimal mathematics, see Julian H.
Blau,“A Direct Proof of Arrow’s Theorem,”
Econometrica 40(1) 1972, 61–67.
5. For an overview, see Charles Blackorby and
David Donaldson,“A Review Article:The Case
Against the Use of the Sum of Compensating
Variation in Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Canadian
Journal of Economics 23(3) 1990, 471–494.
6. Charles Blackorby and David Donaldson,
“Consumers’ Surpluses and Consistent Cost-
Benefit Tests,” Social Choice and Welfare 1(4)
1985, 251–262.
7. Even if one does not demand that the potential
Pareto principle always produce a transitive 
social ordering of policies, the most commonly
used measure of willingness to pay,
compensating variation, can produce what are
called Scitovsky reversals (Tibor Scitovsky, “A
Note on Welfare Propositions in Economics,”
Review of Economic Studies 41(1) 1941, 77–88).
Compensating variation, which is discussed in
Appendix 4A, is the change in income that
would be needed to make the consumer indiffer-
ent between the new policy with the income
change and the old policy without it. For exam-
ple, if the price of a good increases, it is the
amount of income needed to compensate con-
sumers so that they would be indifferent be-
tween the original price and the new price with
the compensation. A Scitovsky reversal results
when the sum of compensating variations for a
group of individuals is positive for a move from
one Pareto efficient policy to another and is also
positive for a move from the new policy back to
the original policy! More generally, the sum of
compensating variations can be positive for
moves among Pareto-efficient allocations, so
that it being positive is a necessary but not a suf-
ficient condition for a potential Pareto improve-
ment (Blackorby and Donaldson, “A Review
Article: The Case Against the Use of the Sum of
Compensating Variation in Cost-Benefit
Analysis,” 471–494).
8. The marginal utility of money is how much a per-
son’s utility changes for a small increase in the
person’s wealth. Economists generally assume
declining marginal utility of money.That is, as a
person’s wealth increases, each additional dollar
produces smaller increases in utility.
9. Abram Bergson [as Burk],“A Reformulation of
Certain Aspects of Welfare Economics,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 52(2) 1938,
310–334.
10. Tibor Scitovsky,“The State of Welfare
Economics,” American Economic Review 51(3)
1951, 301–315; and Kenneth Arrow, Social Choice
and Individual Values, 2nd ed. (New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 1963).
11. One could imagine asking a sample of members
of society to value alternative states of the world
resulting from alternative policies, including the
situations of other people. In this way, their will-
ingness to pay would include the value they
place on the distributional impacts of policies.
Unfortunately, implementing such surveys is very
difficult.
12. The seminal work is Dale Whittington and
Duncan MacRae Jr.,“The Issue of Standing in
Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 5(4) 1986, 665–682.
13. Richard O. Zerbe Jr.,“Comment: Does Benefit
Cost Analysis Stand Alone? Rights and
Standing,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 10(1) 1991, 96–105.
14. For a development of the notion of social con-
straints in CBA, see William N.Trumbull,“Who
Has Standing in Cost-Benefit Analysis?” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 9(2) 1990,
201–218; and Richard O. Zerbe Jr.,“Is Cost-
Benefit Analysis Legal? Three Rules,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 17(3) 1998,
419–456. For a more general treatment of institu-
tional constraints and social welfare, see Daniel
W. Bromley, Economic Interests and Institutions:
The Conceptual Foundations of Public Policy
(New York: Basil Blackwell, 1989).
15. David A. Long, Charles D. Mallar, and Craig V.
D.Thornton,“Evaluating the Benefits and Costs
of the Job Corps,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 1(1) 1981, 55–76.
16. For a discussion of this case from the perspective
of a number of issues of standing of preferences,
see Duncan MacRae Jr. and Dale Whittington,
“Assessing Preferences in Cost-Benefit Analysis:
Reflections on Rural Water Supply Evaluation in
Haiti,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 7(2) 1988, 246–263.
50

Conceptual Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
17. See Daniel W. Bromley,“Entitlements, Missing
Markets, and Environmental Uncertainty,”
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 17(2) 1989, 181–194.
18. Steven Kelman,“Cost-Benefit Analysis:An
Ethical Critique,” Regulation January/February
1981, 33–40.
19. Alan Williams,“Cost-Benefit Analysis: Bastard
Science? And/Or Insidious Poison in the Body
Politick?” Journal of Public Economics 1(2)
1972, 199–226; and Aidan R.Vining and David L.
Weimer,“Welfare Economics as the Foundation
for Public Policy Analysis: Incomplete and
Flawed but Nevertheless Desirable,” Journal of
Socio-Economics 21(1) 1992, 25–37.
20. For a detailed presentation of multigoal analysis,
see David L.Weimer and Aidan R.Vining, Policy
Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 5th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011),
Chapter 15.
21. For a demonstration of the application of various
measures of vertical and horizontal equality, see
Marcus C. Berliant and Robert P. Strauss,“The
Horizontal and Vertical Equity Characteristics of
the Federal Individual Income Tax,” in
Horizontal Equity, Uncertainty, and Economic
Well-Being, Martin David and Timothy
Smeeding, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985), 179–211.
22. The fact that people routinely donate to charities
suggests that, other things equal, most people
would be willing to pay something to obtain a
distribution of wealth that is more favorable to
the currently poor. Ironically, CBA provides a
conceptual way to place a dollar value on alter-
native distributions of wealth: the sum of the
willingness of the individual members of society
to pay for moving from the status quo distribu-
tion of wealth to an alternative one.
Unfortunately, it is usually impractical to elicit
willingness-to-pay amounts of this sort.
23. For example, Harberger proposes that a dual test
be applied:The policy should have positive
weighted and unweighted net benefits.Arnold C.
Harberger,“On the Use of Distributional
Weights in Social Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal
of Political Economy 86(2, part 2) 1978, S87–120.
24. For an excellent development of this approach,
see Edward M. Gramlich and Michael Wolkoff,
“A Procedure for Evaluating Income
Distribution Policies,” Journal of Human
Resources 14(3) 1979, 319–350.
51

52

Microeconomic Foundations 
of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Form Chapter 3 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
53

M
icroeconomic theory provides the basic technical foundations for CBA. This
chapter begins with a review of the major concepts of microeconomic theory as
they apply to the measurement of social costs and benefits. Most of these con-
cepts should be at least somewhat familiar from your previous exposure to economics.
After that we move to welfare economics, which concerns the normative evaluation of
markets and of policies.We explain how to use microeconomic theory to assess benefits,
costs, and net social benefits in CBA.
For purposes of simplicity, we assume the presence of perfect competition
throughout this chapter. Specifically, we assume that there are so many buyers and
sellers in the market that no one can individually affect prices, that buyers and 
sellers can easily enter and exit the market, that the goods sold are homogeneous
(i.e., identical), that there is an absence of transaction costs, that information is per-
fect, and that private costs and benefits are identical to social costs and benefits (i.e.,
there are no externalities).
DEMAND CURVES
An individual’s ordinary demand curve (schedule) indicates the quantities of a good
that the individual wishes to purchase at various prices. The market demand curve is
the horizontal sum of all individual demand curves. It indicates the aggregate quanti-
ties of a good that all individuals in the market wish to purchase at various prices.
In contrast, a market inverse demand curve, which is illustrated by line D in
Figure 1, has price as a function of quantity. The vertical axis (labeled Price) can be
interpreted as the highest price someone is willing to pay for an additional unit of
the good. A standard assumption in economics is that demand curves slope down-
ward. The rationale for this assumption is based on the principle of diminishing
marginal utility; each additional unit of the good is valued slightly less by each con-
sumer than the preceding unit. For that reason, each consumer is willing to pay less
for another unit than for the preceding unit. Indeed, at some point, each consumer
would be unwilling to pay anything for an additional unit; his or her demand would
be sated.
Microeconomic Foundations 
of Cost-Benefit Analysis
54

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P *
X*
8
7
D
6
5
4
Quantity of good X
per month
3
2
1
0
Price
Consumer surplus
Consumer expenditure
FIGURE 1
Consumers’ Total Benefits and Consumer Surplus
In Figure 1 one member of society is willing to pay a price of P1 for one unit of good
X.Also, there is a person (possibly the same person who is willing to pay P1 for the first
unit) who would pay P2 for a second unit of good X, and there is someone who would
pay P3 for a third unit of X, and so forth.1 Each additional unit is valued at an amount
given by the height of the inverse demand curve.The sum of all these willingness to pay
amounts equals the total willingness to pay (WTP) for the good by all the members of so-
ciety. It is approximately equivalent to summing the unit-wide rectangles under the de-
mand curve. For X* units it equals the area under the inverse demand curve from the ori-
gin to X*, which is represented by the sum of the light and dark shaded areas.
WTP is an appropriate measure of the benefit of a good or service. Since, P1 mea-
sures the marginal benefit of the first unit, P2 measures the marginal benefit of the sec-
ond unit, and so on, the sum of X* marginal benefits measures the total benefits (B) so-
ciety would obtain from consuming X* units of good X.2 Thus, the area under the
demand curve, which consists of the sum of the lightly and darkly shaded areas, mea-
sures the total benefits (B) society would receive from consuming X* units of good X.
Consumer Surplus and Changes in Consumers’ Surplus
In a competitive market consumers pay the market price, which we denote as P*. Thus,
consumers spend P*X*, represented by the darkly shaded area, to consume X* units.The
net benefit to consumers equals the total benefits (B) less consumers’ actual expenditures
55

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
(P*X*). This lightly shaded area, which equals the area below the demand curve but
above the price line, is called consumer surplus (CS):
(1)
Consumer surplus (sometimes called consumers’ surplus) is one of the basic con-
cepts used in CBA. Under most circumstances, changes in consumer surplus can be
used as a reasonable measure of the benefits to consumers of a policy change. In the
appendix to this chapter, we examine the circumstances under which changes in con-
sumer surplus do provide close approximations to willingness-to-pay values and the
circumstances under which they do not.The major conclusion is that, in most instances,
such approximations are sufficiently accurate for CBA purposes.
To see how the concept of consumer surplus can be used in CBA, suppose that ini-
tially the price and quantity consumed are given by P* and Q*, respectively, and then
consider a policy that results in a price change. For example, as shown in Figure 2(a), a
policy that reduces the price of good X from P* to P1 would result in a benefit to con-
sumers (an increase in consumer surplus) equal to the area of the shaded trapezoid
P*ABP1. This benefit results because existing consumers pay a lower price for the X*
units they previously purchased, and some consumers gain from the consumption of 
X1  X* additional units. Similarly, as shown in Figure 2(b), a policy that increases the
price of good X from P* to P2 would impose a “cost” on consumers (a loss in consumer
surplus) equal to the area of the shaded trapezoid P2ABP*.
Suppose that a policy results in a price decrease, as in Figure 2(a). Let ΔP  P1  P*
 0 denote the change in price and let ΔX  X1  X*  0 denote the change in the
CS = B - P*X*
P1
X1
P *
X *
A
C
B
D
Price
Quantity of
good X
FIGURE 2(a)
Change in Consumer Surplus Due to a Price
Decrease
56

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
C
P2
X2
P*
X *
A
B
D
Price
Quantity of
good X
FIGURE 2(b)
Change in Consumer Surplus Due to a Price
Increase
quantity of good X consumed. If the demand curve is linear, then the change in con-
sumer surplus, ΔCS, can be readily computed by the following formula:
(2)
If the price of X increases by ΔP  P2  P*  0, as in Figure 2(b), the quantity of good
X consumed changes by ΔX  X2  X*  0 and if the demand curve is linear, then the
change in consumer surplus, ΔCS, can also be readily computed from equation (2). In
fact, this formula usually provides a good approximation to the change in consumer
surplus even if the demand curve is not linear.
Sometimes the analyst may not know the demand curve and, therefore, may not
know directly how many units will be demanded after a price change, but she may
know the (own) price elasticity of demand, Ed. The price elasticity of demand is defined
as the percentage change in quantity demanded that results from a 1 percent increase
in price. Formally:3
(3a)
Because demand curves slope downward, the price elasticity of demand is always nega-
tive. All things being equal, as the slope of the demand curve increases (i.e., it becomes
steeper—more negative), the elasticity decreases (become more negative). This is cum-
bersome.To simplify, we follow economists’ usual practice of talking about an elasticity
as if it were positive, in effect taking the absolute value. We say that the elasticity
increases as the slope of the ordinary demand curve increases. Also, the more responsive
Ed = P
X
 dX
dP
¢CS = -(¢P)1X*2 - 1
21¢X21¢P2
57

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
quantity is to a change in price, we say that demand is more elastic. Noneconomists may
find this a bit confusing at first, but everyone soon gets used to it.
Given the initial price and quantity, P* and X*, and defining ΔX and ΔP as the
changes in quantities and prices, then the price elasticity of demand approximately
equals:
(3b)
Substituting equation (3b) into equation (2) and rearranging provides the following
expression for  the change in consumer surplus due to a price change:
(4)
Taxes
Taxes are very important in CBA because governments have to finance their projects,and
taxation is a main source of financing. Let us now suppose that the price increase from P*
to P2 shown in Figure 2(b) results from a government-imposed excise tax,where each unit
of X is taxed by an amount equal to the difference between the old and the new price (P2
 P*).In this case,the rectangular part of the trapezoid in Figure 2(b),P2ACP*,represents
the tax revenue collected. It can be viewed as a transfer from consumers of X to the gov-
ernment. It is called a transfer because, from the perspective of society as a whole, its net
impact is zero:consumers pay the tax,but this cost is offset by an identical benefit received
by the government.4
The triangular part of the trapezoid, ABC, is a cost of the tax, however. It repre-
sents lost consumer surplus for which there is no offsetting benefit accruing to some
other part of society. This pure loss in consumer surplus is an example of deadweight
loss.5 It results from a distortion in economic behavior from the competitive equilib-
rium. The tax causes some consumers to purchase less output than they would in the
absence of the tax because, inclusive of the tax, the price now exceeds those con-
sumers’ WTP. Those consumers, who in the absence of the tax would collectively have
purchased X*  X2 units of the good, and received the consumer surplus represented
by the triangular area, ABC, lose this consumer surplus.
It follows from equation (4) that the deadweight loss resulting from a price change
is given approximately by:
(5)
If the change in price is due to a unit tax, t, then the deadweight loss is:
(6)
There will always be a deadweight loss if a government imposes a tax on a good sold
in a competitive market. Of particular interest is the amount of the leakage, which equals
the ratio of the deadweight loss due to the tax to the amount of tax revenue collected. If
¢DWL = -  EdX*t2
2P*
¢DWL = -  
EdX*1¢P22
2P*
¢CS = -X*¢P -
EdX*1¢P22
2P*
Ed = P*
X*
 ¢X
¢P
58

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
MC
AVC
Total variable cost
Firm supply curve
Price
P *
X*
Quantity of
good X
FIGURE 3
Individual Firm’s Supply Curve
the price increase in Figure 2(b) is due to a tax, the leakage equals area ABC divided by
area P2ACP*, which equals:
(7)
If the change in output is relatively small, then the following simple formula provides a
very slight overestimate of the leakage:
(8)
The implications of this result for CBA are discussed later in this chapter in the section
on government surplus.
SUPPLY CURVES
In CBA, costs are opportunity costs. Figure 3 presents a standard U-shaped marginal
cost (MC) curve for an individual firm, where costs are opportunity costs. This curve
pertains to costs in the short run, when at least one factor of production, for example
capital, is fixed.We later consider the long run where all factors of production can vary.
Leakage = -  Edt
2P*
Leakage = -  
Edt
2P*11 + ¢X>X*2
59

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
As is well known, the MC curve passes through the firm’s average variable cost (AVC)
curve at its lowest point, as shown in Figure 3. The rising part of the MC curve reflects
diminishing marginal returns—the phenomenon that, given at least one fixed factor of
production (say, capital), diminishing factor returns must eventually occur as output ex-
pands and increasing amounts of the variable factors of production (say, labor) are used
with the fixed factor(s), or it reflects rising opportunity costs of a variable factor of pro-
duction as more units of that factor are employed.
Just as the demand curve indicates the marginal benefit of each additional unit of
a good consumed, the supply curve indicates the marginal cost of each additional unit
of the good produced. Thus, the area under the firm’s marginal cost curve represents
the firm’s total variable cost (VC) of producing a given amount of good X, say X*.
The upward-sloping segment of the firm’s marginal cost curve above the firm’s AVC
corresponds to the firm’s supply curve in a competitive market. If the price were lower
than the firm’s average variable cost, then the firm could not cover its average variable
cost and would shut down,rather than produce any output.At a price above average vari-
able cost, however, the upward-sloping segment of the marginal cost curve determines
how much output the firm will produce at any given price. For example, at a price of P*,
the firm would maximize profit by producing at X*. If it produced more output than X*, it
would take in less in additional revenue than the additional cost it would incur. If it pro-
duced less output than X*, it would lose more in revenue than it would save in costs.
The concept of opportunity cost is critical to CBA.The cost of a policy or project re-
flects the opportunity costs incurred by various members of society to implement the pol-
icy.Consequently,the cost curve in Figure 3 is drawn under the assumption that the own-
ers of all the resources the firm uses are paid prices equal to the opportunity costs of
the resources. For such factors as capital and entrepreneurship, the opportunity cost in-
clude a normal return,6 reflecting their best alternative use.7
Market Supply Curve
The market supply curve, which is illustrated in Figure 4, can be derived by summing
horizontally the supply curves of all the individual firms in a market. It indicates the
total supply available to the market at each price. For example, at price P1 firms in ag-
gregate are willing to supply X1 units. Because individual firm supply curves are based
on marginal cost, the market supply curve also reflects marginal cost. For example, the
marginal cost of the X1
th unit is P1.This explains why the firms are willing to supply X1
units at price P1.
As in the case of the marginal cost curves for individual firms, the area under the
market supply curve indicates the total variable cost of producing a given amount of
output, say X*. The area 0abX* is the total variable cost of supplying X* units. Put an-
other way, it is the minimum total revenue that firms must receive before they would
be willing to produce output X*.
Producer Surplus and Changes in Producer Surplus
Suppose that the market price of a good is P* and, consequently, firms supply X* units.
Their revenue in dollars would be P*X*, which corresponds to the rectangular area
0P*bX* in Figure 4. Their total variable cost (TVC) would be 0abX*, the darkly 
60

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Producer surplus 
Total variable cost
(minimum revenue 
required to produce X *)
Quantity of good X
P*
X*
X1
X2
P2
P1
Price
S
d
b
a
c
0
FIGURE 4
Market Supply Curve
shaded area in Figure 4. The difference between these two areas, the lightly shaded
area aP*b, is called producer surplus (PS):
(9)
Producer surplus measures the benefit going to firms (or their factors of production). It
equals the difference between actual revenues and the minimum total revenue that
firms in the market represented in Figure 4 must receive before they would be willing
to produce X* units at a price of P*.
Producer surplus is the supply-side equivalent to consumer surplus. Just as changes
in prices resulting from government policies have impacts on consumers that can be
valued in terms of changes in consumer surplus, price changes also result in impacts on
producers that can be valued in terms of changes in producer surplus. For example,
referring again to Figure 4, a decrease in the market price from P* to P1 decreases pro-
ducer surplus by P*bcP1 to P1ca, and an increase in price from P* to P2 increases pro-
ducer surplus by P2dbP* to P2da.
SOCIAL SURPLUS AND ALLOCATIVE EFFICIENCY8
Let us now look at the market as a whole. In the absence of impacts on government,
the sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus is called social surplus (SS); some-
times it is called total surplus:
(10)
Social surplus is illustrated in Figure 5, which depicts both a market demand curve and
a market supply curve in the same graph. In this graph, which once again is drawn
under the assumption of perfect competition, equilibrium occurs at a price of P* and a
SS = CS + PS
PS = P*X* - TVC
61

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Consumer surplus + producer surplus
P *
Price
0
X*
X1
X2
Quantity of good X
D
S
b
c
d
h
a
f
e
g
= social surplus
FIGURE 5
Social Surplus
quantity of X*. Consumer surplus is the area caP*, producer surplus is the area P*ab,
and social surplus is the sum of these areas, cab.
Now, net social benefits equals the difference between total consumer benefits and
total producer costs. Total consumer benefits equal the area under the demand curve,
caX*0, while total costs equal total variable costs, the area under the supply curve,
baX*0.9 The difference is the area cab. This formulation makes it clear that social
surplus equals net social benefits.
Remembering that the demand curve reflects marginal benefits (MB) and the sup-
ply curve reflects marginal cost (MC), at the competitive equilibrium demand equals
supply and marginal benefits equals marginal cost. Therefore, net social benefits are
maximized.10 Thus, in a well-functioning, perfectly competitive market net social bene-
fits and social surplus are maximized. The outcome is Pareto efficient: it is not possible
to make someone better off without making someone else worse off.We also say that it
is allocatively efficient (or economically efficient) because social surplus is maximized.
The fact that a competitive equilibrium is economically efficient is referred to as the
first fundamental theorem of welfare economics, clearly reflecting its importance.
In a perfectly competitive market, anything that interferes with the competitive
process will reduce allocative efficiency. Suppose, for example, government policy
causes output to be restricted to X1, due, for example, to output quotas. At least some
people will be worse off relative to output level X*. The loss in social surplus at X1
would equal the triangular area dae—the area between the demand curve (MB) and
the supply curve (MC) from X1 to X*. Similarly, the loss in social surplus at X2 would
equal the triangular area afg—the area between the demand curve and the supply
curve from X* to X2. These deadweight losses reflect reductions in social surplus rela-
tive to what would be attained in a competitive market (at X*).Any government policy
that moves the market away from the perfectly competitive equilibrium increases
deadweight loss and reduces social surplus. Thus, it is only in the presence of market
62

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
failures that government should consider intervening in a market. Such market fail-
ures, however, provide only a prima facie reason to intervene. One must do CBA to de-
cide whether to intervene. Potentially, a government policy that moves a distorted mar-
ket toward the perfectly competitive equilibrium produces net social benefits by
increasing social surplus and reducing deadweight loss.
For policy purposes, it is important to note the relationship between price and
allocative efficiency. Allocative efficiency is maximized in Figure 5 at a price of P*
and a quantity of X*.At the equilibrium point, a, the price paid by consumers equals
the marginal cost of producing the good. Allocative efficiency can be obtained only
when the price paid by consumers for a good equals the marginal social cost to soci-
ety of producing the good.11 This important result can be used to formulate efficient
pricing policies.
Profits and Factor Surplus
The above formula that measures producer surplus, equation (9), is not entirely satis-
factory two reasons. First, the formula excludes firms’ fixed costs. Thus far we have fo-
cused on short-term effects where some factors of production were fixed. While some
government policies do not change firms’ fixed costs, other policies do change them.
For example, if the government makes a one-time purchase of concrete to build a road
extension, the fixed costs of the firms that provide the concrete would probably not
change and the above formulas would apply. On the other hand, for a large, long-term
project, such as the Three Gorges Dam in China, all the factors of production (includ-
ing the number of concrete trucks) would vary. In this situation, changes in fixed costs
should be included in the measure of social surplus.We need a way to do this. Note, by
the way, if as is usual we focus on annual benefits and annual costs, then the fixed costs
may have to be amortized over their useful life or the life of the project. Second,
whether or not we include fixed costs, but especially if we do include them, it is easier
for most people to think about profits than producer surplus.
Fortunately, there is an easy way to deal with both of these concerns. Producer sur-
plus equals profits ( ) plus Ricardian rents going to factors of production, which we
call factor surplus (FS).12 An example of a Ricardian rent is the return going to a par-
ticularly productive plot of land in a competitive agricultural market. The farmer may
rent this land in which case the rents go to the landlord from whom he rents it or he
may own the land in which case he gets them. Or, in a market with minimum wages,
rents may go to workers. In either case, we can rewrite equation (10) as:
(11a)
The incremental net social benefit (ΔSS) of a change in policy is given by:
(11b)
Much of Canadian competition policy concerns whether proposed mergers
should be allowed to go ahead. In these cases, the effect on employees, ΔFS, is as-
sumed to be zero, and the key issue boils down to whether the potential reduction in
consumer surplus, ΔCS, is more than offset by increases in profits, Δπ. A firm making
this argument in a merger hearing is said to be using the “efficiency defense.”13
¢SS = ¢CS + ¢p + ¢FS
SS = CS + p + FS
p
63

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
GOVERNMENT SURPLUS AND ALLOCATIVE EFFICIENCY
Thus far we have considered the effects of policies on consumers and producers.There
is a third important sector in society—government. Impacts on government must also
be included. Specifically we should include the net budget impacts on government,
which is called government surplus (GS). Financial inflows to government from taxes
increase government surplus while financial outflows from expenditures decrease gov-
ernment surplus.When government surplus is not zero, social surplus becomes:
(12a)
The incremental net social benefit (ΔSS) of a change in policy is given by:
(12b)
In a competitive market, the net social benefit of a project equals the net govern-
ment revenue plus the resulting change in the sum of consumer surplus and producer
surplus. Often, government incurs all of the costs of a project and enjoys none of the
financial benefits, for example, it may build rent-free housing for disabled people. To
simplify, and consistent with our assumption of perfect competition, it is reasonable
to assume in this situation that there is no change in producer surplus. The benefit is
the change in consumer surplus, the cost is net government expenditure, and the net
social benefit equals the benefits minus the costs. That is, B  ΔCS, C  ΔGS, and
ΔSS  NSB  B  C.
Now suppose that government builds housing but charges a maket rent.As before,
we assume that there is no change in producer surplus.There are two ways to compute
the change in social surplus (or net social benefits). One way measures the benefit as
the change in consumer surplus and the cost as the change in government expenditure
(i.e., construction costs plus operating costs), as above. The rent paid is a transfer—a
cost to consumers but a benefit to government. The net effect of a transfer is zero.Thus,
it may be ignored in the calculation of net social benefits. In fact, including the rent paid
to government as part of government surplus would be a mistake.
An alternative way to compute the NSB involves gross benefits. The gross bene-
fit to consumers (B) equals the area under the inverse demand curve. From equation
(1), B  ΔCS  Rents. The total cost to society equals the sum of the rents paid by
consumers and the project expenditures paid by government. Therefore, the net so-
cial benefits are given by NSB  B  C  ΔCS  Construction costs—Operating ex-
penses, which is the same as before.
This example makes it clear that there are often different ways to calculate net social
benefits. In this example, it is possible to measure gross benefits that include consumer
expenditures (e.g., rent) if this transfer is also included in the costs.Alternatively, one can
focus on changes in consumer surplus, producer surplus and government surplus as ex-
pressed in equation (12b).
To illustrate direct estimation of equation (12b), suppose that initially the per-
fectly competitive market shown in Figure 6 is in equilibrium at a price of P* and a
quantity of X*. Now suppose that a law is passed guaranteeing sellers a price of PT.
Such a policy has been utilized in otherwise competitive agricultural markets in the
United States, such as those for corn and cotton, and is known as target pricing. At a
¢SS = ¢CS + ¢PS + ¢GS
SS = CS + PS + GS
64

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
X *
0
XT
PD
PT
Price
a
b
c
d
e
Demand
(MB)
Supply
(MC)
Quantity of
good X
P*
FIGURE 6
Target Pricing Example
target price of PT, sellers desire to sell a quantity of XT. However, buyers are willing
to pay a price of only PD for this quantity, so this becomes the effective market price.
Under target pricing, the gap between PT and PD is filled by subsidies paid to sellers
by the government. As the marginal cost of producing XT exceeds marginal benefit
for this quantity of good X, a social surplus loss (deadweight loss), corresponding to
area bde, results from the policy.
Distributional Implications
The target pricing policy affects buyers, sellers, and the government differently.The in-
cremental benefit, incremental cost, and change in social surplus (net benefit) to each
of the three affected groups, and to society as a whole, are presented in a social ac-
counting ledger in Table 1. Because buyers pay a price of only PD under the policy, total
consumer surplus increases from area abP* to area aePD, a gain of P*bePD. Sellers re-
ceive an effective price of PT, causing total producer surplus to increase from area
P*bc to area PTdbc, a gain of PTdbP*. Government provides subsidies represented by
area PTdePD. Subtracting the GS cost from the CS and PS gains, as suggested by equa-
tion (12), gives a deadweight loss resulting from the policy equal to area bde. Estimates
of the actual social cost of agricultural price supports in the U.S. are provided in
Exhibit 1.
As shown in the right hand column of Table 1, the government subsidy (PT dePD)
can be broken down into three areas: the consumer surplus gain, the producer surplus
gain, and the deadweight loss.While area bde represents the net social loss from the pol-
icy, the remainder of the subsidy represent transfers from taxpayers to buyers and sellers.
Because the benefits and costs associated with transfers are fully offsetting, they have no
net impact on the change in social surplus as defined above in equation (12b).
65

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 1
Breakdown of Incremental Benefits, Incremental Costs,
and Changes in Surpluses in Target Pricing Example
Group
Incremental 
Benefit
Incremental 
Cost
Change in 
Surplus
Consumers
P*bePD
P*bePD
Producers
PTdXTO 
 P*bX*O
bdXTX*
 PTdePD
PTdbP*
Government
PTdePD
Net (Social)
bde
Earlier we introduced the idea of leakage when government raises funds. It may
also occur when government spends money. Specifically, the proportion of each dollar
given up by government that, as a result of a deadweight loss (and any administrative
costs required to raise the funds), does not accrue as transfers to any other group (i.e.,
consumers or producers) is also called leakage. In this target pricing example, which ig-
nores administrative costs, the leakage is bde/PT dePD. Obviously, 1 - leakage equals
the proportion of the government subsidy that is transferred to consumers or producers.
Marginal Excess Tax Burden
Most government policies and projects require government expenditure.This expendi-
ture has to be financed in some way. In this chapter, we have shown that an excise tax
on a good usually results in deadweight loss. Taxes on individuals also generally result
in a deadweight loss. Indeed, social surplus is usually (but not always) lost when gov-
ernment taxes consumers, taxpayers, or producers.
EXHIBIT 1
The magnitudes of the inefficiencies of agricul-
tural price supports in the United States have at
times been very large. For example, Gordon C.
Rausser estimated the economic impacts of
price support programs for wheat, corn, cotton,
peanuts, and dairy products during the mid-
1980s. He estimated additional annual costs to
consumers of between $3.27 billion and $4.57
billion, annual transfers to producers of be-
tween $12.8 billion and $14.9 billion, and annual
costs to taxpayers of between $13.5 billion and
$15.7 billion.The annual net social cost of these
effects on consumers, producers, and taxpayers
was between $1.9 billion and $7.4 billion. That
is, the social surplus loss of these policies was
several billion dollars annually.
The Federal Agricultural Improvement and
Reform Act of 1996, the so-called Freedom to
Farm Act, called for phasing out price supports
by 2002. Beginning in 1998 with falling world
agricultural prices, Congress began reversing
the phase-out of price supports. By fiscal year
2001 direct government subsidies to farmers
had risen to $20 billion annually.
Sources: Adapted from Gordon C. Rausser,“Predatory Versus Productive Government:The Case of U.S.Agricultural
Policies,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(3) 1992, 133–157; and David Orden,“Reform’s Stunted Crop: Congress 
Re-Embraces Agricultural Subsidies,” Regulation 25(1) 2002, 26–32.
66

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Because there are numerous sources of deadweight loss in addition to taxes, econ-
omists refer to the deadweight loss that results specifically from a tax as excess tax bur-
den. The change in deadweight loss resulting from raising an additional dollar of tax
revenue is called the marginal excess tax burden (METB). The size of the METB de-
pends on the magnitude of the behavioral response to a tax change, for example, the
extent to which consumer purchases change due to an excise tax or the change in work
hours due to a tax on earnings.14 Exhibit 2 presents a hypothetical, but not implausible,
illustration of computing the average social cost of taxing higher-income households
and redistributing the money to lower-income households. In this illustration, it costs,
on average, $1.63 to transfer each dollar (i.e., the METB  0.63).
Allocative Efficiency and the METB
Because raising government revenue through taxation inevitably involves a dead-
weight loss, changes in government revenue do not fully capture their efficiency impli-
cations. A program that costs the government a dollar actually costs society in aggre-
gate (1  METB). Similarly, a program that yields a dollar of government revenue
allows it to avoid a dollar of taxation and therefore benefits society in aggregate (1 
METB).Taking this efficiency effect into account, equation (12) becomes:
(13a)
(13b)
In other words, in order to measure the allocative efficiency impacts of a project and to
compute its net social benefits, government project expenditures and revenues should
be multiplied by one plus the marginal excess tax burden.
 ¢SS = ¢CS + ¢PS + 11 + METB2¢GS
 SS = CS + PS + 11 + METB2GS
The following table, which was adopted with
modifications from a study by Edgar Browning,is
based on a hypothetical society with only five
households.The idea is to tax everyone to obtain
$1,350 in additional revenue and then distribute
this equally to everyone.In effect,as shown in col-
umn 6, $270 is transferred from the two richest
households to the two poorest households. As
shown in column 8, however, the real incomes of
the two poorest households increase by $240 in
aggregate, whereas the real incomes of the three
richest households decrease by $390.Thus,it costs
society $390>$240  $1.63 in lost income for every
dollar transferred, ignoring administrative costs.
EXHIBIT 2
For purposes of the illustration, it is assumed
that all households initially work 2,000 hours a
year and face a marginal tax rate of 40 percent.
Thus, as indicated in column 2, the gross before-
tax hourly wage rate of household A is $5
($10,000>2,000), but its after-tax net wage rate is
only $3 ($5  0.6). The gross and net hourly
wage rates for the remaining four households
may be similarly computed.It is further assumed
that the compensated labor supply elasticity for
all households is 0.15. In other words, it is as-
sumed that a 1 percent change in net wages,
holding income constant, will cause households
to change their hours worked by 0.15 percent.
(continued)
67

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
Household
Initial
(Gross)
Earnings
Net
Change
in
Earnings
Additional
Tax
Revenue*
Transfer
Net
Transfer
Change in
Disposable
Income
Change in
Real 
Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A
10,000
−25
90
270
180
155
170
B
20,000
−50
180
270
90
40
70
C
30,000
−75
270
270
0
−75
−30
D
40,000
−100
360
270
−90
−190
−130
E
50,000
−125
450
270
−180
−305
−230
Total
150,000
−375
1,350
1,350
0
−375
−150
*These figures are rounded to the nearest $10.
Source: Adapted from Edgar K. Browning,“The Marginal Cost of Redistribution,” Public Finance Quarterly 21(1) 1993, 3–32,
Table 1 at p. 5. Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc.
The Marginal Cost of Redistribution 
Suppose now that the government intro-
duces a separate income tax of 1 percent that
increases each household’s marginal tax rate
from 40 to 41 percent. This reduces each
household’s net after-tax wage rate by 1.67
percent (i.e., 0.01>0.60  0.0167). As a conse-
quence, hours worked fall by 0.25 percent
(0.15 × 0.0167  0.0025), or 5 hours per year.
Hence, as shown in column 3, earnings also fall
by 0.25 percent.
Net additional tax revenue is given in col-
umn 4. For example, household A initially paid
taxes of $4,000 ($10,000  0.4), while after the
new income tax, it paid taxes of about $4,090
($9,975  0.41), an increase of approximately
$90. The total of $1,350 in additional tax rev-
enue is divided equally, and $270 is distributed
to each household.The net transfer (column 5 -
column 4) is given in column 6.
Column 7 presents the total change in dispos-
able income, which is obtained by adding
columns 3 and 6. The net incomes of the three
richest households have been reduced by $570 in
aggregate,while the net incomes of the two poor-
est families have been increased by a total of only
$195. But all families are now working less and
enjoying more leisure. Assuming that the value
of additional leisure equals the after-tax net wage
rate, household A receives a leisure gain valued
at $15 ($3  5 hours), household B receives a
leisure gain valued at $30 ($6  5 hours), and so
forth.The total change in real income (including
the value of the gain in leisure) is given in column
8. The real incomes of households A and B in-
crease by $240 in aggregate, while the incomes of
households C, D, and E decrease by $390.
MEASURING CHANGES IN WELFARE
This chapter focuses on allocative efficiency and the measurement of net social
benefits. Welfare, however, concerns allocative efficiency and equity. Conceptually,
it is straightforward to generalize equation (13b) so that it measures changes in
welfare:
(14)
¢W = gc¢CS + gp ¢p + gf¢FS + gg¢GS
68

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
where γc, γp, γf, and γg are welfare weights for consumers, producers, factors of produc-
tion, and government, respectively. These parameters can reflect efficiency or equity
considerations.15 If γc  γp  γf  1 and γg  1  METB, then equation (14) becomes
equation (13b), and it measures net social benefits. This can be justified on allocative
efficiency grounds. Any other set of weights requires consideration of equity. Some
studies have used equation (14) to measure changes in welfare due to privatization
as is illustrated in Exhibit 3.
CONCLUSIONS
The objective of CBA is more efficient allocation of resources. This chapter has re-
viewed the major principles from microeconomics and welfare economics that pro-
vide the technical foundation for cost-benefit analysis. The key concept is that in
Boardman and colleagues estimated the wel-
fare gains from the privatization of Canadian
National (CN) Railway in 1995.This was one of
the largest rail privatizations in history. A
unique feature of the study is that the authors
were able to create a more credible counterfac-
tual than in other privatization studies based on
cost data from Canadian Pacific Railway (CP).
Boardman and colleagues argued that the ben-
efit to consumers (shippers) was zero because a
variety of evidence suggests that privatization
had no impact on CN’s or CP’s prices or out-
put. The sole factor of production of interest
was employees. Employment decreased at CN
following privatization, but the rate of decrease
in employment was slower after 1992 than be-
fore 1992 (when the privatization was an-
nounced). Following privatization, wages and
salaries at CN increased faster than at CP.Thus,
there is no clear evidence that employees were
better or worse off as a result of privatization.
Attention focused on firms (and their share-
holders) and the Canadian government. Using
EXHIBIT 3
their preferred estimate of the counterfactual,
Boardman and colleagues estimated that the
increase in profits to foreign (non-Canadian)
shareholders was $4.46 billion, the increase in
profits to Canadian shareholders was $3.69 bil-
lion, and the increase in government surplus (to
the Canadian government) was $6.90 billion.
Following usual practice in CBA and assigning
equal welfare weights to profits and govern-
ments (i.e., γp  γg  1) implies that the net so-
cial benefit equals $15.06 billion.Assuming that
only Canadians have standing suggests that the
net social benefit to Canadians was $10.59 bil-
lion ($6.90 billion  $3.69 billion). As noted in
the text, however, there are efficiency argu-
ments for setting γg  1  METB. Boardman
and colleagues also argue that there are effi-
ciency arguments for setting γp  1  shadow
price of capital. They suggest γg  1.4 and γp 
1.16, implying that the net benefit to Canadians
of the privatization of CN equaled $13.94 
billion.
Source: Anthony E. Boardman, Claude Laurin, Mark A. Moore, and Aidan R.Vining,“A Cost-Benefit Analysis of the
Privatization of Canadian National Railway,” Canadian Public Policy 35(1) 2009, 59–83.
69

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
conducting a CBA one must estimate the changes in social surplus that result when
new policies, programs, or projects are implemented. The change in social surplus,
provides a measure of the change in allocative efficiency (or net social benefits).
Social surplus is often expressed as the sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus,
and government surplus. However, projects have to be financed and are often fi-
nanced by taxes, and all taxes create a deadweight loss. To account for the efficiency
impacts of taxes, government inflows or outflows should be multiplied by 1 
METB.
This chapter assumes that markets are initially perfectly competitive. The con-
cepts introduced in this chapter can be used to develop measures of benefits and
costs that are conceptually appropriate under numerous different circumstances.
70

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
APPENDIX A
Consumer Surplus and Willingness to Pay
Earlier in this chapter, we asserted that under
most circumstances, estimates of changes in
consumer surplus, as measured by demand
curves, can be used in CBA as reasonable ap-
proximations of individuals’ WTP to obtain or
to avoid the effects of policy changes. In this
appendix, we examine the circumstances under
which measured changes in consumer surplus
do in fact provide a close approximation to
WTP and the circumstances under which they
do not. For purposes of illustration, we specifi-
cally focus on the link between the amount of
money a consumer would be willing to pay to
avoid a given price increase and estimates
based on the demand curve of the loss in the
consumer’s surplus resulting from the price 
increase.
Compensating Variation
The maximum amount of money that consumers
would be willing to pay to avoid a price increase
is the amount required to return them to the
same level of utility they enjoyed prior to the
change in price, an amount called compensating
variation. If the consumers had to spend any
more than the value of their compensating vari-
ation, then they would be worse off paying to
avoid the increase than allowing it to occur. If
they could spend any less, then they would be
better off paying to avoid the increase, rather
than allowing it to occur. Hence, for a loss in
consumer surplus resulting from a price increase
to equal the consumers’ WTP to avoid the price
increase, it has to correspond exactly to the com-
pensating variation value associated with the
price increase.
These assertions are most readily demon-
strated by an indifference curve analysis. Such
an analysis is presented in Figure A-1(a).This di-
agram represents a consumer who faces a world
with only two goods, X and Y. The straight lines
in the diagram are budget constraints. The par-
ticular budget constraint that the consumer
faces depends upon the consumer’s income level
and on the relative prices of goods X and Y.The
greater the consumer’s income, the more of X
and Y the consumer can afford and, conse-
quently, the greater the distance the budget con-
straint will be from the origin, 0.Thus, for exam-
ple, the budget constraint JK represents a higher
income level than the budget constraint GI, and
the budget constraint GH represents a higher
income level than the budget constrain LK. The
slope of the consumer’s budget constraint indi-
cates how many additional units of Y can be ob-
tained if one less unit of X is purchased. Thus,
holding everything else constant, the slope of
the budget constraint is negative and depends
upon the price of X relative to the price of Y.
Consequently, if the price of X rises relative to
that of Y, the consumer’s budget constraint will
become more steeply sloped, changing, for ex-
ample, from budget constraint GH to budget
constraint GI. As can be seen, such a change
means that a larger number of units of Y can be
purchased in exchange for each unit of X that
the consumer gives up.
The curved lines in Figure A-1(a) are
indifference curves. All points along a single in-
difference curve represent combinations of
goods X and Y that provide the consumer with
equal levels of utility. Thus, the consumer is in-
different between points b and d on U0 or points
a and c on U1. The further an indifference curve
is from the origin, the greater the level of utility.
Thus, the consumer would prefer any point on
indifference curve U1 (e.g., point a) to any point
on indifference curve U0 (e.g., point b). This is
not surprising in this case because more of both
good X and good Y would be consumed at point
a than at point b.
71

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
The indifference curves in Figure A-1(a)
are negatively sloped because any movement
along an indifference curve definitionally rep-
resents a situation whereby an increase in the
FIGURE A-1(b)
Demand Curve
Analysis of Price Change
consumption of one good is offset by a sufficient
reduction in the consumption of the other good
such that the consumer’s level of utility is left
unchanged.1 Were the individual to consume
Y
Price
J
G
L
I
K
H
X
c
a
b
d
0
Marshallian demand curve
Hicksian compensated variation
demand curve
Hicksian equivalent variation 
demand curve
Pc
Pa
0
U0
U1
XbXc Xd Xa
Quantity of 
good X
XbXc Xd Xa
FIGURE A-1(a)
Indifference Curve
Analysis of a Price Change 
72

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
either more of both goods or less of both goods,
the level of utility would obviously change.
The fact that the indifference curves are con-
vex in shape (i.e., they bend inward toward the
origin) reflects diminishing marginal utility—as
the consumer consumes more of one good, she
becomes increasingly less willing to give up con-
sumption of an additional unit of the other good.
For example, the convex shape of indifference
curve U0 implies that at point b the consumer
would be willing to give up more units of Y in
order to consume one additional unit of X than
she would at point d.
Now let us assume that good X in Figure A-
1(a) is a product on which the consumer spends
only a small fraction of her total income, for ex-
ample, movie tickets, and good Y is a composite
good on which the consumer spends the rest of
her income. Under these circumstances, good Y
is a reasonable approximation of the consumer’s
total money income. Consequently, the slope of
a budget constraint in the figure would indicate
the price of good X, that is, the amount of money
income (i.e., good Y) the consumer would have
to give up to obtain one more unit of X.
Assume that the consumer initially faces
budget constraint GH. She will then choose
point a on indifference curve U1. Point a repre-
sents an equilibrium because the consumer can-
not increase her utility by moving to any alter-
native point and, hence, has no incentive to do
so.2 Now assume that as a result of a govern-
ment policy, the price of good X is doubled.3
This changes the consumer’s equilibrium to
point b on a more steeply sloped budget con-
straint, GI, and a lower indifference curve, U0.
Thus, the consumer’s consumption of good X
falls from Xa to Xb.4
If the consumer were paid a lump sum of
money sufficient to compensate her entirely for
the price increase in X, then this payment would
shift the budget constraint in a parallel move-
ment from GI to JK, allowing her to move back
to the original indifference curve, U1. However,
the consumer would now choose point c (rather
than a) and would consume Xc of the good
(rather than Xa). As the vertical distance be-
tween the two parallel budget constraints (i.e.,
the difference between points G and J on the
vertical axis) represents the amount of good Y
(that is, money income) that the consumer
would have to be paid in order to lose no utility
as a result of the price increase, this distance
measures the compensating variation associated
with the price increase.
As asserted previously, this compensating
variation value is the maximum amount that the
consumer would be willing to pay to avoid the
price increase.To see this, suppose that the price
increase occurs and that the consumer is fully
compensated for it. Now imagine that if she 
is willing to pay all the compensation she 
received—that is, the full value of her compen-
sating variation—the price increase will be re-
voked. Will she accept or reject this offer? She
will, in fact, be indifferent to it. If she accepts the
offer, then she will return to her initial equilib-
rium at point a on indifference curve U1; if she
rejects it, then she will remain at point c, which is
also on U1. Thus, the compensation value repre-
sents the maximum amount the consumer would
be willing to pay to avoid the price increase. If
she could pay a bit less to revoke the price in-
crease, then she would definitely do so. If she
had to pay a bit more, then she would prefer to
accept the increase.
Income and Substitution Effects
Given the information contained in Figure A-
1(a), the total effect of the increase in the price of
X on the consumer’s demand for good X (i.e., the
change from Xa to Xb) can be decomposed into
two separate effects: a compensated substitution
effect and an income effect.5 The compensated
substitution effect is represented in Figure A-1(a)
as the change in demand from Xa to Xc. It allows
us to examine the effect of a change in the price
of X on the demand for X if the individual were
exactly compensated for any losses of utility she
suffers as a result of the price increase and, as 
73

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
a consequence, remained on indifference curve
U1. The compensated substitution effect always
causes the demand for a good to change in the op-
posite direction from a change in the price of the
good. For example, holding the consumer’s level
of utility constant, an increase in the price of good
X causes her to substitute some of the now rela-
tively less expensive good Y for good X. Hence, as
shown in the figure, Xc is smaller than Xa.
The income effect is represented in Figure
A-1(a) as the change in demand from Xc to Xb
and results because the increase in the price of
good X reduces the consumer’s disposable in-
come. If, as the figure implies, X is a normal
good—that is, if purchases of the good and dis-
posable income are positively related—then the
consumer will purchase less of it. Hence, Xb is
smaller than Xc. Thus, like the substitution ef-
fect, the income effect associated with the price
increase will also cause the consumer to reduce
her demand for the good.
Demand Curves
Because the slopes of the budget constraints in
Figure A-1(a) indicate both the old and the new
prices of good X and the points tangent to these
budget constraints with indifference curves indi-
cate the amount of the good that the consumer
wants at each price, the figure provides informa-
tion about two points along the consumer’s de-
mand curve for X. Indeed, as we know the quan-
tity of output the consumer would demand after
the price increase, both if her utility were held
constant and if it were not, we can determine the
location of pairs of points along two different de-
mand curves.These two pairs of points appear in
Figure A-1(b) as points a and c and as points a
and b, respectively. (Ignore the third pair of
points, d and b, for the moment.) We can ap-
proximate the demand curves with straight lines
by simply drawing straight lines between the two
points in each pair.
The line in Figure A-1(b) that connects points
a and b is a conventional demand schedule 
of the sort usually emphasized in textbooks. This
demand curve, which is known as a Marshallian
demand curve, incorporates both the substitution
and income effects associated with changes in the
price of good X. Statistical efforts by economists
to estimate relations between the price of a good
and quantities purchased are usually attempts to
estimate Marshallian demand curves empirically,
as this work typically involves trying to hold in-
come, other prices, and other factors constant.
The demand curve in Figure A-1(b) that
connects points a and c keeps utility constant as
the price of good X changes and, thus, incorpo-
rates only the compensated substitution effect
associated with price changes. This demand
curve is sometimes called the utility compensated
or the Hicksian compensated variation demand
curve. Because Hicksian demand curves are un-
affected by income effects, they are usually, as is
the case in Figure A-1(b), more steeply sloped
than Marshallian demand schedules. Unlike
Marshallian demand curves, Hicksian demand
curves usually cannot be directly estimated using
statistical techniques. However, it is often possi-
ble to indirectly estimate them by first estimating
the Marshallian demand curve and then, in ef-
fect, netting out the income effect.6
Equivalence of Consumer Surplus 
and Compensating Variation
Movements up the Hicksian compensated varia-
tion demand curve, for example, from Pa to Pc,
are equivalent to allowing the price to increase
while compensating the consumer with a lump-
sum payment of just sufficient size to permit her
to remain on her original indifference curve.
This lump-sum payment can be measured
graphically as either the vertical distance be-
tween the two parallel budget constraints in
Figure A-1(a) (i.e., as the difference between
money income at points G and J) or as the
change in consumer surplus indicated by the
Hicksian compensated variation demand curve
in Figure A-1(b) (the area Pa acPc). Thus, the
change in consumer surplus resulting from a
price change measured with a Hicksian compen-
sated variation demand schedule exactly equals
74

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
the consumer’s compensating variation; that is,
the maximum amount the consumer would be
willing to pay to avoid the price increase.
Hence, it is Hicksian compensated variation
demand curves that permit measurement of the
compensating variation associated with price
changes. To the extent these two demand curves
differ, using a Marshallian compensated varia-
tion demand curve to measure consumer surplus
will result in a biased estimate of compensating
variation and, therefore, of WTP. As can be seen
from Figure A-1(b), the two alternative demand
curves do produce different measures of con-
sumer surplus, one that differs by the triangular
area abc. For a price increase, the change in
consumer surplus is smaller if measured with the
Marshallian demand schedule than with a
Hicksian compensated variation demand curve;
for a price reduction, it is larger.
As previously suggested, the difference be-
tween the two types of demand curves is that the
Marshallian curve incorporates the income ef-
fects associated with price changes, as well as the
substitution effects, while the Hicksian curve in-
corporates only the latter. Thus, the biased esti-
mate of WTP that results from using Marshallian
rather than Hicksian demand curves to measure
consumer surplus depends upon the size of the
income effect associated with a price change.
Usually this income effect and, hence, the bias are
small and can be safely ignored in CBA.7 This, at
least, is the case if the price change is moderate
and the good in question accounts for a fairly
small part of total consumption. Thus, CBAs of
government policies that affect corn, cotton, to-
bacco, and gasoline prices will generally be little
affected by use of Marshallian rather than
Hicksian demand curves. However, the bias
could be of some importance for a CBA of a gov-
ernment policy that would result in large price
changes in such consumption goods as housing or
automobiles or in large changes in wage rates.
Consequently, except for a few instances when it
clearly seems inappropriate to do so, throughout
the rest of this book we shall assume that the in-
come effects associated with various policy
changes are sufficiently small that consumer sur-
pluses that are measured by using Marshallian
demand schedules provide reasonable approxi-
mations of WTP.
Equivalent Variation as an Alternative
to Compensating Variation
In those situations in which the bias should not
be ignored, there is an alternative to compensat-
ing variation for measuring the welfare effects
of price changes that should be used instead be-
cause it has more desirable properties: namely,
equivalent variation.8
In terms of Figure A-1(a), equivalent varia-
tion is the amount of money, GL, that if paid by
the consumer would cause her to lose just as
much utility as the price increase. If she could
pay a bit less, then she would not be as bad off as
the price increase makes her. If she had to pay a
bit more, then she would be even worse off.
Using the equivalent variation approach,
the income effect is represented in Figure A-
1(a) as the change in demand from Xa to Xd,
while the substitution effect is represented as
the change in demand from Xd to Xb. Note that,
as in the case of the compensating variation ap-
proach, both effects that result from the price in-
crease cause the quantity of the good demanded
to fall as long as the good is a normal good.Also
note that the compensating variation approach
measures the substitution effect by holding util-
ity constant at its level before the price change
was made, while the equivalent variation ap-
proach measures the substitution effect holding
utility constant after the price change. In both
cases, however, a Hicksian demand curve can be
derived because, holding utility constant, the old
and the new prices of good X and the quantity
demanded at both prices are all known. Thus,
the Hicksian compensated variation demand
curve is represented in Figure A-1(b) by the line
that connects points a and c and the Hicksian
equivalent variation demand curve is repre-
sented by the line that connects points d and
b. Neither of the Hicksian demand curves are
affected by income effects; hence, they are more
steeply sloped than the Marshallian demand
75

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
curve. Compensating variation is represented in
Figure A-1(b) by the area PaacPc and equiva-
lent variation by the area PadbPc.
As indicated by Figure A-1(b), the compen-
sating variation that results from the price in-
crease is larger than the change in consumer sur-
plus measured with the Marshallian demand
curve (by the triangular area abc), while the
resulting equivalent variation is smaller (by area
bda). The opposite would be true in the case
of a price decrease.The size of these differences,
as previously discussed, depends on the size of
the income effect resulting from the change in
prices. If they are large, then it is equivalent vari-
ation that should ideally be used to measure the
change in welfare resulting from a price change,
rather than either Marshallian consumer surplus
or compensating variation. This is often, but not
always, possible if a measure of Marshallian con-
sumer surplus is available.9
EXERCISES
1.
A person’s demand for gizmos is given by the following equation:
where q is the quantity demanded at price p when the person’s income is I.Assume initially
that the person’s income is $40,000.
a.
At what price will demand fall to zero? (This is sometimes called the choke price
because it is the price that chokes off demand.)
b.
If the market price for gizmos is $10, how many will be demanded? 
c.
At a price of $10, what is the price elasticity of demand for gizmos? 
d.
At a price of $10, what is the consumer surplus?
e.
If price rises to $12, how much consumer surplus is lost?
f.
If income were $60,000, what would be the consumer surplus loss from a price rise
from $10 to $12?
2.
At the current market equilibrium, the price of a good equals $40 and the quantity equals
10 units. At this equilibrium,
the price elasticity of supply is 2.0. Assume that the supply
curve is linear.
a.
Use the price elasticity and market equilibrium to find the supply curve. (Hint: the sup-
ply curve has the following form: q  a  (Δq>Δp)p. First, find the value of Δq>Δp;
then, find the value of a.)
b.
Calculate the producer surplus in the market.
c.
Imagine that a policy results in the price falling from $40 to $30. By how much does
producer surplus fall?
d.
What fraction of the lost producer surplus is due to the reduction in the quantity sup-
plied and what fraction is due to the fall in price received per unit sold?
3.
(This question pertains to (Appendix 1); instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.)
Imagine a person’s utility function over two goods, X and Y, where Y represents dollars.
Specifically, assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function:
where 0  a  1.
Let the person’s budget be B.The feasible amounts of consumption must satisfy the follow-
ing equation:
B = pX + Y
U1X,Y2 = Xa Y11-a2
q = 6 - 0.5p + 0.0002I
76

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
NOTES
1. One can envision deriving an inverse demand
curve through an auction in which bids are taken
on the first unit of a good offered for sale, then
on the second unit, then the third unit, and so
forth, with successively lower bids obtained for
each additional unit of the good that is offered.
This kind of auction is called a Dutch auction.
Although now done electronically, in years past
it was common in Holland to have a mechanical
“clock” with hands that started at the bid made
on the previous unit and swept through succes-
sively lower bids until stopped by an individual
who wished to make a bid.
2. The total benefit (B) from consuming X* units
can be obtained by integrating under the (in-
verse) demand curve, P(x), from the origin to X*:
Since the inverse demand curve measures mar-
ginal benefits, MB, we can also write:
3. If the absolute value of Ed is greater than 1 and,
hence, the percentage change in quantity
demanded is greater than the percentage change
in price, then demand is said to be elastic. On the
other hand, if the absolute value of Ed is less than
B =
L
X*
0
MB1x2 dx
B =
L
X*
0
P1x2 dx
1 and, hence, the percentage change in quantity
demanded is smaller than the percentage change
in price, then demand is said to be inelastic. If the
value approaches infinity (i.e., the demand curve
is horizontal), then demand is said to be perfectly
elastic, while if the value is 0 (the demand curve is
vertical), then demand is said to be completely in-
elastic.
4. The government is not, of course, the ultimate
beneficiary of the tax revenues. However, if it
simply returned this revenue to consumers, then
consumers in aggregate would be compensated
for their greater expenditures on the units of the
good that they continue to purchase.
5. More generally, with a downward sloping
demand (marginal benefit) curve, MB(x), and an
upward sloping supply (marginal cost) curve,
MC(x), the deadweight loss (DWL) may be
defined more formally:
6. By normal return, we simply mean the risk-
adjusted market price or rate of return that each
DWL =
L
x*
x2
1MB(x2 - MC1x2) dx, if x2 6 x*
DWL =
L
x1
x*
1MB(x2 - MC1x2) dx, if x* 6 x1
where p is the unit price of X and the price of Y is set to 1.
Solving the budget constraint for Y and substituting into the utility function yields:
Using calculus, it can be shown that utility is maximized by choosing:
Also, it can be shown that the area under the Marshallian demand curve for a price increase
from p to q yielding a change in consumption of X from xp to xq is given by:
When B  100, a  0.5, and p  .2, X  250 maximizes utility, which equals 111.80. If price
is raised to p  .3, X falls to 204.12.
a.
Increase B until the utility raises to its initial level.The increase in B needed to return
utility to its level before the price increase is the compensating variation for the price
increase. (It can be found by guessing values until utility reaches its original level.)
b.
Compare ΔCS, as measured with the Marshallian demand curve, to the compensating
variation.
¢CS = 3aBln1xq2 - pxq4 - 3aBln1xp2 - pxp4 - 1q - p2xq
X = aB>p
U = Xa1B - pX211-a2
77

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
unit of a resource commands under perfect com-
petition.
7. Thus, because we are presently assuming the exis-
tence of perfect competition and well-functioning
markets, social opportunity costs, as we have de-
fined them, correspond to private economic costs.
In the absence of perfect competition (or, if ex-
ternalities exist), private economic costs may dif-
fer from the costs that using resources imposes on
society.These latter costs, social opportunity costs,
are the relevant cost measure for purposes of
CBA.
8. For an accessible discussion of the topics covered
in this section and elsewhere in this chapter, and
a history of the development of the concept of
consumer surplus, see James R. Hines Jr.,“Three
Sides of Harberger Triangles,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 13(2) 1999, 167–188.
9. Of course, total costs equal total variable costs
plus fixed costs. Here, for simplicity, we assume
fixed costs are zero.
10. By definition, NSB(x)  B(x)  C(x).To obtain
the value of X that maximizes NSB we differenti-
ate with respect to X and set the result equal to
zero:
Which implies
Thus, net social benefits are maximized when
marginal benefit equals marginal cost.
11. In this discussion, we are assuming that marginal
(private) costs equal marginal social costs.
dB
dX = dC
dX
dNSB
dX
= dB
dX - dC
dX = 0
12. For a clear discussion of the distinction between
producer surplus, rents and profits see Margaret F.
Sanderson and Ralph A.Winter,“Profits Versus
Rents in Antitrust Analysis:An Application to the
Canadian Waste Services Merger,” Antitrust Law
Journal 70(2) 2002, 485–511.
13. Thomas W. Ross and Ralph A.Winter,“The
Efficiency Defense in Merger Law: Economic
Foundations and Recent Canadian
Developments,” Antitrust Law Journal 72(2)
2004, 471–503.
14. In some cases, taxes may increase social surplus.
For example, if prior to being taxed a good was
overconsumed due to a negative externality, then
the introduction of a tax could increase alloca-
tive efficiency by reducing the overconsumption.
In this case the METB would be negative. More
generally, the efficiency implications of interven-
tions depend on the distortions already in the
market. For example, Charles Ballard demon-
strates that when labor markets for low-income
groups are distorted by high effective marginal
tax rates, redistributing through wage subsidies
can actually result in efficiency gains. Charles L.
Ballard,“The Marginal Efficiency Cost of
Redistribution,” American Economic Review
78(5) 1988, 1019–1033.
15. One can argue that these parameters are not
unity on distributional (equity) grounds as well
as efficiency grounds. For this argument applied
to γg see, for example, Joel Slemrod and Shlomo
Yitzhaki,“Integrating Expenditure and Tax
Decisions:The Marginal Cost of Funds and the
Marginal Benefits of Projects,” National Tax
Journal 54(2) 2001, 189–201.
APPENDIX NOTES
1. The slope of an indifference curve is called the
marginal rate of substitution, where the marginal 
rate of substitution  
and 
indicates 
that utility is being held constant.
U
dX
dP
2
U
6 0
2. At equilibrium, the marginal rate of substitution
equals the ratio of the price of good X to the
price of good Y.
3. Thus, in Figure 3A-1(a), 0I  (1>2)0H or I  H>2.
4. Depending on the slopes of the indifference
curves, the consumption of good Y could either
78

Microeconomic Foundations of Cost-Benefit Analysis
increase or decrease.As shown in Figure 3A.1(a),
it slightly decreases in this particular example.
5. In calculus notation, this decomposition can be
represented as follows:
This equation is known as the Slutsky equation.
The first term to the right of the equal sign is the
substitution effect, where utility is held constant.
The second term is the income effect, where
prices are held constant, and X is the amount of
the good consumed prior to the price change.
6. One way of doing this first requires obtaining
estimates of the relation between quantity pur-
chased and prices and the relation between
quantity purchased and income and then (as
implied by the preceding note) using the Slutsky
equation to derive the income-compensated
(rather than the utility-compensated) relation
between prices and quantity purchased. In
practice, however, it is not always feasible to
estimate the relation between quantity pur-
chased and income and, hence, to use the
Slutsky equation.
7. For analyses of the size of the bias, see Ian J.
Irvine and William A. Sims,“Measuring
Consumer Surplus with Unknown Hicksian
Demands,” American Economic Review 88(1)
1998, 314–322; Robin W. Boadway and Neil
Bruce, Welfare Economics (Oxford, UK: Basil
Blackwell Ltd., 1984), 216–219; Julian M.Alston
and Douglas M. Larson,“Hicksian vs.
Marshallian Welfare Measures:Why Do We Do
What We Do?” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 75(3) 1993, 764–769; Jerry A.
Hausman,“Exact Consumer’s Surplus and
dX
dP = dX
dP
2
U
- X dX
dP
2
P
Deadweight Loss,” American Economic Review
71(4) 1981, 662–676; and Robert D.Willig,
“Consumer’s Surplus Without Apology,”
American Economic Review 66(4) 1979, 589–597.
8. Specifically, using compensating variation is
only theoretically correct if consumers have ho-
mothetic preferences (i.e., the slopes of all in-
different curves are constant along any ray
from the origin), which implies that each good
in a consumer’s utility function has an income
elasticity of one. Equivalent variation does not
require a similarly restrictive assumption. See
George W. McKenzie, Measuring Economic
Welfare: New Methods (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1983). Also see Marco Becht,
“The Theory and Estimation of Individual and
Social Welfare Measures,” Journal of Economic
Surveys 9(1) 1995, 53–87; and the references
therein.
Although equivalent variation is an appro-
priate measure of the welfare change resulting
from a price increase or decrease, it has been ar-
gued that either compensating surplus or equiva-
lent surplus is more appropriately used when the
quantity of a good, rather than its price, increases
or decreases. In this appendix, we focus on price
rather than quantity changes. For a discussion of
when each of the welfare change measures is
most appropriately used, as well as a useful
graphical presentation of each, see V. Kerry
Smith and William H. Desvousges, Measuring
Water Quality Benefits (Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff
Publishing, 1986), Chapter 2.
9. A fairly simple procedure for using the Slutsky
equation to approximate the Hicksian measures
of consumer surplus is described by Irvine and
Sims (“Measuring Consumer Surplus . . . ”).Also,
see appendix note 6.
79

80

Valuing Benefits and Costs 
in Primary Markets
Form Chapter 4 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
81

A
cost-benefit analysis of a project or a change in government policy sums all the
benefits resulting from the project or policy and subtracts all the associated
costs. Doing this requires that the values of all these benefits and costs are
measured in monetary terms. Although this is often difficult to accomplish in practice,
in principle it would be relatively straightforward if the changes in consumer surplus
and producer surplus resulting from a change in government policy, as well as the pol-
icy’s effects on government revenues, could be determined. Under most circumstances,
it is changes in these values that provide conceptually correct measures of the mone-
tary value of a government policy’s benefits and costs.
This chapter illustrates how changes in consumer surplus, producer surplus, and net
government revenues could be readily estimated if all the pertinent market demand and
supply curves were known. This chapter focuses on demand and supply curves in
primary markets. Primary markets refer to markets that are directly affected by a policy
or project; for example, if a city builds a new subway system, the primary markets are
the market for public transportation and the market for materials used to build the sub-
way. Secondary markets are markets that are indirectly affected—for example, the mar-
ket for gasoline if some commuters switch from driving to riding the new subway.
The chapter begins with a brief discussion of why real CBA studies often fail to use
conceptually correct measures of benefits and costs and what the implications are of
this. We then examine how the effects of government policies in primary markets can
be valued. In doing so, we emphasize the concept of willingness to pay (WTP) and,
thus, demand curves and consumer surplus. We next describe the valuation of re-
sources purchased in primary markets as inputs for government projects, stressing the
concept of opportunity costs and, hence, the use of supply curves and producer surplus.
Throughout this chapter we ignore the marginal excess tax burden.
This chapter also provides brief explanations of common types of market failures
including monopoly, externalities, information asymmetries, public goods, and addictive
goods. The reason for discussing market failures is that their presence provides the
prima facie rationale for most,although not all,proposed government interventions that
are assessed through CBA. If markets worked perfectly, then Pareto efficiency would be
obtained without government intervention: a set of prices would arise that distributes
resources to firms and goods to individuals in such a way that it would not be possible to
Valuing Benefits and Costs 
in Primary Markets
82

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
find a reallocation that would make at least one person better off without also making
at least one other person worse off. Furthermore, such an outcome would maximize net
social benefits. It is only when markets fail that allocative efficiency grounds exist for
government interventions. However, no more than a prima facie case exists. It is up to
CBA to demonstrate that a specific intervention is worthwhile from society’s perspec-
tive. CBA may also be used to assess existing government policies. In this case, the ana-
lyst is essentially attempting to determine whether the current policy is inefficient and,
therefore, exhibits “government failure.”1
Figure 1 summarizes the analytic steps to follow depending on whether the analyst
observes market failure, government failure, or both.
PRACTICAL VERSUS CONCEPTUALLY CORRECT MEASURES 
OF BENEFITS AND COSTS
In most CBAs, the measures of benefits and costs actually used differ somewhat from
the conceptually correct measures. One purpose of examining the conceptually cor-
rect measures of the benefits and costs of a government policy is so they can serve as
a benchmark against which the measures used in actual CBAs can be compared. So
that we can focus on this objective in this chapter, we ignore the practical problems
Current situation: A market is currently 
functioning without government intervention 
and there is evidence of market failure.
Conclusion: It is worth considering potential 
government interventions that might increase 
net social benifits.
CBA analytic task: Given the presence of 
market failure, assess whether the benefits of 
a proposed government policy (including any 
benefits from reducing or eliminating the 
market failure) exceed the costs of the policy.
Current situation: The government has 
intervened and there is currently no
functioning market, but there is evidence of 
government failure.
Conclusion: The current government
intervention is not optimal—the current 
policy is either redundant or replaceable by
a potentially more efficient government
policy.
CBA analytic task: Given the presence of 
government failure, assess whether either:
The benefits of eliminating 
the current government
policy exceed the costs
of eliminating the policy 
(i.e., whether, on balance,
it is preferable to return to 
an operational market).
The benefits of replacing
the existing government
policy with some other 
government intervention 
exceed the cost of  
replacement (i.e., whether
some other government 
policy would increase net 
social benefits).
Rationales
for
CBA
OR
FIGURE 1
How to Consider Market and Government Failure in CBA
83

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
inherent in actually deriving demand and supply curves needed to measure benefit
and costs. Instead, we focus on how the conceptually correct measures of benefits
and costs would be obtained if the necessary curves were known.
Before turning to the conceptually correct measures, it is helpful to examine why
they often differ from the measures used in actual CBAs.A fundamental reason is that
it is often convenient to use observed prices in valuing benefits and costs. However, as
illustrated later in this chapter, whenever a government policy involves the production
of a public good, or an externality or monopoly power is present, market prices may not
provide good indicators of the social value of benefits or costs. There are other situa-
tions in which a market price does not even exist. For example, persons entering a
U.S. National Park pay a fee, but this fee is set by the National Park Service, not by the
market. Consequently, it is unlikely that it bears a strong relation to the value of the
benefits visitors actually receive from visiting the parks.Thus, a continuum exists.At one
end of this continuum are values that can be measured in terms of prices that are set in
well-functioning, competitive markets.At the other end is the complete absence of mar-
kets that can be used to value benefits and costs resulting from a government policy.
When observed prices fail to reflect the social value of a good accurately or observed
prices do not exist, an approach called shadow pricing is often used to measure some
benefits or costs.That is, analysts adjust observed prices or assign values when appropri-
ate observed prices do not exist, thereby finding in “the shadows,” needed values that are
not readily observable.They attempt to come as close as possible to measuring the value
that those receiving benefits from a government project place on them or the lost value to
those who incur costs. For example, prices charged by paper factories may understate the
true social cost of paper if the production process generates pollution.Given such circum-
stances, an analyst conducting a CBA may adjust the market price upward to account for
the negative externality resulting from the pollution. Another important example of
shadow pricing is the considerable effort that economists have put into attempting to
place an appropriate value on human life.Also,economists have also put much work into
trying to determine the social value of recreational areas such as public parks. We indi-
cate many other situations in this chapter when shadow pricing is required and at sev-
eral junctures suggest approaches that can be taken toward obtaining shadow prices.
Although numerous shadow pricing techniques exist, it is still frequently the case
that the measures of benefits and costs used in actual studies differ from their concep-
tually correct counterparts.There are several reasons for this:
1. Errors are sometimes made in CBA. In some instances, for example, the distinc-
tion between the measure being used and the conceptually correct measure is suf-
ficiently subtle that it is inadvertently overlooked. In such instances, those con-
ducting the study may be unaware that their results are incorrect and thus do not
attempt to use appropriate shadow pricing techniques.
2. It is often difficult to derive an appropriate shadow price. In some studies, conse-
quently, the difference between the actual and the correct measure may be poten-
tially serious, but it is technically infeasible or beyond the time and resources 
84

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
available to those conducting the study to do much about it. In the most extreme in-
stances, even determining the conceptually correct measures of value is so complex
and daunting as to put it beyond the grasp of analysts. Even when shadow prices
are used, the resulting measures of benefits and costs may vary from their concep-
tually correct counterparts.When this is the case, it is at least incumbent upon those
conducting the study to point out why and how the study results may be biased.
3. There may be reason to think that the differences between the actual and the cor-
rect measures are sufficiently minor such that the study results are not much af-
fected. In such instances, shadow pricing may not be necessary.
VALUING OUTCOMES: WILLINGNESS TO PAY (WTP)
The valuation of policy outcomes should be based on the concept of WTP. Some people
like a policy impact and are willing to pay for it. Other people do not like the same im-
pact and are willing to pay to avoid it. Benefits are the sums of the maximum amounts
people would be willing to pay to gain outcomes that they view as desirable; costs are the
sums of the maximum amounts that people would be willing to pay to avoid outcomes they
view as undesirable.2 Estimating changes in social surpluses that occur in relevant mar-
kets enables us to take account of these costs and benefits. In the discussion that follows,
we distinguish between changes in surplus that take place in efficient markets and those
that occur in inefficient or distorted markets where market or government failures are
found. This discussion also focuses on gross benefits, rather than net benefits, because it
usually ignores the inputs the government must purchase to carry out policies.
Measurement of the social cost of these resources is discussed in the following section.
Net benefits would be obtained by subtracting the costs of these inputs from gross benefits.
Thus, as used in this section, the word "costs" refers to negative changes resulting from a
policy, not the expenses on inputs the government must purchase to carry out the policy.
Valuing Benefits in Efficient Markets
Valuation of gross benefits is relatively straightforward when a policy affects the sup-
ply curves of goods in efficient markets. Under these circumstances, the rule is as fol-
lows: the gross social benefits of a policy equal the net government revenue generated by
the policy (exclusive of project costs) plus the resulting changes in consumer surplus and
producer surplus.
We examine two common situations where this rule is applicable. First, we con-
sider policies that directly affect the quantity of a good available to consumers. For ex-
ample, a publicly operated childcare center shifts the supply curve to the right, as it re-
sults in more child care being offered to consumers at each price. This often (but not
always) reduces prices, resulting in benefits to consumers. Second, we consider policies
that shift the supply curve down by altering the price or availability of some input used
to produce the good.An example is deepening a harbor so that it accommodates larger
ships, thus reducing the cost of transporting bulk commodities to and from the port for
shipping companies.This results in direct reductions in costs to producers.
Direct Increases in Supply Available to Consumers.
Figure 2 shows the gross bene-
fits that result when a project directly increases the available supply of a good in a
85

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
well-functioning market, but the increase is so small that the price of the good is unaf-
fected. If the government sells the additional units of the good at the market price,
then it may be treated like other competitors in an efficient market. Hence, as shown
in the figure, it faces a horizontal demand curve, D, for the good at the market price,
P0. If the project directly adds a quantity, q, to the market, then the supply curve as
seen by consumers shifts from S to S  q.3 Because the demand curve is horizontal,
the price of the good and, hence, consumer surplus and producer surplus are unaf-
fected by the shift in the supply curve. However, if consumers purchase the additional
units of the good, the government receives revenue equal to P0 times q, the area of
rectangle q0abq1. The rectangle q0abq1 also, of course, represents a cost to those con-
sumers who purchase the good. This “cost,” however, is exactly offset by benefits that
these persons enjoy in consuming the good and, consequently, can be ignored in our
analysis. Therefore the revenues received by the government are the only gross bene-
fits that accrue from the project selling q units in the market.
If the government adds a sufficiently large quantity of a good to a market so that the
price of the good is reduced, however, then consumers will benefit. Figure 3 illustrates
this possibility by showing a downward-sloping demand curve, D.The intersection of the
demand curve and the supply curve, S, indicates the equilibrium price, P0, prior to the
Price
Quantity
D
S
b
P0
q0
q1
e
d
a
S + q
Social surplus change (ignoring costs of project inputs to the government):
Project (a): Direct increase in supply of q—gain of project revenue equal to area of rectangle q0abq1
Project (b): Supply schedule shift through cost reduction for producers—gain of trapezoid abde
q
FIGURE 2
Measuring Benefits in an Efficient Market with No Price Effects
86

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
Quantity
Social surplus change (ignoring costs of project inputs to the government):
Project (a): Direct increase in supply of q—gain of triangle abc plus project revenue equal 
 
  
   to area of rectangle q2cbq1
Project (b): Supply schedule shift through cost reductions for producers—gain of trapezoid abde
D
S + q
S
a
b
d
e
q2
q0
q1
P1
P0
c
f
q
FIGURE 3
Measuring Benefits in an Efficient Market
project.The equilibrium price of the good falls to P1 after the government provides the q
units of the good.This time, because of the reduction in the price facing consumers, there
is a gain in consumer surplus corresponding to the area of trapezoid P0abP1. Because pri-
vate-sector suppliers continue to operate on the original supply curve, S, the output they
sell falls from q0 to q2, and they suffer a loss of producer surplus equal to the area of
trapezoid P0acP1.Thus, the net gain in surplus among private actors (consumers and pro-
ducers) equals the area of triangle abc, which is lightly shaded. In addition, the govern-
ment receives revenues from the project equal to the area of rectangle q2cbq1.The sum of
project revenues and the gain in social surplus in the market equals area q2cabq1,which is
the total gross benefit from the project selling q units in the market.
What benefits would accrue if q units of the good were instead distributed free to
selected consumers? If the price of the good does not change, as in the situation de-
picted in Figure 2, then the answer is straightforward: as a result of receiving q units of
the good free, consumers gain surplus equal to the area of rectangle q0abq1, an area
that exactly corresponds to the revenues that would have accrued had the project’s
output been sold.
The answer is more complex if the q units of the good are distributed free, but the
increase in supply causes its price to fall. This situation is shown in Figure 3. Under
these circumstances, if the q units are given only to those consumers who would have
valued these units at P1 or higher, then the project’s gross benefit measure is again ex-
actly the same as it would have been had the output been sold.As before, the reduction
87

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
in price from P0 to P1 results in an increase in social surplus equal to area abc.With free
distribution, however, no revenue accrues to the project. Instead, as a result of receiv-
ing q units of the good free, consumers enjoy an additional surplus equal to the area of
rectangle q2cbq1. Thus, total gross benefits from the project once again equal the area
of trapezoid q2cabq1.
It is more likely, however, that if q units of the good are distributed for free, some
would go to consumers who are located below point b on the market demand curve
shown in Figure 3. In other words, some units would be distributed to some consumers
in greater quantities than they would have purchased at price P1. If these consumers
keep the excess units, then area q2cabq1 overestimates the project’s benefit because
these persons value their marginal consumption of these units at less than P1. Area
q2cabq1 approximates project benefits, however, if recipients of the excess units sell
them to others who would have been willing to buy them at a price of P1 (provided the
transaction costs associated with the sale of the excess units are zero).
Suppose, for example, that a project provides previously stockpiled gasoline free to
low-income consumers during an oil supply disruption (an in-kind subsidy). Some low-
income households will find themselves with more gasoline than they would have pur-
chased on their own at price P1; therefore, they will try to sell the excess. Doing so will be
relatively easy if access to the stockpiled gasoline is provided through legally transferable
coupons; it would obviously be more difficult if the gasoline had to be physically taken
away by the low-income households. If the gasoline coupons could be costlessly traded
among consumers, then we would expect the outcome to be identical to one in which the
gasoline is sold in the market and the revenue given directly to low-income consumers.
Reductions in Costs to Producers.
We now turn to a different type of public-sector
project: one, such as harbor deepening, which lowers the private sector’s cost of sup-
plying a market. Figure 3 can again be used to analyze this situation. In this case, how-
ever, the supply curve shifts to S  q, not because the project directly supplies q to
the market, but rather because reductions in marginal costs allow private-sector firms
to offer q additional units profitably at each price.4 As in the case of direct supply of
q, the new equilibrium price is P1. Thus, the gain in consumer surplus corresponds to
the area of trapezoid P0abP1.The change in producer surplus corresponds to the differ-
ence in the areas of triangle P0ae (the producer surplus with supply curve S) and trian-
gle P1bd (the producer surplus with supply curve S  q). Area P1ce is common to the
two triangles and therefore cancels. Hence, producers enjoy a net gain in surplus equal
to area ecbd minus area P0acP1. Adding this gain to the gain in consumer surplus, area
P0abP1, means that the net gain to consumers and producers resulting from the project
equals the area of trapezoid abde. (That is, area ecbd  area P0abP1 - area P0acP1 
area ecbd  area abc  area abde.5) Because no project revenue is generated, area
abde alone is the gross benefit of the project. Notice that because we once again ignore
expenditures the government incurs in purchasing inputs needed to undertake the pro-
ject, we are again measuring gross benefits rather than net benefits.
Revenues as a Measure of Gross Benefits in Efficient Markets.
To private-sector pro-
ducers of goods or services, project revenues are a natural measure of gross benefits.
However,while revenues figure prominently in the computation of producer surplus,they
88

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
generally do not equate to gross consumer benefits.There are, however, two situations
in which it is appropriate to use revenues as gross benefits.
The first situation, which is discussed above, occurs when the government sells a
good in an undistorted market without affecting the market price. For example, a gov-
ernment may have surplus office equipment that it sells in sufficiently small quantities
that the market price of office equipment does not change. The assumption of a negli-
gible effect on price is more reasonable for goods traded in large, national markets
than for goods traded in small, local markets. It is also more reasonable for homoge-
neous goods, such as surplus equipment, than for heterogeneous goods, such as land,
which may differ in desirability from one parcel to another.
Second, revenues can be used as a measure of gross consumer benefits when
changes in consumer surplus are zero. This may occur when a project exports all of its
output. The North East Coal Development Project provides an example. The primary
beneficiaries (besides the Canadian federal government) were the mining and trans-
portation companies. Their producer surplus increase is legitimately computed as the
difference between their additional revenues and their additional costs, that is, as their
incremental profits. However, as this project would supply coal to Japanese customers
only, it does not include any consumer surplus benefits for Canadians. The consumer
surplus would accrue to foreigners and, therefore, should not be counted in the CBA if
the analyst takes a Canadian perspective.
In practice, government often sells goods when markets are distorted or when the
sale has an impact on the price of the good. For example, electricity may not be avail-
able to residents of a remote town unless the government sponsors the construction of
an electric power transmission line. Here, introduction of electricity effectively reduces
the price from infinity to the user fee charged. In these situations, government or firm
revenues are an especially poor measure of gross benefits.
Valuing Benefits in Distorted Markets
If market or government failures distort the relevant product market, then project ben-
efits should continue to be measured as changes in consumer surplus plus producer
surplus resulting from the project plus net government revenues generated by the pro-
ject. However, complications arise in determining the correct surplus changes.We illus-
trate these complications by examining five different types of market failures: monop-
oly, information asymmetry, externalities, public goods, and addictive goods.We do not
attempt to provide a comprehensive discussion of market failures in this chapter, just
an overview. For a comprehensive discussion, we recommend a book by David Weimer
and Aidan Vining, which is cited in the first endnote.6
Monopoly.
It is useful to examine monopoly first because it is an excellent example of
a deviation from the competitive equilibrium that results in a deadweight loss and,
hence, reduces social surplus.7 One key to understanding monopoly is to recognize that
because, by definition, a monopolist is the only firm in its market, it views the market
demand curve as the demand curve for its output.
Because market demand curves slope downward, if the monopolist sells all its
output at the same price, then it can sell an additional unit of output only by reducing
the price on every unit it sells. Consequently, the monopolist’s marginal revenue—the
89

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
additional revenue it receives for each additional unit of output it sells—is less than
the selling price of that unit. For example, if a monopolist could sell four units of out-
put at a price of $10 but must reduce its price to $9 in order to sell five units, its rev-
enue would increase from $40 to $45 as a result of selling the fifth unit.Therefore, the
$5 in marginal revenue it receives from the fifth unit is less than the $9 selling price of
the unit.Thus, as shown in Figure 4, the monopolist’s marginal revenue curve, denoted
MR, is located below its demand curve, denoted AR.
Given this situation, the monopolist would maximize profit by producing at Qm,
where its marginal cost equals its marginal revenue. The price it can charge is deter-
mined by what people are willing to pay for those units, which is given by the demand
curve it faces.At the output level Qm it would set its price equal to Pm.
As before, the social surplus generated by the output produced and sold by the
monopolist is represented graphically by the area between the demand curve, which
reflects the marginal benefit to society, and the marginal cost curve that is to the left of
the intersection of the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves. This is the sum of
consumer surplus plus producer surplus. The consumer surplus, which is captured by
buyers, is the lightest shaded area above the price line. The producer surplus, which is
captured by the monopolist, is the darker shaded area below the price line.
Although the term monopolist is sometimes used pejoratively, in a CBA any in-
crease in producer surplus received by a monopolist that results from a government
policy is counted as a benefit of the policy.The rationale is that owners of monopolies,
like consumers and the owners of competitive firms, are part of society; therefore, ben-
efits accruing to them “count.”8
Price
Consumer surplus
Producer surplus
Deadweight
loss
a
c
MC
AC
b
d
Quantity
D
MR
AR
Qc
Qm
Pm
Pc
f
FIGURE 4
Monopoly
90

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Quantity
MC
AC
Price
Pm
Pr
Qm
Qr
Qc
Q0
MR
Pc
P0
g
h
c
e
b
f
a
D
d
FIGURE 5
Natural Monopoly
Notice that, unlike the perfectly competitive case, social surplus is not maximized if
the monopolist is left to its own devices. This is because the monopolist maximizes
profits, not net social benefits. Net social benefits are maximized at point c on Figure 4,
where the marginal cost curve intersects the marginal benefit curve (demand curve).
The “lost” social surplus, which is called the deadweight loss of monopoly, is repre-
sented in Figure 4 by the darkly shaded triangular area abc. Were it possible for the
government to break up the monopoly into a large number of competing firms, each
firm would produce where price equals MC.9 In Figure 4 this occurs where industry
output and price are Qc and Pc, which are sometimes referred to as the “competitive”
output and price. If this competitive outcome resulted, two things would happen: first,
the deadweight loss would disappear and social surplus would increase by the area abc.
In CBA, this would count as a benefit of the government’s actions. Second, because the
competitive price, Pc, is less than the monopolistic price, Pm, consumers would capture
that part of the monopolist’s producer surplus that is represented by the rectangular
area PmadPc. In CBA, this is viewed as a transfer.
Natural Monopoly.
So far, we have been focusing on a general form of monopoly.We
now turn to a specific type of monopoly: natural monopoly.The essential characteristic
of a natural monopoly is that it enjoys economies of scale over a wide range of output.
Usually, its fixed costs are very large relative to its variable costs; public utilities, roads,
and bridges all provide good examples. As shown in Figure 5, these large fixed costs
cause average costs to fall over a large range of output. Put another way, and as shown
in Figure 5, (long run) average costs exceed (long run) marginal costs over what we
term the relevant range of output, which is the range between the first unit of output
and the amount consumers would demand at a zero price, Q0.
91

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
In principle, marginal costs could be rising or falling over the relevant output range,
but for the sake of simplicity, we have drawn the marginal cost curve as horizontal.The
important point is that (long run) marginal costs are less than (long run) average costs
over the relevant range, so that average costs fall over the relevant range of output as
output increases.As a result, one firm, a natural monopoly, can provide a given amount
of output at a lower average cost than could two or more firms.
In these circumstances, it is reasonable for the government to permit a monopoly
to exist. If it does, however, it must decide whether to regulate the monopoly, and if it
regulates it, what type of policies to invoke.To make our discussion of these policies as
concrete as possible, we will assume that the natural monopoly represented in Figure 5 is
a road and that output is the number of cars that travel the road.Although most roads
are built under government contract and operated by the government, they could in-
stead be built and operated by private-sector firms under various regulatory frame-
works. In fact, several roads have been built by private companies or public–private part-
nerships over the past 200 years.10
The government could follow one of four policies. The first is simply to allow the
road-operating authority, whether a private-sector firm or a government agency, to
maximize profits. As discussed previously, profits are maximized at output Qm, where
marginal cost equals marginal revenue.The road-operating authority could obtain this
output level by charging a toll (i.e., a price) set at Pm. However, under this policy, out-
put is restricted below the competitive level of Qc, and willingness to pay, Pm, exceeds
marginal costs, Pc.This results in a deadweight loss equal to area abc.The policy is also
unattractive politically because it typically permits substantial monopoly profits, corre-
sponding to area Pmafg.
An alternative policy that is often used in regulating natural monopolies is to re-
quire the road-operating authority to set its price at Pr, where the average cost curve
crosses the demand curve. This policy eliminates monopoly profits by transferring so-
cial surplus from the road-operating authority to persons using the road. It also ex-
pands output, increasing social surplus and reducing deadweight loss from area abc to
area dec. Thus, as compared to allowing the road-operating authority to maximize
profits, society receives a benefit from the policy that corresponds to area adeb. But
deadweight loss is not completely eliminated. In other words, society could potentially
benefit still further if output could be expanded.
The third policy alternative does this by requiring the road construction and oper-
ating authority to set its price at Pc, where the marginal cost curve intersects the de-
mand curve—in other words, by requiring competitive market pricing. This completely
eliminates the deadweight loss, thereby maximizing net social benefits. But a problem
exists with this policy: price is below average costs; hence, revenues no longer cover
costs.As a result, tax money must be used to subsidize the road construction and oper-
ating authority.
The fourth policy alternative is the one most often used in the case of roads: to
allow free access, or in other words, to charge a zero price. In this case, output would
expand to Q0, the point at which the demand curve intersects the horizontal axis. The
problem with this policy is that output expands to a level at which marginal costs exceed
marginal benefit (i.e. WTP). This results in a deadweight loss equal to the triangular
92

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
Pu
Qi
Quantity
Qu
Pi
Di
Du
S
c
b
a
Transfer to seller
Deadweight loss
FIGURE 6
Information Asymmetry
area chQ0. Moreover, because no tolls are collected directly from road users, the entire
construction and operating costs of the road must be paid through government subsi-
dies obtained from taxes.
Information Asymmetry.
The term information asymmetry implies that information
about a product or a job may not be equal on both sides of a market. For example, sell-
ers may have more information concerning how well made or safe a product is than
buyers, doctors may know more about needed care than patients, or employers may
know more about job-related health risks than their workers.
The implications of information asymmetry are easy to show in a diagram. To do
this, we focus on the case in which sellers of a product have more information than
buyers. Such a situation is represented in Figure 6, which shows two demand curves.
One of these curves, Di, represents how many units of the product buyers would desire
if they had full information concerning it,while the other demand curve,Du,indicates how
many units they actually desire, given their lack of full information.11 In other words,
the two demand curves represent, respectively, consumers’ WTP with and without full
information concerning the product. They indicate that if buyers had full information,
their WTP would be lower.12
Figure 6 shows that there are two effects of information asymmetry. First, by rais-
ing the price and the amount of the good purchased, information asymmetry increases
producer surplus and reduces consumer surplus, resulting in a transfer from con-
sumers to sellers. This transfer is shown by the trapezoidal area PuacPi. Second, by in-
creasing the amount of the good sold relative to the full information case, information
asymmetry results in a deadweight loss, which is shown as the triangular area abc.
93

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
These two effects, especially the second one, suggest a rationale for the govern-
ment to intervene by providing the missing information. If the government does this
effectively, society will benefit because deadweight loss is reduced. In addition, there
will be a transfer of surplus (back) from sellers to buyers. However, there are also costs
associated with the government obtaining and disseminating information. These costs,
which do not explicitly appear in the diagram, may be sizable.13 Hence, for a govern-
ment information program to have positive net benefits, and not just positive gross
benefits, the deadweight loss associated with the lack of information in the absence of
government intervention must usually be substantial.
It is useful to discuss the circumstances under which information asymmetry is suf-
ficiently important that the benefits from government intervention are likely to exceed
the costs. This largely depends upon two factors: first, the ease with which consumers
can obtain the information for themselves; and second, whether third parties that could
provide the missing information are likely to arise through market forces. To discuss
these factors, it is helpful to distinguish among three types of products: (1) search
goods, (2) experience goods, and (3) post-experience goods.14
Search goods are products with characteristics that consumers can learn about by
examining them prior to purchasing them. For example, a student who needs a note-
book for a class can go to the bookstore and easily learn pretty much everything he or
she wants to know about the characteristics of alternative notebooks. Under such cir-
cumstances, information asymmetry is unlikely to be serious.
Experience goods are products about which consumers can obtain full knowl-
edge, but only after purchasing and experiencing them. Examples are tickets to a
movie, a meal at a new restaurant, a new television set, and a house. At least to a de-
gree, information asymmetry concerning many such products takes care of itself.
For example, once consumers have been to a restaurant, they acquire some infor-
mation concerning the expected quality of the meal should they eat there again.
Warranties, which are typically provided for televisions and many other major con-
sumer durables, serve a similar purpose. In addition, market demand for informa-
tion about experience goods often prompts third parties to provide information for
a fee.This reduces information asymmetry. For example, newspaper reviews provide
information about movies and restaurants; in the United States, Consumer Reports
provides information about many goods; and inspection services examine houses for
perspective buyers.
In the case of post-experience goods, consumption does not necessarily reveal in-
formation to consumers. Government intervention to reduce information asymmetry
associated with post-experience goods is most likely to be efficiency-enhancing be-
cause learning through individual action does not always occur. Examples of this situa-
tion include adverse health effects associated with a prescription drug and a new auto-
mobile with a defective part. Employee exposure to an unhealthy chemical at work is
similar. In these cases, information asymmetry may persist for long periods of time,
even after the health of some people has been ruined. Moreover, because the needed
information is often expensive to gather and individuals may be unwilling to pay for it,
third parties may not provide the necessary information. Under these circumstances,
there may be a strong rationale for government intervention.
94

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
A
E
B
F
C
t
D
S* (marginal private cost)
S# (marginal social cost)
Quantity
P#
Q#
Q*
P*
P# – t
FIGURE 7
Negative Externality
Externalities.
An externality is an effect that production or consumption has on third
parties—people not involved in the production or consumption of the good. It is a by-
product of production or consumption for which there is no market. Indeed, externali-
ties are sometimes referred to as the problem of “missing markets.” Examples include
pollution caused by a factory and the pleasure derived from a neighbor’s beautiful gar-
den. Externalities may occur for a wide variety of reasons. For example, some result be-
cause a particular type of manufacturing technology is used (e.g., air pollution caused
by smokestack industry). Others arise because of interdependencies (or synergies) be-
tween producers and consumers or different groups of producers (e.g., beekeepers
who unintentionally provide pollination services for nearby fruit growers). Still other
externalities occur because of networks (e.g., the larger the number of persons who
purchase a particular type of automobile, the greater the number of qualified service
garages available to each owner). Because the number of externalities is enormous, a
careful CBA should first be conducted before the government intervenes to correct
any specific externality.15
We first examine a negative externality (i.e., one that imposes social costs) and
then a positive externality (i.e., one that produces benefits). Figure 7 illustrates a mar-
ket in which the production process results in a negative externality, such as air or
water pollution. The supply curve, S*, reflects only the private marginal costs incurred
by the suppliers of the good, while the second supply curve, S#, incorporates the costs
that the negative externality imposes on third parties, as well as the private marginal
costs incurred by suppliers. The vertical distance between these two curves, measured
over the quantity of the good purchased, can be viewed as the amount those subjected
to the negative externality would be willing to pay to avoid it. In other words, it repre-
sents the costs imposed by the externality on third parties. The length of this distance
95

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
depends in part upon whether the market somehow compensates third parties for the
negative externality. For example, it would be smaller if homeowners were able to pur-
chase their houses at lower prices because of pollution in their neighborhood than if
they were not.
Figure 7 indicates that, if left to its own devices, the market sets too low a price for
the good (P* < P#) because it fails to take account of the cost to third parties of pro-
ducing the good.As a result, too much output is produced (Q* > Q#).This causes dead-
weight loss, which is represented by the shaded triangular area labeled C. This dead-
weight loss reflects the fact that for each unit of additional output produced in excess
of Q#, marginal social costs (shown by the supply curve S#) increasingly exceed mar-
ginal social benefits (shown by the demand curve D).
The standard technique for reducing deadweight loss resulting from negative ex-
ternalities is to impose taxes.16 For example, the suppliers of the good represented in
Figure 7 could be required to pay a tax, t, on each unit they sell, with the tax set equal
to the difference between marginal social costs and marginal social benefits (shown in
the figure as the vertical distance at Q* between the two supply curves).As production
costs would now include the tax, the supply curve of sellers, S*, would shift upward to
S#. Consequently, the price paid by consumers would increase from P* to P#, the net
price received by producers would fall from P* to P# - t, and output produced and sold
would fall from Q* to Q#. Note that pollution associated with the good would be re-
duced, but not completely eliminated, because the good would continue to be pro-
duced, although in smaller amounts.17
Figure 7 implies that the benefits and costs of the government’s tax policy are dis-
tributed unequally among different groups in the economy. These are displayed in the
following social accounting ledger.
Because the policy causes consumers to pay a higher price for less of the good,
they lose surplus equal to areas A and B. Similarly, because the tax causes producers to
sell less of the good but increases their production costs, they lose producer surplus
equal to areas E and F. On the other hand, because of the reduction in production of
the good and, hence, in pollution, third parties receive benefits from the policy equal to
areas B, C, and F. Finally, the government receives tax revenues equal to areas A and
E. Because areas A, B, E, and F represent transfers from one group to another, only
area C can be counted as a gain to society as a whole from the tax policy.This area cor-
responds to the deadweight loss eliminated by the tax policy.To compute the net social
benefit of the tax, the cost of administering it would have to be subtracted from the re-
duction in deadweight loss.
Benefits
Costs
Consumers of good
A  B
Producers of good
E  F
Third parties
B  C  F
Government revenue
A  E
Social benefit
C
96

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
Quantity
Gain to consumers in target neighborhood: 
B + E
Gain to persons in nearby neighborhood: 
C + G + F
Gain to producers: 
A + C
Program costs: 
A + B + C + G + E
Net benefits: 
C + F
DM
DS
A
B
S – v
S
q0
q1
P1
P0
P1 + v
F
G
H
E
C
FIGURE 8
Social Benefits for Direct Supply of a Good with a Positive
Externality
Now let us look at an example of a positive externality, a program that subsidizes the
purchase of rodent extermination services in a poor neighborhood. One mechanism for
doing this is to provide residents with vouchers that are worth a certain number of dollars,
$v, for each unit of extermination services they purchase.After subtracting the face value
of these vouchers from what they charge neighborhood residents for their services, exter-
minators would then be reimbursed the face value of the voucher by the government.
By increasing the use of extermination services, such a program may result in a
positive externality: the fewer the rodents in the neighborhood, the easier it is for resi-
dents in adjoining neighborhoods to control their own rodent populations. This situa-
tion is illustrated in Figure 8, where the market demand curve, DM, is shown as under-
stating the social demand curve, DS. The area between these two demand curves
represents the WTP for the extermination voucher program by residents of adjoining
neighborhoods, assuming they had knowledge of the potential benefits from the pro-
gram to them.Thus, the market equilibrium price, P0, and quantity, q0, are both too low
from the social perspective, resulting in deadweight loss equal to C  F  H.
What are the social benefits of a program that distributes vouchers worth $v per
unit of extermination service to the residents of a poor neighborhood? As implied by
Figure 8, when the vouchers become available, residents of the poor neighborhood
97

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
face a supply curve that is below the original market supply curve, S, by $v.As a conse-
quence of a voucher-induced shift in the supply curve, neighborhood residents increase
their purchases of extermination services from q0 to q1, paying an effective price of P1.
Consumers in the targeted neighborhood enjoy a surplus gain equal to the area of
trapezoid B  E; producers, who now receive a higher supply price of P1  v, enjoy a
surplus gain equal to the area of trapezoid A  C; and people in the surrounding
neighborhoods, who enjoy the positive externality, gain surplus equal to the area of
parallelogram C  G  F, the area between the market and social demand curves over
the increase in consumption.The program must pay out $v times q1 in subsidies, which
equals the area of rectangle A B  C  G  E. Subtracting this program cost from
the gains in social surplus in the market yields gross program benefits: the area of
trapezoid C  F.18 This benefit results because the program succeeds in eliminating
part (although not all) of the deadweight loss in the market for extermination services.
Public Goods.
Once produced, public goods—for example, flood control projects or na-
tional defense—are available for everyone. No one can or, indeed, should be excluded
from enjoying their benefits. In this sense, public goods may be regarded as a special type
of positive externality. Similar to other positive externalities, private markets, if left to
their own devices, tend to produce less public goods than is socially optimal. Pure public
goods have two key characteristics: they are nonexcludable, and they are nonrivalrous.
A good is nonexcludable if it is impossible, or at least highly impractical, for one
person to prevent others from consuming it. If it is supplied to one consumer, it is avail-
able for all consumers, a phenomenon sometimes called jointness in supply. For exam-
ple, it would be very difficult for a user of the light emitted from a particular streetlight
to prevent others from using that light. In contrast, most private goods are excludable.
For instance, a purchaser of a hamburger can exclude others from taking a bite unless
overcome by physical force.
The reason nonexcludability causes market failure is easy to see. Once a nonex-
cludable good such as street lighting or national defense exists, it is available for every-
one to use. Because people cannot be excluded from using it, a free-rider problem re-
sults. As a consequence, there is not sufficient incentive for the private sector to
provide it. Usually it must be publicly provided, if it is going to be provided at all.
Nonrivalry implies that one person’s consumption of a good does not prevent some-
one else from also consuming it; consequently, more than one person can obtain benefits
from a given level of supply at the same time.For example,one person’s use of a streetlight
to help him see at night does not diminish the ability of another person to use the same
light. But if one person eats a hamburger, another cannot consume the same hamburger.
The hamburger is rivalrous; a streetlight is nonrivalrous.Thus, unlike the hamburger, even
if it were feasible to exclude a second person from using street lighting, it would be ineffi-
cient to do so because the marginal cost of supplying lighting to the second person is zero.
The reason nonrivalry causes market failure can be examined by contrasting how
a total marginal benefit curve, a curve that reflects the incremental benefits to con-
sumers from each additional unit of a good that is available for their consumption, is
derived for a rivalrous good with how such a curve is derived for a nonrivalrous good.
To do this graphically as simply as possible, we assume that there are only two poten-
tial consumers of each of the two goods. Thus, Figure 9a displays two graphs: one for
98

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
dA
dB
MB,D
Quantity
P #
Q*
q2
q1
P*
FIGURE 9a
Rivalrous Good (e.g., hamburger)
FIGURE 9b
Nonrivalrous Good (e.g., streetlight)
dB
dA
MB
Price
Quantity
P*
pb
pa
Q #
Q*
Q
99

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
the rivalrous good (hamburger) and one for the nonrivalrous good (streetlight). Each
graph contains three curves: a demand curve representing consumer A’s WTP (dA), a
demand curve representing consumer B’s WTP (dB), and a total marginal benefit (MB)
curve, which is derived from the demand curves for the two consumers.
The total marginal benefit curve for the rivalrous good is equivalent to a market
demand curve. To derive this curve, the two demand curves for individual consumers
are summed horizontally. For example, at a price of P*, consumer A would want to con-
sume q1 and consumer B would want q2 of the good.Total market demand for the good
at a price of P* is equal to q1  q2, a total of Q*. Thus, WTP for (or equivalently, mar-
ginal benefits from) the last unit of the total of Q* units consumed is P*. Notice that
until the price falls below P#, the marginal benefit curve would correspond to B’s de-
mand curve because A would not demand any of the good.
In contrast, the total marginal benefit curve for the nonrivalrous good is derived
by adding the demand curves for individual consumers vertically rather than horizon-
tally. At an output level of Q*, for example, total WTP (i.e., the total marginal benefits
from the last unit of the good that is made available) is equal to pa  pb or P*. Notice
that at output levels above Q#, consumer A’s WTP falls to zero and, consequently, the
marginal benefit curve corresponds to consumer B’s demand curve.
The reason the demand curves for individual consumers must be summed horizon-
tally in the presence of rivalry and vertically in its absence can be clarified through use
of a numerical example. If at a price of $2 consumer B wanted to buy two hamburgers
and consumer A one hamburger, then total demand would equal three hamburgers—
the horizontal sum of demands at a particular price. But if at a price of $1,000, B wanted
two streetlights on the block on which he and A both lived, but A wanted only one,
then two streetlights would completely satisfy the demands of both. Thus, the total
demand for a nonrivalrous good cannot be determined by summing the quantity of the
good each consumer desires at a given price. It must be determined instead by sum-
ming each consumer’s WTP for a given quantity of the good. Hence, although A and B
have a different WTP for the two streetlights, their total WTP for the two streetlights
can be determined by adding A’s WTP for two lights to B’s.
The distinction between how the total demand for rivalrous and nonrivalrous
goods is determined has an important implication. In the case of the rivalrous good,
consumers will reveal to the market how much they want. For example, if the price of
hamburgers is set at P*, consumer A will actually purchase q1 of the good and con-
sumer B will actually purchase q2. But in the case of a nonrivalrous good, no market
mechanism exists that causes consumers to reveal how many units they would pur-
chase at different prices. For example, if the price of streetlight is at pb, consumer B
would be willing to purchase Q* of the good. But if B did that, A would not purchase
any because, as a result of B’s purchase, he could consume all he wanted. In other
words, A would free ride on B. Because of this free-rider problem, B might refuse to
make any purchase until A agreed to make some sort of contribution.19
When only a small group of people is involved, they may be able to work out the
free-rider problems caused by the nonexcludability and nonrivalry of public goods
through negotiations. For example, a neighborhood association might make arrange-
ments for installing and paying for streetlights. But too much or too little of the good may
be produced. For example, if consumers A and B are to be charged for streetlights on the
100

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
basis of their WTP,each will probably try to convince the other that they place a low value
on streetlights regardless of how they actually value them. It is therefore difficult to de-
termine where the total marginal benefit curve for a public good is located, even if only a
small group of people is involved. When a large group of people share a good that is
nonexcludable and nonrivalrous, such as national defense, negotiations become impracti-
cal. Consequently, if the good is going to be produced at all, the government must almost
certainly intervene by either producing the good itself or subsidizing its production.
Because streetlighting is both nonrivalrous in consumption and nonexcludable, it is
close to being a pure public good. Other goods may be either nonrivalrous or nonex-
cludable, but not both. For example, an uncrowded road is essentially nonrivalrous in
nature. One person’s use of it does not keep another from using it.Yet, it is excludable.
Individuals could be required to pay a toll to use it. Thus, it is sometimes called a toll
good. Fish in international waters provide an example of a good that is rivalrous but
nonexcludable. Fish and fishers move around so it is difficult to preclude fishers from
catching a particular type of fish, for example, tuna. But if a fisher catches a tuna, then
that tuna is no longer available to other fishers.This type of good is called an open access
resource. Goods that are either nonrivalrous or nonexcludable, but not both, exhibit
some, but not all of the characteristics of public goods. However, for the sake of brevity,
we have focused on pure public goods, which are both nonrivalrous and nonexcludable.
Examples of goods that are close to being pure public goods are streetlights, flood con-
trol, national defense, and crime deterrence resulting from police patrolling the streets.
As suggested by the preceding analysis, because of both nonrivalry and nonexclud-
ability, actual markets for pure public goods are unlikely to exist. However, marginal
benefit and marginal cost curves, which are analogous to market demand and supply
curves, do exist. We have already shown how to derive a marginal benefit curve for a
public good. And, as in the case of a private good, the marginal cost curve for a public
good simply reflects the costs of producing each incremental unit of the good. Social
welfare is maximized when marginal benefits equal marginal costs, while deadweight
loss results at either smaller or larger output amounts. However, because of the ab-
sence of a true market, little or none of a pure public good would be produced without
government intervention, or at least some sort of negotiation process. Thus, in the ab-
sence of government intervention or negotiations, society would forgo social surplus
resulting from consumption of the good. Even if the government does intervene or ne-
gotiations do take place, there is nonetheless no guarantee that output of the good will
be at the point where marginal benefits equal marginal costs because the marginal
benefit curve for a pure public good is inherently unknowable. As a consequence, too
much or too little of it may be produced. However, techniques exist that can be used to
obtain information about WTP for public goods.
Intrapersonal Externalities: Consumption under Addiction.
For some people, the
consumption of a particular good today increases their demand for its consumption in
the future. For example, exposure to classical music during childhood may contribute
to a demand for such music in adulthood. Economic models of addictive goods assume
that the amount demanded at any time depends on the amount of previous consump-
tion. Rational addiction occurs when consumers fully take account of the future effects
of their current consumption.20 If current consumption is myopic or fails to take account
101

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
of future risks, then addiction is not rational. For example, some children may fail to
anticipate the consequences of tobacco addiction during their adulthood or some
adults may fail to anticipate the risk that their casual gambling may become a disrup-
tive compulsion. Such cases involve negative intrapersonal externalities—harm imposed
by current consumers on their future selves.
The presence of negative intrapersonal externalities brings into question the appro-
priateness of using changes in consumer surplus measured under market demand curves
as the basis for assessing the benefits of alternative policies. On the one hand, the de-
mand curve reveals the marginal willingness of the market to pay for additional units
of the good. On the other hand, the satisfaction from addictive consumption may not
actually make consumers better off—it avoids the pain of abstinence but does not pro-
vide as much happiness as would alternative consumption in a nonaddicted state. The
stated desire and costly efforts made by many adult smokers to quit smoking suggests
that they perceive benefits from ending their addiction. In other words, they wish they
had not been addicted by their younger selves.
A plausible approach to measuring consumer surplus in the presence of undesir-
able addiction involves assessing consumer surplus using unaddicted demand curves.21
Figure 10 illustrates the approach taking as an example addicted, or so-called problem,
gamblers. It shows two demand curves: DA, the demand curve for gambling in the 
presence of the addiction, and DR, the demand curve for the same group of addicted
gamblers if they were instead like the majority of recreational gamblers who enjoy
gambling but do not have a strong compulsion to gamble that leads them to regret
Price
Quantity
DA
QA
QR
DR
a
b
c
S
P
PC
FIGURE 10
Consumer Surplus in the Presence 
of Gambling Addiction
102

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
their gambling behaviors. The quantity of gambling demanded by these addicted gam-
blers at price P is QA. If they were not addicted, however, then they would consume only
QR at that price. QA minus QR is the excess consumption due to the addiction.
Consumption up to level QR involves a positive consumer surplus of PaPC.The consump-
tion from QR to QA involves expenditures of QRabQA but consumer value equal to only
QRacQA as measured under their recreational demand curve, resulting in a loss equal to
area abc. Overall, participation in this market by these addicted gamblers yields con-
sumer surplus equal to PaPC  abc. If a policy resulted in these addicted gamblers be-
coming unaddicted recreational gamblers, then a surplus gain of abc would result.
The Australian Productivity Commission applied this approach to estimate con-
sumer surplus losses and gains from the Australian gambling industry. It estimated a
consumer surplus gain for recreational gamblers (97.9% of all gamblers) to be between
AU$2.7 billion and AU$4.5 billion annually but a consumer surplus loss of almost
AU$2.7 billion annually for problem gamblers (2.1% of all gamblers).22
VALUING INPUTS: OPPORTUNITY COSTS
Public policies usually require resources (i.e., inputs) that could be used to produce
other goods or services instead. Public works projects such as dams, bridges, highways,
and subway systems, for example, require labor, materials, land, and equipment.
Similarly, social service programs typically require professional employees, computers,
telephones, and office space; wilderness preserves, recreation areas, and parks require
at least land. Once resources are devoted to these purposes, they obviously are no
longer available to produce other goods and services. Almost all public policies incur
opportunity costs. Conceptually, these costs equal the value of the goods and services
that would have been produced had the resources used in carrying them out been used
instead in the best alternative way. These opportunity costs are represented by areas
under supply curves. These areas are the theoretically appropriate measures of the
costs of the inputs.
As a practical matter, the most obvious and natural way to measure the value of
the resources used by a project is simply as the direct budgetary outlay needed to pur-
chase them. Under certain circumstances, the direct budgetary outlay is also identical
to the conceptually appropriate opportunity cost measure, but under other circum-
stances, it is not. To determine when it is and is not permissible to use budgetary out-
lays, we compare the conceptually appropriate measure of costs with the direct bud-
getary outlay measure of costs in three alternative market situations: (1) when the
market for a resource is efficient (i.e., there are no market failures) and purchases of
the resource for the project will have a negligible effect on the price of the resource;
(2) when the market for the resource is efficient, but purchases for the project will have
a noticeable effect on prices; and (3) when the market for the resource is inefficient
(i.e., there is a market failure).As will be seen, in the first of these situations, budgetary
expenditures usually accurately measure project opportunity costs; in the second situa-
tion, budgetary outlays often only slightly overstate project opportunity costs; and in
the third situation, expenditures may substantially overstate or understate project
opportunity costs.
103

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Before beginning, it may be helpful to make a general point concerning opportu-
nity costs: the relevant determination is what must be given up today and in the future,
not what has already been given up.The latter costs are sunk and, unlike variable costs,
are not represented by the areas under supply curves. In CBA, the extent to which
costs are sunk depends importantly on whether an ex ante, ex post, or in medias res
analysis is being conducted. For instance, suppose that you are asked to evaluate a de-
cision to complete a bridge after construction has already begun.What is the opportu-
nity cost of the steel and concrete that is already in place? It is not the original expen-
diture made to purchase them. Rather, it is the value of these materials in their current
best alternative use. This value is most likely measured by the maximum amount for
which the steel and concrete could be sold as scrap. Conceivably, the cost of scrapping
the materials may exceed their value in any alternative use so salvaging them would
not be justified. Indeed, if salvage is still necessary, perhaps for environmental or other
reasons, then the opportunity cost of the materials will be negative (and thus counted
as a benefit, an avoided cost) when calculating the net gains of continuing construction.
In situations where resources that have already been purchased have exactly zero
scrap value (the case of labor already expended, for instance), the costs are entirely
sunk and are not relevant to decisions concerning future actions.
Measuring Opportunity Costs in Efficient Markets 
with Negligible Price Effects
Perfectly Elastic Supply Curves.
An example of this is when a government agency
running a training program for unemployed workers purchases pencils for trainees.
Assuming an absence of failures in the market for pencils, and that the agency buys
only a small proportion of the total pencils sold in the market, the agency is realistically
viewed as facing a horizontal supply curve for pencils.Thus, the agency’s purchases will
have a negligible effect on the price of pencils; it can purchase additional pencils at the
price they would have cost in the absence of the training program.
This situation is depicted in Figure 11. If a project purchases q units of the input
factor represented in the diagram (e.g., pencils), the demand curve, D, would shift hor-
izontally to the right by q. As implied by the horizontal supply curve, marginal costs
remain unchanged and, hence, the price remains at P0.The area under the supply curve
represents the opportunity cost of the factor and P0 is the opportunity cost of one ad-
ditional unit of the factor. Consequently, the opportunity cost to society of the q addi-
tional units of the factor needed by the project is simply the original price of the factor
times the number of units purchased (i.e., P0 times q). In Figure 11, this is represented
by the shaded rectangle abq1q0.Thus, the amount that the agency must pay to purchase
additional pencils equals the opportunity cost of the resources used to produce them.
In other words, if the q units of the factor were not used for purposes of the project,
then P0 times q worth of goods could be produced elsewhere in the economy.
What is important about the situation just described is that the social cost of the
units of the factor needed by the project, the shaded rectangular area in Figure 11, is
identical to the budgetary outlay required to purchase the units; both are equal to P0
times q. Because most factors have neither steeply rising nor declining marginal cost
curves, it is often reasonable to presume that expenditures required for project inputs
104

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Price
Quantity
D
a
b
q0
q′
q1
S
D + q′
P0
FIGURE 11
Opportunity Costs with No Price Effects
equal their social costs. This is the case when the quantity of the resource purchased
makes only a small addition to the total demand for the resource, and where, in addi-
tion, there is no reason to suspect the existence of significant market failures.
Perfectly Inelastic Supply Curves.
In contrast to pencils, let us now examine a gov-
ernment purchase of a parcel of land for a park.We assume that, unlike the pencils, the
quantity of land in a specified area is fixed at A acres.Thus, the government faces a ver-
tical rather than horizontal supply curve. In addition, we assume that if the government
does not purchase the land, it will be sold in one-acre parcels to private buyers who will
build houses on it.
This situation is represented in Figure 12, where S is the supply curve and D the
private-sector demand curve. If the owners of the land sell it in the private market, they
receive the amount represented by the rectangle PbA0. Now let us assume that the
government secures all A units of the land at the market price through its eminent do-
main powers, paying owners the market price of P. Thus, the government’s budgetary
cost is represented in Figure 12 by area PbA0.
Here, however, the government’s budgetary outlay understates the opportunity cost
of removing the land from the private sector.The reason is that the potential private buy-
ers of the land lose consumer surplus (triangle aPb in Figure 12) as a result of the govern-
ment taking away their opportunity to purchase land,a real loss that is not included in the
government’s purchase price.The full cost of the land if it is purchased by the government
is represented in Figure 12 by all of the area under the demand curve to the left of the ver-
tical supply curve, area abA0, not only the rectangular area below the price line.23
105

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
S
D
A
b
0
P
a
Price
Acres of
land
FIGURE 12
Opportunity Costs with Inelastic Supply Curve
Measuring Opportunity Costs in Efficient Markets 
with Noticeable Price Effects
It is possible that even when a resource required by a project is purchased in an essen-
tially efficient market, such a large quantity is required that its price is bid up. This
could occur, for example, if the construction of a very large dam requires massive
amounts of concrete. In such a situation, the project should be viewed as facing an up-
ward-sloping supply curve for the resource input. Such a supply curve is illustrated in
Figure 13. In this example, project purchases of q units of the resource would shift the
demand curve, D, to the right. Because the supply curve, S, is upward sloping, the equi-
librium price rises from P0 to P1, indicating that the large purchase causes the marginal
cost of the resource to rise.The price increase causes the original buyers in the market
to decrease their purchases from q0 to q2. However, total purchases, including those
made by the project, expand from q0 to q1.Thus, the q units of the resource purchased
by the project come from two distinct sources: (1) units bid away from their previous
buyers, and (2) additional units sold in the market.
Total project expenditures on the resource are equal to P1 times q.In Figure 13,these
expenditures are represented by areas B  C  G  E  F, which together form a rec-
tangle. Unlike the case where the price of the resource does not change, however, this ex-
penditure does not correspond to the opportunity cost of using q units of the resource.
The price change must be taken into account in computing the opportunity cost. In doing
this,the general rule is that opportunity cost equals expenditure less (plus) any increase (de-
crease) in consumer surplus or producer surplus occurring in the factor market. In other
words, budgetary outlays on a resource do not equal opportunity costs when the outlays
cause a change in consumer surplus or producer surplus in the market for the resource.
To understand why, first look at the areas labeled A and B in Figure 13. These two
areas represent a decrease in the consumer surplus of the original buyers because of the
price increase. However, sellers gain more in producer surplus as a result of the price 
106

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
q2
q0
q1
P0
P1
A
E
B
F
C
G
G
G
D
Price
Quantity
S
D + q′
q′
FIGURE 13
Opportunity Costs with Price Effects
increase than the original buyers lose—a gain represented by areas A  B  C. Part of
the gain in producer surplus, the area represented by AB, merely offsets the loss in
consumer surplus and, hence, is a transfer from buyers to sellers. However, area C rep-
resents a gain in producer surplus that partially offsets the social cost resulting from 
increased government expenditure on the resource.24 To measure the social cost of the
project’s purchase of the resource, this net gain in producer surplus must be subtracted
from the project’s total budgetary outlay on the resource, areas B  C  G  E  F.
Thus, the net social cost of the project’s purchase of q units of the resource is repre-
sented by areas B  G  E  F.The effects of the purchase are summarized in the fol-
lowing social accounting ledger.25
Benefits
Costs
Original buyers
A  B
Sellers
A  B  C
Project expenditures
B  C  G  E  F
Net social cost
B  G  E  F
The basic point is that when prices change the budgetary outlay does not equal the
social cost. In the example shown in Figure 13, they differ by area C.As an examination
of the figure suggests, however, unless the rise in prices is quite substantial, this area
will be small relative to total budgetary cost.This suggests that in many instances bud-
getary outlay will provide a good approximation of true social cost.
If the price of an input does go up substantially, however, then the budgetary cost
must be adjusted for CBA purposes. If the demand and supply curves are linear (or
107

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
approximately linear), then the amount of this adjustment, which is the area repre-
sented by C, can be readily calculated. It equals the amount of the factor purchased for
the project, q, multiplied by 1/2(P1 - P0), half the difference between the new and the
old prices.26 The opportunity cost of purchasing the resource for the project can also be
computed directly by multiplying the amount purchased by the average of the new and
old prices, 1/2(P1  P0)(q).27 The average of the new and old prices is a shadow price;
it reflects the social opportunity cost of purchasing the resource more accurately than
either the old price or the new price alone.
The social cost of using a resource for a project or program does not necessarily
depend upon the mechanism that a government uses to obtain it. Suppose, for exam-
ple, that instead of paying the market price for q units of the resource represented in
Figure 13, the government instead first orders supplying firms to increase their prices
to the original buyers in the market from P0 to P1, thereby causing sales to these buy-
ers to fall from q0 to q2. Next suppose that the government orders these firms to supply
q units to the government at the additional cost required to produce them. The social
surplus loss resulting from the price increase to the original buyers is area B  E,
which is the deadweight loss attributable to the increase in price. The social opportu-
nity cost of producing the additional q units of the resource for the government, which
in this case corresponds to the government’s budgetary expenditure, is the trapezoidal
area G  F.Thus, the total social cost that results from the government’s directive is B 
G  E  F. This social cost is exactly the same as the social cost that results when the
government purchases the resource in the same manner as any other buyer in the mar-
ket. Notice, however, that this time the government’s budgetary outlay, G  F, is
smaller, rather than larger, than the social opportunity cost of using the resource.
Measuring Costs in Inefficient Markets
In an efficient market, price equals marginal social cost.Whenever price does not equal
marginal social cost, allocative inefficiency results.A variety of circumstances can lead
to inefficiency: absence of a working market, market failures (e.g., public goods, exter-
nalities, natural monopolies, markets with few sellers, and information asymmetries),
and distortions due to government interventions (such as taxes, subsidies, regulations,
price ceilings, and price floors). Any of these distortions can arise in factor markets,
complicating the estimation of opportunity cost.
Because of space limitations, it is possible to examine only three distortions here.
First, we consider the situation in which the government purchases an input at a price
below the factor’s opportunity cost. Second, we examine the case in which the govern-
ment hires from a market in which there is unemployed labor.Third, we explore the sit-
uation in which the government purchases inputs for a project from a monopolist. In
each of these situations, shadow pricing is needed to measure accurately the opportu-
nity cost of the input.
Purchases at Below Opportunity Costs.
Consider a proposal to establish more courts
so that more criminal trials can be held. Budgetary costs include the salaries of judges
and court attendants, rent for courtrooms and offices, and perhaps expenditures for ad-
ditional correctional facilities (because the greater availability of trial capacity leads to
108

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
more imprisonment). For these factors, budgetary costs may correspond well to social
opportunity costs. However, the budget may also include payments to jurors, payments
that typically just cover commuting expenses. If any compensation is paid to jurors for
their time, then it is usually set at a nominal per diem not related to the value of their
time as reflected, perhaps, by their wage rates. Thus, budgetary outlay to jurors almost
certainly understates the opportunity cost of jurors’ time. Consequently, some form of
shadow pricing is necessary. A better estimate of jurors’ opportunity cost is, for exam-
ple, their commuting expenses plus the number of juror-hours times either the average
or the median pre-tax hourly wage rate for the locality. The commuting expenses esti-
mate should include the actual resource costs of transporting jurors to the court, not
just out-of-pocket expenses.The hourly pre-tax wage rate times the hours spent on jury
duty provides a measure of the value of goods forgone because of lost labor.
Hiring Unemployed Labor.
We have stressed that assessing opportunity costs in the
presence of market failures or government interventions requires a careful accounting
of social surplus changes. Analysis of the opportunity cost of workers hired for a gov-
ernment project who would otherwise be unemployed illustrates the kind of effort that
is required.
Let us examine the opportunity costs of labor in a market in which minimum wage
laws, union bargaining power, or some other factor creates a wage floor that keeps the
wage rate above the market-clearing level and, consequently, there is unemployed
labor.28 Notice that we are focusing here on a very specific form of unemployment:
that which occurs when the number of workers who desire jobs at the wage paid in a
particular labor market exceed the number of workers employers are willing to hire at
that wage. Workers who are unemployed for this reason are sometimes said to be in
surplus. We focus on surplus workers so that we can examine their opportunity costs
when they are hired for a government project.This issue is of particular importance be-
cause there are government projects that are specifically designed to put surplus work-
ers to work and numerous other projects that are likely to hire such workers. Of
course, there are other forms of unemployment than the type considered here. For ex-
ample, some persons are briefly unemployed while they move from one job to another.
Before discussing how the opportunity cost of surplus labor might be measured, it
may be useful to consider more explicitly the extent to which the labor hired to work
on a government project reduces the number of unemployed workers.29 Consider, for
example, a project that hires 100 workers. How many fewer workers will be unem-
ployed as a result? In considering this question, it is important to recognize that the
project does not have to hire directly from the ranks of the unemployed. Even if the
project hires 100 previously employed persons, this will result in 100 job vacancies,
some of which may be filled by the unemployed. If the unemployment rate for the type
of workers hired for the project (as determined by their occupation and geographic lo-
cation) is very high (say, over 10 or 15%), the number of unemployed workers may fall
by nearly 100. But if the unemployment rate for the workers is low (say, below 5%),
most of the measured unemployed are probably between jobs rather than in surplus.
As a consequence, the project is likely to cause little reduction in the number of per-
sons who are unemployed. Instead the project will draw its workforce from those
109

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
employed elsewhere or out of the labor force. At rates of unemployment between 5
and 10 percent, the reduction in the number of unemployed persons will probably be
well under 100 but substantially above zero.
Figure 14 depicts a situation in which a government project reduces unemployment.
In this figure,the pre-project demand curve for labor,D,and the supply curve for labor,S,
intersect at Pe, the equilibrium price in the absence of the wage floor, Pm. At the wage
floor, Ls, workers desire employment, but only Ld workers are demanded so that Ls - Ld
workers are in surplus and thus unemployed.Now imagine that L workers are hired for a
government project at a wage of Pm. This shifts the demand curve to the right by L. As
long as L is less than the number of unemployed laborers, the price remains at the floor.
We now consider five alternative measures of the social cost of hiring the L un-
employed workers. All five of these measures are subject to criticism. Indeed, it is not
obvious that, as a practical matter, it is possible to obtain an accurate value of the social
cost of hiring the unemployed. However, some of the alternative measures described
here are far better approximations of the true social cost than others.
1. Measure A. It is sometimes suggested that because the unemployed are not work-
ing, there are zero opportunity costs in putting them to work.This treats the un-
employed, however, as if their time is valueless.This is clearly inappropriate on
two grounds. First, many unemployed persons are in fact engaged in productive
enterprises such as job search, child care, and home improvements. Second, even
if they were completely at leisure, leisure itself has value to those who are enjoy-
ing it. Consequently, few, if any, unemployed persons are willing to work at a zero
wage. Indeed, the supply curve in Figure 14 represents the value that various indi-
viduals, both those who are employed and those who are unemployed, place on
Price
0
Ld
Pr
Pd
Pc
Pe
Pm
D + L′
D
a
b
g
S
f
c
d
e
Lt Le
Ls
Number
of workers
L′
FIGURE 14 Opportunity Costs with a Price Floor
110

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
their time when they are not employed. For example, an individual located at
point f would only be willing to accept employment at a price of Pe or greater.
Thus, Pe provides a measure of the value that this person places on his or her
time. In other words, his or her opportunity cost of giving up leisure time to work
is Pe. Similarly, individuals located on the supply curve at points c and d value
their time at Pc and Pd, respectively. No individual is willing to work at a price
below Pr, and, as Pr has a positive value, Figure 14 implies that the opportunity
cost of hiring the unemployed must be above zero.
2. Measure B. Figure 14 indicates that total budgetary expenditure on labor for this
project is Pm times L, which equals the area of rectangle abLtLd.This budgetary
outlay for labor, however, is likely to overstate substantially the true social cost of
hiring workers for the project.As implied by the supply curve in Figure 14, al-
though employed workers are paid a price of Pm, most would be willing to work
for less.This difference between the value they place on their time, as indicated
by the supply curve, and Pm, the price they are actually paid while employed, is
producer (i.e., worker) surplus, which may be viewed as a transfer to the workers
from the government agency hiring them.To obtain a measure of the social cost
of hiring workers for the project, this producer surplus must be subtracted from
the budgetary expenditure on labor. Measure B fails to do this.
3. Measure C. As the project expands employment in the market represented by
Figure 14 from Ld to Lt, one might assume that the trapezoid abcd represents pro-
ducer surplus enjoyed by the newly hired. Given this assumption, one would sub-
tract area abcd from area abLtLd to obtain a measure of the social cost of hiring
workers for the project.Thus, the social cost would be measured as the shaded
trapezoid cdLdLt, the area under the supply curve between Ld and Lt.This shaded
area would equal the opportunity cost of the newly hired workers—that is, the
value of the time they give up when they go to work.
4. Measure D. One shortcoming of measure C is that it is implicitly based on an as-
sumption that all the unemployed persons hired for the project value their time at
less than Pc and at greater than Pd. In other words, this approach assumes that
these workers are all located between points c and d on the supply curve.
However, there is no basis for such an assumption. Indeed, it is quite likely that
some of the hired unemployed persons value their time at well above Pc and that
others value their time at well under Pd. In fact, the figure implies that unem-
ployed persons who value their time as low as Pr and as high as Pm would be will-
ing to work on the project because the project would pay them a price of Pm.
Thus, perhaps, a better assumption is that the unemployed persons who would ac-
tually get hired for the project are distributed more or less equally along the sup-
ply curve between points e and g, rather than being confined between points d
and c.This assumption implies that the unemployed persons who are hired for the
project value their time by no more than Pm, by no less than Pr, and, on average,
by 1/2(Pm  Pr).Thus, the social cost of hiring L workers for the project would be
computed as equal to 1/2(Pm  Pr)(L).
5. Measure E. One practical problem with using measure D in an actual CBA is that
the value of Pr, the lowest price at which any worker represented in Figure 14
would be willing to accept employment, is unlikely to be known. Given this, some
111

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
assumption about the value of Pr must be made. One possible, and perhaps not un-
reasonable, assumption is that the supply curve passes through the origin and,
hence, the value of Pr equals zero.The fact that the probabilities of illness, divorce,
and suicide all increase with unemployment, while job skills deteriorate, suggest
that Pr could, in practice, be very low for at least some unemployed persons. If we
once again assume that the unemployed persons who are hired for the project are
distributed more or less equally along the supply curve between the point at which
it intersects the vertical axis and point g, then this implies that the unemployed
persons who are hired for the project value their time by no more than Pm, by no
less than zero, and, on average, by 1⁄2  (Pm  0)  1⁄2  Pm. Hence, the social cost of hir-
ing workers for the project would be computed as 1⁄2  Pm(L). Note that the estimate
provided by this computation is equal to half the government’s budgetary outlay.
While this cost estimate would be smaller and almost certainly less accurate than
that computed using measure D, it is usually easier to obtain.
Given our preceding argument that nonwork time has a positive value, measure E
is probably best viewed as providing an easily obtainable lower-bound estimate of the
true project social costs for labor, while the project budgetary cost for labor, measure
B, provides an upper-bound estimate.
Purchases from a Monopoly.
We now turn to a final example of measuring the social
cost of project or program purchases in an inefficient market—the purchase of an input
supplied by a monopoly. In this circumstance, a government agency’s budgetary outlay
overstates the true social costs resulting from the purchase. This overstatement occurs
because the price of the input exceeds the social cost of producing it. As a conse-
quence, a substantial share of the revenues a monopolist receives are transfers or
monopoly rents. Thus, in principle, a CBA should not use the budgetary outlay as a
measure of social cost.
Figure 15 illustrates a government agency’s purchase of an input from a monopoly.
Prior to the purchase, the input is produced at level Q1, where the monopolist’s mar-
ginal cost and marginal revenue curves intersect.The price at Q1, as determined by the
demand curve, is P1. Now, as a result of the agency’s purchase of Q units, the monopo-
list’s demand curve and marginal revenue curve shift to the right.The price of the input
increases to P2 and the quantity sold increases to Q2. At the new higher price, the
agency purchases a quantity equal to the distance between Q3 and Q2, while the origi-
nal buyers in the market reduce the quantity they purchase by an amount equal to the
distance between Q1 and Q3.
As in our previous examples, the direct budgetary cost of the agency’s purchase
equals the price times the quantity purchased: P2(Q2 - Q3). In Figure 15, this is represented
by the rectangle between Q3 and Q2 and bounded by P2 (i.e., areas A  C  G  E).
However, these budgetary costs overstate the true social cost.To find the true social cost
of the agency’s purchase, one must examine the effects of the purchase on the monopo-
list and the original buyers of the input, as well as on the agency’s revenues.
Because the monopolist sells more of the input at higher prices, its producer sur-
plus increases. This increase has two parts: (1) that resulting from the higher price the
monopolist now receives for the units that it previously sold (which is represented in
112

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
Figure 15 by areas B  C  E), and (2) that resulting from the additional units that the
monopolist now sells (area G). Thus, as can be seen from the figure, part of the cost to
the agency, areas C  G  E, is a transfer to the monopolist.
Original buyers in the market are clearly worse off as a result of the agency’s pur-
chase because they now have to pay a higher price for the input. In measuring their loss
of consumer surplus, it is the original demand curve that is pertinent because this is the
curve that reflects the original buyers’ WTP for the input. Thus, the total loss in con-
sumer surplus by the original buyers, all of which is a transfer to the monopolist, is
equal to areas B  C.
The following distributional accounting ledger summarizes the effects of the
purchase:
Price
P2
P1
Q3
Q1
Q2
Quantity
Marginal
cost
D without project
(D + Q)
MR with project 
B
C
E
G
G
G
G
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
MR without 
project 
D without project 
0
Q ′
FIGURE 15
Opportunity Costs When Buying from a Monopoly
Benefits
Costs
Original buyers
B  C
Monopolistic seller
B  C  G  E
Project expenditures
A  C  G  E
Net social cost
A  C
The major conclusion of this analysis is that in the case of input purchases from a monop-
olist, budgetary expenditures are larger than the social costs. The reason is that the price
the monopoly charges exceeds the marginal cost of producing the input. Consequently,
in conducting a CBA, the government’s budgetary cost should, in principle, be ad-
justed downward through shadow pricing. In practice, however, the error that would
result from using the unadjusted budgetary expenditures would often not be very large.
113

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
As an examination of Figure 15 suggests, the size of the bias, areas G  E, depends on the
extent to which the price the monopoly charges exceeds its marginal costs—in other
words,on how much monopoly power it actually has.This,in turn,depends on how steeply
sloped the demand curve is.Thus, before an analyst develops shadow prices, a sometimes
difficult undertaking, he or she should ask whether it is really necessary to do so.
The General Rule.
Other market distortions also affect opportunity costs in pre-
dictable ways. It is useful to summarize the direction of the bias created by some of
these distortions. In factor markets in which supply is taxed, direct expenditure outlays
overestimate opportunity cost; in factor markets in which supply is subsidized, expen-
ditures underestimate opportunity cost. In factor markets exhibiting positive external-
ities of supply, expenditures overestimate opportunity cost; in factor markets exhibit-
ing negative externalities of supply, expenditures underestimate opportunity costs. To
determine opportunity costs in such cases, apply the rule: opportunity cost equals di-
rect expenditures on the factor minus (plus) gains (losses) in producer surplus or con-
sumer surplus occurring in the factor market.
CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has shown that the benefits and costs associated with government pro-
grams and projects are appropriately determined by valuing the resulting changes in
net government revenue flows, producer surplus, and consumer surplus. Even when the
relevant demand and supply curves are known, great care must be exercised in order to
measure the changes appropriately, especially when the relevant markets are distorted.
Two types of relevant markets were considered: the market in which the policy inter-
vention takes place and factor markets where the government purchases the inputs
required by the program or project. These markets, primary markets, are the ones
that are directly affected by a particular policy.
EXERCISES
1.
Consider a low-wage labor market.Workers in this market are not presently covered by the
minimum wage, but the government is considering implementing such legislation. If imple-
mented, this law would require employers in the market to pay workers a $5 hourly wage.
Suppose all workers in the market are equally productive, the current market-clearing wage
rate is $4 per hour, and that at this market-clearing wage there are 600 employed workers.
Further suppose that under the minimum wage legislation, only 500 workers would be em-
ployed and 300 workers would be unemployed. Finally, assume that the market demand and
supply curves are linear and that the market reservation wage, the lowest wage at which any
worker in the market would be willing to work, is $1.
Compute the dollar value of the impact of the policy on employers, workers, and society
as a whole.
2.
Suppose the government is considering an increase in the toll on a certain stretch of high-
way from $.40 to $.50. At present, 50,000 cars per week use that highway stretch; after the
toll is imposed, it is projected that only 40,000 cars per week will use the highway stretch.
114

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
a.
Assuming that the marginal cost of highway use is constant (i.e., the supply curve is
horizontal) and equal to $.40 per car, what is the net cost to society attributable to the
increase in the toll? (Hint: the toll increase will cause the supply curve, not the demand
curve, to shift.)
b.
Because of the reduced use of the highway, the government would reduce its purchases
of concrete from 20,000 tons per year to 19,000 tons per year.Thus, if the price of con-
crete were $25 per ton, the government’s cost savings would be $25,000. However, the
government’s reduced demand for concrete causes its market price to fall from $25 to
$24.50 per ton. Moreover, because of this reduction in price, the purchases of concrete
by nongovernment buyers increase by 300 tons per year.Assuming that the factor mar-
ket for concrete is competitive, can the government’s savings of $25,000 be appropri-
ately used as the measure of the social value of the cost savings that result from the
government purchasing less concrete? Or would shadow pricing be necessary?
3.
A country imports 3 billion barrels of crude oil per year and domestically produces another
3 billion barrels of crude oil per year. The world price of crude oil is $90 per barrel.
Assuming linear curves, economists estimate the price elasticity of domestic supply to be
0.25 and the price elasticity of domestic demand to be 0.1 at the current equilibrium.
a.
Consider the changes in social surplus that would result from imposition of a $30 per
barrel import fee on crude oil that would involve annual administrative costs of $250
million.Assume that the world price will not change as a result of the country impos-
ing the import fee, but that the domestic price will increase by $30 per barrel.Also as-
sume that only producers, consumers, and taxpayers within the country have standing.
Determine the quantity consumed, the quantity produced domestically, and the quan-
tity imported after the imposition of the import fee.Then estimate the annual social
net benefits of the import fee.
b.
Economists have estimated that the marginal excess burden of taxation in the country
is 0.25. Reestimate the social net benefits assuming that 20 percent of the increase in
producer surplus is realized as tax revenue under the existing tax system. In answering
this question, assume that increases in tax revenues less the cost of administrating the
import fee are used to reduce domestic taxes.
c.
The reduction in the country’s demand for imports may affect the world price of crude
oil.Assuming that the import fee reduces the world price from $90 to $80 per barrel,
and thus, the after-tax domestic price is $80  $30  $110 per barrel, a net increase in
domestic price of $20 per barrel, repeat the analysis done in parts a and b.
4.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) A proposed government project in a
rural area with 100 unemployed persons would require the hiring of 20 workers. The pro-
ject would offer wages of $12 per hour. Imagine that the reservation wages of the 100 un-
employed fall between $2 and $20.
a.
Estimate the opportunity cost of the labor required for the project assuming that the
government makes random offers to the 100 unemployed until 20 of them accept jobs.
(First, generate a list of the reservation prices of 100 persons according to the formula
$2  $18u where u is a random variable distributed uniformly [0,1]. Second, work
down the list to identify the first 20 workers with reservation wages less than $12.
Third, sum the reservation wages of these 20 workers to get the opportunity cost of the
labor used for the project.)
b.
Estimate the opportunity cost of the labor required for the project assuming that the
government can identify and hire the 20 unemployed with the lowest reservation
wages.
c.
Repeat part a 15 times to get a distribution for the opportunity cost and compute its
standard deviation.
115

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
NOTES
1. For a detailed examination of government fail-
ures, see David L.Weimer and Aidan R.Vining,
Policy Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 5th ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall,
2011), Chapter 8.
2. Sometimes a policy outcome that people would
be willing to pay to avoid is referred to as a nega-
tive benefit, rather than as a cost.These two
terms can be viewed as equivalent.
3. A change in price only causes a movement along
the supply curve, a change in quantity supplied.
But a project that provides more of a good in-
creases the supply of the good, resulting in a shift
of the supply curve.
4. This assumes, of course, that the market is suffi-
ciently competitive and the firms in it are suffi-
ciently efficient that all of the cost savings are
passed on to consumers in the form of a price
decrease.
5. An alternative method of measuring the gain in
social surplus is simply to compare total social
surplus with and without the project. In the ab-
sence of the project, total social surplus would be
represented by the triangular area fae, while in
the presence of the project, total social surplus
would be represented by the triangular area fbd.
Subtracting the smaller triangle from the larger
triangle, we again find that the net gain in social
surplus equals the trapezoidal area abde.
6. For a theoretical treatment of externalities, pub-
lic goods, and club goods, see Richard Corres and
Todd Sandler, The Theory of Externalities, Public
Goods and Club Goods (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1986).
7. There are, of course, other types of markets in
which individual firms have market power—for
example, those characterized by oligopoly or
monopolistic competition.We focus on markets
characterized by monopoly, and especially nat-
ural monopoly, because government intervention
is most likely to occur in these markets.
8. Of course, foreign-owned firms, regardless of
whether they are competitive or monopolistic,
usually would not be given standing.Therefore,
their benefits would not be counted in a CBA.
9. There are, of course, alternative policies that the
government might adopt in response to the
monopoly. For example, it might tax the monop-
olist’s profits, regulate the prices the monopolist
charges, or operate it as a state-owned enterprise.
10. For a survey of recent infrastructure of public-
private partnerships (P3s) in the United States
and Canada, see Aidan R.Vining,Anthony E.
Boardman, and Finn Poschmann,“Public-Private
Partnerships in the US and Canada:‘There are
No Free Lunches’,” Journal of Comparative
Policy Analysis 7(3) 2005, 199–220.This article
discusses a number of road projects including the
Dulles Greenway in Virginia, SR 91 Express
Lanes in Orange County, Highway 407 outside
Toronto, and the Confederation Bridge that links
Prince Edward Island to the mainland of Canada.
11. In principle, it is possible that Du could be to the
left of Di, rather than to the right of it as shown
in Figure 6.This would occur if instead of desir-
ing more of the product in the absence of infor-
mation concerning it than they would with the
information, consumers desire less of it. In prac-
tice, however, such situations are unlikely to con-
tinue for long because strong incentives would
exist for sellers to eliminate such information
asymmetry by providing buyers with the needed
information, thereby increasing their demand for
the product.When the actual demand curve is to
the right of the fully informed demand curve, the
incentive, in contrast, is for sellers to withhold
the information.
12. The two demand curves are drawn closer to-
gether at high prices rather than at low prices to
imply that at higher prices buyers would go to
more trouble to obtain additional information
about the product than they would at lower
prices.Whether or not this is actually the case,
however, is not essential to the analysis.
13. This is discussed more fully in Aidan R.Vining
and David L.Weimer,“Information Asymmetry
Favoring Sellers:A Policy Framework,” Policy
Sciences 21(4) 1988, 281–303.
14. For a more extensive discussion of these three
types of products, see Vining and Weimer,
“Information Asymmetry Favoring Sellers:A
Policy Framework.”
15. For an entertaining discussion of possible mis-
uses of the term “externality” and when inter-
vention may or may not be appropriate for
116

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
correcting externalities, see Virginia Postrel,
“External Cost:The Dangers of Calling
Everything Pollution,” Reason, 1999.
16. This tax can be levied either in the traditional
manner—that is, on the good itself—or, alterna-
tively, by the government issuing transferable
permits that, in effect, tax effluents emitted by
firms, rather than the goods they produce. Under
the latter approach, which is currently being used
in the United States to control sulphur dioxide
emissions, firms that have found ways to control
their pollution relatively inexpensively can sell
their permits to pollute to firms for which pollu-
tion control would be relatively more costly.
17. Indeed, when, as in the case illustrated in Figure
7, the tax is levied on the good, there is no special
incentive for firms to reduce the amount of pol-
lution resulting from their production process.
However, when the effluent itself is taxed—for
example, through use of the transferable pollu-
tion permits discussed in the previous endnote—
such incentives do exist.
18. In this example, gross program benefits only dif-
fer from net program costs by the administrative
costs required to operate the program.Also no-
tice that in the context of the example the rule
that gross project benefits equal changes in social
surplus plus net revenues generated by the pro-
ject continues to hold once it is recognized that
in this instance net revenues are actually
negative.
19. The free-rider problem is also closely linked to
difficulties in remedying problems resulting from
externalities. For example, because clean air is
both nonrivalrous and nonexcludable, in the ab-
sence of government intervention, limited incen-
tives exist for the private sector to produce clean
air by reducing air pollution.
20. Gary S. Becker and Kevin M. Murphy,“A Theory
of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political
Economy 96(4) 1988, 675–700.
21. Independent developments of this approach can
be found in Fritz L. Laux,“Addiction as a Market
Failure: Using Rational Addiction Results to
Justify Tobacco Regulation,” Journal of Health
Economics 19(4) 2000, 421–437; and Australian
Productivity Commission, Australia’s Gambling
Industries, Inquiry Report No. 10, 26 1999,
Appendix C, 11–13.Available at www.pc.gov.au/
inquiry/gambling/finalreport/index.html.27.
22. Australian Productivity Commission, Australia
Gambling Industries, Chapter 5, p. 24.
23. If the government were to purchase only a small
part of the fixed supply of land on the open mar-
ket, its budgetary outlay would very closely ap-
proximate the opportunity cost of removing the
land from the private sector. In this case, the gov-
ernment’s entry into the market would bid up
the price of the land slightly, crowding potential
private-sector land buyers who are just to the left
of point b on the demand curve out of the mar-
ket.These buyers would lose a negligible amount
of surplus. In addition, those private-sector buy-
ers who remain in the market would pay a
slightly higher price. Hence, surplus would be
transferred between these buyers and the sellers
of the land.
24. There is a natural tendency for those who are
promoting a particular government project (e.g.,
a dam or a recreational area) to emphasize the
potential benefits to those who must supply re-
sources to the project. Our analysis suggests that
in well-functioning markets these benefits only
occur if the price of these resources increases, and
even then, part of the benefits to the suppliers of
the resources is offset by increases in costs to the
original buyers of the resources. Note, however,
that the analysis is based on the assumption that
the resources used in the project would be fully
employed even in the absence of the project.As
will be seen later in this chapter, if this assump-
tion does not hold, additional project benefits can
then accrue to suppliers of resources.
25. Kerry Krutilla emphasizes the importance of
using a social accounting ledger (which he calls a
“Kaldor-Hicks” tableau) in CBA in order to re-
veal fully program or project effects on all the af-
fected stakeholder groups. Depending on the cir-
cumstances, the tableau Krutilla suggests can
become can become fairly elaborate. Kerry
Krutilla,“Using the Kaldor-Hicks Tableau
Format for Cost-Benefit Analysis and Policy
Evaluation,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 24(4) 2005, 864–875.
26. This formula is based on a bit of geometry.The
triangular area C equals one-half the rectangular
area from which it is formed, B  C  F.Thus,
area C is equivalent to 1/2(P1 - P0)(q).
117

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Primary Markets
27. This amount is derived as follows:
28. For a discussion of various forms of wage rigidity
that result in unemployment, see Ronald G.
Ehrenberg and Robert S. Smith, Modern Labor
Economics:Theory and Public Policy, 7th ed.
(Reading, MA:Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.,
2000), Chapter 15.
P1q¿ - 1>2(P1 - P0)q¿ = 1>2(P0 + P1)(q¿).
29. For more detailed discussions of these issues,
see Robert H. Haveman, “Evaluating 
Public Expenditure Under Conditions of
Unemployment,” in Public Expenditure and
Policy Analysis, 3rd ed., Robert H. Haveman and
Julius Margolis, eds. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1983), 167–182; and E. J. Mishan,
Cost-Benefit Analysis, 4th ed. (London: Unwin
Hyman, 1988), 325–329.
118

Valuing Benefits and Costs 
in Secondary Markets
I
n conducting CBAs of government policies, there is a natural tendency to list as
many effects of the policies as one’s imagination permits. For example, an improve-
ment in public transportation in a particular city may increase bus usage and re-
duce car usage. It may also reduce downtown pollution and congestion. In addition, it
may reduce the demand for automobile repairs, parking places, and gasoline.
To assess these effects, one must first determine which occur in primary markets
and which occur in secondary markets. Primary markets refer to markets that are di-
rectly affected by a policy, while secondary markets are markets that are indirectly af-
fected. The changes in bus usage previously mentioned clearly occur in the primary
market for public transportation.The reductions in pollution and congestion also can be
thought of as occurring in the primary market for public transportation, though these
particular impacts are in the external, or missing, part of that market.Any effect that oc-
curs in a primary market should be accounted for in a CBA. On the other hand, effects
on the demand for auto repairs, parking places, and gasoline occur in secondary markets
and, as will be seen, often can (and indeed should) be ignored in conducting CBA.This
last group of effects is often referred to as secondary, second-round, spillover, side, pecu-
niary, or indirect effects.
This chapter focuses on policy impacts in secondary markets, and we distinguish
between efficient and distorted markets. In addition, the chapter takes a brief look at
the special implications of secondary market effects for local communities, as the ben-
efits of such effects are often touted by advocates of local infrastructure projects such
as sports stadiums and convention centers.
VALUING BENEFITS AND COSTS IN EFFICIENT SECONDARY MARKETS
Complements and Substitutes
Secondary market effects result because government policies affect the prices of goods
in primary markets, and this, in turn, noticeably affects the demand for other goods.
These latter goods are referred to as complements and substitutes.
Consider the following example. Stocking a lake near a city with fish lowers the ef-
fective price of access to fishing grounds for the city’s residents. They not only fish
more often, but they also demand more bait and fishing equipment.We say that access
Form Chapter 5 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
119

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
to fishing grounds and fishing equipment are complements because a decrease (in-
crease) in the price of one will result in an increase (decrease) in the demand for the
other. In contrast, fishing is a substitute for golfing because as the price of fishing goes
down (up), the demand for golfing goes down (up).
If government policies affect the demand for goods in secondary markets, then
prices in these secondary markets may or may not change as a result. We first discuss
the simpler situation in which prices do not change.We then analyze the more complex
situation in which prices do change in secondary markets.
Efficient Secondary Market Effects without Price Changes
Because most goods have substantial numbers of complements and substitutes,many gov-
ernment projects cause effects in large numbers of secondary markets.Accounting for all
these effects would impose an enormous burden on analysts. Fortunately, however, such
effects can often be ignored in CBA without substantially biasing the estimates of net ben-
efits. When can we ignore secondary market effects? We can, and indeed should, ignore
impacts in undistorted secondary markets as long as changes in social surplus in the pri-
mary market resulting from a government project are measured and prices in the secondary
markets do not change. The reason for this is that in the absence of price adjustments in
secondary markets in response to price changes in primary markets, impacts are typically
fully measured as surplus changes in primary markets. Measuring the same effects in both
markets will, therefore, result in double counting. Thus, for example, if prices of fishing
equipment do not change,then the increased consumption of fishing equipment is not rel-
evant to the CBA of a project that increases access to fishing grounds.
A closer look at the fishing example should make the rule for the treatment of sec-
ondary markets clearer. For simplicity, we assume that the price of fishing equals the
marginal social cost of fishing and that this marginal social cost is constant.This, in turn,
implies that no producer surplus or externalities exist in the primary market (e.g., high-
way congestion does not result because of increased travel to the newly stocked lake).
Figure 1(a) shows the market for “fishing days.” Prior to the stocking of the
nearby lake, the effective price of a day of fishing (largely the time costs of travel) was
PF0, the travel cost to a lake much further away. Once fishing is available at the nearby
lake, the effective price falls to PF1 and, as a consequence, the number of days spent
fishing by local residents rises from qF0 to qF1. The resulting increase in social surplus
equals the area of trapezoid PF0abPF1, the gain in consumer surplus. We measure this
gain in consumer surplus using the demand schedule for fishing, DF. As is customary
in textbooks, this demand schedule should be viewed as the relation between price
and quantity that would exist in the primary market if the prices of all secondary
goods were held constant. Later we discuss the importance of this assumption.
Now consider the market for fishing equipment. The decline in the effective price
of fishing days shifts the demand schedule for fishing equipment from DE0 to DE1 as
shown in Figure 1(b). If the supply schedule is perfectly elastic, which is likely when the
local market accounts for only a small fraction of regional or national demand, then
the shift in demand will not increase the price of fishing equipment.
Does this shift in demand for fishing equipment represent a change in consumer
welfare that should be counted in a CBA of the fish-stocking project? In other words,
should the gap between the old and new demand schedules that is above the price line
120

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
Access price
Days of fishing
DF
a
b
qF0
qF1
PF 1
PF 0
MCF 0
MCF 1
FIGURE 1(a)
Primary Market: Market for Fishing Days
be counted as an additional increase in consumer surplus? It is tempting to treat the in-
crease in consumer surplus from efPE0 to cdPE0 in panel (b) as an additional increase in
social benefits that should be added to PF0abPF1 in panel (a), but this should not be
done.As discussed next, doing so would result in double counting.As long as price does
not change in the equipment market as a result of stocking the lake, the social surplus
change in the fishing market measures the entire benefit from the stocking project.
To see this, first consider fishers who already own all the fishing equipment they
need at the time the lake is stocked and, hence, presently contribute no demand to the
Equipment price
Units of equipment
f
e
c
d
qE 0
DE 0
DE 1
qE 1
PE0
FIGURE 1(b)
Secondary Market: Market for Fishing Equipment (No Price Effect)
121

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
market for fishing equipment.The value that these persons place on their existing fish-
ing equipment will tend to increase as a result of stocking the nearby lake. However,
because they are not in the market for new fishing equipment, the gap between the old
and new demand schedules for new fishing equipment does not reflect this increase. Of
course, these persons’ willingness to pay (WTP) for fishing days will presumably be
higher than it otherwise would have been as a result of the fact that they will not have
to make further expenditures for fishing equipment. But any additional increase in
consumer surplus that these fishers enjoy as a result of already owning fishing equip-
ment at the time the nearby lake is stocked will already be reflected by the primary
market demand schedule for fishing days, which will be further to the right than it oth-
erwise would be. It cannot show up in the secondary market for fishing equipment.
Now consider individuals who do not own fishing equipment at the time the lake is
stocked but are now induced to make such purchases. The gap between the two de-
mand schedules in Figure 1(b) accurately reveals the increased value that these per-
sons place on fishing equipment. That is, these people are now willing to pay more for
fishing equipment, and indeed they will buy more fishing equipment. It is the only way
they can fully realize surplus gains from the stocking project. But this expenditure is
not an additional benefit from the stocking project. Just like the fishers who already
own fishing equipment, the increase in consumer surplus that these persons receive
from the stocking project is fully reflected by the primary market demand schedule for
fishing days.This includes any consumer surplus that they receive from their purchases
of fishing equipment. Thus, counting the gap between the two demand schedules in
panel (b) as benefits and also counting the increase in consumer surplus shown in
panel (a) as benefits would result in counting the same benefits twice.
Persons who do not own fishing equipment at the time the lake is stocked would be
even better off if, like the current owners of fishing equipment, they did not have to buy
new equipment in order to take advantage of the newly stocked lake.Thus,everything else
being equal, WTP for fishing days is presumably greater among those who already own
fishing equipment than among those who must purchase it.The increase in consumer sur-
plus that results from the stocking project for both groups, even if different from one an-
other, will be fully reflected in the primary market demand schedule for fishing days.
It is important to stress that secondary market effects can be ignored only if social
surplus in the primary market is measured directly. In situations in which cost-benefit
analysts are unable to measure social surplus changes in primary markets, they may
infer them instead from the demand shifts in secondary markets. For example, imagine
that analysts have no information about the demand schedule for fishing days, but they
do know how the demand schedule for fishing equipment will change. With no direct
measure of the benefits from stocking the lake, they might use the difference between
the social surplus in the fishing equipment market after the project (based on demand
schedule DE1) and the social surplus in the equipment market prior to the project (based
on demand schedule DE0).They would then apply some sort of scaling factor to correct
for the underestimation that results from the fact that not all the consumer surplus from
fishing will be reflected in the equipment market. (Because some fishers will use old
equipment and collect their own bait, their surplus will not appear in the equipment
market. Moreover, equipment and bait comprise only some of the inputs to fishing.)
122

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
Efficient Secondary Market Effects with Price Changes1
The situation is more complex when the supply schedule in the secondary market is up-
ward sloping.To see this,we examine the effect of stocking the lake on the demand for golf-
ing. In Figure 2a, panel (a) once again shows the demand for fishing days, while panel (b)
now shows the demand for golfing days.As before,the reduction in the price of fishing days
from PF0 to PF1 as a result of stocking the lake causes an increase in social surplus equal to
the area PF0abPF1 (for the moment ignore demand schedules DF1 and D*).
D*
Access price
Days of fishing
a
b
c
DF 1
qF 0
qF 1
DF 0
PF 1
PF 0
FIGURE 2(a)
Primary Market: Market for Fishing Days
Access price
Days of golfing
e
f
g
h
S
DG0(PF0)
DG1(PF1)
qG1
qG0
PG1
PG0
FIGURE 2(b)
Secondary Market: Market for Golfing Days (Price Effects)
123

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
As fishing and golf are presumed to be substitutes, a reduction in the price of fish-
ing days from PF0 to PF1 would cause the demand for golfing to fall. Thus, the demand
schedule for golfing in panel (b) would shift to the left from DG0 to DG1 As previously
emphasized, by itself this shift does not represent a change in consumer surplus that is
not already fully accounted for in measuring the change in consumer surplus in the pri-
mary market. Golfers are obviously not made worse off by stocking the lake, although
some may now place a lower valuation on golf. Instead, by itself, the shift in demand
merely indicates that in the absence of golf, the consumer surplus gains from stocking
the lake would have been even larger. The existence of golf is reflected in the location
of DF0, the demand schedule for fishing days, which is farther to the left than it would
have been if golf were not available as a substitute for fishing.
The shift of demand from DG0 to DG1, however, causes the fees for golf course use
to fall from PG0 to PG1.This, in turn, results in an increase in consumer surplus, one rep-
resented by the area PG0efPG1, which has not previously been taken into account. In
addition, the fall in golfing fees also causes a reduction in producer surplus equal to
area PG0gfPG1. As the reduction in producer surplus exceeds the increase in consumer
surplus, a net loss in social surplus equal to the area of triangle efg results.2
Should this loss in social surplus in the golfing market be subtracted from the social
surplus gain in the fishing market in measuring net gains from the project? It is fre-
quently unnecessary to do so.The reason is that the increase in consumer surplus gain in
the fishing market is often likely, in practice, to be measured as the area PF0acPF1 rather
than as the area PF0abPF1. If measured in this way, the increase in consumer surplus in
the fishing market would be understated by the triangular area abc, but this triangle
closely approximates triangle efg, the net loss in social surplus in the golfing market.
To see why the consumer surplus gain in the fishing market is often, in practice,
measured as the area PF0acPF1 rather than as the area PF0abPF1, one must recognize
that our fishing story does not end with the shift in the demand schedule in the sec-
ondary market. If golf and fishing are substitutes, the reduction in golf course fees will
cause people to switch from fishing to golf, and the demand for fishing days will fall.
This is shown in panel (a) as a leftward shift in the demand schedule for fishing days
from DF0 to DF1. By itself, this shift does not cause any further changes in social surplus;
because we have assumed that the supply of fishing days is perfectly elastic, prices in
the market for fishing days are unaffected. Note, however, that by drawing a line be-
tween the original and the final equilibrium points in panel (a) of Figure 2—that is, be-
tween points a and c—one can derive a special type of demand schedule, D*.
This demand schedule, which is sometimes called an observed or equilibrium de-
mand schedule,3 indicates what the demand for fishing days will be once prices in other
markets, including the market for golfing days, have fully adjusted to the change in
prices in the market for fishing days. Thus, D* differs from the demand schedules DF0
and DF1, which, as mentioned earlier, indicate the number of fishing days demanded at
each price for fishing days, holding the prices of all other goods constant. As it is fre-
quently difficult statistically to hold the prices of secondary goods constant while mea-
suring the relation between price and quantity demanded in a primary market, empiri-
cally estimated demand schedules—the ones actually observed and available for use in
a CBA—often more closely resemble equilibrium demand schedules such as D* than
“textbook-style” demand schedules such as DF0 and DF1.4
124

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
Thus, the equilibrium demand schedule, D*, is the one that is often used in practice
to obtain a measure of the increase in social surplus resulting from the reduction in the
price of fishing days. However, the resulting measure, PF0acPF1, understates the true
measure of the gain in social surplus in the primary market, PF0abPF0, by the triangular
area abc. But, as previously suggested, area abc provides a good approximation of area
efg in panel (b),5 the area that should be subtracted from area PF0acPF1 to obtain an ac-
curate measure of the overall net gains from stocking the lake. In other words, area abc
represents part of the benefits from the fish-stocking project and area efg an approxi-
mately offsetting cost of the project. Hence, by using the equilibrium demand schedule
to measure the change in social surplus, we incorporate social surplus changes that
occur in the market for golfing days, as well as those that occur in the market for fish-
ing days.We do not have to obtain separate measures of the surplus changes that occur
in secondary markets.6
This is important because it illustrates an important general point: by using an
equilibrium demand schedule for the primary market—the type of demand schedule
that is often empirically estimated, and thus available—one can capture the effects of
policy interventions in both the primary market in which they were initiated and in all
secondary markets. Thus, we can restate our earlier rule concerning project impacts in
secondary markets: we should ignore effects in undistorted secondary markets, regard-
less of whether there are price changes, if we are measuring benefits in the primary mar-
ket using empirically measured demand schedules that do not hold prices in secondary
markets constant.
VALUING BENEFITS AND COSTS IN DISTORTED SECONDARY MARKETS
Unfortunately, use of equilibrium demand schedules in primary markets misses some
of the relevant effects that occur in distorted secondary markets—that is, in sec-
ondary markets in which prices do not equal social marginal costs. To see why, exam-
ine Figure 3, a slightly altered version of panel (b) of Figure 1. This new figure is
based on the assumption that because of negative externalities the market price of
fishing equipment, PE0, underestimates the marginal social cost by x cents. (Think of
the equipment as lead sinkers, some of which eventually end up in the lake, where
they poison ducks and other wildlife. The x cents would then represent the value of
the expected loss of wildlife from the sale of another sinker.) In this case, the expan-
sion of consumption involves a social surplus loss equal to x times qE1  qE0, which is
represented in Figure 3 by the shaded rectangle.This loss, which is not reflected at all
by market demand or supply schedules in the fishing market, should be subtracted
from the benefits occurring in that market in order to obtain an accurate measure of
net gains from the program.
Another type of distortion in secondary markets is imposed by the presence of
taxes. For example, Figure 4 illustrates local produce markets for beef and chicken,
which are substitutes for one another. For simplicity, the supply schedules in both mar-
kets are assumed to be perfectly elastic. In the absence of any taxes on these products,
the price of beef (the primary good) would be PB and the price of chicken (the sec-
ondary good) would be PC.
125

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
For purposes of our illustration, let us assume that chicken is currently subject to a
tax of tC cents per pound, but beef is not presently taxed. In this situation, the existing
demand schedules for beef and chicken are represented by DB0 and DC0, respectively.As
panel (b) of Figure 4 indicates, the tax on chicken provides the government with revenue
equal to area T but reduces consumer surplus by areas T  U.Thus,the tax on chicken re-
sults in deadweight loss equal to the triangular area U.
Equipment price
Units of equipment
Marginal social cost
Marginal private cost
e
f
d
c
PE 0  + x
PE 0
qE 0
DE 0
x
DE 1
qE 1
FIGURE 3
Distorted Secondary Market: Market for Fishing Equipment (No Price
Effect)
Price
Pounds
A
B
PB + tB
PB
DB0
FIGURE 4(a)
Market for Beef
FIGURE 4(b)
Market for Chicken
Price
Pounds
T
U
M
N
V
PC  + tC
PC
DC0
DC1
126

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
Now assume that the government is considering imposing a tax of tB cents per
pound on beef.As indicated in panel (a), if the new tax is adopted, the government will
collect revenue represented by area A, but consumers of beef will lose surplus equal to
the areas A  B. Consequently, imposition of the new tax will result in deadweight loss
in the beef market equal to area B.
The increase in the market price of beef shifts the demand schedule for chicken, a
substitute, from DC0 to DC1. For reasons discussed previously, this shift does not repre-
sent a change in consumer surplus. Indeed, the deadweight loss in the market for
chicken remains the same, although it does shift from area U to areas M  N. However,
the shift causes an increase in the sale of chickens, as consumers substitute chicken for
beef, resulting in an increase in tax revenues collected by the government. This
increase, which is represented in panel (b) by area U  V, is a benefit from the tax
imposed on beef that could conceivably more than offset the deadweight loss occur-
ring in the beef market. The various effects of the tax on beef are summarized in the
following social accounting ledger:
Benefits
Costs
Consumers
—
A  B
Government revenue
A  U  V
—
Social benefit and costs
U  V
B
Notice that while all of the change in consumer surplus takes place in the primary mar-
ket, increases in tax revenues occur in both markets.
The important lesson from this illustration is that, unlike situations in which there
are no distortions in secondary markets, benefits and costs of a policy intervention
cannot be fully measured by observing only the effects that occur in primary markets.
Effects that occur in distorted secondary markets should, in principle, be valued sepa-
rately. A method for doing this is described in Exhibit 1. Yet, in practice and as indi-
cated in the exhibit, it is usually very difficult to do so. Estimation problems usually
preclude accurate measurement of welfare changes that occur in secondary markets.
Estimating own-price effects (how quantity demanded changes as the price of the
good changes) is often difficult; estimating cross-price effects (how the quantity de-
manded of good Y changes as the price of good Z changes) is more difficult yet.
Consequently, we are rarely very confident of predictions of demand shifts in sec-
ondary markets. Moreover, when secondary markets are distorted, it is also difficult to
measure the size of the distortions. (Recall the x-cent loss of wildlife from the sale of
another sinker. How is the value of x to be estimated?) But such measures are usually
needed if program effects in distorted secondary markets are to be taken into 
account.
Fortunately, price changes in most secondary markets are likely to be small. Most
pairs of goods are neither strong complements nor strong substitutes. Hence, large
price changes in the primary markets are usually necessary to produce noticeable de-
mand shifts in the secondary markets. Thus, even when secondary markets are dis-
torted, ignoring these markets may result in relatively little bias to CBA.
127

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
INDIRECT EFFECTS OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
Public infrastructure projects that improve transportation or communications, such
as  road building or harbor deepening, may substantially reduce the cost of produc-
tion in some industries. These reductions in costs may have indirect effects in mar-
kets for consumption goods by reducing the prices at which the goods are sold. These
indirect effects are similar but not quite the same as the secondary market effects that
are the main topic of this chapter. In the case of secondary markets, a government
policy influences prices in a primary market, which in turn influences demand in sec-
ondary markets in which goods that are complements of or substitutes for the primary
It is sometimes both desirable and feasible to
build models of closely linked markets to esti-
mate changes in social surplus. They are com-
monly referred to as computable general equilib-
rium (CGE) models,but this is a misnomer—they
take account of a small set of the many markets
that make up an economy and thus might be
more accurately called computable multi-market
equilibrium models. Considering multiple mar-
kets rather than limiting analysis to the equilib-
rium demand schedule in the primary market is
appropriate when markets are not neatly separa-
ble because of externalities in consumption or
production.
One application of CGE models is to assessing
policy changes in markets for heterogeneous
goods with production externalities. For example,
what is commonly referred to as the oil market in-
volves the extraction of crude oils of various qual-
ities in various locations, their transportation to
refineries employing different technologies to
produce petroleum products in various locations,
and the sale of these petroleum products in vari-
ous regional markets. George Horwich, Hank
Jenkins-Smith, and David Weimer use such a
model to assess the efficiency of various public
policy responses to oil supply disruptions.
EXHIBIT 1
Constructing, calibrating, and using industry-
level CGE models are demanding tasks that
require substantial resources and thus often are
not worth developing for purposes of a single
CBA. For example, a proper CBA of changes in
the capacity of O’Hare International Airport
would require a model that takes account of
the network externality inherent in the airline
system—delays originating at O’Hare propa-
gate to flights into and out of other U.S. air-
ports. Creating a CGE model of the U.S. airline
industry would likely be too costly a task for
analysts doing a one-time study of a proposed
O’Hare expansion but might be an appro-
priate investment for the Federal Aviation
Administration to provide as a tool for assess-
ing the net benefits of any proposed airport
expansions.
Despite the difficulty of creating useful
CGE models, they are being increasingly used
in policy analysis. For example, Thomas
Nechyba has developed models of public edu-
cation to take into account the effect of school
outcomes on residential choice and the conse-
quences of residential choice on student body
composition and tax revenues, important fac-
tors in schooling outcomes.
Sources: George Horwich, Hank Jenkins-Smith, and David L.Weimer,“The International Energy Agency’s Mandatory
Oil-Sharing Agreement:Tests of Efficiency, Equity, and Practicality.” In George Horwich and David L.Weimer, eds.,
Responding to International Oil Crises (Washington, D.C.:American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research,
1988), 104–133;Thomas J. Nechyba,“What Can Be (and What Has Been) Learned from General Equilibrium Simulation
Models of School Finance?” National Tax Journal 54(2) 2003, 387–414.
128

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
market good are sold. In the case of an indirect effect, a government infrastructure pro-
ject reduces the production costs of firms by reducing their expenditures on various in-
puts, and this direct effect of the project causes indirect effects by reducing prices in
markets in which the goods produced by the firms are sold.
Although the two situations differ, both raise a similar question: can the change in
social surplus that results from the government’s policy be adequately measured by fo-
cusing on the market in which the intervention takes place? In both cases the answer is
similar: it can if the markets that are indirectly affected are not seriously distorted.7
To illustrate this in the case of indirect effects that result from public expenditures on
infrastructure improvement, consider the harbor-deepening project. The direct effect of
the project on shippers that use the harbor is a gain in surplus that is represented by area
P0abP1. However, the shippers do not necessarily keep this entire gain. Competitive pres-
sures will likely result in firms paying lower prices for productive inputs that are shipped
through the harbor.This, in turn, will cause cost curves in the markets in which these firms
sell their goods to shift downward and to the right. If prices in these markets fall as a re-
sult, then consumer surplus will increase.
In competitive markets for these goods, this indirect gain in consumer surplus is al-
ready captured by the direct surplus gain represented by area P0abP1.8 The reason is
that some of the surplus gains initially enjoyed by shippers are ultimately passed on to
the buyers of consumption goods through the reductions in the prices of these goods. If
markets where the indirect effects occur are distorted, however, then some of the
changes in surplus in these markets may not be captured by surplus changes in the
market where the direct effects take place. For example, the price reductions may en-
gender increases in sales in markets with both positive and negative externalities. If so,
third parties will enjoy an increase in surplus when positive externalities are present
and will suffer a decrease in surplus when negative externalities exist. These changes
are not reflected by the direct changes in surplus.
SECONDARY MARKET EFFECTS FROM THE PERSPECTIVE 
OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES
Advocates of localized recreational facilities—for example, advocates of new sports sta-
diums, museums, and parks—frequently contend that major benefits will occur in sec-
ondary markets. For example, they predict that the demand for the services of local
restaurants, hotels, and other businesses will increase. In addition, they often claim that
such projects result in multiplier effects; that is, as purchases from nearby businesses in-
crease, these businesses will, in turn, also spend their newly gained revenues nearby, and
this, in turn, will generate still more revenues that will be spent locally, and so forth.
As long as secondary markets in a community are not distorted, one should be
very cautious in counting revenues from local projects that are generated by secondary
market effects and multiplier effects as project benefits. There are several reasons for
exercising this caution.
First, absent market distortions, these revenues are relevant only when standing is
restricted to some group smaller than society as a whole, such as to residents of a spe-
cific geographic area.As discussed in this chapter, when society is broadly defined, such
129

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
claims cannot be justified unless the secondary market is distorted. For example, in eval-
uating the fish-stocking project from the narrow perspective of the local county, one
might count as a benefit increases in revenues received by local businesses resulting
from nonresidents buying fishing equipment in the county or frequenting local hotels or
restaurants. From the broader social or national perspective, however, these expendi-
tures simply represent a transfer from nonresidents to residents because they occur only
as a result of consumers shifting their spending from one geographic area to another.
Second, when standing is restricted to residents of a local community, any social sur-
plus gains that accrue to nonresidents as a result of a local project can no longer be counted
as project benefits. For example, surplus gains enjoyed by sports team fans or owners who
reside outside the community no longer count.Thus,the case for a local project could actu-
ally be stronger if standing is not restricted to the local community than if it is.
Third, as indicated earlier in this chapter, even if the demand for local products
and services increases as a result of a local project, suppliers do not receive increases in
surplus unless prices increase. Even when prices do increase, the resulting increase in
producer surplus is at least partially offset because consumers who are residents of the
local community must now pay more for goods and services and, as a result, lose con-
sumer surplus. However, some residents may value the growth that occurs in the local
economy in and of itself. Moreover, expansions in local businesses may provide some
opportunities for taking advantage of economies of scale and, therefore, could produce
benefits in the form of lower production costs.
Fourth, localized multiplier effects generally tend to be relatively small because
local businesses are often owned by nonresidents. Moreover, many of the purchases by
local businesses are made outside the local area.Thus, expenditures made within a local
area readily dissipate elsewhere, and this becomes increasingly true as standing is
restricted to a smaller geographic area.
It is only when secondary markets are distorted that effects in these markets can
potentially generate important benefits for the community. However, negative impacts
can also occur, such as increases in pollution and congestion that result when nonresi-
dents use local roads to reach a recreational facility. Local projects are most likely to
generate significant positive benefits in secondary markets when local rates of unem-
ployment are high or other local resources are idle and substantial barriers to resource
mobility exist. Under such circumstances, increases in demand in secondary markets
and the multiplier effects that accompany these demand increases could significantly
reduce levels of unemployment and increase the utilization of other idle resources
such as empty buildings. The utilization of idle resources such as empty buildings has
very low opportunity costs, and large increases in surplus accrue to many unemployed
workers when they are hired. However, it is only when the rate of unemployment is
fairly high that a substantial fraction of those hired are likely to be drawn from the
ranks of the unemployed.
CONCLUSION
Most of the key concepts from are summarized in Table 1. As the table indicates,
changes in social surplus serve as the basis for measuring the costs and benefits of poli-
cies. The concept of opportunity cost helps us value the inputs that policies divert from
130

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
FIGURE 1
Rules for Measuring Social Benefits and Costs of Government
Interventions
Type of Intervention
Efficient Markets
Inefficient Markets
Purchases from factor 
markets.
(Concept: value costs as
the opportunity cost of
the purchased resources.)
If supply schedule is flat,
value cost as direct budgetary
expenditure. (Example:
purchase of materials from 
a competitive national market.)
Value costs as direct budgetary
expenditure less (plus) any
increase (decrease) in social
surplus in market. (Examples:
hiring unemployed labor;
purchases of materials from 
a monopoly.)
If supply schedule is not flat,
value cost as direct budgetary
expenditure less (plus) any
increase (decrease) in social
surplus in market. (Example:
purchases of materials from 
a competitive local market.)
Changes in costs to 
consumers or producers 
in primary markets.
(Concept: value benefits 
as WTP for the change
and costs as WTP 
to avoid the change.)
Value change as net change in
social (i.e., consumer and
producer) surplus plus (less)
any increase (decrease) in
government revenues.
(Example: government
provision of goods and 
services to consumers 
or producers.)
Value change as net change in
social (i.e., consumer, producer,
and third-party) surplus plus
(less) any increase (decrease)
in government revenues.
(Example: tax or subsidy in
market with externality.)
Changes in quantities 
exchanged in secondary 
markets as a result of 
government intervention 
in primary or factor 
markets.
(Concept: commodities 
exchanged in secondary 
markets are typically 
complements of or 
substitutes for 
commodities exchanged 
in primary markets; most 
impacts in secondary 
markets can be valued 
in primary markets.)
If prices do not change in
secondary market, ignore
secondary market impacts.
If prices do change, but 
benefits in primary market 
are measured using a demand
schedule with other market
prices held constant, then 
social surplus changes in the
secondary market will always
represent reductions in social
surplus that should be
subtracted from changes in the
primary market. But if benefits
in the primary market are
measured using a demand
schedule that does not hold
other prices constant, ignore
secondary market impacts.
(Example: price changes in
primary market cause demand
schedule shifts in competitive
secondary market.)
Costs or benefits resulting 
directly from increases in the
size of the distortion should, in
principle, be measured. Other
impacts in secondary market
should be ignored if prices do
not change. (Example: price
changes in primary market
causes the demand schedule 
to shift in a secondary market
with an externality.)
These rules pertain only to measuring impacts of government interventions on society as a whole. Issues con-
cerning standing are ignored in the rules.
131

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
1. The cracked walls in houses that would result
from the increased traffic are a negative exter-
nality.Although the externality would occur in
the secondary market for housing, it should be
taken into account in the study.
EXHIBIT 2
2. The increased purchases of gasoline would
occur in a secondary market. If this market is
not seriously distorted (e.g., by externalities or
monopoly power), then the increase in gasoline
purchases should be ignored because any
other uses; the concept of WTP helps us value policy outputs. The key to valuing out-
puts is to identify the primary markets in which they occur. When the outputs are not
traded in organized markets, ingenuity is often needed to infer supply and demand
schedules (remember the market for “fishing days”). For this purpose, various shadow
pricing techniques are often needed. Costs and benefits that occur in undistorted sec-
ondary markets are typically very difficult to value, but generally need not and, indeed,
should not be added to costs and benefits that are measured in primary markets. Doing
so will usually result in double counting.
The rules that appear in Table 1 cannot be used without first determining the type
of market in which the various potential impacts of a project or program occur—pri-
mary, secondary, or factor market—and then determining whether the market is effi-
cient or inefficient. In practice, this is sometimes difficult.To illustrate the sorts of judg-
ments that must be made in practice, we conclude by listing selected impacts of a
hypothetical street-widening project that would substantially increase traffic along the
route and ask the reader to consider what type of market each occurs in and, hence,
whether each should be included in a cost-benefit analysis of the project. Our own
judgment concerning each, which is based on the assumption that surplus gains by
those who drive on the street are measured using an equilibrium demand schedule for
trips, appears in Exhibit 2.
1. The increased traffic would cause vibrations that crack the walls of adjacent
houses.
2. Profits of gasoline at filling stations that are located along the route would
increase.
3. The property values of these stations would also increase.
4. Traffic on adjacent streets would decline.Therefore, the remaining motorists
would experience quicker and cheaper journeys.
5. Air pollution along the route would increase.
6. The increased auto traffic would require the city to hire three more police officers
to enforce traffic regulations.
7. The greater number of motorists would lead to an increased number of traffic
violations, and the resulting fines would mean that the city receives increased
revenue.
8. Fewer people would ride buses; as a consequence the bus company would lay off
10 bus drivers.
9. Widening the road would necessitate cutting down a number of trees.These trees
would then be sold to a nearby sawmill.
132

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
EXERCISES
1.
An increase in the toll on a highway from $.40 to $.50 would reduce use of the highway by
10,000 cars per week.
a.
Because of the reduced use of the highway, demand in the secondary market for sub-
way rides increases.Assuming that the price of subway rides is set equal to the mar-
ginal cost of operating the subway and marginal costs are constant (i.e., the supply
schedule is horizontal), and no externalities result from the reduced use of the highway
and the increased use of the subway, are there additional costs or benefits due to the
increased demand for subway rides? Why or why not?
b.
Because of the reduced use of the highway, demand in the secondary market for gaso-
line falls by 30,000 gallons per year.There is a stiff tax on gasoline, one that existed
prior to the new toll.Assuming that the marginal cost of producing gasoline is $1 per
gallon, that these marginal costs are constant (i.e., the supply schedule is horizontal),
that no externalities result from the consumption of gasoline, and that the gasoline tax
adds 30 percent to the supply price, are there any additional costs or benefits due to
this shift? If so, how large are they?
2.
A country imposes an import fee on the crude oil it imports.Assume that prior to the impo-
sition of the import fee, the country annually consumed 900 million short tons of coal, all 
domestically mined, at a price of $66 per short ton. How would the CBA of the import 
effects on surplus will be captured by measuring
surplus in the primary market. (Notice, how-
ever, that doing this neglects the fact that it is
the owners of the filling stations, rather than
automobile drivers, who receive the increase in
surplus from increased purchases of gasoline; it
also ignores the possibility that filling station
owners who are located on other streets may
face reductions in surplus.)
3. The property market is also a secondary mar-
ket. Hence, these effects should be ignored.
4. The decrease in traffic on adjacent streets can be
viewed as a reduction in a negative externality—
congestion—that distorts a secondary market
(the adjacent streets are presumably substitutes
for the street that would be widened).This is a
real benefit that should be taken into account.
5. Air pollution is a negative externality that dis-
torts the primary market. Hence, it should be
taken into account.
6. The hiring of three additional police officers
would take place in a factor market for labor
and can be viewed as a direct cost of the project.
7. The increase in traffic fines would simply be a
transfer between motorists and the city and,
except for their distributional implications, can
be ignored.
8. The 10 laid off bus drivers would lose their jobs
because the demand schedule in the secondary
market for public transportation would shift to
the left. Unless this market or the factor mar-
kets that serve this market are distorted, the
shift in demand can be ignored. Examples of
such distortions are the loss of monopoly profits
by the bus company or the inability of the bus
drivers to find new jobs because of high rates of
unemployment. Otherwise, the bus drivers
would simply find new jobs at a similar level of
compensation, implying that widening the road
would have no effect on the social value of the
output they produce.
9. The benefits and costs of cutting down the trees
and selling them to a sawmill can be assessed
independently of the street-widening project. If
the benefits from cutting down the trees exceed
the costs, then the trees should be cut regard-
less of whether the street-widening project is
undertaken. However, if the costs exceed the
benefits, then the costs and benefits of cutting
the trees should be included in the CBA of the
street-widening project.
133

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
fee change if, after imposition of the import fee, the following circumstances are assumed to
result from energy consumers switching from crude oil to coal?
a.
Annual consumption of coal rises by 40 million short tons, but the price of coal re-
mains unchanged.
b.
Annual consumption of coal rises by 40 million short tons and the price of coal rises to
$69 per short ton. In answering this question, assume that the prices of other goods, in-
cluding coal, were not held constant in estimating the demand schedule for crude oil.
c.
Annual consumption of coal rises by 40 million short tons and the price of coal rises to
$69 per short ton. In answering this question, assume that the prices of other goods, in-
cluding coal, were held constant in estimating the demand schedule for crude oil.Also
assume that the demand schedule for coal is completely inelastic.
d.
The market price of coal underestimates its marginal social cost by $15 per short ton
because the coal mined in the country has a high sulphur content that produces smog
when burned. In answering this question, assume that the annual consumption of coal
rises by 40 million short tons, but the price of coal remains unchanged.
3.
A country imposes an import fee on the crude oil it imports. Imagine that all the crude oil
imports to the country are made by ships owned by its nationals. The Association of
Petroleum Shippers argues that the reduction in imports resulting from the import fee will
drive down the price of shipping services and thereby inflict a loss on them.The Committee
for Energy Independence, which favors the import fee, argues that the reduction in shipping
prices will benefit consumers of shipping services. Which argument is correct? In preparing
an answer, make the following assumptions: the import fee will reduce the quantity of im-
ported crude oil from 3 billion to 2.5 billion barrels per year; the reduction in barrels
shipped will drive per-barrel shipping costs down from $4 per barrel to $3 per barrel; and
the elasticity of demand in the shipping market at the new equilibrium ($3, 2.5 billion bar-
rels) is 0.3. Also assume that the shipping market is undistorted and that the prices of
other goods, including shipping services, were held constant in estimating the demand
schedule for crude oil.
4.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) Consider an individual’s utility function
over two goods, qm and qs, where m indicates the primary market in which a policy will have
its effect and s is a related secondary market:
where a, bm, bs, and g are parameters such that bm  0, and bs  0, bm  (1  gqs)>2qm,
bs  (1  gqm)>2qs, and g  pmbs>ps  psbm>pm. For purposes of this exercise, assume that
a  1, bm  0.01, bs  0.01, and g  0.015. Also assume that the person has a budget of
$30,000 and the price of qm, pm, is $100 and the price of qs, ps, is $100. Imagine that the policy
under consideration would reduce pm to $90.
The provided spreadsheet has two models. Model 1 assumes that the price in the sec-
ondary market does not change in response to a price change in the primary market.That is,
ps equals $100 both before and after the reduction in pm. Step 1 solves for the quantities that
maximize utility under the initial pm. Step 2 solves for the quantities that maximize utility
under the new pm. Step 3 requires you to make guesses of the new budget level that would
return the person to her original level of utility prior to the price reduction—keep guessing
until you find the correct budget. (You may wish to use the Tools|Goal Seek function on the
spreadsheet instead of engaging in iterative guessing.) Step 4 calculates the compensating
variation as the difference between the original budget and the new budget. Step 5 calcu-
lates the change in the consumer surplus in the primary market.
U = qm + aqs - (bmq2
m + gqmqs + bsq2
s)
134

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
Model 2 assumes that ps  a  bqs. Assume that b  0.25 and a is set so that at the
quantity demanded in step 2 of model 1, ps  100. As no analytical solution for the quanti-
ties before the price change exists, step 1 requires you to make guesses of the marginal util-
ity of money until you find the one that satisfies the budget constraint for the initial pm. Step
2 repeats this process for the new value of pm. Step 3 requires you to guess both a new bud-
get to return the person to the initial level of utility and a marginal utility of money that sat-
isfies the new budget constraint. A block explains how to use the Tools|Goal Seek function
to find the marginal utility consistent with your guess of the new budget needed to return
utility to its original level. Step 4 calculates the compensating variation. Step 5 calculates the
change in the consumer surplus in the primary market and bounds on the change in con-
sumer surplus in the secondary market.
Use these models to investigate how well the change in social surplus in the primary
market approximates compensating variation. Note that as utility depends on consumption
of only these two goods, there are substantial income effects.That is, a price reduction in ei-
ther of the goods substantially increases the individual’s real income. Getting started: the
values in the spreadsheet are set up for a reduction in pm from $100 to $95. Begin by chan-
ging the new primary market price to $90 and resolving the models.
NOTES
1. For a helpful analysis that uses a somewhat dif-
ferent approach than the one presented in this
section but reaches very similar conclusions, see
Herbert Mohring,“Maximizing, Measuring, and
Not Double Counting Transportation-
Improvement Benefits:A Primer on Closed- and
Open-Economy Cost-Benefit Analysis,”
Transportation Research 27(6) 1993, 413–424.
2. As advocates of a policy often claim benefits in
secondary markets, it is ironic that demand shifts
in undistorted secondary markets that cause
price changes always involve losses in social sur-
plus.This can be seen by using panel (b) in
Figure 2 to illustrate the case of an outward shift
in demand in a secondary market, as well as the
case of an inward shift in demand. Simply take
DG1 as the original demand schedule and DG0 as
the post-project demand schedule. Using the
post-project demand schedule for measuring so-
cial surplus changes, we see that the price in-
crease from PG1 to PG0 results in a producer sur-
plus increase equal to the area of trapezoid
PG1fgPG0 and a consumer surplus loss equal to
the area of PG1hgPG0 so that social surplus falls
by the area of triangle fgh.
3. See Richard E. Just, Darrell L. Hueth, and
Andrew Schmitz, Applied Welfare Economics
and Public Policy (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1982), Chapter 9.
4. For greater detail concerning this point, see Just,
Hueth, and Schmitz, Applied Welfare Economics
and Public Policy, 200–213.
5. Indeed, under certain assumptions, areas abc and
efg will almost exactly equal one another.The
most important of these assumptions is that the
price changes in the two markets represented in
Figure 2 are small and that no income effects re-
sult from these price changes. If there are no in-
come effects, there will be symmetry in substitu-
tion between the two goods. In other words, their
cross-substitution effects will be equal.That is,
qF> PG  qG> PF. Given this equality, PFqF
PG ΔqG. Hence, area abc approximately equals
area efg.Typically, income effects do occur as a
result of price changes, but as discussed in
Appendix 3A, these effects tend to be small for
most goods. Consequently, one would anticipate
that area abc would generally closely approxi-
mate area efg.
6. Separate measures would have to be obtained,
however, to examine how benefits and costs were
distributed among various groups. For example,
area abc is a gain to consumers, while area efg is
a loss to producers.To the extent these two areas
are equal, they represent a transfer of surplus
from producers to consumers. In addition, sur-
plus corresponding to area PG0efPG1 is also trans-
ferred from producers to consumers.
¯
0
0
0
0
135

Valuing Benefits and Costs in Secondary Markets
7. For a detailed analysis of the secondary market
effects of transportation and land use projects,
see David M. Newberry, “Spatial General
Equilibrium and Cost-Benefit Analysis” in
Cost-Benefit Analysis: Environmental and
Ecological Perspectives, K. Puttaswamaiah, edi-
tor, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers,
2002, pp. 1–18.
8. For a formal demonstration of this assertion, see
Jan Rouwendal,“Indirect Welfare Effects of
Price Changes and Cost-Benefit Analysis,” un-
published paper (Amsterdam:Tinbergen
Institute, 2002).
136

Discounting Benefits and Costs 
in Future Time Periods
B
oth private and public decisions can have important consequences that extend
over time.When consumers buy houses, automobiles, or education, they gener-
ally expect to derive benefits and incur costs over a number of years.When the
government builds a dam, subsidizes job training, regulates carbon dioxide emissions,
or leases the outer continental shelf for oil exploration, it also sets in motion impacts
that extend over many years. Often, analysts have to compare projects with benefits
and costs that arise in different time periods. Formally, they have to make intertemp-
oral (across time) comparisons. To do this, analysts discount future costs and benefits
so that all costs and benefits are in a common metric—the present value.They can then
measure and compare the net social benefits of each policy alternative using the net
present value criterion.
This chapter deals with the practical techniques needed to compute the net present
value of a project (or policy). It assumes that the social discount rate, the rate at which an-
alysts should discount the future benefits and costs of a project, is known. Some contro-
versy remains over the appropriate value of the social discount rate. In practice, though,
oversight agencies, such as the Office of Management and Budget in the United States,
Her Majesty’s Treasury in the United Kingdom, or the Treasury Board in Canada, often
specify the discount rate that analysts should use.
The sections of this chapter cover the following topics: the basics of discounting,
compounding and discounting over multiple years, the timing of benefits and costs,
comparing projects with different time frames, real versus nominal dollars, relative
price changes, long-lived projects and calculating horizon values, time-declining dis-
counting, and sensitivity analysis in discounting.
Appendix A presents some shortcut formulas for calculating the present value of
annuities and perpetuities. The topics covered in this chapter are essentially uncontro-
versial.
THE BASICS OF DISCOUNTING
Projects with Lives of One Year
Technically speaking, discounting takes place over periods rather than years. However,
because the discounting period is a year in almost all public-sector applications, and it
is easier to think of years rather than periods, we generally use the term years.
Form Chapter 6 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
137

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
In this section, we consider projects that last for exactly one year. In the following
section we consider projects that last for longer than one year. Suppose, for example, a
city government has the opportunity to buy a parcel of land for $10 million. Also sup-
pose that if it buys the land, then the land will be sold for $11 million one year from
now. Should the city buy the land now?
Before proceeding, it is worth noting that it is often useful to lay out the annual
benefits and costs of a project on a time line, as shown in Figure 1. The horizontal axis
represents time measured in years. Benefits appear above the time line and costs are
below it. Although a time line might seem unnecessary for this simple example, this
tool clarifies the timing of the benefits and costs of a project and is particularly useful
when the timing of impacts is more complicated.
To decide whether to buy the land,the city should compare the land purchase project,
which has a cost of $10 million now and a benefit of $11 million in one year to the best
alternative—in this case, the status quo (not buy the land, invest the money). There are
three ways to do this, each of which gives the same answer.
Future Value Analysis.
This method compares the amount the city will receive in the fu-
ture if it engages in the project with the amount it will receive in the future if it invests the
money. Suppose that if the city does not buy the land, it will invest the money in Treasury
bills (T-bills) at an interest rate of 5 percent.1 If it invests in T-bills, then it will have
$10.5 million in one year—the principal amount of $10 million plus interest of $500,000.This
amount,$10.5 million,is called the future value (FV) of theT-bills because it represents the
amount the city will have in a future period if it buys them.The city can compare this future
value with the future value it will receive if it invests in the land,$11 million,and choose the
alternative that has the highest future value. In this example, the city should buy the land.
In general, the future value in one year of some amount X (available today) is
given by the following formula:
(1)
where, i is the annual rate of interest.The concept of future value is intuitively appeal-
ing to anyone who has ever had a savings account. For example, if one invests $1,000 in
FV = X(1 + i)
0
10,000,000
1
11,000,000
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
FIGURE 1
A Time Line
Diagram for City
Land Purchase
Example
138

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
a savings account at 4 percent, one will have $1,000(1  0.04)  $1,040 in a year. As is
evident from equation (1), the future value increases as the interest rate increases.
Note that interest rates are often stated as percentages, such as 5 percent.This cor-
responds to an interest rate, i, equal to 0.05.
Present Value Analysis.
We now switch from future values to present values. Present
value analysis compares the current equivalent value of the project, which is called its
present value (PV), with the current equivalent value of the best alternative project,
given prevailing interest rates. The present value of buying the land that will be worth
$11 million in one year’s time, given that the city could invest its money at 5 percent, is
found by setting FV  $11,000,000, X  PV, and i  0.05 in equation (1):
Solving this equation for PV gives:
In contrast, the present value of the best available alternative, buying the T-bills now, is
$10 million.2 Comparing these two present values shows that the city would be
$476,190 better off in present value terms if it bought the land.
In general, if the prevailing interest rate is i, then the present value of an amount
received in one year, Y, is given by:
(2)
As is evident from equation (2), the present value decreases as the interest rate
increases.
Net Present Value Analysis.
This method calculates the present values of all the ben-
efits and costs of a project, including the initial investment, and sums them to obtain
the net present value (NPV) of that project. For the land purchase example, the NPV is
the difference between the present value of the land if the city buys it and the current
cost of the land:
These calculations are represented graphically on a time line in Figure 2. As the NPV
of buying the land is positive, the city should buy the land. It will be $476,190 better off
in present value terms if it invests in this project.
By definition, the NPV of a project equals the difference between the present
value of the benefits, PV(B), and the present value of the costs, PV(C):
(3)
NPV = PV(B) - PV(C)
NPV = $10,476,190 - $10,000,000 = $476,190
PV =
Y
1 + i
PV = $11,000,000
1.05
= $10,476,190
PV(1 + 0.05) = $11,000,000
139

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
The NPV method provides a simple criterion for deciding whether to undertake a pro-
ject. If the NPV of a project is positive, then one should proceed with it; if the NPV is
negative, then one should not. The positive NPV decision rule assumes implicitly that
no other alternative with a higher NPV exists. If there are multiple, mutually exclusive
alternatives, then one should select the alternative with the highest NPV.
The foregoing example assumes that the city has $10 million available that could
be used either to buy the land or to invest at interest rate i. Sometimes analysts calcu-
late NPVs of projects for which the government does not have all the cash immedi-
ately available and has to borrow some funds. Implicitly, analysts assume that the 
government can borrow or lend funds at the same interest rate i. Under this assumption
it does not matter whether the government currently has the money or not: the NPV rule
still holds. The source of funding for a project may affect the choice of the discount
rate. However, even in these situations, analysts should select the project with the
largest NPV.
COMPOUNDING AND DISCOUNTING OVER MULTIPLE YEARS
We now generalize these results to apply to projects with impacts that occur over many
years. Again, we first discuss future values, then present values, and finally net present
values.
Future Value over Multiple Years.
Suppose that the city could invest the $10 million
for five years with interest at 5 percent per annum. Using equation (1), at the end of the
first year the city would have $10 million  1.05  $10.5 million. In order to calculate
the interest in future years, we need to know if there is simple interest or compound in-
terest.
If there is simple interest, then each year interest is paid only on the original princi-
pal amount, and the city would receive interest of $500,000 per year. The future value
would be $12.5 (the initial $10 million plus five years of interest of $0.5 million).
0
1
11,000,000
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
 
PV(B) = 10,476,190
PV(C) = 10,000,000
NPV = 476,190
FIGURE 2
NPV of Buying the Land
140

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
However, if interest is compounded annually, then, in effect, $10.5 million would be in-
vested at the beginning of the second year which, again using equation (1), would grow
to $10.5 million  1.05  $11.025 million at the end of the second year. Notice that the
interest in the second year, $0.525 million, is more than the interest in the first year,
$0.500 million.With compound interest, interest is earned on the principal amount and
on the interest that has been reinvested (interest on the interest). This process is called
compounding interest. Henceforth, we shall always assume that interest is compounded
annually, unless explicitly stated otherwise.
Table 1 illustrates that when interest is compounded annually, the future value
can grow quickly—much more quickly than under simple interest. For example, at 
an interest rate of 7 percent compounded annually, the original capital amount
increases by more than 40 percent after only five years. Under simple interest the
FV would increase by only 35 percent. Over longer periods (10 years or more), the
divergence between compound interest and simple interest becomes quite large.
This gap increases with time, thereby lending credence to the adage of many
pension fund sales agents who exhort young adults “to invest early and leave 
it alone.”
In general, if an amount, denoted by X, is invested for n years and interest is com-
pounded annually at rate i, then the future value is:3
(4)
For example, if $10 million is invested for four years with interest compounded annu-
ally at 7 percent, then the future value is:
The term (1  i)n, which gives the future value of $1 in n years at annual interest rate i,
compounded annually, is called the compound interest factor. In this example, the com-
pound interest factor is 1.3108.4 Most finance textbooks include an appendix of com-
pound interest factors. Many pocket calculators and electronic spreadsheets have this
function. Different sources may give slightly different answers due to rounding error.
In practice, though, these rounding errors are not material.
FV = $10(1 + 0.07)4 = $13.108 million
FV = X(1 + i)n
TABLE 1
Investment of $10 Million with Interest Compounded Annually 
at 7 Percent
Year
Beginning of 
Year Balance 
($ millions)
Annual 
Interest 
($ millions)
End of Year 
Balance 
($ millions)
1
10.000
0.700
10.700
2
10.700
0.749
11.449
3
11.449
0.801
12.250
4
12.250
0.858
13.108
5
13.108
0.918
14.026
141

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
Present Value over Multiple Years.
Suppose that a government agency wants to un-
dertake an organizational restructuring in three years that is expected to cost $100,000
at that time. If the interest rate is 6 percent, then the amount needed now to yield
$100,000 in three years, denoted by PV, can be found by substituting into equation (4):
Solving this equation for PV gives:
Consequently, the government agency would need $83,962 now to have $100,000 in
three years.
In general, the present value of an amount received in n years, denoted Y, with in-
terest compounded annually at rate i is:
(5)
The term 1>(1  i)n is called the present value factor, or the discount factor. It equals the
present value of $1 received in n years when the interest rate is i,compounded annually.For
example, the present value factor in the foregoing example equals 1>(1  .06)3  0.8396.
Again, these factors are available in most finance textbooks, on calculators, and in com-
puter spreadsheet programs.
The process of calculating the present value of a future amount is called
discounting. As is evident from equation (5), the present value of a future amount is
less than the future amount itself—it is discounted. The amount of the discount in-
creases as the interest rate increases and as the number of years increases. Comparing
equations (4) and (5) shows that discounting is the reverse of compounding.5
If a project yields benefits in many periods, then we can compute the present value
of the whole stream of benefits by adding the present values of the benefits received in
each period. Specifically, if Bt denotes the benefits received in period t for t  0, 1, . . . , n,
then the present value of the stream of benefits, denoted PV(B), is:
(6)
Similarly, if Ct denotes the costs incurred in period t for t  0, 1, . . . , n, then the present
value of the stream of costs, denoted PV(C), is:
(7)
PV(C) = a
n
t=0
Ct
(1 + i)t
 PV(B) = a
n
t=0
Bt
(1 + i)t
 PV(B) =
B0
(1 + i)0 +
B1
(1 + i)1 + #  #  # +
Bn-1
(1 + i)n-1 +
Bn
(1 + i)n
PV =
Y
(1 + i)n
PV =
$100,000
(1 + 0.06)3 = $100,000
1.19102
= $83,962
PV (1 + 0.06)3 = $100,000.
142

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
To illustrate the use of equation (6), consider a government agency that has to
choose between two alternative projects. Project I yields a benefit of $10,500 four years
from now, whereas project II yields $5,500 four years from now and an additional
$5,400 five years from now. Assume the interest rate is 8 percent. Which is the better
project? The present values of the projects follow:
In this example, the present values of the two projects happen to be identical.Thus, one
would be indifferent between them. Time lines for these two projects are shown in
Figure 3.
Net Present Value of a Project.
We have now introduced all of the material on basic
discounting needed for CBA. As discussed earlier, the NPV of a project is the differ-
ence between the present value of the benefits and the present value of the costs, as
 PV(II) =
$5,500
(1 + 0.08)4 +
$5,400
(1 + 0.08)5 = $4,043 + $3,675 = $7,718
 PV(I) =
$10,500
(1 + 0.08)4 = $7,718
4
10,500
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
 
PV(I) = 7,718
0
1
2
3
5
Project I
4
5,500
5,400
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
3,675
4,043
PV(II) = 7,718
0
1
2
3
5
Project II
FIGURE 3
Time Lines for Project I and Project II
143

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
represented in equation (3). Substituting equations (6) and (7) into equation (3) gives
the following useful expression:
(8)
To illustrate the mechanics of computing the NPV of a project using this formula,
suppose a district library is considering purchasing a new information system that
would give users access to a number of online databases for five years. The benefits of
this system are estimated to be $100,000 per annum, including both cost savings to the
library and user benefits.The information system costs $325,000 to purchase and set up
initially, and $20,000 to operate and maintain each year. After five years, the system
would be dismantled and sold, resulting in a net cash inflow of $20,000. Such amounts
that arise at the end of a project are sometimes referred to as a terminal value or
liquidation value.Assume that the appropriate discount rate is 7 percent and there are
no other costs or benefits.
A time line for this project is shown in Figure 4. It shows the timing of each benefit
and cost, their present values, the present value of all the benefits, the present value of
all the costs, and the NPV of the project. The present value of the benefits is $424,280;
the present value of the costs is $407,004; and the NPV of the project is $17,276.As the
NPV is positive, the library should purchase the new information system.
NPV = a
n
t=0
Bt
(1 + i)t - a
n
t=0
Ct
(1 + i)t
4
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
20,000
20,000
100,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
0
1
2
3
5
85,558
76,290
81,630
87,344
93,458
PV(B) = 424,280
325,000
18,691
17,469
16,326
15,258
14,260
PV(C) = 407,004
NPV = 17,276
 
FIGURE 4
Time Line of the Benefits and Costs of the Library Information
System
144

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
An alternative way to compute the NPV of a project is to compute the present
value of the annual net (social) benefits. Let NBt  Bt - Ct denote the annual net social
benefits that arise in year t (t  0, 1, 2, . . . , n). It follows from equation (8) that the
NPV of a project equals the present value of the net benefits:6
(9)
To illustrate that equations (8) and (9) produce the same NPV, Table 2 contains the an-
nual benefits, annual costs, and annual net benefits of the library information system
project. Using equation (9), the present value of the net benefits of the project is
$17,276, as shown in the last column of Table 2. This is the same value as the NPV ob-
tained earlier by taking the difference between the present value of the benefits and
the present value of the costs.
In many respects, tables and time lines are substitutable.They both present key in-
formation succinctly, and they facilitate computation of project PVs and NPVs. Neither
is necessary.Analysts can experiment with them and use them whenever they are help-
ful. For complicated projects it is often useful to start with a time line to indicate pre-
cisely when impacts occur and then enter the data into a spreadsheet to compute the
PVs and the NPVs.
One special situation is worth discussing briefly.In some projects,all of the costs occur
at the beginning (t  0) and only benefits occur in the ensuing years (t  1, 2, . . . , n). In
this situation, equation (8) simplifies to:
Continuous Compounding.
Throughout this chapter we assume that interest is com-
pounded once per period, with a period being a year. In practice, interest on mortgages,
savings accounts and other investments is often compounded more than once per pe-
riod. It may be compounded semiannually, monthly, or even daily. Sometimes, interest
is compounded continuously.7 In general, the present value of a future amount declines
NPV = a
n
t=0
Bt
(1 + i)t - C0
NPV = a
n
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t
TABLE 2
The Net Present Value of the Library Information System
Year
Event
Annual 
Benefits
Annual 
Costs
Annual Net 
Benefits
0
Purchase and install
0
325,000
—325,000
1
Annual benefits and costs
100,000
20,000
80,000
2
Annual benefits and costs
100,000
20,000
80,000
3
Annual benefits and costs
100,000
20,000
80,000
4
Annual benefits and costs
100,000
20,000
80,000
5
Annual benefits and costs
100,000
20,000
80,000
5
Liquidation
20,000
0
20,000
PV
$424,280
$407,004
$17,276
145

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
as the frequency of discounting increases. However, the difference between assuming
interest is compounded once per period and assuming it is compounded continuously
is not great. For example, under the assumption of continuous compounding, the PV of
the benefits of the library information system would be $421,374, the PV of the costs
would be $406,456, and the NPV would be $14,918.
TIMING OF BENEFITS AND COSTS
The compounding and discounting formulae presented above assume that all benefits
and costs occur at the end of each period (year). Impacts are assumed to arise immedi-
ately (t  0), or at the end of the first year (t  1), or at the end of the second year (t  2),
and so on. For many projects, this is a reasonable assumption. Furthermore, when most
of the costs occur early in the project and most of the benefits occur late in the project,
this assumption is conservative, in the sense that the NPVs are lower than they would
be if they were computed under alternative assumptions.
To illustrate this point, reconsider the library information system example, but now
assume that the annual benefits of $100,000 all occur at the beginning of each year in-
stead of at the end of each year, and assume the timing of all other benefits and costs is
unchanged.A time line under these assumptions is given in Figure 5.The present value of
the benefits increases by $28,702 from $424,280 to $452,982, and the NPV of the project
increases by $28,702 from $17,276 to $45,978. Clearly, the NPV of a project can vary con-
siderably according to the assumptions made about the timing of benefits and costs.
4
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
0
1
2
3
5
325,000
18,691
17,469
16,326
15,258
14,260
PV(C) = 407,004
NPV = 45,978
14,260
76,290
81,630
87,344
93,458
100,000
PV(B) = 452,982
 
FIGURE 5
Time Line of the Benefits and Costs of the Library Information
System Assuming User Benefits Occur at the Beginning of Each Year
146

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
When costs or benefits actually occur over the course of a year, a more appropriate
approach is to treat them as if they occurred in the middle of that year. So, for instance, if
the $100,000 in benefits and $20,000 in operating costs were distributed throughout each
of the five years of the library project,one would discount these benefits and costs at times
t  0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5. If, as before, the installation costs of $325,000 occurred at the
beginning of the first year of the project (t  0) and the liquidation benefit of $20,000
arose at the end of the fifth year (t  5), then the NPV of the project would be $28,562.
COMPARING PROJECTS WITH DIFFERENT TIME FRAMES
In principle, projects should always be compared over the same discounting period so
that they have the same opportunity to accumulate costs and benefits. Projects with
different time frames are not directly comparable.
Suppose that a government-owned electric utility company is considering two new
alternative sources of power. One is a large hydroelectric dam (HED), which would
last 75 years; the other is a cogeneration plant (CGP), which would last 15 years.After
considering all relevant social benefits and costs, and assuming a discount rate of 8 per-
cent, the NPV of the 75-year hydroelectric project is $30 million and the NPV of the
15-year cogeneration project is $24 million. Is the hydroelectric project preferable sim-
ply because it has the larger NPV? The answer is no.These projects are not comparable
because they have different life spans.The cogeneration project could be “rolled over”
five times within the life of the hydro project.
There are two methods for evaluating projects with different time frames: the roll-
over method and the equivalent annual net benefit method. They always lead to the
same conclusion, as we now illustrate.
Roll-Over Method
Suppose that the utility decides to build the cogeneration power plant. Further sup-
pose that in 15 years time it builds another new cogeneration plant; in 30 years it builds
another one; and it builds another again in 45 and 60 years. If so, the length of these five
sequential cogeneration plants will be the same as the length of the 75-year hydroelec-
tric project.This makes the projects directly comparable.8
The NPV of five back-to-back cogeneration power plants, denoted 5CGP, is:
As this NPV is higher than the NPV of the hydroelectric project, the utility should se-
lect this option.
Equivalent Annual Net Benefit Method
An often easier way to compare projects of unequal lengths is to use the equivalent an-
nual net benefit (EANB) method.The EANB of a project equals its NPV divided by the
+ $24,000,000
(1 + 0.08)45 + $24,000,000
(1 + .008)60 = $34.94 million9
NPV(5CGP) = $24,000,000 + $24,000,000
(1 + 0.08)15 + $24,000,000
(1 + 0.08)30
147

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
annuity factor that has the same term and discount rate as the project itself (i.e., the
present value of an annuity of $1 per year for the life of the project, discounted at the
rate used to calculate the NPV):
(10)
where, an
i is the annuity factor, defined by equation (A.2). The EANB is the amount
which, if received each year for the life of the project, would have the same NPV as the
project itself. This process is called amortization: the cost of the project is amortized
over n years. The EANBs for the hydroelectric and the cogeneration projects equal:10
The EANB of the cogeneration project is $2.804 million, which implies that this project
is equivalent to an annuity of $2.804 million per year for 15 years. In contrast, the net
benefit of the hydroelectric alternative is equivalent to an annuity of $2.407 million per
year for 75 years. If one could continuously replace each project at the end of its life
with a similar project, then the cogeneration project would yield net annual benefits
equivalent to a perpetuity of $2.804 million per year, and the hydroelectric project
would yield annual net benefits equivalent to a perpetuity of $2.407 million per year.
Consequently, the cogeneration alternative is preferable, assuming replacement of
both types of plant is possible at the end of their useful lives.
An Additional Advantage of the Cogeneration Project
In fact, if the utility chooses the cogeneration project at the beginning, then it may not be
desirable to replace it with an identical cogeneration plant in 15 years.At that time a more
efficient alternative is likely to be available. In contrast, if the utility builds the hydroelec-
tric project,then it is probably locked in for 75 years.Thus,the cogeneration project has an
additional benefit because of its flexibility in allowing the introduction of more efficient
technology as it becomes available during the 75-year period. Here it is sufficient to rec-
ognize that the shorter project has an additional benefit that is not incorporated in the
EANB calculation.
INFLATION AND REAL VERSUS NOMINAL DOLLARS
Conventional private-sector financial analysis measures revenues, expenditures, net in-
come, assets, liabilities and cash flows in terms of historical monetary units. Such units
are referred to as nominal dollars (sometimes called current dollars). However, if you
have ever listened to an older person reminisce, then you probably know that a dollar
purchased more in 1986 than it does now—“a dollar’s not worth a dollar anymore!” For
example, nominal per capita disposable personal income in the United States was
approximately 2.345 times higher in 2006 than in 1986 ($32,049 versus $13,665), but the
 EANB(CGP) = $24>8.559 = $2.804 million
 EANB(HED) = $30>12.461 = $2.407 million
EANB = NPV
an
i
148

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
average person could not buy 2.3 times as many goods and services in 2006 as in 1986.11
The purchasing power of a dollar declines with price inflation. In order to control for
the declining purchasing power of a dollar due to inflation, we convert nominal dollars
to real dollars (sometimes called constant dollars).
To obtain real dollar measures, analysts deflate nominal dollars. There are a num-
ber of possible deflators. Usually, the deflator is based on the market price of a basket
of goods and services purchased by consumers, that is, based on consumer prices: some-
times analysts use the gross domestic product (GDP), which is broader and reflects the
price of all goods and services in the economy, including the public sector. The choice
of whether to use a consumer price deflator or the GDP deflator depends on whether
the impacts of a project are concentrated on consumers or are much broader. In prac-
tice, most CBA studies use a consumer price deflator, especially when calculating con-
sumer surplus. Some studies use a GDP deflator when calculating producer surplus.
In the U.S. the most-often-used deflator reflecting consumer prices is the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).The most commonly-used variant is the all-items CPI for
all urban consumers, CPI-U, which is published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and is
summarized in Table 3 for the period 1980–2009.12 Currently, the base year (when the
CPI  100) is the period 1982–1984. The CPI is expressed as the ratio of the cost of
purchasing a standard basket of market goods in a particular year to the cost of pur-
chasing the same (or very similar) basket of goods in the base year, multiplied by 100.
For example, the CPI for 1980 was 82.4, which implies that the cost of a basket of goods
in 1980 was 82.4 percent of the cost of a similar basket of goods in 1982–1984.
Returning to our example where average incomes increased 2.345 times from 1986
and 2006, Table 3 shows that average market prices increased 1.84 times (201.6>109.6)
from 1986 to 2006. Therefore, on average, people were about 27.5 percent ((2.345 
1.84)/1.84) better off in 2006 than in 1986 in terms of how much more market goods
and services they could consume.13
In order to convert amounts measured in nominal dollars for some year into
amounts measured in real dollars for the base year (1982–1984), we simply divide by
the CPI for that year (divided by 100). For example, the average real income of people
in 1986 measured in 1982–1984 dollars was $12,468 ($13,665>1.096), and the average
real income of people in 2006 measured in 1982–1984 dollars was $15,897 ($32,049>2.016),
again showing an increase of 27.5 percent.
To convert amounts from base year dollars to, say, 2003 dollars, they are simply multi-
plied by the CPI for 2003 (divided by 100). Thus, the average real disposable incomes of
people in 1986 and 2006,expressed in 2003 dollars,were $22,941 and $29,250,respectively.
More generally, as the preceding example illustrates, to convert amounts expressed in
year a nominal dollars into amounts expressed in year b real dollars, the year a dollar
amounts are divided by the CPI for year a and multiplied by the CPI for year b.
Fortunately for analysts in the U.S.,the following government website contains an inflation
calculator that does this automatically: http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm.
Problems with Indices Based on Consumer Prices
Although the CPI is the most widely used price index in the U.S., it is subject to a
number of criticisms. Its value matters considerably to those many people who receive
149

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
payments linked to it. Many pensions, for example, are adjusted each year (usually up-
ward) according to the increase in the CPI.The return to holders of index-linked bonds
also depends on the value of the CPI.
Most academic economists believe that the CPI overstates the rate of increase in
market prices.14 In the mid-1990s, a commission set up by the Senate Finance
Committee and chaired by Michael Boskin estimated that in the United States the CPI
overestimated the increase in the cost of living by about 1 percentage point per annum,
with a range between 0.8 percentage points and 1.6 percentage points.15 As a result,
people receiving entitlements linked to the CPI were, in effect, receiving more than
was necessary to keep their purchasing power constant.
The main reason why the CPI might be biased upward is because it does not accu-
rately reflect consumers’ current purchases of goods.16,17 This is sometimes called the
commodity substitution effect. When the price of a good rises, consumers change their
spending patterns and buy similar, but less expensive, products. As this switch to less ex-
pensive goods is not immediately picked up by the CPI, it overestimates the cost of liv-
ing.18 One version of this argument is sometimes called the discount stores effect. While
government statisticians are visiting the same older,relatively expensive stores,consumers
are switching to newer, cheaper discount stores.A similar problem occurs when pharma-
ceutical patents expire. Some consumers switch to new generic drugs, which are often as
effective as patented drugs, but are considerably less expensive. These generic drugs did
not exist previously and so are not included in the sample basket. This “new goods”
TABLE 3
The U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
All Urban Consumers—All items 1982–84 = 100
Year
Average 
Annual 
CPI
% 
Change
Year
Average 
Annual 
CPI
% 
Change
1980
82.4
13.5
1995
152.4
2.8
1981
90.9
10.3
1996
156.9
3.0
1982
96.5
6.2
1997
160.5
2.3
1983
99.6
3.2
1998 
163.0
1.6
1984
103.9
4.3
1999 
166.6
2.2
1985
107.6
3.6
2000
172.2 
3.4
1986
109.6
1.9
2001 
177.1
2.8
1987
113.6
3.6
2002 
179.9
1.6
1988
118.3
4.1
2003 
184.0
2.3
1989
124.0
4.8
2004 
189.9
2.7
1990
130.7
5.4
2005 
195.3
3.4
1991
136.2
4.2
2006
201.6
3.2
1992
140.3
3.0
2007 
207.3
2.8 
1993
144.5
3.0
2008 
215.3 
3.8 
1994
148.2
2.6
2009
214.5
- 0.4
Source: ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt
150

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
problem applies also to new “high-tech” goods, such as iPads or BlackBerry phones,
which improve our quality of life and are often cheaper than older substitutes,but are also
not included in the basket. A second type of problem concerns quality improvements to
existing products. The CPI does not reflect changes in product quality, such as safer and
more reliable cars. The U.S. government has corrected the CPI for some of these prob-
lems.In 1998,it under took some major revisions that reduced the estimated bias to about
0.65 percent per annum.19
The downward bias in consumer price indices is probably not as large in other
countries as in the U.S. For example,Allan Crawford estimates that the bias was about
one-half a percentage point per annum in 1998 in Canada.20 One reason why it was
lower in Canada than the United States is that the base basket of goods has been up-
dated every 4 years in Canada versus approximately every 10 years in the United
States.Also, the Canadian index attaches a lower weight to medical services.
The United Kingdom has two main consumer-focused indices: the UK Consumer
Price Index (also abbreviated by CPI) and the Retail Prices Index (RPI).21 The UK’s
CPI is the main measure of inflation for macroeconomic policy purposes, currently
targetted at 2 percent. It is constructed in a way that is consistent across the European
Union and thereby allows inflation to be compared across the EU.The RPI is the more
familiar index, going back to 1947, and is used for indexation of pensions, state benefits,
and index-linked gilts (short-term government bonds).The weights in the UK’s CPI and
the RPI are updated annually. In general, the RPI index is considerably more variable
over time than the CPI index.
Analyzing Future Benefits and Costs in CBA
Analysts may work with project benefits and costs in either real dollars or nominal dol-
lars.Also, they may use either a real interest rate or a nominal interest rate. Care must
be taken to ensure that the units of measurement of benefits and costs are consistent
with the units of measurement of the discount rate. If benefits and costs are measured in
nominal dollars, then the analyst should use a nominal discount rate; if benefits and costs
are measured in real dollars, then the analyst should use a real discount rate. Both meth-
ods result in the same numerical answer.22
In the private sector, it is more natural to work in nominal dollars. Interest rates
and other market data are expressed in nominal dollars; pro forma income and cash
flow projections are usually made in nominal dollars; and the tax system is based on
nominal amounts. However, for the analysis of public policy projects, it is usually easier
and more intuitively appealing to express all benefits and costs in real dollars and to dis-
count using a real discount rate. Returning to our library example, it makes more sense
to think about the current and future annual cost savings to the library at today’s prices
than in future inflated prices. Similarly, it is easier to think about user benefits in terms
of the number of hours of use at today’s value per hour than to think about them in
terms of future valuations. If one expects that user benefits will increase over time, for
example, due to more people using the system or because each person uses it more
often, then the projected real annual benefits will increase.This would be immediately
clear if annual benefits were measured in real dollars. If, alternatively, annual benefits
were expressed in nominal dollars, then it would not be immediately obvious whether
increases were due to real increases in benefits or were due to inflation.
151

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
If the analyst prefers to work in real dollars, but benefits, costs, or the interest rate
are expressed in nominal dollars, then nominal dollar amounts must be converted to
real dollars. This requires an estimate of expected inflation throughout the life of the
project, denoted m. To convert future impacts (benefits or costs) measured in nominal
dollar to real dollars we use the formula for computing present values, equation (5), but
discount at rate m:23
For example, if a city could invest $10 million for five years at 7 percent, the nominal
future value would be $14.026 million; see Table 1. However, with an expected inflation
rate of 4 percent throughout the period, the real future value would be $14.026>(1.04)5
 $11.53 million.
Suppose we begin with $1 today. With a nominal interest rate, i , we would receive
$(1  i) one year from now. However, if the inflation rate is m, then $(1  i) received
one year from now would buy only as much as $(1  i)>(1m) does today, using the
formula immediately above or equation (2). The real interest rate, r , is therefore de-
fined by (1  r)  (1  i)>(1  m). Rearranging this expression gives the following
equation, which we use to convert a nominal interest rate, i, to a real interest rate, r, with
an inflation rate, m:24
(11)
For example, if the nominal interest rate is 7 percent and inflation is 4 percent, then the
real interest rate is (.07–.04)>1.04  0.0288, or 2.88 percent. Note that if the City could
invest $10 million for 5 years at a real interest rate of 2.88 percent then it would have
$10(1.0288)5  $11.53 million in real terms, the same amount we computed above. If
inflation is quite low (m is small), then the real interest rate approximately equals the
nominal interest rate minus the rate of inflation: r L i - m. For example, if the nominal
interest rate is 7 percent and inflation is 4 percent, then the real interest rate is approx-
imately 3 percent.
In order to convert benefits or costs from real dollars to nominal dollars, analysts
can use the formula for computing future values, equation (4), but compound at the rate
of inflation, m. To convert a real interest rate to a nominal interest rate, solve equation
(11) for i.
Estimates of Expected Inflation
Moving from nominal interest rates to real interest rates or from nominal dollars to
real dollars, or vice versa, requires an estimate of the expected rate of inflation
during the life of the proposed project. For convenience, some analysts use the cur-
rent annual rate of increase in the CPI, but this could be extremely inaccurate, espe-
cially for longer projects. It would be better to use one of four other alternative
methods.
r = i - m
1 + m
Real cost or benefitt = Nominal cost or benefitt
(1 + m)t
152

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
One option is to use an inflation forecast from a published source such as rep-
utable investment firm, branches of the federal government, a Federal Reserve Bank,
or the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Each
week The Economist presents the latest changes in consumer prices in many countries
and includes a forecast of the change in the current year’s consumer prices. Each
month it provides a forecast for the following year for major industrialized countries.
A second alternative is to use a readily accessible survey measure of inflationary
expectations. Three such measures are available in the United States: the Livingston
Survey of professional economists, the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers,
and the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).25 Most of these sources provide
short-term forecasts. However, SPF respondents have provided 10-year-ahead inflation
forecasts of the CPI since 1991. Dean Croushore found that the Livingston Survey and
the SPF underestimated inflation during the 1970s (by over 7 percent some years), but
more recent estimates were not biased.26 Lloyd Thomas compared the one-year
predictive performance of these three surveys and two simple naive alternatives. He
found that all of the surveys performed better than the naive models, with the median
Michigan consumer survey forecast performing best.27
Probably the best approach is to use the inflation expectations implied by the price of
inflation-indexed government bonds. This type of bond is called a Treasury Inflation
Protected Security (TIPS) in the United States,an index-linked gilt in the United Kingdom,
or a real return bond in Canada.The semi-annual coupon payments and the final principal
payment are linked to the inflation rate in each country.An estimate of expected inflation
during the life of a project is provided by taking the difference between the nominal yield
on conventional bonds that have the same term as the project and the real yield on real-re-
turn bonds with the same term.Suppose,for example,that the life of the project is 20 years.
If the nominal yield on a conventional bond that matures in 20 years is currently 6 percent,
and the real yield on a 20-year index-linked bond is 2 percent, then the expected annual
rate of inflation over this 20-year period is about 4 percent.
One advantage of this approach is that it is usually much easier to find bonds that
have the same maturity length as the project of interest than to find a survey whose in-
flationary expectations pertain to the same period as the project. A second advantage
is that by comparing inflationary expectations for one period to those for a different
period, one can estimate inflation during the intervening period. For example, if the
expected average annual inflation rate is 5 percent per annum for the next 5 years, but
only 4 percent per annum for the next 4 years, then one can compute the expected
inflation during the fifth year (9.1 percent).
A fourth approach is to infer inflationary expectations from inflation swaps.
However, we will not discuss this more complicated method as it should, in theory, pro-
vide the same estimates as using inflation-indexed bonds. Matthew Hurd and Jon
Rellen explain this method in detail and discuss discrepancies between the results ob-
tained from this method and using inflation-indexed bonds.28
A Simple Example of Handling Inflation: Garbage Trucks
A practical example illustrates the basic technique of handling inflation and moving
from market interest rates, which are nominal rates, to real interest rates. Consider a
153

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
city that uses a rural landfill to dispose of solid refuse. By adding large trucks to the
refuse fleet, the city would save $100,000 in real disposal costs during the first year
and the same amount in each successive year. The trucks would be purchased today
for $500,000 and would be sold after four years when the city will open a resource
recovery plant that will obviate the need for landfill disposal. The current market
value of four-year-old trucks of the same type and quality as the city might buy is
$200,000. The city can currently borrow money at a market interest rate of 6 per-
cent. Analysts expect that inflation will be 4 percent during the next four years.
Should the city buy the trucks? As usual, the answer should be yes if the NPV is pos-
itive. Is it?
Using Real Dollars
The annual benefits and costs in real dollars are given in column 3 of Table 4. It is as-
sumed that the annual savings are the same in real terms each year. This assumption
is based on several implicit assumptions, for example, that the amount of time opera-
tors drive the trucks remains constant and vehicle operating costs and operator
wages increase with inflation. As benefits and costs are expressed in real dollars, we
need to use a real discount rate. Since the market interest rate is 6 percent and infla-
tionary expectations are 4 percent, the real interest rate equals (.06 - .04)>1.04 
0.0192, or 1.92 percent, using equation (11). Applying this real discount rate to the
real annual benefits and costs yields an NPV equal to $66,812. Thus, as long as no al-
ternative equipment configuration offers a greater NPV, the city should purchase the
larger trucks.
Using Nominal Dollars
If analysts take the market interest rate facing the city as the appropriate discount rate,
which is a nominal rate, then they must predict future costs and benefits in nominal dol-
lars.To convert amounts in real dollars to nominal dollars, we simply inflate them by the
TABLE 4
The Net Present Value of Investment in New Garbage Trucks
Year
Event
Annual Benefits 
and Costs 
(in real dollars)
Annual Benefits 
and Costs 
(in nominal dollars)
0
Truck purchase
—500,000
—500,000
1
Annual savings
100,000
104,000
2
Annual savings
100,000
108,160
3
Annual savings
100,000
112,486
4
Annual savings
100,000
116,986
4
Truck liquidation
200,000
233,972
NPV
66,812a
66,812b
aUsing a real discount rate of 1.923 percent.
bUsing a nominal discount rate of 6 percent.
154

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
expected rate of inflation, m. The right-hand column of Table 4 shows the anticipated
benefits and costs of this project in nominal dollars, assuming a 4 percent annual infla-
tion rate. Notice that the city expects to receive $233,972 when it sells the trucks at the
end of the fourth year.This is called the nominal liquidation value of the trucks.
Discounting the benefits and costs measured in nominal dollars using a nominal
interest rate of 6 percent gives an NPV of the project equal to $66,812, as shown in the
4th column of Table 4.Thus, the two methods give exactly the same answer.
RELATIVE PRICE CHANGES
The preceding section discusses how to handle general price increases due to inflation.
It assumes relative prices do not change. This section discusses how to handle relative
price changes.
The importance of relative price changes is illustrated by a CBA of a development
project in British Columbia to supply coal to Japanese customers, which is summarized
in Table 5.29 The second, third, and fourth columns contain the proposed project’s ben-
efits, costs, and net benefits, respectively, according to a CBA prepared by the provin-
cial government of British Columbia (roughly equivalent to a state government in the
United States).30 Overall, the net benefits were estimated to be $330 million.The main
beneficiaries of this project were expected to be the Canadian National Railway
(CNR), which was the state-owned railway company at that time, and the Canadian
federal government, which would receive corporate taxes.31 The mining sector was also
expected to benefit in terms of increased profits (producer surplus). While the British
Columbian government was expected to benefit from royalties and higher corporate
taxes, it would pay for the Tumbler Ridge Branchline extension. Previously unem-
ployed workers in British Columbia and the rest of Canada were expected to enjoy
benefits worth $25 million. Notice that this analysis does not include any consumer sur-
plus benefits because it was conducted from the perspective of British Columbia, and
all of the coal would be exported.
The fifth column contains the expected net benefits to each sector if the price of
coal were to fall to 90 percent of the base price. Under this assumption, the aggregate
net benefits would fall by $264 million from $330 million to $66 million, a substantial
change.The sixth column shows the expected net benefits to each sector if the price of
coal were to fall to 90 percent of the base price and Japanese customers cut back their
purchases of coal to 90 percent of their expected orders. Under this assumption, the
overall net benefits would fall by $449 million from $330 million to -$119 million.32
Thus, fairly small changes in relative prices and quantities purchased would have a
huge impact on the NPV of this project.
Under the base case scenario the main anticipated “winners”were the CNR,the fed-
eral government of Canada and, to a lesser extent, the mining sector. If the price of coal
fell by 10 percent, then the mining sector would lose money.Also, the residents of British
Columbia would switch from being marginal “winners” to marginal “losers,” largely be-
cause royalties and corporate taxes would decrease while the costs of highways and the
Tumbler Ridge Branchline would be fixed. If the price and quantity levels were to fall to
90 percent of the anticipated levels, then the mining sector would lose badly.
155

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
TABLE 5
CBA of North East Coal Development Project
Net Benefits
Benefits 
($ million)
Costs 
($ million)
Base Case 
($ million)
90% Base
Price 
($ million)
90% Base 
Price and 
Quantity 
($ million)
Mining Sector
3,316
3,260*
56
-146
-240
Transport Sector 
Trucking
33
33
0
0
0
Canadian National Railway
504
358
146
146
121
B.C. Railway
216
202
15
15
6
Port Terminal
135
150
-15
-15
-23
Analysis and Survey
11
11
0
0
0
British Columbia**
Royalties
77
0
77
69
62
Corporate Taxes
154
0
154
125
107
Producer Surplus (Labor)
25
0
25
25
25
Environment
10
5
5
5
5
Highways***
0
88
-88
-88
-88
Tumbler Ridge Branchline
91
267
-176
-176
-185
Canada
Corporate Taxes
132
0
132
107
92
Highways, Port Navigation
0
26
-26
-26
-26
Producer Surplus (Labor)
25
0
25
25
25
Totals
4,729
4,400
330
66
-119
*Includes taxes and royalties.
**Excluding impacts included elsewhere.
***Highways, electric power, townsite.
Source: Based on W. G.Waters II,“A Reanalysis of the North East Coal Development,” (undated),Tables 2
& 3.All figures in millions of 1980 dollars, assuming a real discount rate of 10 percent with the discounting
period ending in 2003 and no terminal value.
LONG-LIVED PROJECTS AND HORIZON VALUES
Earlier we stated that analysts should discount benefits and costs using equation (8) or,
equivalently, equation (9).These equations imply that all of the impacts attributable to
the project occur during the first n years. Subsequent benefits and costs are assumed to
equal zero.
Even though a project may be finished from an engineering or administrative
perspective after a relatively short period of time, the benefits (and some costs) may
continue to flow from the project for many years. In England, for example, cars travel
on roads that were laid out by the Romans more than 18 centuries ago. The Great
Wall of China continues to generate tourism benefits even though it was built to dis-
courage particularly unwelcome “visitors” many centuries ago. The same issue also
arises in human capital investment programs, especially training and health programs.
For example, preschool training programs may benefit participants throughout their
156

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
entire lives, years after they completed the program; some benefits may even accrue
to their children. All of these impacts should be included in a CBA. However, in
practice, it is often not clear how to handle costs and benefits that arise far in the
future.
If benefits or costs occur indefinitely then the NPV can be calculated using equa-
tions (8) or (9) with n replaced with infinity,
For example, one could use:
(12)
Alternatively, one could discount net benefits (or benefits and costs) over the first k
years, the discounting horizon, and include a second term that equals the present value
of all subsequent net benefits, which is denoted PV(Hk):33
(13)
Hk is called the horizon value. It equals the present value at the end of the discount-
ing horizon of all subsequent net benefits. This amount has to be converted to its
present value at time zero. Suppose that the useful life of a highway is 20 years and
the horizon value of the highway in 20 years is $100 million. Further suppose that
the discount rate is 3.5 percent, then PV(Hk) equals $50.3 million.
It is practical to use equation (12) if it is reasonable to assume that the net benefits
are constant or grow or decline indefinitely at a constant rate; see Appendix A.
Analysts might prefer to use equation (13) if they are more confident about predicting
costs and benefits during the “near future” (the first k periods) than the “far future.”
The first k years might perhaps be the useful life of the project, and one might be able
to specify and estimate reasonably confidently the benefits and costs in each of these
years.The present value of all subsequent impacts (those in the “far future”) is reduced
to a single number.
When using horizon values, the length of the discounting period, k, is arbitrary in
theory.34 In practice, it is usually determined by the nature of each project. For exam-
ple, analysts often use a 20-year discounting period for highways because they tend to
last about 20 years before they require major repairs. Sometimes the discounting pe-
riod ends when an intervention ends and the remaining assets are liquidated. In this sit-
uation, the horizon value is sometimes referred to as the terminal value or the liquida-
tion value. Notice that many short-lived projects have horizon values. For example, the
library information project had a horizon value even though it lasted only five years.
Some projects have negative horizon values. For example, there may be costs associ-
ated with decommissioning the site used for a World Exposition, the Olympic Games,
or a nuclear power plant.
Alternative Methods for Estimating Horizon Values
A variety of methods exist for estimating horizon values, although none may be
entirely satisfactory. One method is based on simple projections, another uses scrap
NPV = a
k
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t + PV(Hk)
NPV = a
q
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t
q.
157

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
values or liquidation values, a third uses (economic) depreciated values, a fourth is
based on initial construction costs, and a fifth assumes the horizon value is zero.
Horizon Value Based on Simple Projections.
One method estimates the horizon
value based on simple extrapolations of benefits and costs (or net benefits).This is sim-
ilar to estimating equation (12), but it distinguishes between the “near future” and the
“far future.” Consider, for example, the construction of a new dike and suppose the an-
nual net benefits have been calculated for the first 35 years. It is necessary to estimate
the horizon value after 35 years. One possibility is to make an assumption about the
growth in future net benefits. Suppose analysts expect net benefits will be $1 million in
the thirty-sixth year and will grow at 1.5 percent per annum indefinitely. Using equa-
tion (A.7) in Appendix A, the formula for the present value of a perpetuity that grows
at a constant rate, and an interest rate of 8 percent, the horizon value at the end of the
thirty-fifth year is $1>(0.080 - 0.015) million  $15.38 million.The present value of this
horizon value is $1.04 million.
There is strong evidence that, for medium- to long-term periods, simple forecasting
models predict better than more complicated models. Thus, this method may estimate
the NPV of the project at least as well as more complicated direct estimation of equa-
tion (10). For many government projects, especially training programs, it is reasonable
to assume that the annual net benefits decay at a constant rate after some date.
Horizon Value Based on Salvage Value or Liquidation Value.
The remaining assets
may be sold at the end of some project, and the value of these assets may be used as the
horizon value (also called the terminal value, scrap value, residual value, liquidation
value, or salvage value in this context). For example, a school board may buy some
buses, operate them for a specific period of time, and then sell them at their market
value.This liquidation value may be used as the horizon value.
This method is appropriate when no other social costs or benefits arise beyond the
discounting period, when there is a well-functioning market in which to value the asset,
and when the market value reflects the asset’s social value (i.e., there are no externali-
ties). For example, the library information system example assumes that the net social
benefits of the equipment at liquidation is $20,000 (plus dismantling costs). However, if
the equipment could be used in schools where its social value (less new setup costs)
would be more than $20,000 (plus dismantling costs), then a higher horizon value
should be used.
In practice, it is difficult to determine the liquidation value of some government as-
sets. Clearly, there is often no market for a used highway, and even if there were, the mar-
ket value would probably not reflect the discounted value of future net social benefits.
Horizon Value Based on Its Depreciated Value.
The third method recognizes that the
current value of an asset equals the present value of its future net benefits. However,
instead of estimating the stream of future benefits and costs, this method estimates the
value of an asset by subtracting its depreciation from its initial value, where its depre-
ciation is calculated based on empirical market studies of similar assets.
The value of most assets decline at a geometric rate; that is, the value in one year is
a constant proportion of the value in the previous year. The depreciation rate is high
158

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
for assets with short lives, such as tires, motor vehicles, and medical equipment, and is
low for assets with long lives, such as steam turbines, warehouses, railroad structures,
and water systems. Barbara Fraumeni describes the methodology used by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA) for calculating depreciation and presents a comprehen-
sive summary of the depreciation rates and service lives of many assets.35
Of course, one should make adjustments where appropriate. For example, if the
asset will be used more heavily or maintained more poorly than normal, then one
should raise the depreciation rate and reduce the horizon value. One should also en-
sure that the depreciated value reflects the anticipated future use of the asset. For ex-
ample, an aircraft may have a fairly high depreciated value, but if it is in mothballs and
nobody will fly it, then the social benefits may be much less, possibly zero.
It is important to emphasize that we are referring to real (i.e., economic) depre-
ciation, not accounting depreciation. There is often a substantial difference between
the two. Economic depreciation concerns the decline in the economic value of an
asset over time. In contrast, accounting depreciation, also called capital cost al-
lowance (CCA), is often largely determined by tax or reporting requirements. The
tax authority may allow companies to write off all of an investment in one year take
(100 percent CCA), even though the investment itself may yield benefits that extend
over decades.Thus, the depreciated accounting value may bear no relationship to the
actual economic usefulness of an asset. Accounting depreciation should never be in-
cluded as a cost (expense) in CBA.
Horizon Value Based on the Initial Construction Cost.
This method estimates the
horizon value as a fraction of the initial construction cost. In the highway example, for
example, the horizon value of the highway was assumed to equal 75 percent of the ini-
tial construction cost: 0.75  $338.1 million  $253.58 million.36 However, the 75 per-
cent figure is quite arbitrary. It may bear no relationship to the future net social bene-
fits.Thus this method, while simple, is not intuitively appealing.
Setting the Horizon Value Equal to Zero.
A final method chooses a fairly long dis-
counting period and ignores subsequent benefits and costs. In effect, this is a special
case of the first method we discussed—it is equivalent to assuming that after k periods
the net benefits in each subsequent period are zero.This is often a reasonable assump-
tion in private-sector decision making because project evaluation requires only the
consideration of private benefits and costs that may approach zero fairly quickly. The
social impacts of government projects, however, may last many years.Analysts may in-
correctly omit important benefits or costs if they use a time horizon that is too short.
Reprise of Horizon Values
The analyst must decide on both the discounting period and the method for calculating
the horizon value.These may be interdependent. If, for example, the analyst is going to
assume the horizon value is zero, then he or she should use a relatively long discount-
ing period. If the analyst is using one of the other methods, then it makes sense to dis-
count over the project’s useful life. Analysts may try to check their results by calculat-
ing the horizon value in several different ways. Because of uncertainty concerning the
159

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
actual magnitude of the horizon value, sensitivity analysis is often conducted by select-
ing alternative horizon values and seeing how this affects the findings.
A further consideration is that for some very long-lived projects analysts should
use time-declining discount rates.We now turn to that issue.
TIME-DECLINING DISCOUNTING
Thus far this chapter has assumed that the discount rate is constant, that is, it does not
vary over time.This is reasonable for most projects because most projects have “short”
discount periods. However, some projects, including those that affect climate change,
have impacts that last a very long time. In such circumstances many authors have pro-
posed the use of time-declining discount rates. We suggest that for long-lived projects,
benefits and costs should be discounted at 3.5 percent for the first 50 years, at 2.5 per-
cent for years 50–100, 1.5 percent for years 100–200, 0.5 percent for years 200–300, and
0.0 percent for years more than 300 in the future.
It is important to understand how this works. Suppose that a project has a cost of
$1 million today and a benefit of $1 billion in 400 years time. Assuming continuous
discounting, the PV of the benefit would be $1 billion [(e-0.035*50) * (e-0.025(100-50)) *
(e-0.015(200-100)) * (e-0.005(300-200))], which is approximately $6,737,945, yielding a pro-
ject NPV of $5,737,947. Note that we discount at 0 percent from year 400 to 300. We
then discount at 0.5 percent from year 300 to 200, then take the resulting value in year
200 and discount it back to year 100 at 1.5 percent, then take the resulting value in year
100 and discount it back to year 50 at 2.5 percent and so on. This is equivalent to ap-
plying a single, constant rate of 1.26 percent over 400 years.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS IN DISCOUNTING
This chapter assumes that the rate (or rates with time declining discounting) that
should be used to discount future benefits and costs is known. However, there are
significant differences of opinion about the correct value of the social discount rate.
Also, there may be some uncertainty about the magnitude of the horizon value.
Because the discount rate and the horizon value often determine the sign of the
NPV and, therefore, whether a project should be adopted, analysts frequently con-
duct sensitivity analyses with respect to these two parameters.
Varying the Discount Rate and the Horizon Value
The most straightforward way to perform sensitivity analysis is to vary each parame-
ter about which there is uncertainty and recalculate the NPV. This is easy to do on a
spreadsheet. If the policy recommendations are robust (i.e., the NPV remains either
positive or negative) under all plausible values of the parameters, we can have
greater confidence that the recommendations are valid.
160

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
Figure 6 plots the NPV of the library project against the discount rate for two dif-
ferent horizon values, one of $20,000 and the other $0. As the discount rate increases,
the NPV of the project decreases. This common pattern arises for investment projects
whose costs occur early and whose benefits occur late.A higher discount rate results in
a lower NPV because the future benefits are discounted more than the more immedi-
ate costs.
The top curve corresponds to a horizon value of $20,000. If the discount rate
equals 7 percent, then the NPV equals $17,276, as shown in Figure 4 and Table 2. The
internal rate of return (IRR), or breakeven discount rate, is 8.9 percent, which can be
read off the graph where the NPV  0 or found exactly by trial and error.37 As long as
the horizon value equals $20,000 and the appropriate discount rate is less than 8.9 per-
cent, the project offers a positive NPV and should be adopted; if the appropriate dis-
count rate is more than 8.9 percent, then the project has a negative NPV and should
not be adopted.
If the horizon value equals zero, then the curve shifts down by the discounted
value of $20,000.As this value decreases as the discount rate increases, the curve shifts
down less for high interest rates than for low interest rates. Thus, it is flatter than the
curve with a horizon value of $20,000. Although the NPV is smaller at every interest
rate if the horizon value equals zero, it is still positive as long as the discount rate is less
than 7.35 percent. Most analysts agree that the appropriate real social discount rate is
less than 7.35 percent. Consequently, we can be reasonably confident that if the project
goes ahead it will have a positive NPV.
Of course, we could also compute the breakeven horizon value—the horizon value
at which the NPV equals zero.Assuming the appropriate discount rate is 7 percent, the
project would break even if the present value of the horizon value were -$3,016 and,
therefore, if the horizon value were -$4,230.This implies the city would just break even
on the project if it cost $4,230 to dismantle the project at the end.
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
NPV
($ '000)
IRR
Horizon value = $20,000
Horizon value = $0
Discount rate (%)
FIGURE 6
Sensitivity Analysis: NPV of the Library Information System as a
Function of the Discount Rate and the Horizon Value
161

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
Using the Internal Rate of Return as a Decision Rule
As mentioned above, the discount rate at which the NPV is zero is called the 
internal rate of return (IRR). The IRR of the library information system project is
8.9 percent, which implies that this project is equivalent to a project of similar size
that provides annual benefits equal to 8.9 percent of the original amount for five
years (the length of the project) and returns all of the initial invested capital at the
end of the fifth year.
The IRR may be used for selecting projects when there is only one alternative to the
status quo. If the IRR of a project is greater than the appropriate social discount rate,
then one should proceed with the project; if the IRR is less than the appropriate social
discount rate, then one should not proceed with it. In this example, the library should
proceed with the project because the IRR of 8.9 percent is greater than the appropriate
social discount rate of 7 percent.The basic idea is that society should only invest in pro-
jects that earn a higher return than could be earned by investing the resources else-
where. In other words, the appropriate discount rate should reflect the opportunity
cost of the funds.
There are, however, a number of potential problems with using the IRR for deci-
sion making. First, it may not be unique; that is, there may be more than one discount
rate at which the NPV is zero.This problem may arise when annual net benefits change
more than once from positive to negative (or vice versa) during the discounting period.
Second, IRRs are percentages (i.e., ratios), not dollar values.Therefore, they should not
be used to select one project from a group of projects that differ in size.This scale prob-
lem always arises with the use of ratios, including benefit-cost ratios, cost-effectiveness
ratios, and IRRs. Nonetheless, if it is unique, the IRR conveys useful information to de-
cision makers or other analysts who want to know how sensitive the results are to the
discount rate.38
CONCLUSION
This chapter presents the main issues concerning the mechanics of discounting. It as-
sumes that the appropriate discount rate is known. In fact, determination of the appro-
priate discount rate to use in CBA is a somewhat contentious issue.
162

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
APPENDIX A
Shortcut Methods for Calculating the Present 
Value of Annuities and Perpetuities
In many practical situations the benefits or costs
of a project can be treated as annuities or perpe-
tuities. If so, there are some relatively easy ways
to calculate the present values.
An annuity is an equal, fixed amount re-
ceived (or paid) each year for a number of
years. A perpetuity is an annuity that continues
indefinitely. Suppose, for example, that in order
to finance a new state highway, a state govern-
ment issues $100 million worth of 30-year
bonds with an interest rate of 7 percent paid
annually.
The annual interest payments of $70,000 are
an annuity. If at the end of each 30-year period
the state government refinances the debt by is-
suing another 30-year bond that also has an in-
terest rate of 7 percent, then the annual interest
payments of $70,000 would continue indefi-
nitely, which is a perpetuity.
Sometimes an annuity grows or declines at a
constant rate. Equations (6) or (7) could be used
to compute its present value, but this can be ex-
tremely time consuming. Computing the PV of a
perpetuity in this way can be even more time
consuming. Fortunately, some simple formulas
enable analysts to compute PVs of annuities or
perpetuities easily.
Present Value of an Annuity
The library information system problem con-
tains two annuities: the annual benefits of
$100,000 per year for five years, which we refer
to as annuity A1, and the annual costs of $20,000
per year for five years, which we refer to as an-
nuity A2. From Figure 4 we see that the present
value of A1 is $410,020 and the present value of
A2 is $82,004. But there is an easier way to ob-
tain the present values.
Using equation (6), the present value of an
annuity of $A per annum (with payments re-
ceived at the end of each year) for n years with
interest at i percent is given by:
This is the sum of n terms of a geometric se-
ries with the common ratio equal to 1>(1  i).
Consequently,
(A.1)
where
(A.2)
The term an
i , which equals the present value of
an annuity of $1 per year for n years when the
interest rate is i, is called an annuity factor.
Tables of annuity factors are contained in most
finance textbooks and are also built into many
calculators and computer spreadsheets.
Returning to our library example, the pre-
sent value of annuity A1 computed using equa-
tions (A.1) and (A.2) is:
Similarly,
PV(A2) = $20,000 * 4.1002 = $82,004
 PV(A1) = $410,020
 PV(A1) = $100,000 * 4.1002
 PV(A1) = $100,000 * 1 - (1 + 0.07)-5
0.07
an
i = 1 - (1 + i)-n
i
PV = Aan
i
PV = a
n
t=1
A
(1 + i)t
163

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
Although this example dealt with only a five-year
annuity, it is easy to compute the present value of
annuities that extend over much longer periods.
When working with annuities it is important
to get the timing of the cash flows exactly right.
Equation (A.1) assumes that the benefits or
costs occur at the end of each period (year), with
the first payment occurring one year from now.
This type of annuity is called an ordinary annu-
ity. An annuity due is an annuity with payments
that occur at the beginning of each period
(year). Many spreadsheets allow one to easily
compute the present values of ordinary annu-
ities and of annuities due. If the spreadsheet (or
calculator) computes only ordinary annuities,
then one can calculate the PV of an annuity due
for n years by computing the PV of an ordinary
annuity for n-1 years and adding the value of
the initial payment or receipt made today.
A deferred annuity is an annuity whose first
payment is deferred until after the first year.
Suppose, for example, a government agency is
considering refinancing some of its debt.
Currently, it is scheduled to make debt pay-
ments of $150,000 per year for seven years with
the first payment in three years.Assuming inter-
est rates are 8 percent, what is the present value
of this obligation? A time line for this problem is
shown in Figure A-1.The first step is to treat the
seven annual payments as an ordinary annuity
and compute its present value as of the begin-
ning of year 2 using equations (A.1) and (A.2)
or a calculator. This PV is $780,956. The second
step, recognizing that this amount is the value of
an ordinary annuity in two years’ time, is to dis-
count the $780,956 back two years to obtain the
present value of $669,543.
It is informative to note that the present
value of an annuity decreases as the interest rate
increases, and vice versa. This is a partial expla-
nation for why bond prices rise as interest
rates fall.
Another important observation is that when
there is a relatively constant annuity stream,
annuity payments received after about the twenti-
eth year add little to the present value when inter-
est rates are 10 percent or higher. Thus, private
companies are often reluctant to make very
long-term investments such as reforestation.
Present Value of a Perpetuity
A perpetuity is an annuity that continues indefi-
nitely. Taking the limit of equation (A.2) as n
goes to infinity, the annuity factor reduces to 1>i,
if i > 0. Consequently, the present value of an
amount, denoted by $A, received (at the end of)
each year in perpetuity is given by:
(A.3)
To provide some intuition for this formula, sup-
pose that a municipality has an endowment of
PV = A
i   if i 7 0
8
Time
(years)
Benefits
($)
Costs
($)
2
4
6
10
7
1
0
3
5
9
780.96
PV = 669.54
150
150
150
150
150
150
150
150
FIGURE A-1
Present Value of $150 per Year (in Thousands) for Seven Years, 
Starting in Three Years
164

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
$10 million. If interest rates are 6 percent, then
this endowment will provide annual interest
payments of $600,000 indefinitely. More gener-
ally, if the municipality has an endowment of X
and if the interest rate is i, then the perpetual
annual income from the endowment, denoted
by A, is given by A  iX. Rearranging this
equation shows the present value of the perpet-
ual annuity is given by X  A>i, which is equa-
tion (A.3).
Equation (A.3) is easy to apply. For exam-
ple, the present value of a perpetuity of $150,000
per year when interest rates are 8 percent is:
When interest rates are 10 percent, the present
value of a perpetuity is especially easy to calcu-
late: it simply equals the perpetuity multiplied
by 10. For example, the present value of a perpe-
tuity of $150,000 per year is $1,500,000 when in-
terest rates are 10 percent.
The Present Value of an Annuity that
Grows or Declines at a Constant Rate
Sometimes a project’s benefits (or costs) grow at
a constant rate. Let Bt denote the annual bene-
fits in year t. If the annual benefits grow after the
first year at a constant rate, g, then the benefits
in year t will be:
(A.4)
Under these circumstances, and if i > g, then the
present value of the total benefits—the stream
over n years—can be shown to be:1
(A.5)
where  
is defined by equation (A.2) and:
(A.6)
i 7 g
i0 = i - g
1 + g,
an
i0
PV(B) =
B1
(1 + g)
 an
i0
Bt = Bt-1(1 + g) = B1(1 + g)t-1 t = 2, Á , n
PV = $150,000
0.08
= $1,875,000
Comparing equation (A.1) with (A.5) shows
that the PV of a benefit stream that starts at B1
in year 1 and grows at a constant rate g for n - 1
additional years, when the interest rate is i,
equals the PV of an annuity of B1>(1  g) for n
years when the interest rate is i0, where i0 is
given by equation (A.6).
To illustrate how to calculate the present
value of a stream of benefits that grows at a con-
stant rate, return again to the library example.
Suppose we now assume that, due to increased
use, the annual use benefits grow at 2 percent
per annum after the first year (and, as before, i 
0.07). From equation (A.5), the present value of
this stream of benefits equals the present value
of an annuity of $100,000>1.02  $98,039 per
annum for five years, discounted at the following
rate:
which amounts to $425,636.2 In contrast, when
the annual benefits are constant ($100,000>yr.),
the present value equals $410,020, a difference
of $15,614. This increase would be carried
straight to the bottom line because the NPV
would also increase by $15,614; in fact, the NPV
almost doubles from $17,276 to $32,890.This ex-
ample illustrates that even quite small growth
rates can have large impacts on NPVs.
If the growth rate is small, then B1>(1 + g)
B1 and i0
i - g. Therefore, from equation
(A.5), the present value of a benefits stream
that starts at B1 and grows at rate g for n - 1 ad-
ditional years approximately equals the pre-
sent value of an annuity of B1 for n years dis-
counted at rate i - g, as long as i > g. This
approximation makes it clear that when bene-
fits grow at a positive rate, the annuity is dis-
counted at a lower rate, which will yield a
higher PV. On the other hand, if the benefits
are declining at a constant rate, then the annu-
ity is discounted at a higher rate, which will
yield a lower PV.
To illustrate this approximation, the present
value of a stream of benefits that starts at


i0 = i - g
1 + g = 0.07 - 0.02
1.02
= 0.049
165

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
$100,000 per year and grows at 2 percent per
annum for four additional years with i  0.07 is
approximately equal to the present value of an
annuity of $100,000 per year for five years dis-
counted at i - g  5 percent, which equals
$432,948.3 This value is slightly higher than
the correct amount of $425,634, but it is within
2 percent of the right answer and it is easier to
calculate.
Equation (A.5) only holds if the interest
rate exceeds the growth rate: i > g. If i
g, then
it should not be used. Importantly, though, it can
always be used if g is negative, that is, if benefits
decline at a constant rate. Of course, equation
(A.5) pertains to costs that change at a constant
rate as well as to benefits that change at a con-
stant rate.
…
Present Value of Benefits (or Costs) that
Grow or Decline at a Constant Rate in
Perpetuity
If the initial benefits,B1,grow indefinitely at a con-
stant rate g and if the interest rate equals i,then the
PV of the benefits is found by taking the limit of
equation (A.5) as n goes to infinity, which gives:
(A.7)
Some finance students may recognize this model
as the Gordon growth model, which is also called
the dividend growth model. This model can be
used to value a stock that yields a constant flow of
dividends that grow at a constant rate.As before,
this formula holds only if i > g.
PV(B) =
B1
i - g  if i 7 g
EXERCISES
1.
A highway department is considering building a temporary bridge to cut travel time during
the three years it will take to build a permanent bridge.The temporary bridge can be put up
in a few weeks at a cost of $740,000.At the end of three years, it would be removed and the
steel would be sold for scrap.The real net costs of this would be $81,000. Based on estimated
time savings and wage rates, fuel savings, and reductions in risks of accidents, department
analysts predict that the benefits in real dollars would be $275,000 during the first year,
$295,000 during the second year, and $315,000 during the third year. Departmental regula-
tions require use of a real discount rate of 4 percent.
a.
Calculate the present value of net benefits assuming that the benefits are realized at
the end of each of the three years.
b.
Calculate the present value of net benefits assuming that the benefits are realized at
the beginning of each of the three years.
c.
Calculate the present value of net benefits assuming that the benefits are realized in
the middle of each of the three years.
d.
Calculate the present value of net benefits assuming that half of each year’s benefits
are realized at the beginning of the year and the other half at the end of the year.
e.
Does the temporary bridge pass the net benefits test?
2.
A government data processing center has been plagued in recent years by complaints from
employees of back pain. Consultants have estimated that upgrading office furniture at a net
cost of $425,000 would reduce the incidence and severity of back injuries, allowing the cen-
ter to avoid medical care that currently costs $68,000 each year.They estimate that the new
furniture would also provide yearly benefits of avoided losses in work time and employee
comfort worth $18,000. The furniture would have a useful life of five years, after which it
would have a scrap value equal to 10 percent of its initial net cost. The consultants made
their estimates of avoided costs assuming that they would be treated as occurring at the be-
ginning of each year.
166

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
In its investment decisions, the center uses a nominal discount rate of 9 percent and an
assumed general inflation rate of 3 percent. It expects the inflation rate for medical care will
run between 3 and 6 percent but is uncertain as to the exact rate. In other words, it is uncer-
tain as to whether the cost of medical care will inflate at the same rate as other prices or rise
3 percentage points faster. Should the center purchase the new furniture?
3.
A town’s recreation department is trying to decide how to use a piece of land. One option is
to put up basketball courts with an expected life of 8 years.Another is to install a swimming
pool with an expected life of 24 years. The basketball courts would cost $180,000 to con-
struct and yield net benefits of $40,000 at the end of each of the 8 years.The swimming pool
would cost $2.25 million to construct and yield net benefits of $170,000 at the end of each of
the 24 years. Each project is assumed to have zero salvage value at the end of its life. Using
a real discount rate of 5 percent, which project offers larger net benefits?
4.
The environmental protection agency of a county would like to preserve a piece of land as a
wilderness area.The current owner has offered to lease the land to the county for 20 years in
return for a lump sum payment of $1.1 million, which would be paid at the beginning of the
20-year period. The agency has estimated that the land would generate $110,000 per year in
benefits to hunters, bird watchers, and hikers. Assume that the lease price represents the so-
cial opportunity cost of the land and that the appropriate real discount rate is 4 percent.
a.
Assuming that the yearly benefits, which are measured in real dollars, accrue at the end
of each of the 20 years, calculate the net benefits of leasing the land.
b.
Some analysts in the agency argue that the annual real benefits are likely to grow at a
rate of 2 percent per year due to increasing population and county income. Recalculate
the net benefits assuming that they are correct.
5.
Imagine that the current owner of the land in the previous exercise was willing to sell the
land for $2 million. Assuming this amount equaled the social opportunity cost of the land,
calculate the net benefits if the county were to purchase the land as a permanent wildlife
refuge. In making these calculations, first assume a zero annual growth rate in the $110,000
of annual real benefits; then assume that these benefits grow at a rate of 2 percent per year.
6.
Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended New City is considering building a recreation
center.The estimated construction cost is $12 million with annual staffing and maintenance
costs of $750,000 over the 20-year life of the project. At the end of the life of the project,
New City expects to be able to sell the land for $4 million, though the amount could be as low
as $2 million and as high as $5 million. Analysts estimate the first-year benefits (accruing at
the end of the year of the first year) to be $1.2 million. They expect the annual benefit to
grow in real terms due to increases in population and income. Their prediction is a growth
rate of 4 percent,but it could be as low as 1 percent and as high as 6 percent.Analysts estimate
the real discount rate for New City to be 6 percent, though they acknowledge that it could be
a percentage point higher or lower.
a.
Calculate the present value of net benefits for the project using the analysts’ predictions.
b.
Investigate the sensitivity of the present value of net benefits to alternative predictions
within the ranges given by the analysts.
NOTES
1. T-bill is an abbreviation of Treasury bill.A T-bill
is a short-term bond issued by the Treasury
Department of the U.S. government.
2. PV  $10,500,000>1.05  $10,000,000.
3. At the end of the first year, one would have FV 
X(1  i).At the end of the second year, one
would have FV  [X(1  i)](1  i)  X(1  i)2,
and so on.
4. There is a handy rule for computing approximate
future values called the “rule of 72.” Capital
roughly doubles when the interest rate (expressed
in percentage points) times the number of years
167

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
equals seventy-two: 100  i  n  72. For exam-
ple, if the interest rate is 8 percent, then your capi-
tal doubles in 72>8  9 years. Similarly, in order to
double your capital in 10 years, you need an inter-
est rate of at least 72>10  7.2 percent.
5. The following equation summarizes the relation-
ship between discounting and compounding:
where PV is the present value and FV is the fu-
ture value.
6.
7. If interest is compounded continuously, then the
present value of $Y received in n years time with
interest rate i is given by:
where 
is the base of the 
natural logarithm, which equals 2.71828 to five
decimal places. For example, the present value
of $100,000 received in five years with interest at
7 percent, compounded continuously, is:
8. If project A were two-thirds the length of project
B, then the analyst should compare three project
As back-to-back with two project Bs back-to-back.
9. The difference between the NPV of five back-to-
back cogeneration plants and the NPV of only
one cogeneration plant is $10.94 million. In ef-
fect, we would have arrived at the same figure if
we had evaluated building only one cogeneration
plant, but assigned a horizon value with a present
value of $10.94 million to this project.
10. The annuity factor for the hydroelectric project is
the present value of an annuity of $1 per year for
75 years using an interest rate of 8 percent, which,
using equation (A.2) or a calculator, equals 12.461.
Similarly, the annuity factor for the cogeneration
project equals the present value of $1 per annum
for 15 years at an interest rate of 10 percent.
PV = $100,000
e0.07*5
= $100,000
1.419
= $70,469
e =
lim
n: q a1+ 1
nb
n
PV = Y
ein
= a
n
t=0
Bt - Ct
(1 + i)t = a
n
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t
NPV = a
n
t=0
Bi
(1 + i)t - a
n
t=0
Ct
(1 + i)t
PV =
FV
(1 + i)n
11. Bureau of Labor Statistics, November 2007,“The
U.S. Economy to 2016: Slower Growth as
Boomers Begin to Retire,” Monthly Labor
Review,Table 4, available at http://www.bls.gov/
emp/empmacro04.htm.
12. The most recent CPI figures for the United
States as well as CPI figures back to 1913 are
available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics at
its web site: www.bls.gov.The most recent CPI
figures for Canada are available from Statistics
Canada at its web site: www.statcan.ca. For long,
term historical Canadian data, see F. H. Leacy,
ed., Historical Statistics of Canada (Ottawa,
Ontario: Statistics Canada, 1983). For the latest
statistics for the United Kingdom see the Office
for National Statistics’ web site at http://www.
statistics.gov.uk/default.asp.Another useful
website for the U.S. is www.bls.gov/data/
inflation_calculator.htm, which provides.
13. An alternative way to obtain this result follows.A
person with an average disposable income of
$13,665 in 1986 would be able to purchase the
same basket of goods in 2006 as a person on an
income of $25,136 ($13,665  201.6>109.6).
Because the average disposable income was
$32,049 in 2006, we can conclude that effective
(i.e., real) average disposable incomes increased
by ($32,049 - $25,136)>$25,136  0.275, or 27.5
percent over this period.
14. Some economists argue that the CPI understates
inflation; see, for example, John Williams’
Shadow Government Statistics at http://www.
shadowstats.com/.
15. See Michael J. Boskin, Ellen R. Dulberger,
Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches and Dale 
W. Jorgenson, Toward a More Accurate Measure
of the Cost of Living, Final Report to the 
Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory
Committee to Study the Consumer Price Index.
(Washington, D.C.: Senate Finance Committee,
1996).
16. For more detail see Brent R. Moulton,“Bias in the
Consumer Price Index:What Is the Evidence?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4) 1996,
159–177 and Allan Crawford,“Measurement
Biases in the Canadian CPI:An Update,” Bank 
of Canada Review Spring 1998, 39–56.
17. For practical reasons the CPI is a Laspeyres
index, which uses the quantities of each good
consumed in a previous period to compute ex-
penditures in the current period.
168

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
18. See Zvi Griliches and Iain Cockburn,“Generics
and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price Indexes,”
American Economic Review 84(5) 1994, 1213–1232.
19. For more information about the 1998 CPI revi-
sions see http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpi1998.htm.
20. See Allan Crawford,“Measurement Biases in the
Canadian CPI:An Update.”
21. There are three main differences between the CPI
and the RPI.The first concerns the goods.The CPI
covers the full range of consumer purchases made
by households, excluding council tax and most
owner-occupier housing costs, such as mortgage
interest payments, which are included in the RPI.
Other items included in the RPI but not in the CPI
include vehicle excise duty and trade union sub-
scriptions. Items included in the CPI but not in the
RPI include unit trust and stockbroker charges,
overseas students’ university fees and accommoda-
tion costs.The second key difference is that the CPI
has a broader population base: the RPI (unlike the
CPI) excludes households in the top 4 percent of
income and some pensioners.The third key differ-
ence is the weights: the CPI weights are based on
household expenditure from the National
Accounts, while the RPI uses the Expenditure and
Food Survey. Fourth, the aggregation formulae are
different. For more information see Rob Pike,
Measuring inflation, Office for National Statistics,
available at http://www.statistics.gov.uk/elmr/07_08/
downloads/ELMR_Jul08_Pike.pdf.
22. Recall that the NPV for a project is given by
equation (8), and suppose that these benefits, Bt,
and costs, Ct, are in nominal dollars and i is the
nominal interest rate. Let bt denote real benefits,
ct denote real costs, and suppose the rate of infla-
tion is m, then, using equation (4), Bt  bt(1  m)t
and Ct  ct(1  m)t. Consequently,
Now, to simplify, set 
which gives:
As we discuss later, we can interpret r as the real
interest rate.
23. The expected CPI in t periods in the future equals
(1  m)t times the current CPI.Therefore, dividing
NPV = a
n
t=0
bt - ct
(1 + r)t
1>(1 + r) = (1 + m)>(1 + i),
NPV = a
n
t=0
Bt - Ct
(1 + i)t = a
n
t=0
(bt - ct)(1 + m)t
(1 + i)t
the future amounts measured in nominal dollars
by (1  m)t, in accordance with equation (5), is
exactly the same as the method implied at the
end of the previous subsection for converting
amounts expressed in year b dollars into amounts
expressed in year a dollars, namely: dividing by
the expected CPI in t periods in the future and
multiplying by the CPI for the current year.
24. This relationship is known as the Fisher effect.
An alternative derivation follows. Suppose that
we invest $1 for a year, the real rate of return is r
and the rate of inflation during the year is m,
then the we would have $(1  r)(1 m) in a
year.Thus, the nominal rate of return i is:
Rearranging this expression also gives 
equation (11).
25. For the Livingston survey data and more informa-
tion about this survey see http://www.phil.frb.org/
research-and-data/real-time-center/livingston-
survey/. For more information about the SPF see
http://www.phil.frb.org/research-and-data/real-
time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/,
and for more information about the University of
Michigan’s Survey of Consumers see http://
research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/MICH/.
26. Dean Croushore, 2006,“An Evaluation of
Inflation Forecasts from Surveys Using Real-
Time Data,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadeplphia,Working Paper 06-19.
27. Lloyd B.Thomas Jr.,“Survey Measures of
Expected U.S. Inflation,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13(4) 1999, 125–144.
28. See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
quarterlybulletin/qb060101.pdf.
29. An initial study was prepared by the government
of British Columbia,“A Benefit-Cost Analysis of
the North East Coal Development,” (Victoria,
B.C.: Ministry of Industry and Small Business,
1982). Subsequent analysis was conducted by 
W.W.Waters, II,“A Reanalysis of the North East
Coal Development,” (Working paper, University
of British Columbia, undated).
30. The initial study made shadow price adjustments
for foreign exchange earnings.These are ex-
cluded from Table 5 because, according to Bill
Waters, the author of the re-analysis, they are
probably inappropriate.
(1 + i) = (1 + r)(1 + m)
i = (1 + r)(1 + m) - 1, or
169

Discounting Benefits and Costs in Future Time Periods
31. Like many studies, this study ignores the mar-
ginal excess tax burden.
32. This scenario of declining prices and declining
quantities sold is quite plausible for this project.
The major Japanese customers were simultane-
ously encouraging development of Australian
and other sources. If these alternative sources
came on line at the same time, there would be a
worldwide excess supply, internationally deter-
mined coal prices would fall, and demand for
B.C. coal would fall.
33. Comparing equation (13) with equation (12) im-
plies:
34. For example,
35. Barbara M. Fraumeni,“The Measurement of
Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts,” Survey of Current Business
77(7) 1997, 7–23.
36. This is the value 20 years after the highway was
completed, which was 21.5 years after the deci-
sion to build the highway in 1986. Consequently,
 = a
30
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t + PV(H30)
 NPV = a
20
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t + PV(H20)
PV(Hk) = NPV - a
k
t=0
NBt
(1 + i)t =
a
q
t=k+1
NBt
(1 + i)t
according to the method, the present value of the
horizon value was $53.3 million.
37. By definition, the internal rate of return can be
found by setting the left-hand side of equations
(8) or (9) equal to zero and solving for i. In prac-
tice, this can be quite difficult. It is usually easier
to enter the data into a spreadsheet and use trial
and error.
38. If expenditures equal social costs and if the total
amount of expenditures is constrained, then
ranking projects on the basis of the IRR crite-
rion may maximize the total NPVs. For example,
if three projects cost a total of $1 billion and, in
addition, each has a higher IRR than a fourth
project that costs $1 billion by itself, then the first
three projects will also have a larger combined
NPV than the NPV of the fourth project. In ef-
fect, the IRR provides an estimate of the average
annual net benefit per unit of (constrained) ex-
penditure. Problems with ranking project in
terms of their IRRs only arise when the total ex-
penditure on the projects with the highest IRRs
does not exactly equal the total amount avail-
able. Even if the first, second, and third projects
have higher IRRs than the fourth project, the
fourth project may still have a higher NPV than
the three smaller projects combined if its total
cost is larger (but still no more than $1 billion).
In any constrained project choice setting, the op-
timal set of projects can be found by using linear
programming.
APPENDICES NOTES
1.
Setting 
implies 
Therefore,
2. Alternatively, substituting equation (A.2) into
equation (A.5) gives the following formula for
computing the PV of the benefits:
PV(B) =
B1
(1 + g)a1 - (1 + i0)-n
i0
b
PV(B) = a
n
t=1
B1
(1 + g)a
1
(1 + i0)tb =
B1
(1 + g)an
i0
(1 + g)>(1 + i).
1>(1 + i0) =
i0 = (i - g)>(1 + g)
PV(B) = a
n
t=1
B1(1 + g)t-1
(1 + i)t
= a
n
t=1
B1
(1 + g)a1 + g
1 + i b
t
Therefore, for this example:
3. That is:
= $432,948
PV(B) = a
n
t=1
B1
(1 + i - g)t = a
5
t=1
$100,000
(1 + 0.07 - 0.05)t
= $98,039 * 4.3415 = $425,636
PV(B) =
$100,000
(1 + 0.02) * 1 - (1 - 0.049)-5
0.049
170

Dealing with Uncertainty: Expected
Values, Sensitivity Analysis, and the
Value of Information
C
ost-benefit analysis often requires us to predict the future. Whether it is desir-
able to begin a project depends on what we expect will happen after we have
begun. But, as mere mortals, we rarely are able to make precise predictions
about the future. Indeed, in many situations analysts can be certain that circumstances
largely beyond their clients’ control, such as epidemics, floods, bumper crops, or fluctu-
ations in international oil prices, will greatly affect the benefits and costs that would be
realized from proposed policies. How can analysts reasonably take account of these
uncertainties in CBA?
In this chapter, we consider three topics relevant to uncertainty: expected value as
a measure reflecting risks, sensitivity analysis as a way of investigating the robustness of
net benefit estimates to different resolutions of uncertainty, and the value of informa-
tion as a benefit category for CBA and as a guide for allocating analytical effort.
Expected values take account of the dependence of benefits and costs on the occur-
rence of specific contingencies, or “states of the world” to which analysts are able to as-
sign probabilities of occurrence. Sensitivity analysis is a way of acknowledging uncer-
tainty about the values of important parameters in our predictions—it should be a
component of almost any CBA. When analysts have opportunities for gaining addi-
tional information about costs or benefits, they may be able to value the information
by explicitly modeling the uncertainty inherent in their decisions. A particular type of
information value, called quasi-option value, is relevant when assessing currently avail-
able alternatives that have different implications for learning about the future.
EXPECTED VALUE ANALYSIS
One can imagine several types of uncertainty about the future. At the most profound
level, one might not be able to specify the full range of relevant circumstances that may
occur. Indeed, the human and natural worlds are so complex that one cannot hope to
anticipate every possible future circumstance. Yet, in many situations of relevance to
one’s daily life and public policy, it is reasonable to characterize the future in terms of
a number of distinct contingencies. For example, in deciding whether to take an um-
brella to work, one might reasonably divide the future into two contingencies: Either it
Form Chapter 7 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
171

Dealing with Uncertainty
will or will not rain sufficiently to make the umbrella useful. Of course, other relevant
contingencies can be imagined as well—it will be a dry day, but one may or may not be
the victim of an attempted mugging in which the umbrella would prove valuable in
self-defense! Yet, if these additional contingencies are very unlikely, it is often reason-
able to leave them out of one’s model of the future. Modeling the future as a set of rel-
evant contingencies involves yet another narrowing of uncertainty: How likely are
each of the contingencies? If one is willing to assign probabilities of occurrence to each
of the contingencies, then uncertainty about the future becomes a problem of dealing
with risk. In relatively simple situations, risk can be readily incorporated into CBA
through expected value analysis.
Contingencies and their Probabilities
Modeling uncertainty as risk begins with the specification of a set of contingencies that,
within the simplified model of the world being employed, are exhaustive and mutually
exclusive. Contingencies can be thought of as possible events, outcomes, or states of the
world such that one and only one of the relevant set of possibilities will actually occur.
What makes a set of contingencies the basis of an appropriate model for conducting a
CBA of a policy?
One important consideration is that the contingencies capture the full range of
likely variation in net benefits of the policy. For example, in evaluating an oil stockpile
for use in the event of an oil price shock sometime in the future, one would want to
consider at least two contingencies: There never will be an oil price shock (a situation
in which the policy is likely to result in net losses), and there will be a major price shock
(a situation in which the policy is likely to result in net gains).
Another consideration is how well the contingencies represent the possible out-
comes between the extremes. In some circumstances, the possible contingencies can be
listed exhaustively so that they are fully representative. More often, however, they
sample an infinite number of possibilities. In these circumstances, each contingency can
be thought of as a scenario, which is just a description of a possible future. Do the spec-
ified contingencies provide a sufficient variety of scenarios to convey the possible
futures adequately? If so, then the contingencies are representative.
Figure 1 illustrates the representation of a continuous scale with discrete con-
tingencies. The horizontal axis gives the number of inches of summer rainfall in an
agricultural region.The vertical axis gives the net benefits of a water storage system,
which increase as the amount of rainfall decreases. Imagine that an analyst repre-
sents uncertainty about rainfall with only two contingencies: “excessive” and “defi-
cient.” The excessive contingency assumes 22 inches of rainfall, which would yield
zero net benefits from the storage system. The deficient contingency assumes zero
inches of rainfall, which would yield $4.4 million in net benefits. If the relationship
between rainfall and net benefits follows the straight line labeled A, and all the rain-
fall amounts between 0 and 22 are equally likely, then the average of net benefits
over the full continuous range would be $2.2 million. If the analyst assumed that
each of the contingencies were equally likely, then the average over the two contin-
gencies would also be $2.2 million, so that using two scenarios would be adequately
representative.1
172

Dealing with Uncertainty
22
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
Inches of summer rainfall
A
B
Deficient
Normal
Excessive
Millions of dollars of net benefits
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10
FIGURE 1
Representativeness of Contingencies
Now imagine that the net benefits follow the curved line labeled B. Again assum-
ing that all rainfall amounts between 0 and 22 inches are equally likely, the average of
net benefits over the full continuous range would only be about $1.1 million, so that
using only two contingencies would grossly overestimate the average net benefits from
the storage system.2 Adding “normal” as a contingency that assumes 11 inches of rain-
fall and averaging net benefits over all three contingencies yields net benefits of $1.6
million, which is more representative than the average calculated with two contingen-
cies but still considerably larger than the $1.1 million calculated over the full continu-
ous range. Even more contingencies are desirable. For example, moving to five equally
spaced contingencies gives an average of $1.3 million, which is much closer to the aver-
age over the continuous range.3
Once we have specified a tractable but representative set of contingencies, the
next task is to assign probabilities of occurrence to each of them.To be consistent with
the logical requirement that the contingencies taken together are exhaustive and mu-
tually exclusive, the probabilities that we assign must each be nonnegative and sum to
exactly 1. Thus, if there are three contingencies, C1, C2, and C3, we must assign corre-
sponding probabilities p1, p2, and p3 such that p1  p2  p3  1.
The probabilities may be based solely on historically observed frequencies;
on subjective assessments by clients, analysts, or other experts based on a variety 
173

Dealing with Uncertainty
of information and theory; or on both. For example, return to the contingencies in 
Figure 1: agriculturally “excessive,” “normal,” and “deficient” precipitation in a river
valley for which a water storage system has been proposed. The national weather ser-
vice may be able to provide data on average annual rainfall over the last century that
allows an analyst to estimate the probabilities of the three levels of precipitation from
their historical frequencies. If such data were not available, then the analyst would
have to base the probabilities on expert opinion, comparison with similar valleys in the
region for which data are available, or some other subjective assessment. As such sub-
jective assessments are rarely made with great confidence, it is especially important to
investigate the sensitivity of the results to the particular probabilities chosen.
Calculating the Expected Value of Net Benefits
The specification of contingencies and their respective probabilities allows us to cal-
culate the expected net benefits of a policy.We do so by first predicting the net benefits
of the policy under each contingency and then taking the weighted average of these
net benefits over all the contingencies, where the weights are the respective probabil-
ities that the contingencies occur. Specifically, for n contingencies, let Bi be the bene-
fits under contingency i, Ci be the costs under contingency i, and pi be the probability
of contingency i occurring. Then the expected net benefits, E[NB], are given by the
formula:
(1)
which is just the expected value of net benefits over the n possible outcomes.4
E[NB] = p1(B1 - C1) + Á + pn(Bn - Cn)
Being explicit about contingencies, their proba-
bilities, and their consequences can help struc-
ture complex decision problems. Consider the
following letter that President Abraham
Lincoln wrote to Major General George B.
McClellan on February 3, 1862:
My dear Sir:
You and I have distinct,and different plans for a
movement of the Army of the Potomac—yours to
in be down the Chesapeake, up the Rappahannock
to Urbana, and across land to the terminus of the
Railroad on the York River—, mine to move di-
rectly to a point on the Railroad South West of
Manassas.
EXHIBIT 1
Source: John G. Nicolay and John Hay, eds., Abraham Lincoln: Complete Works,Volume Two (New York:The Century
Company, 1894), 120.
If you will give me satisfactory answers to the
following questions, I shall gladly yield my plan to
yours.
First. Does not your plan involve a greatly
larger expenditure of time and money than mine?
Second. Wherein is a victory more certain by
your plan than mine?
Third. Wherein is a victory more valuable by
your plan than mine?
Fourth. In fact, would it not be less valuable, in
this, that it would break no great line of the
enemy’s communications, while mine would?
Fifth. In case of disaster, would not a safe re-
treat be more difficult by your plan than by mine?
Yours truly,Abraham Lincoln
174

Dealing with Uncertainty
When facing complicated risk problems, analysts often find it useful to model them
as games against nature. A game against nature assumes that nature will randomly, and
nonstrategically, select a particular state of the world.The random selection of a state of
the world is according to assumed probabilities. The selection is nonstrategic in the
sense that nature does not alter the probabilities of the states of the world in response to
the action selected by the analysts. A game against nature in normal form has the fol-
lowing elements: states of nature and their probabilities of occurrence, actions available
to the decision maker facing nature, and payoffs to the decision maker under each com-
bination of state of nature and action.
Table 1 shows the analysis of alternatives for planetary defense against asteroid
collisions as a game against nature in normal form. It considers three possible states of
nature over the next 100 years: exposure of Earth to collision with an asteroid larger
than one kilometer in diameter, which would have enough kinetic energy to impose
severe regional or even global effects on society (10 on the Torino Scale); exposure of
Earth to collision with an asteroid smaller than one kilometer but larger than 20 me-
ters in diameter, which would have severe local or regional effects on society (8 or 9 on
the Torino Scale); and no exposure of Earth to an asteroid larger than 20 meters in
diameter.The game shows three actions: build a forward-based asteroid defense, which
would station nuclear devices sufficiently deep in space to give a good possibility of
In their evaluation of alternative government oil
stockpiling programs in the early 1980s, Glen
Sweetnam and colleagues at the U.S.Department
of Energy modeled the uncertainty surrounding
oil market conditions with five contingencies:
slack market—oil purchases for the U.S. stock-
pile of up to 1.5 million barrels per day (mmb/d)
could be made without affecting the world oil
price; tight market—oil purchases increase the
world price at the rate of $3.60 per mmb/d;
minor disruption—loss of 1.5 mmb/d to the
world market (e.g., caused by a revolution in an
oil-exporting country); moderate disruption—
loss of 6.0 mmb/d to the world market (e.g.,
caused by a limited war in the Persian Gulf);
major disruption—loss of 12.0 mmb/d to the
world market (e.g., caused by a major war in the
Persian Gulf). For each of the 24 years of their
EXHIBIT 2
Sources: Adapted from Glen Sweetnam,“Stockpile Policies for Coping with Oil-Supply Disruptions,” in George Horwich
and Edward J. Mitchell, eds., Policies for Coping with Oil-Supply Disruptions (Washington, D.C.:American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research, 1982), 82–96. On the role of the model in the policy-making process, see Hank C.
Jenkins-Smith and David L.Weimer,“Analysis as Retrograde Action:The Case of Strategic Petroleum Reserves,” Public
Administration Review 45(4) 1985, 485–494.
planning horizon, they assumed that the prob-
abilities of each of the contingencies occurring
depended only on the contingency that oc-
curred in the previous year. For each year,
they calculated the social surplus in the U.S.
oil market conditional on each of the five mar-
ket contingencies and change in the size of the
stockpile.
The model they constructed allowed them to
answer the following questions: For any current
market condition and stockpile size, what
change in stockpile size maximizes the present
value of expected net benefits? How much
storage capacity should be constructed? How
fast should it be added? The model and the an-
swers it provided were influential in policy de-
bates concerning expansion of the U.S. stock-
pile, the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
175

Dealing with Uncertainty
TABLE 1
A Game against Nature: Expected Values of Asteroid Defense Alternatives
State of Nature
Exposure to a 
Collision with 
an Asteroid 
Larger Than 
One Kilometer 
in Diameter
Exposure to a 
Collision with an
Asteroid between 
20 Meters and 
1 Kilometer 
in Diameter
No Exposure to
Collision with an
Asteroid Larger 
Than 20 Meters 
in Diameter
Probabilities of states of nature
(over next century)
.001
.004
.995
Actions (alternatives)
Payoffs (net costs in billions of 2000 dollars)
Expected
Value
Forward-based asteroid defense
5,060
1,060
60
69
Near-Earth asteroid defense
10,020
2,020
20
38
No asteroid defense
30,000
6,000
0
54
Choose near-Earth asteroid defense: Expected net cost  $38 billion.
their timely use in diverting asteroids from collision courses with Earth; build a near-
Earth asteroid defense, which would be less expensive but not as effective as the
forward-based defense; and build no asteroid defense.
Although actually estimating the payoffs for this game would be a monumental
and controversial analytical task, Table 1 displays some hypothetical figures. The pay-
offs, shown as the present value of net costs over the next century, range from $30 tril-
lion (Earth is exposed to a collision with an asteroid larger than one kilometer in di-
ameter in the absence of any asteroid defense) to $0 (Earth is not exposed to collision
with an asteroid larger than 20 meters and no defense system is built). Note that esti-
mating the costs of a collision between Earth and an asteroid would itself involve ex-
pected value calculations that take account of size, composition, and point of impact of
the asteroid. The $30 trillion figure is about half the world’s annual sum of gross do-
mestic products.
The last column of Table 1 shows expected values for each of the three alternatives.
The expected value for each alternative is calculated by summing the products of its pay-
off conditional on states of nature with the probabilities of those states. For example, the
expected value of payoffs (present value of net costs) for no asteroid defense is:
Similar calculations yield $69 billion for forward-based asteroid defense and $38
billion for near-Earth asteroid defense.As the maximization of expected net benefits is
equivalent to minimizing expected net costs, the most efficient alternative is near-
Earth asteroid defense. Alternatively, one could think of near-Earth asteroid defense
as offering expected net benefits of $16 billion relative to no defense ($54 billion in
expected net costs minus $38 billion in expected net costs equals $16 billion in ex-
pected net benefits), while forward-based asteroid defense offers negative $15 billion
in expected net benefits relative to no defense ($54 billion in expected net costs minus
$69 billion in expected net costs equals negative $15 billion in expected net benefits).
(0.001)($30,000 billion) + (0.004)($6,000 billion) + (0.995)($0) = $54 billion
176

Dealing with Uncertainty
In CBA, it is common practice to treat expected values as if they were certain
amounts. For example, imagine that a perfect asteroid defense system would have a pre-
sent value cost of $100 billion under each of the states of nature. In this case, assuming
accurate prediction of costs, the $100 billion would be certain because it does not de-
pend on which state of nature actually results. CBA generally treats a certain amount
such as this as fully commensurate with expected values, even though the latter will not
actually result in its expected value. In other words, although the expected net cost of no
asteroid defense is $54 billion, assuming an accurate prediction of payoffs, the actually
realized net cost will be $30 trillion, $6 trillion, or $0. If the perfect defense system cost
$54 billion, then CBA would rank it and no defense as equally efficient.
Treating expected values as if they were certain amounts implies that the person
making the comparison has preferences that are risk neutral.A person has risk neutral
preferences when he or she is indifferent between certain amounts and lotteries with
the same expected payoff. A person is risk averse if he or she prefers the certain
amount and is risk seeking if he or she prefers the lottery. Buying insurance, which of-
fers a lower expected payoff than the certain premium charged, indicates risk aversion;
buying a lottery ticket, which offers a lower expected value than its price, indicates risk
seeking.
Consider the appropriateness of treating expected values and certain equivalents
as commensurate (e.g., risk neutrality). Doing so is not conceptually correct in measur-
ing willingness to pay in circumstances in which individuals face uncertainty.
Nevertheless, in practice, treating expected values and certain amounts as commensurate
is generally reasonable when either the pooling of risk over the collection of policies, or
the pooling of risk over the collection of persons affected by a policy, will make the actu-
ally realized values of costs and benefits close to their expected values. For example, a
policy that affects the probability of highway accidents involves reasonable pooling of
risk across many drivers (some will have accidents, others will not) so that realized val-
ues will be close to expected values. In contrast, a policy that affects the risk of asteroid
collision does not involve pooling across individuals (either everyone suffers from the
global harm if there is a collision or no one does if there is no collision), so that the re-
alized value of costs may be very far from their expected value. Such unpooled risk
may require an adjustment to expected benefits called option value.
Decision Trees and Expected Net Benefits
The basic procedure for expected value analysis, taking weighted averages over contin-
gencies, can be directly extended to situations in which costs and benefits accrue over
multiple years, as long as the risks in each year are independent of the realizations of
risks in previous years. Consider, for example, a CBA of a dam with a 20-year life.
Assume that the costs and benefits of the dam depend only on the contingencies of
below-average rainfall and above-average rainfall in the current year. Additionally, if
the analyst is willing to make the plausible assumption that the amount of rainfall in
any year does not depend on the rainfall in previous years, then the analyst can simply
calculate the present value of expected net benefits for each year and calculate the pre-
sent value of this stream of net benefits in the usual way.
177

Dealing with Uncertainty
The basic expected value procedure cannot be so directly applied when either the
net benefits accruing under contingencies or the probabilities of the contingencies de-
pend on the contingencies that have previously occurred. For example, above-average
rainfall in one year may make the irrigation benefits of a dam less in the next year be-
cause of accumulated ground water. In the case of a policy to reduce the costs of earth-
quakes, the probability of a major earthquake may change each year depending on the
mix of earthquakes that occurred in the previous year.
Such situations require a more flexible framework for handling risk than basic ex-
pected value analysis. Decision analysis provides the needed framework.5 Though it
takes us too far afield to present decision analysis in any depth here, we sketch its gen-
eral approach and present simple illustrations that demonstrate its usefulness in CBA.
A number of book-length treatments of decision analysis are available for those who
wish to pursue this topic in more depth.6
Decision analysis can be thought of as a sequential, or extended form, game against
nature. It proceeds in two basic stages. First, one specifies the logical structure of the
decision problem in terms of sequences of decisions and realizations of contingencies
using a diagram, called a decision tree, that links an initial decision (the trunk) to final
outcomes (branches). Second, using backward induction, one works from final out-
comes back to the initial decision, calculating expected values of net benefits across
contingencies and pruning dominated branches (i.e., eliminating branches with lower
expected values of net benefits).
Consider a vaccination program against a particular type of influenza that involves
various costs.7 The costs of the program result from immunization expenditures and
possible adverse side effects; the benefits consist of the adverse health effects that are
avoided if an epidemic occurs.This flu may infect a population over the next two years
before sufficient immunity develops worldwide to stop its spread. Figure 2 presents a
simple decision tree for a CBA of this vaccination program. The tree should be read
from left to right to follow the sequence of decisions, denoted by 
, and random
selections of contingencies, denoted by ( ). The tree begins with a decision node, the
square labeled 0 at the extreme left.The upper bough represents the decision to imple-
ment the vaccination program this year; the lower bough represents the decision not to
implement the program this year.
Upper Bough: The Vaccination Program.
Follow the upper bough first. If the pro-
gram is implemented, then it will involve direct administrative costs, Ca, and the costs
of adverse side effects, such as contracting the influenza from the vaccine itself, suf-
fered by those who are vaccinated, Cs. Note that Cs, like most of the other costs in this
example, is itself an expected cost based on the probability of the side effect, the cost to
persons suffering the side effect, and the number of persons vaccinated. The solid ver-
tical line on the bough can be thought of as a toll gate at which point the program costs,
Ca  Cs, are incurred.A chance node, represented by a circle, appears next. Either the
influenza infects the population (the upper branch, which occurs with probability P1
and results in costs Ce|v, where the subscript should be read as “epidemic occurs given
that the vaccination program has been implemented”), or the influenza does not infect
the population (the lower branch, which occurs with probability 1  P1 and results in
zero costs at that time). If the influenza does occur, then the population will be immune
178

Dealing with Uncertainty
First year
0
0
gate
gate
Ca + Cs
Ca + Cs
0
1
2
Vaccination
program
(V )
No vaccination
program
(NV )
Assume:
Ca + Cs > P2(Ce|nv – Ce|v)
Second year
P1
1 – P1
1 – P1
P2Ce|v /(1 + d )
P2Ce|nv /(1 + d )
P1
P2
P2
P2
1 – P2
1 – P2
1 – P2
0
0
0
Ce|nv
Ca + Cs + P2Ce|v
P2Ce|nv
P2Ce|v
Ce|nv
Ce|v
Ce|v
Ce|v
FIGURE 2
Decision Tree for Vaccination Program Analysis
in the next year. Thus, the upper branch does not continue. If the influenza does not
occur, then there is still a possibility that it might occur in the next year. Therefore, the
lower branch continues to the second year, where the square labeled 1 notes the begin-
ning of the second year. It leads directly to another chance node that specifies the two
contingencies in the second year: The influenza infects the population (the upper sub-
branch, which occurs with probability P2 and results in costs Ce|v), or the influenza does
not infect the population (the lower subbranch, which occurs with probability 1  P2 and
results in zero costs).8 We assume that P2 is known at the time of the initial decision.9
Lower Bough: No Vaccination Program.
We now return to the initial decision node
and follow the lower bough representing no vaccination program in the first year.
Initially there is no cost associated with this decision. A chance node follows with two
branches: Either the influenza infects the population (the lower branch, which occurs
with probability P1 and results in costs Ce|nv), or the influenza does not infect the pop-
ulation (the upper branch, which occurs with probability 1  P1 and results in zero
costs).10 If the influenza does occur, then there is no need to consider the next year.
If it does not occur, then the tree continues to decision node 2: Either implement the
179

Dealing with Uncertainty
vaccination program in the second year (the upper subbranch crossing the gate where
program costs Ca  Cs are incurred) or do not implement it (the lower subbranch).
If the program is implemented, then a chance node occurs: The influenza infects
the population (the lower twig, which occurs with probability P2 and results in costs
Ce|v), or the influenza does not infect the population (the upper twig, which occurs with
probability 1  P2 and results in zero costs). We complete the tree by considering the
parallel chance node following the decision not to implement the program in the sec-
ond year: The influenza infects the population (the lower twig, which occurs with prob-
ability P2 and results in costs Ce|nv), or the influenza does not infect the population (the
upper twig, which occurs with probability 1  P2 and results in zero costs).
Solving the Decision Tree.
To solve the decision problem, we work from right to left,
replacing chance nodes with their expected costs and pruning off parallel nodes that
are dominated. Consider the chance node following decision node 1. Its expected cost,
calculated by the expression P2Ce|v  (1  P2)0, equals P2Ce|v.
Now consider the chance nodes following decision node 2.The lower chance node,
following a decision not to implement the vaccination program, has an expected cost of
P2Ce|nv.The upper chance node has an expected cost of P2Ce|v, to which must be added
the certain payment of program costs so that the full expected cost of implementing
the vaccination program in the second year is Ca  Cs  P2Ce|v. We can now compare
the expected cost of the two possible decisions at node 2: P2Ce|nv versus Ca  Cs 
P2Ce|v. To illustrate, assume that program costs are greater than the expected cost
reduction from the vaccine, that is, Ca  Cs > P2(Ce|nv  Ce|v), then P2Ce|nv is smaller
than Ca  Cs  P2Ce|v so that not implementing the program dominates implementing
it. (If this were not the case, then the lower branch would be unequivocally dominated
by the upper branch.11) We can now prune off the upper subbranch. If we reach deci-
sion node 2, then we know that we can obtain expected second-year costs of P2Ce|nv.
At decision node 0 the expected costs of implementing the vaccination program
(i.e., following the upper bough) consist of direct costs plus the expected costs of the
following chance node, which now has the payoffs Ce|v if there is an epidemic and the
discounted expected value of node 1, P2Ce|v/(1  d) if there is not an epidemic. Note
that because this latter cost occurs in the second year, it is discounted using rate d.
Thus, the present value of expected costs from implementing the vaccination program
is given by:
(2)
where the last term incorporates the expected costs from the second year.
The expected costs of not implementing the vaccination program are calculated in
the same way:The payoff if there is not an epidemic becomes the discounted expected
costs from decision node 2, P2Ce|nv>(1  d); the payoff if there is an epidemic is still
Ce|nv.Therefore, the expression:
(3)
gives the present value of expected costs of not implementing the program.
E[Cnv] = P1Ce|nv + (1 - P1)P2Ce|nv>(1 + d)
E[Cv] = Ca + Cs + P1Ce|v + (1 - P1)P2Ce|v>(1 + d)
180

Dealing with Uncertainty
The final step is to compare the present values of expected costs for the two possi-
ble decisions at node 0. We prune the bough with the larger present value of expected
costs.The remaining bough is the optimal decision.
As an illustration, suppose that we have gathered data suggesting the following
values for parameters in the decision tree: P1  .4, P2  .2, d  .05, Ce|v  .5Ce|nv (the
vaccination program cuts the costs of influenza by half), Ca  .1Ce|nv (the vaccination
costs 10 percent of the costs of the influenza), and Cs  .01Ce|nv (the side-effect costs
are 1 percent of the costs of the influenza). For these values, E[Cv]  .367Ce|nv and
E[Cnv]  .514Ce|nv. Therefore, the vaccination program should be implemented in the
first year because E[Cv] < E[Cnv].
Calculating Expected Net Benefits of the Vaccination Program.
Returning explicitly
to CBA, we can recognize the benefits of the vaccination program as the costs it avoids.
Thus, the present value of expected net benefits of the vaccination program is simply
E[Cnv]  E[Cv], which in the numerical illustration presented in the preceding para-
graph equals 0.147Ce|nv.
Extending Decision Analysis.
Decision analysis can be applied to both public- and
private-sector issues, and it can be used to structure much more complicated analyses
than the CBA of the vaccination program. Straightforward extensions include more
than two alternatives at decision nodes, more than two contingencies at chance nodes,
more than two periods of time, and different probabilities of events in different peri-
ods. For example, analyses of the U.S. oil stockpiling program typically involve trees so
large that they can only be fully represented and solved by computers.12 Even in less
complex situations, however, decision analysis can be very helpful in showing how risk
should be incorporated into the calculation of expected net benefits.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Whether or not we structure a CBA explicitly in terms of contingencies and their prob-
abilities, we always face some uncertainty about the magnitude of the impacts we pre-
dict and the values we assign to them. Our basic analysis usually submerges this uncer-
tainty by using our most plausible estimates of these unknown quantities. These
estimates comprise what is called the base case.The purpose of sensitivity analysis is to
acknowledge the underlying uncertainty. In particular, it should convey how sensitive
predicted net benefits are to changes in assumptions. If the sign of net benefits does not
change when we consider the range of reasonable assumptions, then our results are
robust, and we can have greater confidence in them.
Large numbers of unknown quantities, the usual situation in CBA, make the brute
force approach of looking at all combinations of assumptions unfeasible. For example,
the vaccination program analysis, which we further develop in the next section, in-
volves 17 different uncertain numerical assumptions. If we looked at just three differ-
ent values for each assumption, there would still be over 129 million different combi-
nations of assumptions to consider.13 Even if we could compute net benefits for all
181

Dealing with Uncertainty
these combinations, we would still face the daunting task of sorting through the results
and communicating them in an effective way.
Instead, we illustrate three more manageable approaches to doing sensitivity
analysis. First, we demonstrate partial sensitivity analysis: How do net benefits change
as we vary a single assumption while holding all others constant? Partial sensitivity is
most appropriately applied to what the analyst believes to be the most important and
uncertain assumptions. It can be used to find the values of numerical assumptions at
which net benefits equal zero, or just break even. Second, we consider worst- and best-
case analysis: Does any combination of reasonable assumptions reverse the sign of net
benefits? Analysts are generally most concerned about situations in which their most
plausible estimates yield positive net benefits, but they want to know what would hap-
pen in a worst case involving the least favorable, or most conservative, assumptions.
Third, we present Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis: What distribution of net benefits re-
sults from treating the numerical values of key assumptions as draws from probability
distributions? The mean and variance, or spread, of the distribution of net benefits con-
vey information about the riskiness of the project.
A Closer Look at the Vaccination Program Analysis
We illustrate these techniques by considering a more detailed specification of the costs
relevant to the decision analysis of the hypothetical vaccination program presented in
Figure 2. This program would vaccinate some residents of a county against a possible
influenza epidemic.14
Consider the following general description of the program.Through an advertising
and outreach effort by its Department of Health, the county expects to be able to re-
cruit a large fraction of older residents in poor health who are at high mortality risk
from influenza, and a much smaller fraction of the general population, for vaccination.
As the vaccine is based on a live virus, some fraction of those vaccinated will suffer an
adverse reaction that, in effect, converts them to high-risk status and gives them in-
fluenza, a cost included in the side effects of the vaccine, Cs.As the vaccine does not al-
ways confer immunity, often because it is not given sufficiently in advance of the expo-
sure to the influenza virus, its effectiveness rate is less than 100 percent. Everyone who
contracts the influenza must be confined to bed rest for a number of days.Analysts can
value this loss as the average number of hours of work lost times the average wage rate
for the county, although this procedure might overestimate the opportunity costs of
time for older persons and underestimate the cost of the unpleasantness of the in-
fluenza symptoms for both younger and older persons.They can place a dollar value on
the deaths caused by the influenza by multiplying the number of expected deaths times
the dollar value of life. The various numerical assumptions for the analysis appear in
Table 2. Notice, for example, that the base case value used for each saved life is $3 mil-
lion.That is, it is assumed that people make decisions about how much value they place
on changes in risks of death as if they valued their lives at $3 million.
The benefits of vaccination arise through two impacts. First, those effectively vac-
cinated are immune to the influenza.Thus, the program targets persons with high mor-
tality risk because they benefit most from immunity. Second, through what is known as
the herd immunity effect, a positive externality, vaccinated persons reduce the risks of
182

Dealing with Uncertainty
TABLE 2
Base-Case Values for Vaccination Program CBA
Parameter
Value [Range]
Comments
County Population (N)
380,000
Total population in the county
Fraction High Risk (r)
.06 
[.04, .08]
One-half population over age 64
Low-Risk Vaccination 
Rate (vl)
.05 
[.03, .07]
Fraction of low-risk persons vaccinated
High-Risk Vaccination 
Rate (vh)
.60 
[.40, .80]
Fraction of high-risk persons vaccinated
Adverse Reaction 
Rate ()
.03 
[.01, .05]
Fraction vaccinated who become high risk
Low-Risk Mortality 
Rate (ml)
.00005 
[.000025, .000075]
Mortality rate for low-risk infected
High-Risk Mortality 
Rate (mh)
.001 
[.0005, .002]
Mortality rate for high-risk infected
Herd Immunity Effect ()
1.0 
[.5, 1.0]
Fraction of effectively vaccinated who 
contribute to herd immunity effect
Vaccine Effectiveness 
Rate (e)
.75 
[.65, .85]
Fraction of vaccinated who develop 
immunity
Hours Lost (t)
24 
[18, 30]
Average number of work hours lost to 
illness
Infection Rate (i)
.25 
[.20, .30]
Infection rate without vaccine
First-Year Epidemic 
Probability (p1)
.40
Chance of epidemic in current year
Second-Year Epidemic 
Probability (p2)
.20
Chance of epidemic next year
Vaccine Dose Price (q)
$9/dose
Price per dose of vaccine
Overhead Cost (o)
$120,000
Costs not dependent on number vaccinated
Opportunity Cost 
of Time (w)
$12/hour
Average wage rate (including benefits) in
the county
Value of Life (L)
$3,000,000
Assumed value of life
Discount Rate (d)
.05
Real discount rate
Number High-Risk 
Vaccinations (Vh)
13,680
High-risk persons vaccinated: vhrN
Number Low-Risk 
Vaccinations (Vl)
17,860
Low-risk persons vaccinated:
vl (1  r)N
Fraction Vaccinated (v)
.083
Fraction of total population 
vaccinated: rvh  vl (1  r)
infection to those not vaccinated—this is the reason why some low-risk persons are
recruited for vaccination to increase the total fraction of the population that is vac-
cinated.15 These two effects cause the expected costs of the epidemic with vaccina-
tion, Ce|v, to be less than the expected costs of the epidemic without the vaccination
program, Ce|nv.
183

Dealing with Uncertainty
TABLE 3
Formulas for Calculating the Net Benefits of Vaccination Program
Variable
Value 
(millions 
of dollars)
Formula
Ca
0.404
o  (Vh  Vl)q
Cs
3.111
(Vh  Vl) (wt  mhL)
Ce|nv
57.855
i[rN(wt  mhL)  (1  r)N(wt  mlL)]
Ce|v
36.014
(i  ve){(rN  eVh)(wt  mhL)  [(1  r)N  eVl](wt  mlL)}
ECv
22.036
Ca  Cs  p1Ce|v  (1  p1) p2 Ce|v>(1  d)
ECnv
29.754
p1Ce|nv  (1  p1)p2Ce|nv>(1  d)
E[NB]
7.718
ECnv  ECv
Table 3 relates the specific numerical assumptions in Table 2 to the parameters in
Figure 2. From Table 3, we see that the direct program costs, Ca, depend on the over-
head (i.e., fixed) costs, o, and cost per vaccination, q, times the number of vaccinations
given (Vh  Vl).The costs of side effects, Cs, depend on the adverse reaction rate, , the
number vaccinated, and the cost per high-risk infection, wt  mhL, where wt is the op-
portunity cost of lost labor and mhL is the cost of loss of life.The epidemic’s costs with-
out the vaccination program, Ce|nv, depend on the infection rate, i, the number of high-
risk susceptibles, rN, the number of low-risk susceptibles, (1  r)N, and the costs per
high- and low-risk infections. Finally, the cost of the epidemic with the vaccination pro-
gram, Ce|v, depends on the postvaccination infection rate, i  ve, the number of high-
risk individuals remaining susceptible, rN  eVh, the number of low-risk individuals re-
maining susceptible, (1  r)N  eVl, and the costs per low- and high-risk infections.
Working through these formulas in Table 3 yields expected net benefits equal to $7.718
million for the base-case assumptions presented in Table 2.
Partial Sensitivity Analysis.
An important assumption in the analysis is the probabil-
ity that the epidemic occurs. In the base case, we assume that the probability of the
epidemic in the next year, given no epidemic in the current year, p2, is one-half the
probability of the epidemic in the current year, p1. To investigate the relationship be-
tween net benefits and the probability of epidemic, we vary p1 (and, hence, p2) holding
all other base-case values constant. Specifically, we vary p1 from 0 to 0.5 by increments
of 0.05. We thereby isolate the marginal partial effect of changes in probability on net
benefits.
The results of this procedure are displayed as the line labeled L  $3 million in
Figure 3.This label reminds us of another base-case assumption, the value of life equals
$3 million, which we vary next. Because the equations underlying the calculation of net
benefits were embedded in a spreadsheet on a personal computer, it was easy to gen-
erate the points needed to draw this line by simply changing the values of p1 and
recording the corresponding net benefits.
As expected, this line is upward sloping: the higher the probability of the epidemic,
the larger the net benefits of the vaccination program. Note that for values of p1 less
than about 0.11, net benefits become negative (i.e., it lies below the solid horizontal
184

Dealing with Uncertainty
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
0
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
Probability of epidemic in current year
Expected net benefits
(millions)
.30
.35
.40
.45
.50
L = $3 million
L = $1 million
Breakeven probability
for L = $3 million
FIGURE 3
Expected Net Benefits of Vaccination
line). In other words, if we think that the probability of the epidemic in the current year
is less than 0.11, and we are willing to accept the other base-case assumptions, then we
should not implement the program.The probability at which net benefits switch sign is
called the breakeven value. Finding and reporting breakeven values for various para-
meters is often a useful way to convey their importance.
The line labeled L  $1 million repeats the procedure changing the base-case assump-
tion of the value of life from $3 million per life to $1 million per life.16 The graph thus con-
veys information about the impact of changes in two assumptions: Each line individually
gives the marginal impact of epidemic probability; looking across lines conveys informa-
tion about the impact of changes in the assumed value of life.As this illustration suggests,
we can easily consider the sensitivity of net benefits to changing two assumptions at the
same time by constructing families of curves in a two-dimensional graph. Although com-
puters make it feasible to produce graphs that appear three-dimensional, the added infor-
mation that these graphs convey is sometimes difficult to interpret.
Figure 4 considers one more example of partial sensitivity analysis. It repeats the
investigation of the marginal impact of epidemic probability on net benefits for two
different assumptions about the size of the herd immunity effect, .The upper curve is
for the base case that assumes a full herd immunity effect (  1). The lower curve as-
sumes that only one half of the effect occurs (  .5), perhaps because the population
does not mix sufficiently uniformly for the simple model of herd immunity assumed in
the base case to apply. (Both cases return to the base-case assumption of $3 million per
life saved.) Note that the breakeven probability rises to over 0.16 for the weaker herd
immunity effect. Of course, we could instead give primary focus to the herd immunity
effect by graphing net benefits against the size of the herd immunity effect, holding
epidemic probability constant.
185

Dealing with Uncertainty
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
0
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
Probability of epidemic in current year
Expected net benefits
(millions)
.30
.35
.40
.45
.50
Half herd immunity
Full herd immunity
FIGURE 4
Expected Net Benefits of Vaccination
A thorough investigation of sensitivity ideally considers the partial marginal im-
pacts of changes in each of the important assumptions. However, there is a “chicken
and egg” problem: Identifying the important assumptions often cannot be done before
actually doing the sensitivity analysis because importance depends on the marginal re-
sponse of net benefits to changes in assumptions, as well as the plausible range of the
assumptions. In the analysis of the vaccination program, for example, partial sensitivity
analysis might well be warranted for most of the assumptions presented in Table 2.
Worst- and Best-Case Analysis.
The base-case assumptions, which generally assign
the most plausible numerical values to unknown parameters, produce an estimate of
net benefits that we think is most representative. In the vaccination program example,
these assumptions yield fairly large positive net benefits. We can put a plausible lower
bound on net benefits by considering the least favorable of the plausible range of val-
ues for each of the assumptions. In this way, we can calculate a pessimistic prediction of
net benefits.Also, we can calculate an optimistic prediction of net benefits by using the
most favorable assumptions.As we discuss later in the chapter, information usually has
value in decision making to the extent it can potentially lead us to make a different
choice.Therefore, worst-case analysis is generally most valuable when the expected net
benefits are positive; best-case analysis is generally most valuable when the expected
net benefits are negative. It should be kept in mind, however, that if the ranges are
plausible, then the probability of actually realizing net benefits as extreme as either the
worst or the best case gets very small as the number of parameters gets large.
Worst-case analysis acknowledges that society, or specific decision makers, may be
risk averse.That is, they often care not just about expected net benefits, the appropriate
consideration in most cases, but also about the possible “downside.” Furthermore,
186

Dealing with Uncertainty
there are often cognitive limitations and bureaucratic incentives to generate optimistic
forecasts.Worst-case analysis provides a useful check against these biases.
As a demonstration of worst-case analysis, we take the lower end of each of the
ranges presented in Table 2 for r, vl, vh, ml, mh, , e, t, and i, and the higher end of the
range for . For example, we assume that r, the fraction of the population at high
mortality risk, equals .04 rather than the base-case value of .06. (For the time being, we
keep p1, p2, q, o, w, L, and d at their base-case values.) With worst-case assumptions, net
benefits fall to $0.101 million. Though still positive, this more conservative estimate is
almost two orders of magnitude (102) less than under the base-case assumptions.
Return to the question of the sensitivity of net benefits to the probability of epi-
demic. The breakeven probability rises from about 11 percent under the base-case as-
sumptions to almost 37 percent under the more conservative worst-case assumptions.
In other words, expected net benefits would no longer be positive if we assessed the
probability of an epidemic to be only somewhat less likely than 0.4, the assumed value
under the base case.
Care must be taken in determining which are the most conservative assumptions.
Under the base-case assumptions, for example, net benefits increase as our assumed
value of life increases. Under the conservative assumptions, however, net benefits de-
crease as the value of life increases. This reversal in the direction of the marginal im-
pact of the value of life occurs because the higher rate of adverse reactions, , under
the conservative case is sufficiently large so that the expected number of deaths is
greater with the vaccination program (1.8 deaths) than without it (1.7 deaths).
More generally, caution is warranted when net benefits are a nonlinear function of a
parameter. In such cases, the value of the parameter that either minimizes or maximizes
net benefits may not be at the extreme of its plausible range. Close inspection of partial
sensitivity graphs generally gives a good indication of the general nature of the relation-
ship, though these graphs can sometimes be misleading because they depend on the par-
ticular assumed values of all other parameters.A more systematic approach is to inspect
the functional form of the model used to calculate net benefits. When a nonlinear rela-
tionship is present, extreme values of assumptions may not necessarily result in extreme
values of net benefits. Indeed, inspection of Table 3 indicates that net benefits are a qua-
dratic function of vaccination rates vl and vh because they depend on Ce|v, which involves
the product of direct effects and the herd effect. Under the base-case assumptions, for
instance, net benefits would be maximized if all high-risk persons were vaccinated and
46 percent of low-risk persons were vaccinated.As these rates are well above those that
could realistically be obtained by the program, we can reasonably treat the upper and
lower bounds of vaccination rates as corresponding to extreme values of net benefits.
If the base-case assumptions generate negative net benefits, then it would have been
reasonable to see if more optimistic, or best-case, assumptions produce positive net bene-
fits. If the best-case prediction of net benefits is still negative, then we can be very certain
that the policy should not be adopted. If it is positive, then we may want to see if combi-
nations of somewhat less optimistic assumptions can also sustain positive net benefits.
Monte Carlo Sensitivity Analysis.
Partial- and extreme-case sensitivity analyses have
two major limitations. First, they may not take account of all the available information
187

Dealing with Uncertainty
about assumed values of parameters. In particular, if we believe that values near the
base-case assumptions are more likely to occur than values near the extremes of their
plausible ranges, then the worst and best cases are highly unlikely to occur because
they require the joint occurrence of a large number of independent low-probability
events. Second, these techniques do not directly provide information about the vari-
ance, or spread, of the statistical distribution of realized net benefits. If we cannot dis-
tinguish between two policies in terms of expected values of net benefits, then we may
be more confident in recommending the one with the smaller variance because it has a
higher probability of producing realized net benefits near the expected value.
Monte Carlo analysis provides a way of overcoming these problems.The name sug-
gests the casinos of that famous gambling resort. It is apt because the essence of the ap-
proach is playing games of chance many times to elicit a distribution of outcomes.
Monte Carlo analysis has played an important role for many years in the investigation
of statistical estimators whose properties cannot be adequately determined through
mathematical techniques alone. The falling opportunity cost of computing, especially
the greater availability of flexible spreadsheet software for microcomputers, makes
Monte Carlo analysis feasible for most practicing policy analysts.As it is a method that
effectively takes account of uncertainty about assumed parameters in complex analy-
ses, it should be in every analyst’s tool kit. Indeed, it should be routinely used in CBA.
The basic steps for doing Monte Carlo analysis are as follows. First, specify proba-
bility distributions for all the important uncertain quantitative assumptions. For the
Monte Carlo analysis of the vaccine program, we focus on the ten parameters with ex-
pressed ranges in Table 2. If we do not have theory or empirical evidence that suggests
a particular distribution, then it is sometimes reasonable to specify a uniform distribu-
tion over the range. That is, we assume that any value between the upper and lower
bound of plausible values is equally likely. For example, we assume that the distribu-
tion of the fraction of the population at risk, r, is uniformly distributed between 0.04
and 0.08. Often, though, we believe that values near the most plausible estimate should
be given more weight. For example, assume that analysts believe that hours lost due to
influenza follow a normal distribution.They could then center it at the best estimate of
24 hours and set the standard deviation at 3.06 so that there is only a 5 percent chance
of values falling outside the plausible range of 18 to 30 hours. (See Appendix A for a
brief discussion of working with probability distributions on spreadsheets.) Analysts
can sometimes estimate unknown parameters statistically using regression analysis.
They might then wish to use their 95 percent confidence intervals as their ranges.
Commonly used regression models allow analysts to approximate the distribution of
an unknown parameter as normal with mean and standard deviation given by their
empirical estimates.
Second, we execute a trial by taking a random draw from the distribution for
each parameter to arrive at a set of specific values for computing realized net bene-
fits. For example, in the case of the vaccination program analysis, analysts have to
determine which contingencies occur in each of the two periods. To determine if an
epidemic occurs in the current year, they take a draw from a Bernoulli distribution
with probability p1 of yielding “epidemic” and (1  p1) of yielding “no epidemic.”
That is, it is as if we were to flip a coin that has a probability of p1 of landing with
“epidemic” face up. Almost all spreadsheets allow users to take draws from random
188

Dealing with Uncertainty
EXHIBIT 3
variables uniformly distributed between 0 and 1—a draw from the uniform distribu-
tion produces an outcome within this range that is as likely to occur as any other
outcome in the range. Thus there is a p1 probability of a value between zero and p1
occurring. To implement a draw from a Bernoulli distribution that has a probability
of p1 of yielding “epidemic,” one simply compares the draw from the uniform distri-
bution to p1: If the random draw from the uniform distribution is smaller (larger)
than p1, then assume that an epidemic does (not) occur in the current year; if an epi-
demic does not occur in the current year, then follow a similar procedure to deter-
mine if an epidemic occurs in the second year. Three mutually exclusive realizations
of net benefits are possible:
where the value of NB depends on the particular values of the parameters drawn for
this trial.
Note that these estimates of NB no longer involve expectations with respect to the
contingencies of epidemics, though the cost estimates themselves are expected values.
For each random draw, only one combination of contingencies can actually occur. (The
epidemic poses a collective risk to the population, while the costs result from the real-
izations of independent risks to individuals in the population.)
 Epidemic in next year: NB = -(Ca + Cs) + (Ce|nv - Ce|v)>(1 + d)
 Epidemic in current year: NB = -(Ca + Cs) + (Ce|nv - Ce|v)
 Epidemic in neither year:  NB = -(Ca + Cs)
value of net benefits to be $18.27 (2010 dollars)
with a 95 percent confidence interval ranging
from $44.10 in positive net benefits to $2.92 in
negative net benefits. In order to assess the rela-
tive importance of various assumed parameters
to net benefits, she regressed the net benefits
from each trial on the randomly drawn values of
the parameters. Net benefits were most sensi-
tive to the illness rate, the work absenteeism
rate due to influenza, and the hourly wages. In
addition, a poor match between the vaccine and
the circulating virus strain gave negative net
benefits. Not surprisingly, the 95 percent confi-
dence interval from the Monte Carlo analysis
was much tighter than the best/worst-case range
of positive net benefits of $233.15 to negative
net benefits of $28.45.
Influenza vaccination programs are usually tar-
geted to those in high-risk groups, such as in-
fants, the elderly, and people with compromised
immune systems. Is vaccination of healthy
workers cost-beneficial? Kristin L. Nichols at-
tempts to answer this question with a cost-benefit
analysis. Benefits of vaccination include avoided
lost work days, hospitalizations, and deaths.
Costs include the costs of the vaccination and
lost work days, hospitalizations, and deaths from
side effects. She employed Monte Carlo analysis
to estimate net benefits. Noting that previous
studies reported that managers generally took
fewer sick days than other personnel, she built a
negative correlation between sick days and
wage rate, two of the important parameters, into
the Monte Carlo trials. She estimated the mean
Source: Adapted from Kristin L. Nichol,“Cost-Benefit Analysis of a Strategy to Vaccinate Healthy Working Adults
Against Influenza,” Archives of Internal Medicine 161(5) 2001, 749–759.
189

Dealing with Uncertainty
Third, we repeat the trial described in the second step many times to produce a
large number of realizations of net benefits.The average of the trials provides an es-
timate of the expected value of net benefits. An approximation of the probability
distribution of net benefits can be obtained by breaking the range of realized net
benefits into a number of equal increments and counting the frequency with which
trials fall into each one.The resulting histogram of these counts provides a picture of
the distribution. The more trials that go into the histogram, the more likely it is that
the resulting picture gives a good representation of the distribution of net benefits.
Underlying this faith is the law of large numbers, which tells us that, as the number
of trials approaches infinity, the frequencies will converge to the true underlying
probabilities.
Figure 5 presents a histogram of 1,000 replications of random draws from the
bracketed assumptions in Table 2. The assumed distributions are all uniform except
that for hours lost, w, which follows a normal distribution, and whether or not the epi-
demic occurs, which, although a Bernoulli distribution, is implemented with the readily
available uniform distribution.The height of each bar is proportional to the number of
trials that had net benefits falling in the corresponding increment.
The average of net benefits over the 1,000 trials is $5.48 million. This differs from
our base-case calculation of $7.72 million because the base-case value of the herd im-
munity factor, , was set at 1 rather than at the middle of the plausible range. Repeating
the Monte Carlo procedure with the herd immunity factor set to 1 yields an average of
realized net benefits of $7.47 million, which is almost identical to the base-case calcula-
tion of expected net benefits.17
The histogram provides a visual display of the entire distribution of net benefits so
that its spread and symmetry can be easily discerned.The trials themselves can be used
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Net benefits in increments ($ million) 
Number of trials out of 1,000
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Trials with negative net benefits: 47.2%
Mean net benefits: $5.48 million
FIGURE 5
Histogram of Realized Net Benefits
190

Dealing with Uncertainty
to calculate directly the sample variance, standard deviation, and other summary sta-
tistics describing net benefits.
The most striking feature of the histogram is that it portrays a bimodal distribu-
tion. If an epidemic occurs in either year, then the vaccination program has positive net
benefits and it is as if we are drawing only from the right-most hump of the distribu-
tion. If an epidemic occurs in neither year, then the vaccination program has negative
net benefits and it is as if we are drawing from the left-most hump of the distribution.
The assumed probabilities of epidemic in the two years lead us to expect positive net
benefits 52 percent of the time [p1  (1  p1) p2], which is close to the 52.8 percent of
trials with positive net benefits in the Monte Carlo analysis.
The Monte Carlo results presented in Figure 5 treated several parameters as if
they were certain. Most important, they treated the values of time and life and the dis-
count rate as certain.We are in fact uncertain about these values. One approach would
be to repeat the Monte Carlo analysis treating these parameters as random variables
as well. In effect, we would be mixing uncertainty about predicted effects with uncer-
tainty over how we value those effects. In some situations, this may be appropriate, but
here it would probably be clearer to distinguish between these two types of uncer-
tainty. To take account of our uncertainty about how we should value effects, we can
simply repeat the original Monte Carlo analysis for a number of combinations of the
fixed. It is usually best to handle uncertainty about the appropriate discount rate in this
way. Our results would be a collection of histograms like Figure 5 that would provide
the basis for assessing how sensitive our assessment of net benefits is to changes in
these values.
INFORMATION AND QUASI-OPTION VALUE
The various analytical techniques developed in the previous sections provide a basis
for assessing uncertainty about information (assumed or measured parameters) in
CBA. In this section we demonstrate the use of games against nature to place value on
information itself.We use the normal form to illustrate the basic concepts.We then use
decision trees to explicate a particular information value, the quasi-option value, that
arises in the context of delaying irreversible decisions to allow time for the gathering or
revelation of information about the future.
Introduction to the Value of Information
The value of information in the context of a game against nature answers the following
question: by how much would the information increase the expected value of playing the
game? As an example of how to answer this question,return to the asteroid defense game
presented in Table 1. Imagine that scientists have proposed developing a detection device
that would allow them to determine with certainty whether the Earth would be exposed
to a collision with a large asteroid (diameter greater than one kilometer) in the next 100
years.What is the maximum investment that should be made to develop this device?
If the device were to be built, then it would tell us which of two possible futures
were true: First, with a probability of .001, it would tell us that there would be a colli-
sion with a large asteroid. Second, with a probability of .999, it would tell us that there
191

Dealing with Uncertainty
EXHIBIT 4
Research and development projects typically
have very uncertain costs and benefits when
they are initiated. Based on an assessment 
of detailed case studies of six research and
development projects (Supersonic Transport,
Applications Technology Satellite Program,
Space Shuttle, Clinch River Breeder Reactor,
Synthetics Fuels from Coal, and Photovoltaics
Commercialization),Cohen and Noll concluded:
“The final success of a program usually hinges
on a few key technical objectives and baseline
economic assumptions about demand or the cost
of alternative technologies, or both. The results
of the research that addressed the key technical
issues,and realizations a few years after that pro-
gram was started of the key unknown economic
parameters,typically made the likely success of a
project very clear” (p. 82).
For example, Susan Edelman prepared CBAs
of the supersonic transport project with the in-
formation that would have been available to
conscientious analysts in each of a number of
years. She reports that the plausible range of
benefit-cost ratios fell from 1.97 to 4.97 in 1963
to 1.32 to 1.84 in 1971. They declined as it be-
came clear that either higher operating costs or
reduced loads would result from failures to
achieve technical objectives and that operations
over land would likely be restricted to reduce the
impacts of sonic booms on people (pp. 112–121).
Source: Adapted from Linda R. Cohen and Roger G. Noll, eds., The Technology Pork Barrel (Washington, D.C.:The
Brookings Institution, 1991).
would be no collision with a large asteroid. Each of these two futures implies a differ-
ent game against nature.These are shown in Table 4.
Game One, shown on the left side of Table 4, results if the detection device indi-
cates that the Earth will be exposed to collision with a large asteroid. Not surprisingly,
in this game the best action is to choose forward-based asteroid defense, which has the
smallest net costs of the three actions ($5,060 billion). Game Two, shown on the right
side of Table 4, results if the detection device indicates that the Earth will not be ex-
posed to collision with a large asteroid.As exposure to collision with a large asteroid is
ruled out, the probabilities of the other two possible states of nature are adjusted up-
ward so that they sum to 1 (.004004 and .995996). In this game, the best action is to
choose no asteroid defense, which has the smallest net costs of the three actions
($24.02 billion).
Prior to developing the detection device, we do not know which of these two
games it will give us to play.We do know, however, that it will indicate Game One with
probability .001 and Game Two with probability .999. Thus we can compute an ex-
pected net cost over the two games as (.001)($5,060 billion)  (.999)($24.02 billion) 
$29.06 billion. In order to place a value on the information provided by the device, we
compare the expected net cost of the optimal choice in the game without it ($38 billion
as shown in Table 1) with the expected net cost resulting from optimal choices in the
games with it ($29.06 billion). The difference between these net costs ($38 billion 
$29.06 billion) equals $8.94 billion, which is the value of the information provided by
the device. Consequently, as long as the detection device cost less than $8.94 billion, it
would be efficient to develop it.
192

Dealing with Uncertainty
TABLE 4
Reformulated Games against Nature: Value of Device for Detecting Large
Asteroids
Game One 
p  .001
Game Two 
p  .999
State of Nature
Exposure to a 
Collision with an 
Asteroid Larger 
Than 1 Kilometer 
in Diameter
Exposure to a 
Collision with an 
Asteroid between 20 
Meters and 1 Kilometer 
in Diameter
No Exposure to 
Collision with an 
Asteroid Larger 
Than 20 Meters 
in Diameter
Probabilities of
states of nature 
(over next century)
1
.004004
.995996
Payoffs 
(net costs in
Payoffs (net
Actions (alternatives)
billions of 
2000 dollars)
Expected
Value
costs in billions
of 2000 dollars)
Expected
Value
Forward-based
asteroid defense
5,060
5,060
1,060
60
64.01
Near-Earth asteroid
defense
10,020
10,020
2,020
20
28.01
No asteroid defense
30,000
30,000
6,000
0
24.02
Game One: Choose forward-based asteroid defense: Expected net cost  $5,060 billion.
Game Two: Choose no asteroid defense: Expected net cost  $24.02 billion.
Expected net cost of decision with detection device: (.001)($5,060 billion)  (.999)($24.02 billion)  $29.06.
Value of information provided by detection device: $38 billion  $29.06 billion  $8.94 billion.
Note that the value of the information derives from the fact that it leads to differ-
ent optimal decisions.The optimal choice without the device is near-Earth asteroid de-
fense. The optimal choice with the device is either forward-based asteroid defense if
collision exposure is confirmed or no asteroid defense if the absence of collision expo-
sure is confirmed.
In practice, analysts rarely face choices requiring them to value perfect informa-
tion of the sort provided by the asteroid detection device. They do, however, routinely
face choices involving the allocation of resources—time, energy, budgets—toward re-
ducing uncertainty in the values of the many parameters used to calculate net benefits.
For example, a statistical estimate based on a random sample size of 600 will be much
more precise than one based on a sample of 300. How can the analyst determine if the
investment in the larger sample size is worthwhile?
In a CBA involving many assumed parameters, Monte Carlo analysis may provide
especially useful information. For example, suppose an agency is deciding whether it is
worthwhile to invest analytical resources in conducting a study that would reduce the es-
timate of the variance of hours lost from the influenza described in the previous section.
One could replicate the analysis presented in Figure 5 with a smaller assumed variance of
hours lost and compare the resulting distribution of net benefits to that resulting with the
larger variance. A necessary condition for the investment of analytical resources to be
worthwhile is a meaningful change in the distribution of realized net benefits.
193

Dealing with Uncertainty
Quasi-Option Value
It may be wise to delay a decision if better information relevant to the decision will be-
come available in the future.This is especially the case when the costs of returning to the
status quo once a project has begun are so large that the decision is effectively irreversible.
For example, consider the decision of whether to develop a virgin wilderness area. We
may be fairly certain about the costs and benefits of development to the current genera-
tion.We may be very uncertain of the opportunity cost to future generations of losing the
virgin wilderness, however. If information will become available over time that would
reduce our uncertainty about how future generations will value the wilderness area, then
it may be desirable to delay a decision about irreversible development so that we have the
opportunity to incorporate the new information into our decision.The expected value of
information gained by delaying an irreversible decision is called quasi-option value.18
Quasi-option value can be quantified by explicitly formulating a multiperiod deci-
sion problem that allows for the revelation of information about the value of options in
later periods.19 Although some environmental analysts see quasi-option value as a dis-
tinct benefit category for policies that preserve unique assets such as wilderness areas,
scenic views, and animal species, it is more appropriately thought of as a correction to
the calculation of expected net benefits through an inappropriate one-period decision
problem. As the calculation of quasi-option value itself requires specification of the
proper decision problem, whenever quasi-option value can be quantified, the correct ex-
pected net benefits can and should be calculated directly.
As background for an illustration of quasi-option value, Table 5 sets out the para-
meters for a CBA of alternatives for use of a wilderness area.The value of net benefits
from full development (FD) and limited development (LD) are measured relative to no
development (ND) for two contingencies. Under the contingency labeled “Low Value,”
which will occur with a probability p, future generations place the same value as current
generations on preservation of the wilderness area. Under the contingency labeled
“High Value,” which will occur with a probability 1  p, future generations place a much
higher value than current generations on preservation of the wilderness area. If the Low
Value contingency occurs, then FD yields a positive present value of net benefits equal
TABLE 5
Benefits and Costs of Alternative Development Policies Assuming 
No Learning
Preservation Contingencies
Low Value
High Value
Full development (FD)
BF
CF
Limited development (LD)
BL
CL
No development (ND)
0
0
Probability of contingency
p
1  p
Expected value of full development:
E[FD]  pBF  (1  p)CF
Expected value of limited development:
E[LD]  pBL  (1  p)CL
Expected value of no development:
E[ND]  0
Adopt full development if:
pBF  (1  p)CF > pBL  (1  p)CL
and pBF  (1  p)CF > 0
194

Dealing with Uncertainty
to BF and LD yields a positive present value of net benefits equal to BL. That is, after
taking account of all costs and benefits, the present value of net benefits for FD and LD
are the positive amounts BF and BL, respectively. If instead the High Value contingency
occurs, then FD yields a negative present value of net benefits equal to CF and LD
yields a negative present value of net benefits equal to CL, where CF and CL are net
costs and therefore signed negative to be the present value of net benefits.Assume that
BF  BL  0 and CF  CL  0 so that FD yields greater net benefits under the Low
Value contingency and greater net costs under the High Value contingency than LD.
Imagine that we conduct a CBA assuming that no learning will occur over time.
That is, we assume that no useful information will be revealed in future periods.The ex-
pected net benefits of FD equal pBF  (1  p)CF; the expected net benefits of LD
equal pBL  (1  p)CL; and the expected net benefits of ND equal 0.We would simply
choose the alternative with the largest expected net benefits.
Now consider the case of exogenous learning.That is, we assume that after the first pe-
riod we discover with certainty which of the two contingencies will occur.Our learning is ex-
ogenous in the sense that the information is revealed to us no matter what actions we take.
Figure 6 presents a decision tree for the case of exogenous learning. The square
box at the extreme left-hand side of the figure represents our initial decision. If we
FD
FD
BF
BF – BL 
BL
p
–CF
–CL
1 – p
1 – p
1 – p
p
p
Period 1
Period 2
ND
ND
LD
LD
0
FD
– (CF – CL)
LD
0
0
FD
BF
LD
BL
ND
0
FD
–CF
LD
–CL
FIGURE 6
Exogenous Learning
195

Dealing with Uncertainty
select FD, then we have the same expected value as in the case of no learning—we
have made an irreversible decision and, hence, learning has no value because we have
no decision left to make in period 2. If we select either LD or ND in the first period,
then we do have a decision left to make in period 2 after we know which contingency
has occurred. The expected values of the LD and ND decisions in period 1 can be
found by the method of backward induction introduced in the vaccine example devel-
oped earlier in the chapter.
Consider LD first. If the Low Value contingency is revealed at the beginning of pe-
riod 2, then the optimal decision will be to complete the development to obtain net
benefits BF  BL. The present value of this amount is obtained by discounting at rate
d. It is then added to BL, the period 1 net benefits, to obtain the net benefits of LD
conditional on the Low Value contingency occurring. If the High Value contingency is
revealed at the beginning of period 2, then the optimal decision is to forgo further de-
velopment so that the net benefits conditional on the High Value contingency occur-
ring consist only of the CL realized in period 1. Multiplying these conditional net
benefits by their respective probabilities yields the expected net benefits for limited
development in period 1 of p[BL  (BF  BL)>(1  d)]  (1  p)CL. Note that it dif-
fers from the expected value in the no-learning case by the expected net benefits of the
period 2 option, p(BF  BL)>(1  d), which is the quasi-option value of LD.
Next consider the decision ND in period 1. If the Low Value contingency is re-
vealed at the beginning of period 2, then the optimal decision is FD, which has a pre-
sent value of BF >(1  d). If the High Value contingency is revealed at the beginning of
period 2, then the optimal decision is ND, which has a present value of 0. Consequently,
the expected net benefits from choosing ND in period 1 are pBF >(1  d), which equal
the quasi-option value of ND.
The middle column of Table 6 summarizes the expected values of the period 1 al-
ternatives for the case of exogenous learning.
Figure 7 presents a decision tree for the case of endogenous learning. Unlike the
case of exogenous learning, information is generated only from development itself. For
example, the value placed on preservation by future generations may depend on the
risk that development poses to a species of bird that feeds in the wilderness area dur-
ing its migration.The effect of limited development on the species may provide enough
information to permit a reliable prediction of the effect of full development. If no
TABLE 6
Expected Values for Decision Problems: Quasi-Option Values (QOV)
Measured Relative to No Learning Case
No Learning
Exogenous Learning
Endogenous Learning
E[FD]
pBF  (1  p)CF
pBF  (1  p)CF
QOV  0
pBF  (1  p)CF
QOV  0
E[LD]
pBL  (1  p)CL
p[BL  (BF  BL)>(1  d)] 
 (1  p)CL
QOV  p(BF  BL)>(1  d)
p[BL  (BF  BL)>(1  d)] 
 (1  p)CL
QOV  p(BF  BL)>(1  d)
E[ND]
0
pBF (1  d) 
QOV  pBF >(1  d)
0 
QOV  0
196

Dealing with Uncertainty
FD
FD
BF
p
BF – BL 
BL
–CF
–CL
1 – p
1 – p
1 – p
p
p
Period 1
Period 2
ND
LD
LD
0
FD
– (CF – CL)
LD
0
0
0
FIGURE 7
Endogenous Learning
development is undertaken, then no new information will be available at the beginning
of the second period. If full development is undertaken, then new information will be
generated but there will be no decision for it to affect.
As shown in the last column of Table 6, the expected net benefits for the FD and
LD alternatives in the case of endogenous learning are identical to those for the
case of exogenous learning. The expected net benefits of ND are zero, however,
because there will be no new information to alter the decision not to develop in the
future.
Table 7 compares the different learning cases for a specific set of parameter values.
If we specify the decision problem as one of no learning, then FD has the largest ex-
pected net benefits. Imagine that instead we specify the decision problem as the exoge-
nous learning case. Now ND has the largest expected net benefits. Furthermore, relative
to the case of no learning, the quasi-option value of ND is $46.3 million (46.30  0)
and the quasi-option value of LD is $23.15 million (28.15  5). Now imagine that we
specify the decision problem as the case of endogenous learning. LD has the largest
expected net benefits. Relative to the case of no learning, the quasi-option value of LD
is $23.15 million (28.15  5), and the quasi-option value of ND is 0 (0  0).
This simple numerical illustration conforms to the common wisdom about quasi-
option value: It tends to be large for no development in cases of exogenous learning and
large for limited development in cases of endogenous learning. It is important to keep in
mind, however, that the illustration is based on very stylized models of learning.
Differently specified models could yield different rankings and different quasi-option
197

Dealing with Uncertainty
TABLE 7
Numerical Illustration of Quasi-Option Value ($ million)
Assumptions:
BF  100
CF  80
BL  50
CL  40
No 
Learning
Exogenous
Learning
Endogenous
Learning
p  .5
d  .08
E[FD]
10.00
10.00
10.00
E[LD]
5.00
28.15
28.15
E[ND]
0.00
46.30
0.00
values for the alternatives. Even with this simple model, different numerical assump-
tions could lead to different rankings of alternatives.
Note that our numerical estimates of quasi-option values in the illustration depend
on expected values calculated by comparing what was assumed to be the correct two-
period decision problem to a one-period decision problem that incorrectly fails to take
account of learning. Of course, if we knew the correct decision problem, then there
would be no need to concern ourselves with quasi-option value as a separate benefit
category because solving the decision problem would lead to the appropriate calcula-
tions of expected net benefits.
Quasi-Option Value in Practice
How should we treat quasi-option value in practice? Two heuristics seem warranted.
First, quantitative quasi-option values should be based on an explicit decision problem
that structures the calculation of the expected net benefits. An explicit decision problem
focuses attention on the key assumptions that determine the magnitude of quasi-
option value. It also makes it unnecessary to consider quasi-option value as a distinct
benefit category. Second, when insufficient knowledge is available to formulate a decision
problem for explicitly calculating the magnitude of quasi-option value, it should be
discussed as a possible source of bias rather than added as an arbitrary quantitative
adjustment to expected net benefits. As with other biases, one can ask the question:
How big would quasi-option value have to be to affect the ranking of policies?
CONCLUSIONS
Uncertainty is inherent to some degree in every CBA. Through expected value analy-
sis, we attempt to average over the possible contingencies to arrive at expected net
benefits as a plausible prediction of net benefits. In situations not explicitly involving
risk, we often assume parameter values that are more appropriately thought of as
draws from probability distributions rather than as certainties.The purpose of sensitiv-
ity analysis is to determine how net benefits change if these parameters deviate from
their assumed values. Partial sensitivity analysis, the most commonly used approach,
focuses attention on the consequences of alternative assumptions about key parame-
ters. Extreme-case analysis examines whether combinations of plausible assumptions
exist that reverse the sign of net benefits. Monte Carlo analysis attempts to estimate
198

Dealing with Uncertainty
the distribution of net benefits by explicitly treating assumed parameter values as ran-
dom variables. It is especially useful when the risk of the policy is of particular concern
and the parameters have nonuniform distributions or the formula for the calculation of
net benefits involves the parameters in other than simple sums.While the nature of the
policy under consideration and the resources available to the analysts attempting to es-
timate its benefits and costs determine the appropriate form of sensitivity analysis,
every CBA should be subjected to tests of its sensitivity to the assumptions it employs.
Explicit decision analysis frameworks, including games against nature in both nor-
mal and extensive form, provide a basis for assessing the value of information in risky
circumstances. It allows an explicit calculation of quasi-option value, which is some-
times treated as a separate benefit category in CBAs. Quasi-option values take account
of the value of being able to act upon future information. As solving a correctly speci-
fied decision problem naturally incorporates quasi-option values, they need not be
treated as distinct benefits. Quantitative claims about quasi-option values should be
based on an explicit decision problem.
199

Dealing with Uncertainty
APPENDIX A
Doing Monte Carlo Sensitivity Analysis 
with a Simple Spreadsheet
Spreadsheets greatly reduce the labor needed to
conduct sensitivity analysis. Usually the calcula-
tion of net benefits can be organized so that par-
tial sensitivity analysis can be done by simply
changing the value of a single spreadsheet cell.
Although specialized software is available for
doing Monte Carlo analysis, such as Crystal Ball
(Decisioneering, Inc.) for use with Excel and
DATA (TreeAge,Inc.) for decision analysis,with a
bit of effort it can be done with any simple spread-
sheet that provides a random number generator.
Generating Random Variables
Most spreadsheets provide a function for gener-
ating random variables that are distributed uni-
formly from 0 to 1. [In Excel, the function is
RAND(); in Quattro Pro, the function is
@RAND.] To generate uniform random vari-
ables with other ranges, one simply multiplies
the draw from the random variable uniformly
distributed from 0 to 1 by the desired range and
then adds the minimum value. So, for example,
to get the appropriate random variable for 
the fraction of high-risk persons in the popula-
tion, r in Table 2, use the following formula: .04
 (.08  .04)z where z is the uniform random
variable with range 0 to 1.
Some other distributions can be generated
directly from the uniform distribution. For ex-
ample, to obtain a triangular distribution be-
tween zero and one, simply take one-half of the
sum of two independent draws from a uniform
distribution over zero to one. To obtain draws
from an exponential distribution, one would
simply take the natural logarithm of the uni-
formly distributed random variable and multi-
ply it by the negative of the desired expected
value of the exponential distribution. The most
useful distribution, the normal, can also be gen-
erated in most spreadsheets by combining func-
tions for the inverse of the cumulative normal
distribution and the uniform distribution. [In
Excel, the formula for generating a draw from
a standard normal distribution is NORM-
SINV(RAND()) and the formula for Quattro
Pro is @NORMSINV(@RAND).]
The standardized normal distribution can
be given any expected value and variance
through simple transformations: Add a constant
equal to the desired expected value and multiply
by the square root of the desired variance. A
range of 3.92 standard deviations includes 95
percent of the area of the normal distribution.
To get the random variable we used in the
Monte Carlo analysis for hours lost, t in Table 2,
we added 24 to the standardized normal and
multiplied it by (30  18)>3.92 so that there was
only a 5 percent chance that a value of t would
be generated outside the range 18 to 30.
Most books on mathematical statistics indi-
cate how random variables distributed as chi-
square, Student’s t, F, and multivariate normal
can be generated using combinations of nor-
mally distributed random variables. Similarly, the
gamma distribution and the discrete Poisson dis-
tribution can be generated from exponential dis-
tributions. Discussion of these methods here
would take us too far afield.
Steps in Monte Carlo Sensitivity
Analysis
Once procedures have been developed for gen-
erating appropriately distributed random vari-
ables, doing Monte Carlo analysis is straight-
forward, although, depending on the capabilities
of the spreadsheet and the hardware upon
200

Dealing with Uncertainty
which it operates, perhaps somewhat tedious. A
simple approach follows.
First, construct a row of appropriate random
variables and the formulas that use them to
compute net benefits. The last cell in the row
should contain net benefits.
Second, copy the entire row a number of
times so that the last column of the resulting block
contains different realizations of net benefits.
Most spreadsheet and hardware arrangements
should be able to handle blocks of more than
1,000 rows without memory or time problems.
Third, analyze the accumulated realizations
in the last column along the lines of Figure 5, cal-
culating the mean and standard deviation, and
plotting as a histogram.
EXERCISES
1.
The initial cost of constructing a permanent dam (i.e., a dam that is expected to last forever)
is $425 million.The annual net benefits will depend on the amount of rainfall: $18 million in
a “dry” year, $29 million in a “wet” year, and $52 million in a “flood” year. Meteorological
records indicate that over the last 100 years there have been 86 “dry” years, 12 “wet” years,
and 2 “flood” years.Assume the annual benefits, measured in real dollars, begin to accrue at
the end of the first year. Using the meteorological records as a basis for prediction, what are
the net benefits of the dam if the real discount rate is 5 percent?
2.
Use several alternative discount rate values to investigate the sensitivity of the present
value of net benefits of the dam in exercise 1 to the assumed value of the real discount rate.
3.
The prevalence of a disease among a certain population is .40. That is, there is a 40 percent
chance that a person randomly selected from the population will have the disease. An im-
perfect test that costs $250 is available to help identify those who have the disease before
actual symptoms appear.Those who have the disease have a 90 percent chance of a positive
test result; those who do not have the disease have a 5 percent chance of a positive test.
Treatment of the disease before the appearance of symptoms costs $2,000 and inflicts addi-
tional costs of $200 on those who do not actually have the disease.Treatment of the disease
after symptoms have appeared costs $10,000.
The government is considering the following possible strategies with respect to the disease:
S1. Do not test and do not treat early.
S2. Do not test and treat early.
S3.Test and treat early if positive and do not treat early if negative.
Find the treatment/testing strategy that has the lowest expected costs for a member of the
population.
In doing this exercise, the following notation may be helpful: Let D indicate presence of
the disease, ND absence of the disease, T a positive test result, and NT a negative test result.
Thus, we have the following information:
This information allows calculation of some other useful probabilities:
 P(T|ND) = .05, which implies P(NT|ND) = .95
 P(T|D) = .90, which implies P(NT|D) = .10
 P(D) = .40, which implies P(ND) = .60
 P(T|ND) = .05, which implies P(NT|ND) = .95
 P(T|D) = .90, which implies P(NT|D) = .10
 P(D) = .40, which implies P(ND) = .60
201

Dealing with Uncertainty
4.
In exercise 3 the optimal strategy involved testing. Does testing remain optimal if the preva-
lence of the disease in the population is only .05? Does your answer suggest any general
principle?
5.
(Use of a spreadsheet recommended for parts a through e and necessary for part f.) A
town with a population of 164,250 persons who live in 39,050 households is considering in-
troducing a recycling program that would require residents to separate paper from their
household waste so that it can be sold rather than buried in a landfill like the rest of the
town’s waste. Two major benefits are anticipated: revenue from the sale of waste paper
and avoided tipping fees (the fee that the town pays the owners of landfills to bury its
waste). Aside from the capital costs of specialized collection equipment, household con-
tainers, and a sorting facility, the program would involve higher collection costs, inconve-
nience costs for households, and disposal costs for paper that is collected but not sold.The
planning period for the project has been set at eight years, the expected life of the spe-
cialized equipment.
The following information has been collected by the town’s sanitation department:
Waste Quantities: Residents currently generate 3.6 pounds of waste per person per
day. Over the last 20 years, the daily per capita amount has grown by about 0.02
pounds per year. Small or no increases in the last few years, however, raise the
possibility that levels realized in the future will fall short of the trend.
Capital Costs: The program would require an initial capital investment of $1,688,000.
Based on current resale values, the scrap value of the capital at the end of eight years
is expected to be 20 percent of its initial cost.
Annual Costs: The department estimates that the separate collection of paper will add
an average of $6/ton to the cost of collecting household waste. Each ton of paper
collected and not sold would cost $4 to return to the landfill.
Savings and Revenues: Under a long-term contract, tipping fees are currently $45 per
ton with annual increases equal to the rate of inflation.The current local market price
for recycled paper is $22 per ton but has fluctuated in recent years between a low of
$12 per ton and a high of $32 per ton.
Paper Recovery: The fraction of household waste made up of paper has remained
fairly steady in recent years at 32 percent. Based on the experience of similar pro-
grams in other towns, it is estimated that between 60 and 80 percent of paper included
in the program will be separated from other waste and 80 percent of the paper that is
separated will be suitable for sale, with the remaining 20 percent of the collected
paper returned to the waste stream for landfilling.
Household Separation Costs: The sanitation department recognized the possibility
that the necessity of separating paper from the waste stream and storing it might
impose costs on households.An average of 10 minutes per week per household of
additional disposal time would probably be needed.A recent survey by the local
newspaper, however, found that 80 percent of respondents considered the inconve-
nience of the program negligible.Therefore, the department decided to assume that
household separation costs would be zero.
Discount Rate: The sanitation department has been instructed by the budget office to
discount at the town’s real borrowing rate of 6 percent. It has also been instructed to
assume that annual net benefits accrue at the end of each of the eight years of the
program.
a.
Calculate an estimate of the present value of net benefits for the program.
b.
How large would annual household separation costs have to be per household to make
the present value of net benefits fall to zero?
202

Dealing with Uncertainty
c.
Assuming that household separation costs are zero, conduct a worst-case analysis with
respect to the growth in the quantity of waste, the price of scrap paper, and the per-
centage of paper diverted from the waste stream.
d.
Under the worst-case assumptions of part c, how large would the average yearly house-
hold separation costs have to be to make the present value of net benefits fall to zero?
e.
Investigate the sensitivity of the present value of net benefits to the price of scrap paper.
f.
Implement a Monte Carlo analysis of the present value of net benefits of the program.
6.
Imagine that, with a discount rate of 5 percent, the net present value of a hydroelectric plant
with a life of 70 years is $25.73 million and that the net present value of a thermal electric
plant with a life of 35 years is $18.77 million. Rolling the thermal plant over twice to match
the life of the hydroelectric plant thus has a net present value of ($18.77 million)  ($18.77
million)>(1  0.05)35  $22.17 million.
Now assume that at the end of the first 35 years, there will be an improved second 
35-year plant. Specifically, there is a 30 percent chance that an advanced solar or nuclear
alternative will be available that will increase the net benefits by a factor of three, a 60 per-
cent chance that a major improvement in thermal technology will increase net benefits by
50 percent, and a 10 percent chance that more modest improvements in thermal technology
will increase net benefits by 10 percent.
a.
Should the hydroelectric or thermal plant be built today?
b.
What is the quasi-option value of the thermal plant?
NOTES
1. A more realistic assumption (e.g., rainfall
amounts closer to the center of the range are
more likely) would not change this equality as
long as the probability density function of rain-
fall is symmetric around 11 inches.
2. Assuming that rainfall is distributed uniformly
over the range, the expected value of net benefits
is simply the area under curve B from 22 inches
to 0 inches. See note 4 on how to calculate this
area for any distribution of rainfall.
3. The representativeness is very sensitive to the
particular shape of the probability density func-
tion of rainfall.The use of two contingencies
would be even less representative if amounts of
rainfall near 11 inches were more likely than
more extreme amounts.
4. In the case of a continuous underlying dimen-
sion, such as price, the expected value of net
benefits is calculated using integration, the con-
tinuous analog of addition. Let NB(x) be the net
benefits given some particular value of x, the
underlying dimension. Let f(x) be the probability
density function over x.Then,
where the integration is over the range of x.
E[NB] = 1NB(x)f(x)dx
5. The term decision analysis was originally used to
include both choice under risk (statistical
decision analysis) and games against strategic
opponents (game theory). Now it is commonly
used to refer only to the former.
6. We recommend Howard Raiffa, Decision
Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices under
Uncertainty (Reading, MA:Addison-Wesley,
1969); Morris H. DeGroot, Optimal Statistical
Decisions (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970);
Robert L.Winkler, Introduction to Bayesian
Inference and Decision (New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1972); and Robert D.
Behn and James W.Vaupel, Quick Analysis for
Busy Decision Makers (New York: Basic Books,
1982) as general introductions. For more direct
application to CBA, see Miley W. Merkhofer,
Decision Science and Social Risk Management:A
Comparative Evaluation of Cost-Benefit Analysis,
Decision Analysis, and Other Formal Decision-
Aiding Approaches (Boston: D. Reidel
Publishing Company, 1987).
7. Although this example is hypothetical, it cap-
tures the essence of the problem facing public
health officials in confronting the N1H1 virus in
2009 and 2010. For an analysis of the issues that
arose in the Swine Flu episode in the 1970s, see
203

Dealing with Uncertainty
Richard E. Neustadt and Harvey V. Fineberg,
The Swine Flu Affair: Decision-Making on a
Slippery Disease (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
8. Note that in this example the probability of an
epidemic in the second year is conditional on
whether an epidemic occurred in the first year. If
an epidemic has occurred in the first year, then
the population gains immunity and there is zero
probability of an epidemic in the second year. If
an epidemic has not occurred, then there is some
probability, p2, that one will occur in the second
year.
9. Instead, we might have allowed the estimate of
P2 to be adjusted after information was revealed,
or gathered, during the first year. If this were the
case, then we might use Bayes’ theorem to update
the initial beliefs about P2 in the face of the new
information. Bayes’ theorem provides a rule for
updating subjective probability estimates on the
basis of new information. Let A and B be events.
A basic axiom of probability theory is that:
where P(A and B) is the probability of both A
and B occurring, P(A) is the probability of A
occurring, P(B) is the probability of B occurring,
P(A|B) is the conditional probability that A
occurs given that B has occurred, and P(B|A) is
the conditional probability of B occurring given
that A has occurred. It follows directly from the
axioms that:
which is the simplest statement of Bayes’ rule.
Its application is quite common in diagnos-
tic tests. For example, we may know the fre-
quency of a disease in the population, P(A), the
probability that a test will yield a positive result
if randomly given to a member of the popula-
tion, P(B), and the conditional probability that,
given the disease, the test will be positive,
P(B|A). We would thus be able to calculate,
P(A|B), the conditional probability that someone
with a positive test has the disease.
Discussions of Bayes’ rule can be found in
almost any introductory text on probability and
statistics. For a more advanced treatment, see 
P(A|B) = P(B|A)P(A)>P(B)
P(A and B) = P(A|B)P(B) = P(B|A)P(A)
S. James Press, Bayesian Statistics: Principles,
Models, and Applications (New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1989).
10. Note the assumption that the probability of the
influenza reaching the population, p1, is indepen-
dent of whether or not this particular population
is vaccinated.This would not be a reasonable
assumption if the vaccination were to be part of
a national program that reduced the chances that
the influenza would reach this population from
some other vaccinated population.
11. In this particular problem, it will never make
sense to wait until the second year to implement
the program if it is going to be implemented at
all. If, however, the risk of side effects were
expected to fall in the second year, say, because a
better vaccine would be available, then delay
could be optimal. In terms of the decision tree,
we could easily model this alternative scenario
by using different values of Cs in the current and
next years.
12. For a discussion of the application of decision
analysis to the stockpiling problem, see David
L. Weimer and Aidan R. Vining, Policy Analysis:
Concepts and Practice, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005),
Chapter 17.
13. Calculating the number of combinations:
317  129,140,163.
14. For examples of CBA applied to hepatitis vac-
cine programs, see Josephine A. Mauskopf, Cathy
J. Bradley, and Michael T. French,“Benefit- Cost
Analysis of Hepatitis B Vaccine Programs for
Occupationally Exposed Workers,” Journal of
Occupational Medicine 33(6) 1991, 691–698;
Gary M. Ginsberg and Daniel Shouval,“Cost-
Benefit Analysis of a Nationwide Neonatal
Inoculation Programme against Hepatitis B in 
an Area of Intermediate Endemicity,” Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health 46(6)
1992, 587–594; and Murray Krahn and Allan S.
Detsky,“Should Canada and the United States
Universally Vaccinate Infants against Hepatitis
B?” Medical Decision Making 13(1) 1993, 4–20.
15. Call the basic reproductive rate of the infection
R0.That is, each primary infection exposes R0
individuals to infection. If i is the fraction of the
population no longer susceptible to infection
because of previous infection, then the actual
reproductive rate is R  R0(1  i  v), where v
204

Dealing with Uncertainty
is the fraction of the population effectively vacci-
nated. If R falls below 1, then the infection dies
out because, on average, each infection generates
less than one new infection.Assuming that the
population is homogeneous with respect to sus-
ceptibility to infection and that infected and non-
infected individuals uniformly mix in the popula-
tion, a rough estimate of the ultimate i for the
population is given by the formula i  1  (1>R0)
 v where 1  1>R0 is the estimate of the infec-
tion rate in the absence of the vaccine. For an
overview, see Roy M.Anderson and Robert M.
May,“Modern Vaccines: Immunisation and Herd
Immunity,” The Lancet 8690(March) 1990,
641–645; and Joseph W. G. Smith,“Vaccination
Strategy,” in Philip Selby, ed., Influenza,Virus,
Vaccines, and Strategy (New York:Academic
Press, 1976), 271–294.
16. The L  $3 million and L  $1 million lines
cross because lives are at risk both from the vac-
cination side effects and from the epidemic.At
low probabilities of epidemic, the expected num-
ber of lives saved from vaccination is negative so
that net benefits are higher for lower values of
life. At higher probabilities of epidemic, the ex-
pected number of lives saved is positive so that
net benefits are higher for higher values of life.
17. In general, if the calculation of net benefits in-
volves sums of random variables, using their ex-
pected values yields the expected value of net
benefits. If the calculation involves sums and
products of random variables, then using their
expected values yields the expected value of net
benefits only if the random variables are uncor-
related. In the Monte Carlo approach, correla-
tions among variables can be taken into account
by drawing parameter values from either multi-
variate or conditional distributions rather than
from independent univariate distributions as in
this example. Finally, if the calculation involves
ratios of random variables, then even indepen-
dence (i.e., an absence of correlations) does not
guarantee that using their expected values will
yield the correct expected value of net benefits.
In this latter situation, the Monte Carlo approach
is especially valuable because it provides a way
of estimating the correct expected net benefits.
18. The concept of quasi-option value was intro-
duced by Kenneth J.Arrow and Anthony C.
Fisher,“Environmental Preservation,
Uncertainty, and Irreversibility,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 88(2) 1974, 312–319.
19. Jon M. Conrad,“Quasi-Option Value and the
Expected Value of Information,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 44(4) 1980, 813–820; and
Anthony C. Fisher and W. Michael Hanemann,
“Quasi-Option Value: Some Misconceptions
Dispelled,” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 14(2) 1987, 183–190.
20. The concept of quasi-option value also applies to
private sector investments involving large initial
costs that cannot be recovered if abandoned. For
overviews, see Robert S. Pindyck,“Irreversibility,
Uncertainty, and Investment,” Journal of
Economic Literature 29(3) 1991, 1110–1148;
Avinash Dixit and Robert Pindyck, Investment
Under Uncertainty (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1994); Gilbert E. Metcalf and
Donald Rosenthal,“The ‘New’ View of
Investment Decisions and Public Policy Analysis:
An Application to Green Lights and Cold
Refrigerators,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 14(4) 1995, 517–531; and Anthony
Edward Boardman and David H. Greenberg,
“Discounting and the Social Discount Rate,” in
Fred Thompson and Mark T. Green, eds.,
Handbook of Public Finance (New York: Marcel
Dekker, 1998), 269–318.
205

206

Option Price and Option Value
Form Chapter 8 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
207

Option Price and Option Value
I
n the actual practice of CBA in circumstances involving significant risks, analysts
almost always apply the Kaldor-Hicks criterion to expected net benefits. They typ-
ically estimate changes in social surplus conditional on particular contingencies oc-
curring, and then they compute an expected value over the contingencies. Economists,
however, now generally consider option price, the amount that individuals are willing
to pay for policies prior to the realization of contingencies, to be the theoretically cor-
rect measure of willingness to pay in circumstances of uncertainty.Whereas social sur-
plus can be thought of as an ex post measure of welfare change in the sense that indi-
viduals value policies as if contingencies have already occurred, option price is an ex
ante welfare measure in the sense that consumers value policies without knowing
which contingency will actually occur. These measures generally differ from one an-
other. In this chapter, we consider the implications of the common use of expected so-
cial surplus, rather than option price, as the method for measuring benefits.
The central concern of this chapter is the conceptually correct measure of willingness
to pay in circumstances in which individuals face uncertainty. Individuals may face
uncertainties about their demand for a good, the supply of a good, or both. With re-
spect to demand, one may be uncertain about one’s future income, utility function
(tastes), and the prices of other goods. For example, one’s utility from skiing may de-
pend on the sturdiness of one’s knees, a physical condition that cannot be predicted
with certainty. With respect to supply, one may be uncertain about the future quantity,
quality, or price of a good. For example, the increase in the quality of fishing that will
result from restocking a lake with game fish depends on such circumstances as weather
and spills of toxic chemicals, and thus is uncertain to some degree.
We limit our attention to uncertainties of direct relevance to individuals.We ignore
uncertainties that are not of direct individual relevance, but instead arise because ana-
lysts must make predictions about the future to estimate measures of WTP. In the con-
text of the CBA of the vaccination program, for example, the probability of epidemic,
the probability an unvaccinated individual will be infected, the probability a vacci-
nated individual will be infected, and the probability a vaccinated individual will suf-
fer a side effect are exactly the types of uncertainties considered in this chapter.
Although these analytical uncertainties are usually of greatest practical concern 
in CBA, we seek here to provide the conceptual foundation required for understand-
ing the appropriate measure of costs and benefits when individuals face significant 
208

Option Price and Option Value
uncertainties.We are especially interested in how to assess government policies that in-
crease or reduce the uncertainties that individuals face.
This chapter has three major sections. The first introduces option price and clari-
fies its relationship to expected surplus. The second section introduces the concept of
option value, the difference between option price and expected surplus, and reviews
the theoretical literature that attempts to determine its sign. Although sometimes
thought of as a conceptually distinct category of benefits, option value is actually an ad-
justment to measured benefits to account for the fact that they are usually measured in
terms of expected surplus rather than in terms of option prices. The third section pro-
vides a general assessment of the appropriateness of the use of expected surplus as a
proxy for option price.
EX ANTE WTP: OPTION PRICE1
Viewing benefits (or costs) in terms of the willingness of individuals to pay to obtain
desirable (or avoid undesirable) policy impacts provides a clear perspective on the ap-
propriateness of treating expected net benefits as if they were certain amounts. By
identifying the conceptually correct method for valuing uncertain costs and benefits,
we can better understand the circumstances under which the use of expected net ben-
efits is more or less appropriate.
There is now a near consensus among economists that the conceptually correct
way to value the benefits of a policy in circumstances involving risk is to sum the ex
ante amounts that the individuals affected by the policy would be willing to pay to ob-
tain it.2 To see this, imagine that each person, knowing the probabilities of each of the
contingencies that would occur under the policy, would give a truthful answer to the
following question: Prior to knowing which contingency will actually occur, what is the
maximum amount that you would be willing to pay to obtain the policy? Each individ-
ual’s answer to this question is what economists call the person’s option price for the
policy. If we think of the policy as a lottery having probabilities of various payoffs to
the person, then the individual’s option price is a certainty equivalent of the lottery—
that is, an amount the person would pay for a ticket without knowing the payoff (or
contingency) that is actually realized. (It is called a certainty equivalent because the
amount paid for a lottery ticket is certain even if the payoff is not.)
By summing the option prices of all persons, we obtain the aggregate benefits of
the policy, which can then be compared to its opportunity cost in the usual way. If the
opportunity cost is not dependent on which contingency actually occurs, then we have
fully taken account of risk by comparing the aggregate WTP, which is independent of
the contingency that actually occurs, with the certain opportunity cost.
Illustrations of Option Price
To illustrate the concept of option price, consider asteroid defense policies. Assume
that the United Nations wishes to evaluate forward-based asteroid defense from the
perspective of humankind. Analysts might employ a contingent valuation survey. It
209

Option Price and Option Value
would require surveyors to explain to each person (or more likely to a representative
of each household) the possible contingencies (exposure to collision with an asteroid
larger than one kilometer diameter, exposure to collision with an asteroid between
20 meters and one kilometer in diameter, and no exposure to collision with an aster-
oid larger than 20 meters in diameter), the probabilities of each contingency, and the
consequences to the Earth under each contingency with and without forward-based
asteroid defense. Each person would then be asked questions to elicit the maximum
amount that he or she would be willing to pay to have forward-based asteroid de-
fense. These amounts would be summed over all earthlings to arrive at the social
benefits of forward-based asteroid defense. As this sum represents aggregate WTP
before people know which contingency occurs, and therefore is the WTP irrespective
of which one actually occurs, it can be thought of as a certainty equivalent. Let us as-
sume that the social net benefits, the sum of individual option prices, equaled $100 bil-
lion. The net benefits of forward-based asteroid defense would then be calculated as
this amount minus the certain program costs of $60 billion, or $40 billion.
Recall that in actual CBA, analysts more commonly measure benefits by first esti-
mating the social surplus under each contingency and then taking the expected value of
these amounts using the probabilities of the contingencies. For example, the expected
benefits of forward-based asteroid defense relative to no program might be $15 bil-
lion. (The expected value of net costs of no program, $54 billion, minus the expected
value of net costs of forward-based asteroid defense, $69 billion.) Thus, in this example,
the expected surplus would underestimate net benefits by $55 billion ($40 billion minus
$15 billion). This difference between option price and expected surplus is the option
value of forward-based asteroid defense. In this case, the option value can be thought of
as an additional “insurance benefit” of the program. It is the maximum amount beyond
expected benefits that individuals are willing to pay to have the defense program avail-
able to reduce the risk of the catastrophic consequences that would result from an un-
defended collision with a large asteroid.
In general, how does this expected surplus measure compare to the option price?
Assuming that individuals are risk averse, expected surplus can either underestimate or
overestimate option price depending on the sources of risk. For an individual who is risk
averse and whose utility function depends only on income, expected surplus will un-
derestimate option price for policies that reduce income risk and overestimate option
price for policies that increase income risk. In order to understand how these possibili-
ties can arise, it is necessary to look more carefully at the relationship between option
price and expected surplus from the perspective of an individual consumer. The fol-
lowing diagrammatic expositions illustrate cases where option price exceeds expected
surplus (a temporary dam) and expected surplus exceeds option price (a bridge).
Table 1 shows the contingent payoffs for building a temporary dam that provides
water for irrigation. With or without the dam, the farmer can be viewed as facing two
contingencies: It rains a lot or it does not rain very much. If it is wet, then he will al-
ways produce more crops than if it is dry. Without the dam, the farmer would receive
an income of $100 if it rains a lot and only $50 if it does not rain very much.As a result
of the dam, his income will increase by $50 if it is dry but by only $10 if it is wet.These
$50 and $10 figures are the surplus that the farmer receives from the dam under each
210

Option Price and Option Value
contingency. In expected value terms, assuming that the dry and wet contingencies are
equally likely, this surplus equals $30.This $30 expected surplus figure corresponds to
the measure of benefits that is used in CBA when option price is not estimated.3
Notice that this example assumes that the dam will store water that can be used for
irrigation purposes if it is dry. Consequently, the dam will do more for the farmer if it
turns out to be dry than if it turns out to be wet.As a result, his income depends much
less on which contingency actually occurs once the dam is built than it did without the
dam. In other words, the dam reduces the income risk faced by the farmer by reducing
the variation in his income.A useful summary measure of this reduction in income risk
is provided by the effect of the dam on the variance of the farmer’s income, which is
$625 without the dam but only $25 with the dam.4
To determine the farmer’s benefits from the dam, we first calculate his expected
utility, EU, without the dam. We then find his option price, which is the maximum
amount he would be willing to pay for the dam or, equivalently, the amount that gives
him the same expected utility as he would have without the dam. To compute these
amounts, we need to know the farmer’s utility function. Normally, we would not have
this information, which is why, in practice, expected surplus rather than option price is
normally used to determine net benefits. For purposes of our illustration, however, we
assume that the farmer’s utility is given by the natural log of his income as shown in
Table 1.
The curved line in Figure 1 shows this utility function. In the absence of a dam,
the farmer realizes income of $50 dollars if it is dry and $100 if it is wet. Because the
probabilities of wet and dry are each one-half, the expected utility without the dam
can be found as the point midway between the utilities of these no-dam incomes.
TABLE 1
Example of a Risk-Reducing Project
Policy
Contingency 
Dam
No 
Dam 
Probability of 
Contingency
Wet
110
100
.5
Dry
100
50
.5
Expected value 
105
75
Variance 
25
625
Surplus point:
U(110  Sw)  U(100) implies Sw  10
U(100  Sd)  U(50) implies Sd  50
Expected surplus:
E(S)  .5Sw  .5Sd  30
Expected utility of no dam:
EU  .5U(100)  .5U(50)
Willingness-to-pay locus:
(sw, sd) such that
.5U(110  sw)  .5U(100  sd)  EU
Option price:
.5U(110  OP)  .5U(100  OP)  EU 
EU  4.26 and OP  34.2
for U(c)  ln(c), where c is net income
Comparison:
OP > E(S)
211

Option Price and Option Value
FIGURE 1
Utility Function and Option Price for Risk-Decreasing Project
25
20
30
40
35
45
55
50
60
70
Income ($) 
a
a
b
OP = 34.2
OP = 34.2
Income:
wet, no dam
and dry, dam
Utility of income
P(dry) = P(wet) = .5
65
75
85
80
90
100
95
105
115
110
120
4.6
4.8
2.8
4.4
4.2
EU = 4.26
4
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
Income:
wet, dam
Income:
dry, no dam
The point on the vertical axis labeled EU  4.26 is exactly a units of utility away
from each of the contingent utilities. As it is midway between them, it equals the ex-
pected utility. If the dam is built, then the farmer receives an income of $100 if it is
dry and $110 if it is wet. The option price for the dam is the maximum amount of in-
come the farmer would be willing to give up to have the dam—in other words, the
amount that would allow him to obtain the same expected utility with the dam as he
would obtain without it.The arrows marked OP  34.2 shift the contingent incomes
with the dam by subtracting $34.20 from each so that the net contingent incomes are
$65.80 and $75.80. The utilities of these net incomes are each b units of utility away
from 4.26 so that their expected utility equals the expected utility of no dam. Thus,
either no dam or a dam with a certain payment of $34.20 gives the farmer the same
expected utility.
The farmer’s option price for the dam of $34.20 exceeds his expected surplus of
$30.Thus, if the opportunity cost of the project were $32 and the farmer were the only
beneficiary, then the common practice of using expected surplus would result in reject-
ing building the dam when, in fact, the option price indicates that building the dam
would increase the farmer’s utility.
Figure 2 provides an alternative graphical representation of the relationship
between expected surplus and option price for the farmer. The vertical axis indicates
the farmer’s willingness-to-pay amounts if it is dry; the horizontal axis represents his
willingness-to-pay amounts if it is wet. Thus, point A represents his surplus under
each contingency.
212

Option Price and Option Value
FIGURE 2
Risk-Reducing 
Project: Expected Surplus and 
Option Price
0
5
10
15
20
25
Certainty line
Fair bet line
Expected surplus
(30,30)
Option price
(34.2,34.2)
Surplus point
(10,50)
Willingness-to-pay
locus
30
Willingness to pay if dry
Willingness to pay if wet
35
40
45
50
55
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
60
A
B
C
There is a slightly different way to view point A. Imagine that before the govern-
ment will build the dam the farmer would be required to sign a contract, Contract A,
that stipulates that he will pay the government an amount equal to $Xw if it turns out
to be wet and an amount equal to $Xd if it turns out to be dry.This is called a contingent
contract because its terms depend on events that will not be known until sometime in
the future. Although the government is unlikely to require a contingent contract in
practice, it is a useful device for thinking about how much the farmer values the dam
or, in other words, his benefits from the dam. These benefits correspond to the maxi-
mum value that the government could assign to $Xw and $Xd and still get the farmer to
sign Contract A, $10 and $50, respectively.The farmer would be willing to sign at these
amounts because he would be exactly back to the situation he faced without the dam,
when his income equaled $100 if it rained and $50 if it was dry. In other words, $10 and
$50 are his maximum WTP under Contract A.
Notice that because the $10 payment if it is wet and the $50 payment if it is dry put
the farmer back to where he would be without the dam, they measure the surplus he
receives but not the utility he receives because the dam reduces the income risk he
faces. If the farmer makes these payments, then his income variability would be exactly
what it was without the dam. To examine the change in income risk resulting from the
dam, imagine now that the government is also willing to let the farmer choose an alter-
native contract, Contract B, that allows him to pay the same amount, $30, regardless of
which contingency actually occurs. If the government does this, then the expected value
of the payment it will receive would be equal under the two contracts. However,
Contract B would place the farmer on a line that bisects the origin of Figure 2.This line
is called the certainty line because payment amounts along it are the same regardless of
which contingency actually occurs. Thus, any point along this line, including B, repre-
sents a certainty equivalent.
213

Option Price and Option Value
The certainty line intersects another line. This one passes through the surplus
point, but every point along it has the same expected value. For example, in the case of
our illustration, the expected value would always be equal to $30 along this line. This
line is called the fair bet line.To see why, imagine flipping a coin.A payoff of $10 if you
get heads and $50 if you get tails would have exactly the same expected value as $20 if
you get heads and $40 if you get tails.Thus, the slope of the fair bet line, 1, is equal to
the negative of the ratio of the probabilities of the contingencies. As one moves along
the fair bet line toward the certainty line, the expected value always remains the same,
but the variation in income decreases. Finally, at point B on the certainty line, the pay-
off is equal regardless of which contingency, heads or tails, actually occurs.5 In our ex-
ample, this payoff is $30.
We now return to our farmer and the dam and ask whether he would be indiffer-
ent between signing Contract A, under which he must pay $10 if it is wet and $50 if it is
dry, and Contract B, under which he must pay $30 regardless of whether it is wet or dry,
noting that the expected value of his income would be equal under the two contracts.
To answer this, we look at what his income would be under the two contracts:
Contingency
Probability
Income under
Contract A
Income under
Contract B
Wet
.5
$100
$80
Dry
.5
$50
$70
EV
$75
$75
Although the expected value of income under the two contracts would be identi-
cal, the variation in income between the two contingencies is obviously much less
under Contract B.Thus, by comparing Contracts A and B, we can examine the effect of
the dam on the risk facing the farmer, while holding the expected value of his income
constant. If the farmer is risk averse and, hence, would prefer a more stable to a less
stable income from year to year, then he will not be indifferent between the two con-
tracts but will prefer B to A because he will face less risk with B than with A.
Now, recall that at point A in Figure 2 the farmer was willing to sign a contract
that would require him to pay $10 if it is wet and $50 if it is dry and that the expected
value of these payments was $30. Because the farmer prefers point B to point A, this
suggests that in order to reach the certainty line, the farmer would be willing to sign a
contract requiring him to pay a certainty equivalent greater than $30. The maximum
such amount that he would pay is represented by point C in Figure 2, a point that is
farther northeast along the certainty line than point B. Point C represents the farmer’s
option price, the maximum amount that he would be willing to pay for both the in-
crease in expected income and the reduction in income risk resulting from the dam. In
other words, it incorporates the full value of the dam to the farmer. Conceptually, it is
the correct measure of benefits that the farmer would receive from the dam. But in
CBAs, it is point B, the expected value of the surpluses resulting from the dam, that is
typically predicted.While point B captures the effect of the dam on expected income,
it does not incorporate the effect of the dam on income variability or risk.
214

Option Price and Option Value
Although the farmer would prefer point B to point A, he would be indifferent be-
tween points A and C. Indeed, a curve drawn between these points is very similar to an
indifference curve. This curve, the willingness-to-pay locus,6 shows all of the combina-
tions of contingent payments for the dam that give the farmer the same expected util-
ity with the dam as without it.7 It is based on knowledge of the probabilities of the con-
tingencies prior to knowing which one will actually occur.
If the option price lies farther to the northeast along the certainty line than does
the certain project cost, then the project would increase the farmer’s welfare.
Table 2 describes a policy involving constructing a bridge in an area where the
probability of an earthquake is 20 percent. The bridge would increase the expected
value of income that the individual described in the table receives, but at the same
time, it would make her income more dependent on whether or not a quake actually
occurs. In other words, the bridge increases the income risk facing the individual.
Consequently, as shown in the table, the expected surplus of $84 exceeds the option
price of $71.10. Thus, if the opportunity cost of the bridge were a certain $75 and the
person were the only beneficiary, then the option price indicates that building it would
reduce her expected utility if she actually had to pay the opportunity cost of its con-
struction. Hence, the bridge should not be built, even though the expected surplus from
building it is positive.
This situation is illustrated in Figure 3.The bridge can be viewed as initially placing
the individual at point D. Once again, we can imagine the government requiring the in-
dividual to sign a contingent contract, Contract D. In this case, the individual would be
TABLE 2
Example of a Risk-Increasing Project
Policy
Contingency 
Bridge
No 
Bridge
Probability of 
Contingency
No earthquake
200
100
.8
Earthquake
100
80
.2
Expected value 
180
96
Variance 
1600
64
Surplus point:
U(200  Sn)  U(100) so Sn  100
U(100  Se)  U(80) so Se  20
Expected surplus:
E(S)  .8Sn  .2Se  84
Expected utility of no bridge:
EU  .8U(100)  .2U(80)
Willingness-to-pay locus:
(sn, se) such that
.8U(200  sn)  .2U(100  se)  EU
Option price:
.8U(200  OP)  .2U(100  OP)  EU 
EU  4.56 and OP  71.1
for U(c)  ln(c), where c is net income
Comparison:
OP < E(S)
215

Option Price and Option Value
10
20
30
40
Willingness to pay if earthquake
Willingness to pay no earthquate
Certainty line
Willingness-to-pay locus
Fair bet line
Option price
(71.1,71.1)
Expected surplus
(84,84)
Surplus point
(100,20)
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
60
70
80
90
E
F
D
FIGURE 3
Risk-Increasing Project: Expected Surplus and Option
Price
willing to pay up to $100 in the event that there is not a quake but only $20 if there is a
quake. By signing such a contract, she would be no worse off than she was without the
bridge.
We have taken account of the fact that the bridge would increase expected surplus
but not the fact that it would also affect income risk. Thus, as before, we imagine that
the government is also willing to sign a different contract, Contract E, as long as the ex-
pected value of the payments continues to equal $84, their expected value under
Contract D.
Which contract would she prefer? If she is risk averse, she would prefer Contract
D to Contract E because, in the following table even though the expected value of her
income is identical under the two contracts, her income would be subject to less risk:
Contingency
Income under
Probability
Income under
Contract D
Contract E
No quake
.8
$100
$116
Quake
.2
$80
$16
EV
$96
$96
Because a risk-averse individual would prefer Contract D to Contract E, her will-
ingness to pay  locus for the bridge would be below her fair bet line. Consequently, her
option price, which is represented by point F, is less than $84. As in the previous illus-
tration, the individual would be indifferent between points D and F, but not between
points D and E.
216

Option Price and Option Value
Is Option Price the Best Measure of Benefits?
The illustrations previously described demonstrate that, in general, option price does
not equal expected surplus in circumstances of uncertainty. In the first illustration, op-
tion price was larger than the expected value; in the second illustration, it was smaller.
We have implicitly taken option price to be the correct benefit measure. Is this gener-
ally the case? The answer to this question requires a clearer specification of the institu-
tional environment of policy choice.
The key consideration concerns the availability of insurance against the risks in
question. If complete and actuarially fair insurance is unavailable against the relevant
risks, then option price is the conceptually correct measure of benefits. Insurance is com-
plete if individuals can purchase sufficient coverage to eliminate their risks entirely. It is
actuarially fair if its price depends only on the true probabilities of the relevant contin-
gencies. In the case of two contingencies, with the probability of contingency 1 equal to
p and the probability of contingency 2 equal to 1  p, actuarially fair insurance would
allow the individual to trade contingent income in contingency 1 for contingent income
in contingency 2 at a price of p>(1  p). For example, if p equals .2, then the price of in-
surance equals .25 (.2>.8), so that to increase income in contingency 1 by $100, the indi-
vidual would have to give up $25 in contingency 2. Graphically, the availability of actu-
arially fair insurance means that individuals could move along the fair bet lines toward
the certainty lines shown in Figures 2 and 3 through purchases of insurance.
Complete and actuarially fair insurance is rarely available in the real world.8 The
problem of moral hazard, the changes in risk-related behavior of insurees induced by
insurance coverage, encourages profit-maximizing insurers to limit coverage through
copayments.9 Insurers may be unwilling to provide full insurance against losses to
unique assets that cannot be easily valued in markets.10 Adverse selection occurs when
insurees have better information about their true risks than do insurers.Adverse selec-
tion may result in either the combining of low- and high-risk persons in the same price
pool or the limiting of the extent of coverage to induce high risks to reveal them-
selves.11 The pooling of high- and low-risk persons implies that at least one of the
groups receives an actuarially unfair price; limiting available coverage to high-risk per-
sons means that complete insurance is unavailable. Routine administrative costs, as
well as efforts to control moral hazard and adverse selection, inflate prices above the
actuarially fair levels. Limited pools of insurees or uncertainty about the magnitudes of
risks may require a further increment in prices to reduce the risk of bankruptcy.12
Finally, some risks are so highly correlated across individuals that risk pooling does not
sufficiently reduce aggregate risk to allow actuarially fair prices.13 In order to manage
the risk of going bankrupt, insurers facing correlated risks must charge an amount
above the actuarially fair price to build a financial cushion or buy reinsurance to guard
against the possibility of having to pay off on many losses at the same time.
Imagine that, despite these practical limitations, complete and actuarially fair insur-
ance were available for the risk in question. It would then be possible for the sponsor of
the project to trade the contingent surplus amounts for a certain payment by purchasing
sufficient insurance to move along the fair bet line, which represents actuarially fair in-
surance, to the certainty line. In this way, a certain payment corresponding to the ex-
pected surplus could be achieved. For example, returning to Figure 3, the project spon-
sor could guarantee a certain payment of $84, which is larger than the option price 
217

Option Price and Option Value
of $71.10. Notice, however, that if the option price exceeds the expected surplus (the sit-
uation illustrated in Figure 2), then the latter will understate the conceptually correct
measure of project benefits, even if complete and actuarially fair insurance can be pur-
chased. In general, therefore, if complete and actuarially fair insurance is available, then
the larger of option price or expected surplus is the appropriate measure of benefits.
This generalization ignores one additional institutional constraint:It is not practical to
specify contingency-specific payments that would move an individual from his or her con-
tingent surplus point to other points on his or her willingness-to-pay locus.The impracti-
cality may arise from a lack of either information about the shape of the entire willing-
ness-to-pay locus or the administrative capacity to write and execute contingent contracts
through taxes and subsidies whose magnitudes depend on the occurrence of events.Yet,if
such contracts were administratively feasible and the analyst knew the entire willingness-
to-pay locus, then the policy could be designed with optimal contingent payments so that
the person’s postpayment contingent surpluses would have the greatest expected value,
which could then be realized with certainty through insurance purchases.
Figure 4 illustrates this possibility. In the absence of payments, the person realizes
either S1 or S2 depending on which contingency occurs. If, in addition to the direct 
S1
FB1
FB*
Certainty
line
Willingness-to-pay locus
Fair bet lines
Slope = 
– p
______
(1 – p)
FB2
S2
E(S)
E (FB*)
OP
WTP contingency 1
(probability p)
WTP contingency 2
(probability 1 – p)
E (FB*)
FIGURE 4
Option Price and the Maximum Expected Value of Willingness to Pay
218

Option Price and Option Value
effects of the policy, the person were given a payment equal to FB1  S1 if contingency
1 occurred or paid a fee of S2  FB2 if contingency 2 occurred, then the person’s post-
payment contingent surpluses would be given by point FB*. Because FB* is the point
of tangency between the willingness-to-pay locus and a fair bet line, it has the largest
expected value of any point on the willingness-to-pay locus. Starting at this point, com-
plete and actuarially fair insurance would allow the policy sponsors to move along the
fair bet line to the certainty line. The resulting certain payment, E(FB*) would be the
maximum certain amount of benefit produced by the payment-adjusted policy.14
Thus, in the exceedingly unlikely circumstance that optimal contingent payments are
feasible and complete and actuarially fair insurance is available, the expected value of
the point on the willingness-to-pay locus that is just tangent to the fair bet line is the
appropriate measure of benefits.
In summary, if the policy under consideration involves costs that are certain and
complete and actuarially fair insurance is unavailable, then option price is the appropri-
ate measure of benefits because it allows us to compare certain willingness-to-pay
amounts with certain costs. In practice, however, option prices are difficult to measure.
Indeed, as will be evident from the discussion of option values in the next section, very
specific assumptions about the nature of risks must be made to be able to determine
whether option price is larger or smaller than the commonly measured expected surplus.
DETERMINING THE BIAS IN EXPECTED SURPLUS: 
SIGNING OPTION VALUE
Early attempts to apply CBA to recreational resources such as national parks raised
uneasiness about the appropriateness of expected surplus as a benefit measure. In a
seminal article dealing with the issue, Burton Weisbrod pointed out that estimates of
the benefits of preserving a national park based solely on the benefits accruing to ac-
tual visitors do not capture its value to those who anticipate visiting it sometime in the
future but actually never do.15 He argued that these nonvisitors would be willing to pay
something to preserve the option of visiting. He called this amount option value, which
has been interpreted by many as a separate benefit category of relevance to valuing
assets, such as natural resources, that offer opportunities for future consumption.
CBA requires a more precise definition of option value, however.16 The key to for-
mulating it lies in the recognition that option price fully measures a person’s ex ante
willingness to pay for a policy in the presence of uncertainty about the benefits that
will accrue ex post. The uncertainty may arise from a variety of sources, including not
only uncertainty about the demand the person will actually have for the goods pro-
duced by the policy if it is implemented (Weisbrod’s point), but also uncertainty about
the quantities, qualities, and prices of the goods, as well as the prices of other goods.
Because, even with such uncertainties, it is a full measure of willingness to pay, option
price includes option value.
It is now standard to define option value as the difference between option price
and expected surplus:
(1)
OV K OP - E[S]
219

Option Price and Option Value
where OV is option value, OP is the option price, and E[S] is expected surplus. For ex-
ample, the option value for the dam presented in Table 1 is $4.20, the option price of
$34.20 minus the expected surplus of $30. The option value of the bridge presented in
Table 2 is $12.90, the option price of $71.10 minus the expected surplus of $84.
Rearranging the equation defining option value gives the practical interpretation
of option value as an adjustment to expected surplus required to make it equal to
option price:
(2)
where the left-hand side is the certain amount a person is willing to pay, the conceptu-
ally correct measure of benefits, and the right-hand side consists of expected surplus,
which is what is typically measurable, and option value, which is the amount that would
have to be added to expected surplus to make it equal to option price. Though it may
seem natural to interpret option value as a distinct benefit category, it is probably better
to interpret it as the bias in estimated benefits resulting from measurement by expected
surplus rather than option price. Unfortunately, either interpretation requires caution
because the sign, let alone the magnitude, of option value is often difficult to determine.
Determining the Sign of Option Value
The sign of option value may be positive or negative, depending on a variety of as-
sumptions concerning the source and nature of risk, the characteristics of the policy
being analyzed, and the underlying structure of individual utility. With only a few ex-
ceptions, the sign of option value has proven to be theoretically ambiguous.This raises
the issue of the usefulness of the concept of option value for even determining the
direction of bias when expected surplus is used as an approximation of option price.
The earliest studies (see Appendix A) attempted to determine the sign of option
price when the change in the price or quantity of the good being valued is certain but
the demand for the good is uncertain. For example, in the earliest effort to sign option
value, Charles J. Cicchetti and A. Myrick Freeman III assumed that there is some prob-
ability that a person will have positive demand for the good.17 Their conclusion that
option price is always positive when demand is uncertain was later contradicted 
by Richard Schmalensee, who showed that the sign was ambiguous under general
assumptions.18
Subsequent efforts to sign option value without making specific assumptions
about individuals’ utility functions have produced an unequivocal result only with re-
spect to uncertainty in income. Specifically, in valuing a certain change in the price or
quantity of a normal good (quantity demanded increases with increases in income),
option value will be negative for a risk-averse person with uncertain income because
the change in price or quantity of the good accentuates the income uncertainty.
Conversely, in valuing a certain change in the price or quantity of an inferior good
(quantity demanded decreases with increases in income), option value will be positive
for a risk-averse person. As CBA typically involves valuing normal goods, this general
result cautions against the tendency to think of option value as a positive adjustment to
expected surplus.
OP = E[S] + OV
220

Option Price and Option Value
EXHIBIT 1
In 1980 Richard G. Walsh, John B. Loomis, and
Richard A. Gillman combined survey and
recreational use data in an effort to estimate
the willingness of Colorado households to pay
for increments of land designated for wilder-
On the other hand, with the imposition of a variety of different restrictive assump-
tions, it appears that for risk-averse persons, uncertainty about the quantity, quality, or
price of a normal good (supply-side uncertainty) will usually result in a positive option
value. For example, Douglas M. Larson and Paul R. Flacco show that if the demand for
a normal (inferior) good is linear, semilog, or loglinear in price, then option price is
positive (negative) for uncertainty in the price or quality of the good being valued.19
They also show that uncertainty about the prices of other goods and tastes––demand-
side uncertainty––similarly yields positive (negative) option values for normal (infe-
rior) goods for these demand functions.20
Overall, the theoretical studies of option value suggest the following general
heuristic: With risk-averse individuals and normal (inferior) goods, treat option value as
negative (positive) for income uncertainty, positive (negative) for other demand-side un-
certainties, and generally positive (negative) for supply-side uncertainties. Of course, the
assumed sign of option value should be consistent with the specific assumptions em-
ployed. So, for example, if the empirically estimated demand for a normal good em-
ploys a loglinear functional form with a positive income elasticity, then option value
would be negative for income uncertainty, positive for other demand-side uncertain-
ties, and positive for supply-side uncertainties.
It should not be surprising that in view of the difficulty in establishing the sign of op-
tion value, even less progress has been made in putting bounds on its size relative to ex-
pected surplus. Calculations by V. Kerry Smith suggest that the size of option value rela-
tive to expected surplus is likely to be greater for assets that have less perfect substitutes.21
Larson and Flacco derived expressions for option value for the specific demand functions
that they investigated, but the implementation of these expressions is computationally
very difficult.22 Consequently, it is generally not possible to quantify option value using
the information from which estimates of expected surplus are typically made.
RATIONALES FOR EXPECTED SURPLUS AS A PRACTICAL 
BENEFIT MEASURE
Although option price is generally the conceptually correct measure of benefits in cir-
cumstances of uncertainty, analysts most often estimate benefits in terms of expected
surpluses. As indicated in the preceding discussion of option value, determining even
ness. They estimated that residents of the state
were willing to pay a total of $41.6 million an-
nually for 2.6 million acres.Approximately $6.0
million, or almost 15 percent, of this total was
option value.
Source: Adapted from Richard G.Walsh, John B. Loomis, and Richard A. Gillman,“Valuing Option, Existence, and
Bequest Demands for Wilderness,” Land Economics 60(1) 1984, 14–29.
221

Option Price and Option Value
the sign of the bias that results from the use of expected surplus rather than option
price is not always possible. In this section we consider the reasonableness of expected
surplus as a practical benefit measure.
We present two arguments often made in defense of the use of expected surplus.
One argument is based on the consideration of benefits at the aggregate social level.
Another argument applies at the level of the individual policy when people face inde-
pendent risks so that realized net benefits are likely to be close to expected net bene-
fits.We consider each of these arguments in turn.
Expected Values and Aggregate Social Benefits
If society were risk neutral, then choosing policies that individually maximized expected
net benefits would be efficient in the sense of maximizing the expected value of soci-
ety’s entire portfolio of policies.23 If we assume that projects spread costs and benefits
broadly over a large population, then the effect of any particular project on the net in-
come of any person is likely to be small. Even if people are risk averse, their preferences
can be reasonably approximated as being risk neutral for such small changes in income.
Therefore, aggregation of individual preferences would lead to risk neutrality at the
social level so that expected surplus would be an appropriate measure of benefits.24
The variable magnitudes and uneven distribution of costs and benefits that often
arise from public policies undercut this line of argument, however. Policies of great
import may involve large costs and benefits that remain significant at the individual
level, even when spread over a large population. Policies that are targeted at specific
groups, such as the unemployed, or at geographical regions often impose substantial
costs on and produce substantial benefits for specific individuals. Thus, because social
risk neutrality is a questionable assumption, this aggregate-level argument for the use
of expected surplus is weak.
A related line of argument is based on the assumption that society holds a fully
diversified portfolio of policies that allows it to self-insure against the risk of any
particular project. In other words, society is able to pool risk across projects so that it
effectively has complete and actuarially fair insurance. (As previously noted, insurance
is complete if it is available against all risks; it is actuarially fair if it is offered at a pre-
mium equal to the expected values of the risks.) As discussed earlier, with the avail-
ability of such insurance, the larger of option price and expected surplus is the appro-
priate benefit measure. Thus, benefits would always be at least as large as expected
surplus so that any project with positive expected net benefits would be potentially
Pareto improving. Of course, the comparison of mutually exclusive policies in terms of
expected surpluses could be misleading if any of the projects have option prices larger
than expected surpluses.
It is worth noting that this version of the argument does not rely on the collection
of policies effectively averaging costs and benefits across individuals as does the first
version of the argument. Rather, it relies on an averaging of aggregate net benefits
across policies so that the potential Pareto criterion can be met overall, if not at the
level of the individual project.
The weakness of this argument is that diversification does not eliminate all risk.A
portfolio of policies as broad as even the whole stock market would still involve some
222

Option Price and Option Value
systematic risk. For example, imagine adding independent policies with positive ex-
pected net benefits to the portfolio. Although the variance of the average net benefits
of the policies would approach zero, the variance in total net benefits would actually
increase. The variance in total net benefits means that society cannot guarantee that it
will realize the total expected value of net benefits. As diversification does not permit
fully effective self-insurance, it does not provide a fully satisfactory rationale for the
practical use of expected net benefits.
Expected Values and Pooling Risks across 
Individuals: Collective and Individual Risk
We next consider the possibility of risk pooling at the level of the individual policy. It is
important to make a distinction between collective risk and individual risk.
By collective risk, we simply mean that the same contingency will result for all in-
dividuals in society. For example, in the context of doing a CBA for a nuclear power
plant, the contingencies might be “no accident” and “nuclear accident”—everyone in
the geographic area experiences the same realized contingency.The actual realized net
benefits can differ substantially from the expected net benefits because all individuals
share either the favorable or the unfavorable outcome, rather than the weighted aver-
age of the two. In such circumstances, the world does not offer us a “middle” outcome
corresponding to the expected value. Realized net benefits will, therefore, differ sub-
stantially from expected net benefits.
In contrast, consider the case of a large number of individuals who have identical
preferences and who face the same probabilities of realizing each of the contingencies,but
the contingency that each individual realizes is independent of the contingency realized
by any other individual.This is a case of individual risk.This might occur, for instance, in
the context of evaluating an automobile safety device using a model of traffic accidents in
which there is some probability that a driver will have a potentially fatal accident for each
mile driven. Multiplying the expected net benefits for one individual by the number of in-
dividuals yields a measure of total expected net benefits for the policy that can appropri-
ately be treated as approximately certain.The reason is that in circumstances of individual
risk with large numbers of individuals exposed to the risk, the proportion of individuals
realizing each contingency approximates the probability associated with that contingency.
In other words, the averaging process tends to produce realizations of total net benefits
close to those calculated by the expected value procedure.
This averaging is analytically equivalent to the availability of actuarially fair
insurance—it effectively translates, through a movement along a fair bet line, any contin-
gent surplus point to a point on the certainty line.Thus,in cases of individual risk,the larger
of option price and expected surplus is the appropriate benefit measure. As with complete
diversification, the use of expected surplus as a benefit measure would guarantee that
adopted policies were potentially Pareto improving but would not necessarily lead to the
adoption of the most efficient policies in comparisons of mutually exclusive alternatives.
Reprise: Expected Surplus as a Practical Measure
How reasonable is the use of expected surplus as a practical benefit measure?
Although social risk neutrality argues for expected surplus as the correct benefit
223

Option Price and Option Value
measure, its underlying assumptions are not plausible. Somewhat more plausibly, di-
versification across policies argues for expected surplus as a conservative measure of
benefits. That is, benefits can be no smaller than expected surplus. The pooling of in-
dividual risks among those affected by a policy argues convincingly for treatment of
expected surplus as a conservative measure of benefits. Overall, these arguments
suggest that when neither option prices nor option values can be estimated, and risks
are individual rather than collective, analysts can reasonably use expected surplus as
an approximate measure of benefits. When dealing with cases involving collective
risk, they should take special care to consider the potential bias in this approach.
CONCLUSIONS
We rarely have much opportunity to infer option prices directly from observable be-
havior, though insurance premiums and self-protection investments may convey some
useful information about people’s WTP for reductions in risk. Contingent valuation
surveys provide an alternative approach for directly eliciting option prices through
structured conversations with respondents, but they are prone to problems.
Consequently, we often have no alternative but to predict policy effects under the
specified contingencies, value them with shadow price estimates from observed mar-
ket behavior, and calculate expected net benefits. In cases of individual risk, it is un-
likely that this procedure will result in an overestimation of net benefits. In cases of
collective risk, however, these expected net benefits may either understate or over-
state the conceptually correct benefits based on option price by an amount called the
option value. Unfortunately, confidently signing, let alone quantifying, option price is
often not possible.
224

Option Price and Option Value
APPENDIX A
Signing Option Value
Study
Douglas M. Larson and Paul R.
Flacco,“Measuring Option Prices
from Market Behavior,” Journal
of Environmental Economics and
Management 22(2) 1992, 178–198.
Assumptions and Conclusions
(1) Linear, semilog, or loglinear
demand functions; uncertainty in
own-price, other prices, quality, or
tastes: Option value positive for
normal goods; option price nega-
tive for inferior goods.
(2) Linear demand, uncertainty
about income, normal or inferior
goods: Option value is zero.
(3) Semilog or loglinear demand;
uncertainty about income; normal
or inferior goods: Option value is
negative.
Comments 
Assumption of specific functional
forms for demand allow signing of
option value for nonincome un-
certainty. Linear demand implies
risk neutrality; semilog and loglin-
ear demands imply risk aversion
for normal goods and risk seeking
for inferior goods.
Richard C. Hartman and Mark L.
Plummer,“Option Value under
Income and Price Uncertainty,”
Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management
14(3) 1987, 212–225.
(1) Uncertainty in income: Option
value is negative for normal
goods.
(2) Uncertainty in own-price and
other prices: Sign of option value
is ambiguous.
General in the sense that prefer-
ences may depend on contingencies.
Mark L. Plummer and Richard 
C. Hartman,“Option Value:
A General Approach,” Economic
Inquiry 24(3) 1986, 455–471.
A. Myrick Freeman III,“The Sign
and Size of Option Value,” Land
Economics 60(1) 1984, 1–13.
(1) Uncertainty in income and
risk aversion: Option value is
negative for normal goods.
(2) Uncertainty in quality and risk
aversion: Option value is positive
for normal goods.
(3) Uncertainty in tastes and risk
aversion: Option value ambiguous
for more than two contingencies.
(1) Uncertainty in demand due to
exogenous factors and risk aver-
sion: Option value is positive.
(2) If probability of demand is low,
expected consumer surplus is large,
and person is highly risk averse,
then option value may be large.
Sign of option value for uncertain
parameter depends on signs of the
changes in surplus and marginal
utility with respect to the 
parameter.
Depends on assumption that mar-
ginal utilities and attitudes toward
risk independent of exogenous
factors; demonstrated for only two
contingencies.
Richard C. Bishop,“Option Value:
An Exposition and Extension,”
Land Economics 58(1) 1982, 1–15.
Richard Schmalensee,“Option
Demand and Consumer’s Surplus:
Valuing Price Changes under
Uncertainty,” American Economic
Review 62(5) 1972, 813–824.
(1) Uncertainty in demand: Sign of
option value is ambiguous.
(2) Uncertainty in supply (price un-
certainty): Option value is positive.
Uncertainty in demand: Sign of
option value is ambiguous.
Supply-side case demonstrated for
only two contingencies.
Sign depends on risk aversion and
whether surplus is measured by
equivalent or compensating 
variation.
The following table shows the progression of theoretical investigations of the sign of option value.
225

Option Price and Option Value
Charles J. Cicchetti and A. Myrick
Freeman III,“Option Demand and
Consumer Surplus: Further
Comment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 85(3) 1971, 528–539.
Uncertainty in demand: Option
value is positive.
Overly strong assumptions imply the
same utility results under each
contingency.
EXERCISES
1.
A large rural county is considering establishing a medical transport unit that would use
helicopters to fly emergency medical cases to hospitals.Analysts have attempted to estimate
the benefits from establishing the unit in two ways. First, they surveyed a random sample of
residents to find out how much they would be willing to pay each year for the unit. Based on
responses from the sample, the analysts estimated a total willingness to pay of $8.5 million
per year. Second, the analysts estimated the dollar value of the improvements in health
outcomes and avoided medical costs of users of the unit to be $6.2 million per year.
Taking the analysts’ estimates at face value, specify the following:
a.
The aggregate of individuals’ annual option prices for the unit.
b.
The annual total expected gain in social surplus from use of the unit.
c.
The annual aggregate option value for the unit.
2.
Imagine that we want to value a cultural festival from the point of view of a risk-averse per-
son.The person’s utility is given by U(I) where $I is her income. She has a 50 percent chance
of being able to get vacation time to attend the festival. If she gets the vacation time, then
she would be willing to pay up to $S to attend the festival. If she does not get the vacation
time, then she is unwilling to pay anything for the festival.
a.
What is her expected surplus from the cultural festival?
b.
Write an expression for her expected utility if the festival does not take place.
c.
Write an expression incorporating her option price, OP, for the festival if the festival
takes place. (To do this, equate her expected utility if the festival takes place to her
expected utility if the festival does not take place. Also, assume that if the festival
does take place, then she makes a payment of OP whether or not she is able to attend
the festival.)
d.
Manipulate the expression for option price to show that the option price must be
smaller than her expected surplus. (In doing this, begin by substituting 0.5S  e for OP
in the equation derived in part c.Also keep in mind that because the person is risk
averse, her marginal utility declines with income.)
e.
Does this exercise suggest any generalizations about the benefits of recreational pro-
grams when individuals are uncertain as to whether they will be able to participate in
them?
3.
(Spreadsheet required.) Imagine that a rancher would have an income of $80,000 if his
county remains free from a cattle parasite but only $50,000 if the county is exposed to the
parasite. Further imagine that a county program to limit the impact of exposure to the par-
asite would reduce his income to $76,000 if the county remains free of the parasite but in-
crease it to $70,000 if the county is exposed to the parasite.Assume that there is a 60 percent
chance of exposure to the parasite and that the rancher’s utility is the natural logarithm of
his income. What is the rancher’s option price for the county program? (Set up the appro-
priate equation and solve through iterative guessing.)
226

Option Price and Option Value
NOTES
1. Our discussion in this section is based on Daniel
A. Graham,“Cost-Benefit Analysis Under
Uncertainty,” American Economic Review 71(4)
1981, 715–725;V. Kerry Smith,“Uncertainty,
Benefit-Cost Analysis, and the Treatment of
Option Value,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 14(3) 1987,
283–292; and Charles E. Meier and Alan
Randall,“Use Value Under Uncertainty: Is There
a ‘Correct’ Measure?” Land Economics 67(4)
1991, 379–389.The latter is the best overview of
this topic despite a pedagogically relevant typo-
graphical error (the slope of the fair bet line is
misstated in several diagrams).
2. Measuring benefits by persons’ ex ante willing-
ness to pay assumes that they correctly assess
and process risks. Lack of information about
risks, or biases in processing the information,
muddies the comparison between this approach
and the expectational approach if the latter
involves more accurate risk assessments. For
overviews, see Colin F. Camerer and Howard
Kunreuther,“Decision Processes for Low
Probability Risks: Policy Implications,” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 8(4) 1989,
565–592, and W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Trade-offs:
Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).
3. Formally, let mi be the person’s wealth under
contingency i and let Z be an indicator of
whether or not the policy under consideration 
is adopted (Z  0 if not adopted; Z  1 if
adopted).The person’s utility under contingency
i can be written as U(mi, Z).The person’s surplus
(willingness to pay) for the project given that
contingency i occurs, Si, satisfies the equation:
The expected value of the person’s contingent
surpluses is E(S)  p1S1  p2S2 in the case of
two contingencies with probabilities p1 and p2,
respectively.
4. Variance is defined as: Var[X]  E{(X  E[X])2}.
For a discrete random variable with possible
outcomes xi, i  1, 2, . . . n,
E[X] = gxip(xi) and Var[X] = g(xi - E[X])2 p(xi)
U(mi - Si, 1) = U(mi, 0)
where p(xi) is the probability of the ith outcome
occurring.
In the case of the payoffs from the dam given in
Table 1:
5. The intersection of the fair bet line and the
certainty line corresponds to the solution of the
following equations:
where x1 defines the location of points on the ver-
tical axis and x2 defines the location of points on
the horizontal axis. Solving these equations gives
E(S)  x, where x is the point of intersection.
6. Two aspects of the relation among the fair bet line,
the certainty line, and the willingness-to-pay locus
are worth noting. First, if insurance were available
in unlimited quantity at an actuarially fair price,
then the person could actually move from any
point on the willingness-to-pay locus along the fair
bet line to the certainty line by buying insurance.
The near consensus that option price is the ap-
propriate benefit measure is based on the rea-
sonable assumption that complete and actuari-
ally fair insurance markets generally do not exist
in the real world. Second, a fair bet line can be
drawn through any point.Thus, for example, if
we wanted to know which point on the willing-
ness-to-pay locus has the largest expected value,
then we would find the point that is just tangent
to a fair bet line.
7. Continuing with the notation from note 3, points
on the willingness-to-pay locus, (w1, w2), satisfy
the following equation:
where EU  p1U1(m1, 0)  p2U2(m2, 0) is the
person’s expected utility without the project.
p1U1(m1 - w1, 1) + p2U2(m2 - w2, 1) = EU
 p1 = 1 - p2
 x1 = x2 (certainty line)
 E(S) = p1x1 + p2x2 (expected value line)
 = 25
+ (.5)(100 - 105)2
 and Var[X] = (.5)(110 - 105)2
 E[X] = (.5)(F110) + (.5)(100) = 105
227

Option Price and Option Value
8. For a general introduction to the theory of insur-
ance, see Isaac Ehrlich and Gary S. Becker,
“Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-
Protection,” Journal of Political Economy 80(4)
1972, 663–648.
9. Mark V. Pauly,“The Economics of Moral
Hazard: Comment,” American Economic Review
58(3) 1968, 531–537.
10. Philip J. Cook and Daniel A. Graham,“The
Demand for Insurance and Protection:The Case
of Irreplaceable Commodities,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 91(1) 1977, 141–156.
11. One way to get high-risk persons to reveal
themselves is to offer two insurance options: one
that gives full coverage at a premium that is
actuarially fair for high risks and another that
gives only limited coverage at a premium that is
actuarially fair for low risks. If the level of cover-
age under the latter option is sufficiently low,
then high risks will be better off revealing them-
selves to get the full coverage. The result is a so-
called separating equilibrium in which both risk
groups honestly reveal themselves. The informa-
tion is gained, however, at the cost of limiting
coverage to low-risk persons. See Michael
Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in
Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on
the Economics of Imperfect Information,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4) 1976,
629–650. An extension of the Rothschild-Stiglitz
model, which incorporates contracting costs,
allows for the possibility that low-risk persons
receive more favorable coverage. See Joseph 
P. Newhouse, “Reimbursing Health Plans and
Health Providers: Efficiency in Production
Versus Selection,” Journal of Economic
Literature 34(3) 1996, 1236–1263.
12. J. David Cummins,“Statistical and Financial
Models of Insurance Pricing and the Insurance
Firm,” Journal of Risk and Insurance 58(2) 1991,
261–301.
13. Jack Hirshleifer and John G. Riley, The Analytics
of Uncertainty and Information (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1992).
14. The difference between E[FB*] and E[S] is
called the option premium. Unlike option value,
it is always nonnegative. See Dennis C. Cory and
Bonnie Colby Saliba,“Requiem for Option
Value,” Land Economics 63(1) 1987, 1–10.
Unfortunately, the extreme assumptions of com-
plete and actuarially fair insurance, knowledge of
the entire willingness-to-pay locus, and the feasi-
bility of contingent-specific payments give the
notion of option premium little practical rele-
vance to CBA.
15. Burton A.Weisbrod,“Collective Consumption
Services of Individual Consumption Goods,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 78(3) 1964,
71–77.
16. The possibility of double counting benefits 
with this formulation was soon pointed out by
Millard F. Long, “Collective-Consumption
Services of Individual-Consumption Goods,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 81(2) 1967,
351–352.
17. Charles J. Cicchetti and A. Myrick Freeman III,
“Option Demand and Consumer Surplus:
Further Comment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 85(3) 1971, 528–539.
18. Richard Schmalensee, “Option Demand and
Consumer’s Surplus: Valuing Price Changes
under Uncertainty,” American Economic
Review 62(5) 1972, 813–824. Robert Anderson
later showed that the contradictory results
arose because of additional assumptions made
by Cicchetti and Freeman that had the unattrac-
tive consequence of guaranteeing the option
buyer a certain utility level no matter which
contingency arose. Robert J. Anderson Jr., “A
Note on Option Value and the Expected Value
of Consumer’s Surplus,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management
8(2) 1981, 187–191.
19. Douglas M. Larson and Paul R. Flacco,
“Measuring Option Prices from Market
Behavior,” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 22(2) 1992, 178–198.
20. Larson and Flacco,“Measuring Option Prices
from Market Behavior.” Empirical estimation of
demand equations usually involves at least in-
come and own-price as explanatory variables for
quantity. If the sign of the estimated coefficient
of income is positive (negative), then the good is
normal (inferior).
21. V. Kerry Smith,“A Bound for Option Value,”
Land Economics 60(3) 1984, 292–296.
22. Their expressions require not only estimates of
the parameters of the demand equations, but
also fairly complicated expectations over the
parameters that are treated as uncertain.
228

Option Price and Option Value
23. To say that society is risk neutral implies that
there is a social welfare function that ranks alter-
native distributions of goods among individuals.
That is, it gives a “score” to each possible distrib-
ution such that a distribution with a higher score
is preferred by society to a distribution with a
lower score.Aggregation of individual prefer-
ences, however, cannot guarantee a social wel-
fare function that satisfies minimally desirable
properties. See Tibor Scitovsky,“The State of
Welfare Economics,” American Economic
Review 51(3) 1951, 301–315. More generally, see
Kenneth J.Arrow, Social Choice and Individual
Values, 2nd ed. (New Haven, CT:Yale University
Press, 1963).
24. Kenneth J.Arrow and Robert C. Lind,
“Uncertainty and the Evaluation of Public
Investment Decisions,” American Economic
Review 60(3) 1970, 364–378.
229

230

Existence Value
Form Chapter 9 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
231

Existence Value
W
ithin the CBA framework, people’s willingness to pay (WTP) for a policy
change comprehensively measures its social benefits. Though analysts
sometimes elicit willingness-to-pay amounts through contingent valuation
surveys, they prefer to make inferences about them from observations of people’s be-
haviors. Observed changes in consumption of a good whose price or quantity is af-
fected by the policy change allow WTP to be estimated. For many, perhaps most, ap-
plications of CBA, analysts can reasonably assume that such estimates capture the
entire WTP. Yet in some applications of CBA, especially those involving changes to
unique environmental resources, people may be willing to pay for the existence of
“goods” that they themselves will never actually “consume.” Correctly conceptualizing
and measuring such existence values poses a challenge to the application of CBA.
In this chapter, we consider existence value as an additional category of benefit. It
is often grouped with option value and quasi-option value under the heading of nonuse
or passive use benefits. However, option and quasi-option values are better thought of
as adjustments to standard benefit measures to take account of various aspects of un-
certainty rather than as distinct categories of benefits. In contrast, existence value is an-
other meaningful benefit category, though one that poses problems of definition and
measurement.1 After framing existence value as a special benefit category, we discuss
the theoretical and empirical problems analysts face in measuring it.
ACTIVE AND PASSIVE USE VALUE
The notion that people may place a value on the very existence of “unique phenomena
of nature” that they neither visit, nor ever anticipate visiting, was introduced into the
CBA literature almost 30 years ago by John V. Krutilla.2 Consider, for example, a
unique wilderness area. Hunters might be willing to pay to preserve the area because it
either lowers the price of or increases the quality of hunting. Naturalists might be will-
ing to pay to preserve the area because it provides a desirable area for hiking or bird-
watching. Nearby residents may be willing to pay to preserve the area because they
enjoy its scenic beauty and it prevents commercial development that they find undesir-
able. People who enjoy nature films may be willing to pay to preserve the area because
it provides a unique setting for filming rare species.All of these people value the area
because they make use of it in some way. Yet one can imagine that some people
might be willing to pay to preserve the area even though they do not use it in any of
232

Existence Value
these ways. In commonly used terminology, these people are said to derive nonuse
value from the wilderness area. Note that while it might make sense to think about
these people as additional people, they may not be, that is, some people may derive
both use value and nonuse value from an asset.
While most economists accept the general idea that people may derive value from
mere knowledge of the existence of unique assets such as scenic wilderness, animal
species, or works of art, clearly defining nonuse value is a complicated issue, and there
is not yet a clear consensus on its precise meaning.
One complication is the difficulty of drawing a sharp line between use and nonuse.
In terms of standard consumer theory, any good that a person values is an argument in
his or her utility function. The good need not involve any observable activity by the
person to secure its value.The quantity of a pure public good such as national defense,
for instance, is “consumed” by individuals, however passively. Existence value can also
be thought of as a pure public good.3 It is nonrivalrous—the value one person derives
from it does not diminish the values derived by others. It is nonexcludable—no one can
be excluded from deriving value from the quantity of the good, which is provided com-
monly to all.Viewed as a public good, it seems more appropriate to describe existence
value as passive use rather than nonuse.
Yet, how passive must the “consumption” be in order to distinguish use from
nonuse? It is probably safe to say that merely thinking about the good does not consti-
tute use as the term is commonly understood. What about discussing the good with
other people? Consumption now involves observable behavior, the consumption of a
complementary good, time, but most economists would probably consider it nonuse.
Consuming films and photography books based on the good, however, probably crosses
the line between use and nonuse because it leaves a behavioral trace in the markets for
these complementary goods.These distinctions hinge not just on the intrinsic attributes
of the good, but also on our ability to observe and value behavior.Thus, in actual appli-
cation, distinguishing between use and nonuse is not just a purely conceptual issue.
A second complication, which we consider in more detail in Appendix A, arises
because individuals derive both use and nonuse value from a given asset. A person’s
WTP for preservation of a wilderness area may be motivated by the anticipation of
hunting and the pleasure of knowing that future generations will be able to enjoy it as
well.While the person’s total WTP, or as it is often called in this context total economic
value, is conceptually clear, the division between these two categories of value is
ambiguous because the order of valuation is generally relevant. One ordering is to
elicit first the person’s WTP for use and then, taking this amount as actually paid, to elicit
the person’s WTP for nonuse.The other possible ordering is to elicit first the person’s
WTP for nonuse and then, taking this amount as actually paid, elicit the person’s
WTP for use.The orderings should yield the same total WTP,but they probably will yield
different values for use and nonuse. Obviously, the ordering problem blurs the boundary
between use and nonuse.
A third complication has to do with differences in the way quantity changes affect
use and nonuse benefits. In general, nonuse benefits tend to be less quantity sensitive
than use benefits. For example, consider a species of mammal that will remain viable
as long as its population exceeds 20,000. Someone may very well have a nonuse
value for the existence of this species that is the same for total populations of 
233

Existence Value
either 25,000 or 25 million because either level of population is large enough to avoid
extinction. Hikers who wish to see this species in its natural habitat, however, may have
a use value that is substantially higher for a larger population because it offers a
greater likelihood of an encounter with the species.
Finally, the nonuse category raises issues of motivation that are typically avoided
by economists. If nonuse does not leave a behavioral trace, then its value can normally
only be discovered empirically through stated rather than revealed preferences, in
other words, by contingent valuation surveys. Sometimes economists may be able to
find behavioral traces outside of normal market transactions. For example, especially
at the local level, binding referenda on the provision of public goods are sometimes
held. By relating percentages of affirmative votes to district-level property values or in-
comes, it may be possible to make inferences about WTP. Nonetheless, most empirical
estimates of nonuse values rely on stated rather than revealed preferences.
A theory about the motivations behind nonuse value can help guide the formula-
tion and interpretation of questions for eliciting stated preferences. For example, a pos-
sible motivation for nonuse value is altruism toward either current people or future
generations. Yet, it makes a difference whether the altruism is either individualistic or
paternalistic. A concern about the general utility levels of others can be described as
individualistic altruism; a concern about the consumption of specific goods by others is
paternalistic altruism. For example, giving money to homeless alcoholics is consistent
with individualistic altruism, while contributing to a program that gives them only
meals is consistent with paternalistic altruism. If the analyst believes that individualis-
tic altruism is the motivation for existence value, then it is important that respondents
be given sufficient context to understand the implications of provision of the good on
the overall wealth of others. Because the targets of altruism generally bear some share
of the costs of the provided goods, individualistic altruism generally results in lower ex-
istence values than paternalistic altruism.4 For example, altruism might motivate some-
one to want to bequeath the current world climate to subsequent generations. If the al-
truism is paternalistic rather than altruistic, then, in determining WTP for current
policies, the person ignores the possibility that members of future generations might
prefer some climate change and a higher endowment of capital to no climate change
and a lower endowment of capital.
With these caveats in mind, we present Table 1 as a way of thinking about exis-
tence value as a benefit category within the broader framework of benefit categories.5
The distinction between use benefit and nonuse benefit partially reflects our ability to
measure them.
Consider first benefits that arise from active use of a good.The most obvious ben-
efit category is rivalrous consumption of goods, such as trees for wood products, water
for irrigation, and grasslands for cattle grazing. As markets usually exist for rivalrous
goods, they are the category most amenable to valuation through the estimation of de-
mand schedules and consumer surplus.
The other use categories are for nonrivalrous goods. Those consumed onsite, such
as hiking and bird-watching that do not interfere with other users or uses, are labeled
direct nonrivalrous consumption.Though rarely traded in markets, such goods often can
be valued by observing the travel and time costs people are willing to bear to consume
234

Existence Value
them. In alternative taxonomies of benefits, this category is sometimes labeled
nondestructive consumption.
Indirect nonrivalrous consumption takes place offsite. For example, a person may
derive value from watching a film about wildlife in a particular wilderness area.
Expenditures of time and money on offsite nonrivalrous consumption provide some
information for estimating its value, though much less reliably than for the other use
categories.
Consider next passive use benefits. Four categories can be distinguished in terms
of motivation.The first category, option value, is the amount that someone is willing to
pay to keep open the option of use, active or passive, in the future. It is only passive in
the sense that it would not be fully captured by estimates of WTP based on observa-
tions of active use.
The other categories pertain to different types of existence value.The second cate-
gory, pure existence value, arises because people believe the good has intrinsic value
apart from its use. For example, some people might be willing to pay to preserve a
wilderness area because they think that it is right that some natural habitats exist for
rare animal species.
The remaining two categories are based on altruism. Some people may be willing
to pay to preserve a wilderness area, for example, because they get pleasure from
knowing that it is used by others. Generally, the motivation for such altruistic existence
value is paternalistic in the sense that it is driven by the desire for others to consume
this particular good, rather than by the desire to increase their consumption overall. It
may be based on the belief that exposure to nature, art, or historical sites is intrinsically
good or perhaps on the desire to share with others a type of experience one has found
to be emotionally enriching. When the altruism is directed toward future generations,
the good is said to have a bequest value. People get pleasure from knowing that those
not yet born will be able to use (and not use!) the good. Just as people often wish to
leave their children a share of the wealth they have accumulated, they may want to be-
queath them access to unique goods as well.
The distribution of benefits across these categories obviously depends on the spe-
cific attributes of the project being evaluated. By their very nature, projects involving
TABLE 1
Taxonomy of Benefits: Possible Partitioning of WTP
Type of Use
Benefit Category 
Example
Rivalrous consumption
Logging of old-growth forest
Active Use
Nonrivalrous consumption: direct
Hiking in wilderness
Nonrivalrous consumption: indirect
Watching a film of wilderness area
Option value
Possibility of visiting wilderness 
area in the future
Passive Use
(nonuse)
Pure existence value: good has 
intrinsic value
Perceived value of natural order
Altruistic existence value: gift to 
current generation
Others hiking in wilderness
Altruistic existence value: bequest to
future generation
Future others hiking in wilderness
235

Existence Value
the conservation of wilderness areas are likely to derive a high fraction of their bene-
fits from nonuse values. For example, based on survey data, K. G.Willis estimated exis-
tence values for three nature sites of special scientific interest in Great Britain.6
Consumer surplus associated with use of the sites appeared to account for only about
10 to 12 percent of people’s total WTP. Option value accounted for a comparable
percentage. The remaining portion of WTP consisted of existence (pure and bequest)
value. Only if the nonuse benefits were included did conservation of these areas appear
to have positive net benefits.
THE MEASUREMENT OF EXISTENCE VALUE
Despite the difficulty economists have in clearly defining existence value as a benefit
category, few economists would deny that sometimes people are willing to pay a total
amount for the preservation of assets that exceeds their WTP for their use or antici-
pated possible future use. Yet, some economists believe that the method of measure-
ment currently available, the contingent value survey, lacks sufficient reliability for
existence values to be reasonably included in CBA. Our discussion here raises only the
general issues most relevant to the measurement of existence value.
Directly Eliciting Total Economic Value
One way to avoid some of the conceptual problems in defining existence value is to
measure WTP for a policy change holistically rather than disaggregating it into
component parts. In the context of contingent valuation, the analyst poses questions
aimed at getting respondents to state their WTP amounts based on consideration of
all their possible motivations for valuing policy changes. The total economic value
revealed through this structured conversation is each respondent’s benefit from the
policy change.
The viability of this approach obviously depends on the analyst’s ability to structure a
meaningful conversation. The analyst must convey a full description of the policy effect
being valued. Considerably more context must be provided in the valuation of effects on
passive than active use. People typically know their own current levels of use as a starting
point for valuing marginal changes.They are less likely to know the total stock of a good
that has nonuse value to them.Yet their valuation of marginal changes in the good is likely
to depend on how much they think is currently available. For example, people who think
that a particular species lives only in one particular wilderness area are likely to place a
much higher value on the preservation of that area than if they knew that the species lived
in several other already protected areas. Indeed, one can imagine that, given enough in-
formation and time for reflection, some people may place a zero or negative value on the
existence of more of some good when its quantity is above some threshold. One may
place a negative value on policies that increase the number of deer in an area if, for in-
stance, their number is already so large as to threaten the survival of other species.
Existence value based on altruism poses special problems. When individuals are
concerned only about their own consumption, it is reasonable to separate costs from
benefits. Each can be estimated separately and combined to find net benefits.Altruistic
236

Existence Value
Public opinion and economic analysis fre-
quently conflict in the evaluation of public sub-
sidies for the construction and operation of sta-
diums for professional sports teams.Valid CBAs
of sports stadiums based only on use benefits al-
most never find positive social net benefits,espe-
cially if conducted from the national perspective.
One possible exception is the baseball stadium
built for the Baltimore Orioles at Camden
Yards, which appears to have increased average
EXHIBIT 1
Annual Benefits:
$3.36 million
Job creation
$0.48 million
Out-of-stadium incremental taxes 
$1.25 million
Incremental admission tax 
$1.20 million
Sales tax on incremental stadium spending 
$0.43 million
Annual Costs:
$14.00 million
Annual Net Benefits:
$10.64 million
attendance from 30 thousand to 45 thousand per
game. Further, approximately 70 percent of the
increase in attendance consists of residents from
outside Maryland, suggesting the possibility of
positive net benefits if the CBA were conducted
from a state rather than a national perspective.
Bruce W. Hamilton and Peter Kahn con-
ducted a detailed CBA from the perspective of
the residents of Maryland. They reported the
following annual benefits and costs:
The net cost of the stadium to Maryland tax-
payers is $10.64 million per year, which is
equivalent to about $14.20 per Baltimore
household per year. Hamilton and Kahn note
that building the stadium was probably neces-
sary to keep the Orioles from eventually mov-
ing to another city, and that citizens of
Maryland, even if they never attend Orioles
games, may place a value on the stadium be-
cause they get pleasure from simply having the
Orioles in Baltimore. Hamilton and Kahn call
these values “public consumption benefits,”
which can be thought of as passive use benefits,
consisting of some combination of option value
and existence value. Only if the annual value of
public consumption benefits exceed $10.64 mil-
lion would Oriole Park at Camden Yards pass
the net benefits test.
Source: Adapted from Bruce W. Hamilton and Peter Kahn,“Baltimore’s Camden Yards Ballparks,” in Roger G. Noll and
Andrew Zimbalist, eds., Sports, Jobs, and Taxes:The Economic Impact of Sports Teams and Stadiums (Washington, D.C.:
The Brookings Institution, 1997), 245–281. Corrections to original provided by Bruce W. Hamilton.
values, however, may depend on the distribution of both costs and benefits.
Respondents thus need to know who is likely to use the good being valued and who is
likely to bear the costs of preserving it. Failure to include the latter may inflate exis-
tence values if it leads to respondents not taking into account all the effects on others.
Let us assume that these concerns, along with the more general problems of con-
tingent valuation are adequately addressed so that analysts can be confident that they
have correctly elicited individuals’ total economic value for the policy change under
consideration. If their sample of respondents included all the people with standing,
then these total valuations would suffice for completing the CBA. Often, however, an-
alysts wish to combine benefits estimated from behavioral data with existence value
237

Existence Value
estimates from a relatively small sample drawn from people with standing. As already
noted, partitioning respondents’ total WTP into use and nonuse values is sensitive to
the ordering of categories. If nonuse values from the sample are to be added to use val-
ues estimated by other methods to get total economic benefits, then it is important that
questions be asked so as to elicit nonuse values after respondents have considered and
reported their use values.
In contrast to use, nonuse does not occur in easily defined geographic markets.
Aggregate existence values are very sensitive to the geographic assumptions made in
extrapolating from survey samples to the population with standing.7 People appear to
place a higher existence value on resources in closer proximity.8 Using average exis-
tence values estimated from local samples to obtain aggregate existence values for a
more geographically extensive population may be inappropriate. Indeed, the question
of geographic extrapolation appears to be one of the most controversial aspects of the
use of existence values in damage assessment cases.9
As a final point, note that as long as the structured conversation leads respondents
to consider all the sources of uncertainty relevant to their valuation of the policy
change, their total WTP amount is an option price. It is thus fully inclusive of option
value so that no adjustments for uncertainty are required.
Behavioral Traces of Existence Value?
Many economists would be more comfortable measuring existence value through the
observation of related behavior.As a pure public good, however, its behavioral trace is
likely to be so weak that considerable ingenuity will be required to find ways of mea-
suring it through nonconversational methods. Nevertheless, the history of the develop-
ment of increasingly sophisticated methods for measuring benefits offers some hope
that a way will be found.
Bruce Madariaga and Kenneth McConnell suggest one line of investigation.10 They
note that people are willing to pay to join such organizations as the Nature
Conservancy and the Audubon Society. Some part of their membership fees can be
thought of as voluntary contributions for a public good, the preservation of wilderness
areas.Ways of making inferences about existence values from the patterns of contribu-
tions to such organizations have yet to be developed. Doing so is complicated by the
problem of free riding—some who benefit from the public good will not voluntarily
contribute to its provision.
More sophisticated models of individual utility may also provide some leverage on
the measurement of existence value. Douglas Larson notes that public goods are some-
times complements of, or substitutes for, private goods.11 If investigators are willing to
impose assumptions about the form of the demand for market goods and the nature of
the complementarity between market goods and existence values, then they may be
able to make inferences about the magnitudes of the existence values from observa-
tion of the consumption of the market goods. Larson also suggests that explicitly treat-
ing time as a constraint in utility maximization may open up possibilities for measure-
ment based on people’s allocations of time. For example, the time people spend
watching films or reading books about habitats of endangered species might, with suf-
ficient cleverness, provide a basis for estimating their existence values for the habitats.
238

Existence Value
Should Existence Value Be Included in CBA?
A growing number of efforts to estimate existence values through surveys can be
found in the literature.12 The particular estimates are often controversial.13
Should existence values be used in CBA? The answer requires a balancing of con-
ceptual and practical concerns. On the one hand, recognizing existence values as pure
public goods argues for their inclusion. On the other hand, given the current state of
practice, estimates of existence values are very uncertain. This trade-off suggests the
following heuristic: Although existence values for unique and long-lived assets should
be estimated whenever possible, costs and benefits should be presented with and without
their inclusion to make clear how they affect net benefits.When existence values for such
assets cannot be measured, analysts should supplement CBA with discussion of their
possible significance for the sign of net benefits.
CONCLUSION
As CBA is increasingly applied to environmental policies, concern about existence val-
ues among analysts will almost certainly grow. Unless methods of measurement im-
prove substantially, however, deciding when and how to include existence values in
CBA will continue to be difficult. By being aware of the limitations of these methods,
analysts can be better producers and consumers of CBA.
239

Existence Value
APPENDIX A
Expenditure Functions and the Partitioning of Benefits
Policies that have multiple effects pose concep-
tual problems for the aggregation of benefits. In
most situations, we approximate willingness-to-
pay by summing the changes in social surplus as-
sociated with each of the effects. In general,
however, this procedure tends to overestimate
total economic value (TEV). In this appendix,
we introduce some notation for formally repre-
senting the measurement of utility changes from
policies with multiple effects with expenditure
functions, an analytical approach commonly
used in more theoretical treatments of social
welfare.1 A stylized numerical example follows
to show the ambiguity in the partitioning of ben-
efits among the various effects.
Imagine that a person has a budget B and also
has a utility function U that depends on the quan-
tities of goods X1, X2, . . . , Xn. Assume that the
prices of these goods are p1,p2,...,pn,respectively.
The problem facing the consumer is to choose the
quantities of the goods that maximize U such that
p1X1  p2X2  . . .  pnXn  B. Let U* be the
maximum utility that the person can obtain given
B and the prices of the goods.We can construct an
expenditure function,e(p1,p2,...,pn;U*),which is
defined as the minimum dollar amount of budget
necessary to obtain utility U* at the given prices.
Obviously, for the original set of prices that we
used to find U*, e( p1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)  B.
Assume that we instituted a policy that
increased the price of the first good from p1 to
q1.Associated with this new price is the expendi-
ture function e(q1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)  B, where
B is greater than B because the person must be
given more budget to keep the utility equal to
U* in the face of the higher price. A measure of
the consumer surplus loss from the price in-
crease is given by:
e(q1, p2, . . . , pn; U*) - e(p1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)
which equals B  B. This amount equals the
compensating variation for the price change.2
Imagine now that X1 and X2 are goods, per-
haps existence value and hiking, provided to the
person by a particular wilderness area. How
would we use the expenditure function to value
the wilderness area, given the original budget
and set of prices?
We want to know how much compensation
we would have to give to the person to restore
his or her utility level to U* after making X1 and
X2 equal zero. In terms of the expenditure func-
tion, we do this by setting p1 and p2 sufficiently
high so that the person’s demand for X1 and X2
is “choked off” at zero quantities. Assume that
p1c and p2c choke off demand.To get the TEV of
the wilderness area to the individual, we calcu-
late how much additional budget we would have
to give the person to return him or her to the
original utility level:
which is an unambiguous and correct measure
of the person’s willingness-to-pay for the wilder-
ness area.
Now consider how we might partition TEV
into its two components associated with X1 and
X2. One way would be to first value X1 and then
X2. We can express this by adding and subtract-
ing e(p1, p2c, . . ., pn; U*) to the equation for TEV
to get the following equation:
- e(p1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)]
+ [e(p1, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
- e(p1, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)]
 TEV = [e(p1c, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
 - e(p1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)
 TEV = e(p1c, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
240

Existence Value
where the first line represents the WTP to ob-
tain X1 at price p1 and the second line repre-
sents the WTP to obtain subsequently X2 at
price p2.
The other possible partition is to first re-
store X2 at price p2 and then restore X1 at price
p1. It is expressed by the following equation:
where the first line represents the WTP to ob-
tain X2 at price p2 and the second line repre-
sents the WTP to subsequently obtain X1 at
price p1.
These alternative partitionings generally will
not yield the same WTP amounts for X1 and X2.
Typically,the WTP for a good will be greater if the
good is introduced in the partitioning sequence
earlier rather than later. The rough intuition be-
hind this result is that a good will be relatively less
valuable at the margin if it is added to an already
full bundle of goods.
If one can measure TEV directly, then this
ambiguity in partitioning is of little concern.3 In
most circumstances, however, analysts attempt
to construct TEV from independent estimates of
separate benefit categories. In terms of expendi-
ture functions, what is commonly done can be
expressed as follows:
where the first line is the compensating varia-
tion for making only X1 available, the second
line is the compensating variation for making
only X2 available, and TB is the total estimated
benefits. In general, TB does not equal TEV.
TB systematically overestimates TEV. The
overestimation tends to increase as the number
of benefit components increases.4
 - e(p1c, p2, . . . , pn; U*)]
 + [e(p1c, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
 - e(p1, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)]
 TB = [e(p1c, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
 - e(p1, p2, . . . , pn; U*)]
 + [e(p1c, p2, . . . , pn; U*)
 - e(p1c, p2, . . . , pn; U*)] 
 TEV = [e(p1c, p2c, . . . , pn; U*)
We next illustrate these concepts with the
stylized numerical example presented in Table
A-1.The model assumes that the person’s utility,
U, depends on three goods: E, the size of the
wilderness area (existence); X, a particular use
of the wilderness area such as hiking; and Z, a
composite good that represents all goods other
than E and X. It also depends on the parameter
Q, an index of the quality of the wilderness area.
The person has a budget of B = 100 and faces
prices for E, X, and Z of pe  $.50, px  $1, and
pz  $2, respectively.5 The quantities of E, X,
and Z that maximize utility for the parameter
values listed in the table can be found through
numerical methods to be E  9.89, X  30.90,
and Z  32.08.6 The utility from this combina-
tion of goods, U*, equals 38.93.
The expenditure function follows directly.
Obviously, the budget that gives U*  38.93 is
just the budget of $100 in the optimization.
Therefore, we can write the expenditure func-
tion for the initial position as:
Before illustrating the partitioning problem,
it may be helpful to consider how expenditure
functions can be used to find compensating vari-
ations for independent policy effects. Consider,
for instance, how one can find the compensating
variation for a reduction in the price of X from
$1 to $.50. The procedure involves finding the
expenditure function:
by asking what budget amount would allow
the person to obtain the original utility at the
lower price. The compensating variation for
the price reduction is just the difference be-
tween the values of the expenditure function
with the lower price, $63.25, and the value of
the original expenditure function, $100.That is,
the person would be indifferent between fac-
ing the original price of $1 with a budget of
 Q = 1; U* = 38.93) = 63.25
 e(pe = 0.5, px = 0.5, pz = 2;
 U* = 38.93) = 100
 e(pe = 0.5, px = 1, pz = 2; Q = 1;
241

Existence Value
TABLE A-1
An Illustration of the Benefits Partitioning Problem
Utility function
U(E, X, Z; Q)  QE  QX  Z
where E is the quantity of wilderness that exists, X is the use level of the 
wilderness, Z is a market good, and Q is an index of quality of the wilderness
Budget constraint
B  peE  pxX  pzZ
where B is the available budget, and pe, px, and pz are the respective prices 
of E, X, and Z
Optimization problem
Maximize L  U   [B  peE  pxX  pzZ]
where  is the marginal utility of money
Numerical assumptions
Q  1;   0.5;   0.75; q  0.9; pe  0.5; px  1; pz  2; B  100
E  9.89; X  30.90; Z  32.08;   .318
Solution values
U (9.89, 30.90, 32.08; 1)  38.93  U*
e(pe, px, pz; Q; U*)  e(0.5, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)  100
Expenditure functions
Wilderness area not available: e(q, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  116.95
Wilderness existence, no use: e(0.5, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  111.42
Wilderness use only: e(q, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)  105.04
Existence-use partition
Existence value  e(q, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(0.5, q, 2; 1; 38.93)
TEV  16.95
 116.95  111.42  5.53
Use value  e(0.5, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(0.5, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)
 111.42  100  11.42
Use-existence partition
Use value  e(q, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(q, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)
TEV  16.95
 116.95  105.04  11.91
Existence value  e(q, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(0.5, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)
 105.04  100  5.04
Independent summation
Existence value  e(q, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(0.5, q, 2; 1; 38.93)
TB  17.44
 116.95  111.42  5.53
Use value  e(q, q, 2; 1; 38.93)  e(q, 1, 2; 1; 38.93)
 116.95  105.04  11.91
$100 and facing the reduced price of $.50 with
a budget of $63.25. Therefore, the willingness-
to-pay for the price reduction is the difference
between $100 and $63.25, or $36.75.
Now consider how one could value a pol-
icy that would increase the quality index, Q, by
10 percent. The expenditure function for the
quality improvement relative to the initial po-
sition is:
which indicates that the compensating variation
for the quality improvement is $5.55 ($94.45 
$100), indicating that the original utility could be
obtained with a smaller budget.
 U* = 38.93) = 94.45
 e(pe = 0.5, px = 1, pz = 2; Q = 1.1;
Returning to the initial position, let us now
consider the total value of wilderness, TEV, and
the two ways of partitioning it between exis-
tence and use. We choke off consumption of E
and X by setting their prices at infinity. This
yields the expenditure function:
e(pe  q, px  q, pz  2; Q  1;
which implies that the wilderness area has a
total value of $16.95 ($116.95  $100). If we
partition first by existence and then by use, we
calculate:
e(pe  0.5, px  q, pz  2;
 Q = 1; U* = 38.93) = 111.42
 U* = 38.93) = 116.95
242

Existence Value
EXERCISES
1.
Imagine a wilderness area of 200 square miles in the Rocky Mountains. How would you expect
each of the following factors to affect people’s total WTP for its preservation?
a.
The size of the total wilderness area still remaining in the Rocky Mountains
b.
The presence of rare species in this particular area
c.
The level of national wealth
2.
An analyst wishing to estimate the benefits of preserving a wetland has combined informa-
tion obtained from two methods. First, she surveyed those who visited the wetland—fishers,
duck hunters, and bird-watchers—to determine their WTP for these uses. Second, she sur-
veyed a sample of residents throughout the state about their WTP to preserve the wetland.
This second survey focused exclusively on nonuse values of the wetland. She then added her
estimate of use benefits to her estimate of nonuse benefits to get an estimate of the total
economic value of preservation of the wetland. Is this a reasonable approach? (Note: In re-
sponding to this question assume that there was virtually no overlap in the persons con-
tacted in the two surveys.)
NOTES
1. Put another way, existence value is part of option
value.That is, option value includes use value
and nonuse value.
2. John V. Krutilla,“Conservation Reconsidered,”
American Economic Review 57(4) 1967, 777–786
at 784. For a discussion of the importance of this
article, see V. Kerry Smith,“Krutilla’s Legacy:
Twenty-First Century Challenges for
Environmental Economics,” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 86(5) 2004, 1167–1178.
3. Charles Plourde,“Conservation of Extinguishable
Species,” Natural Resources Journal 15(4) 1975,
791–797.
4. Bruce Madariaga and Kenneth E. McConnell,
“Exploring Existence Value,” Water Resources
Research 23(5) 1987, 936–942.
5. For an alternative framework, see R. Kerry
Turner, Jouni Paavola, Philip Cooper, Stephen
Farber,Valma Jessamy, and Stavros Georgiou,
“Valuing Nature: Lessons Learned and Future
Research Directions,” Ecological Economics
46(3) 2003, 493–510 at 495 (Table 1).
which implies an existence value of $5.53
($116.95  $111.42) and a use value of $11.42
($111.42  $100).7 If instead we partition first by
use and then by existence, we calculate:
e(pe  q, px  1, pz  2; Q  1;
which implies a use value of $11.91 ($116.95 
$105.04) and an existence value of $5.04
($105.04  $100).8 Thus, we see that the se-
quence of valuation makes a difference:
Existence value and use value are each larger
when they are valued first rather than second.9
 U* = 38.93) = 105.04
Finally, consider the independent summation
of benefits. Existence is valued as in the existence-
use sequence and use is valued as in the use-
existence sequence. Thus, we would estimate the
total economic value of the wilderness to be
$17.44 ($5.53  $11.91),which exceeds the correct
compensating variation by $.49 ($17.44  $16.95).
In summary, the partitioning of benefits be-
tween existence and use is conceptually ambigu-
ous when the same individuals derive both values
from a policy change.More generally,policies that
affect people’s utilities in multiple ways are prone
to overestimation of WTP when each effect is val-
ued independently as a separate benefit category.
243

Existence Value
6. K. G.Willis,“Valuing Non-Market Wildlife
Commodities:An Evaluation and Comparison of
Benefits and Costs,” Applied Economics 22(1)
1990, 12–30.
7. For an overview, see V. Kerry Smith,“Nonmarket
Valuation of Environmental Resources,” Land
Economics 69(1) 1993, 1–26.
8. Ronald J. Sutherland and Richard G.Walsh,“The
Effect of Distance on the Preservation Value of
Water Quality,” Land Economics 61(3) 1985,
281–291; and Ian J. Bateman and Ian H.
Langford,“Non-Users’ Willingness to Pay for a
National Park:An Application and Critique of
the Contingent Valuation Method,” Regional
Studies 31(6) 1997, 571–582.
9. Raymond J. Kopp and V. Kerry Smith,“Benefit
Estimation Goes to Court:The Case of Natural
Resource Damage Assessment,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 8(4) 1989,
593–612.
10. Bruce Madariaga and Kenneth E. McConnell,
“Exploring Existence Value,” Water Resources
Research 23(5) 1987, 936–942.
11. Douglas M. Larson,“On Measuring Existence
Value,” Land Economics 69(1) 1992, 116–122.
12. Richard G.Walsh, John B. Loomis, and Richard
A. Gillman,“Valuing Option, Existence, and
Bequest Demands for Wilderness,” Land
Economics 60(1) 1984, 14–29; K. G.Willis,
“Valuing Non-Market Wildlife Commodities:An
Evaluation and Comparison of Benefits and
Costs,” Applied Economics 22(1) 1990, 13–30;
Thomas H. Stevens, Jaime Echeverria, Ronald J.
Glass,Tim Hager, and Thomas A. More,
“Measuring the Existence Value of Wildlife:
What Do CVM Estimates Really Show?” Land
Economics 67(4) 1991, 390–400; John B. Loomis
and Douglas S.White,“Economic Benefits of
Rare and Endangered Species: Summary and
Meta-Analysis,” Ecological Economics 18(3)
1996, 197–206; John Loomis,“Estimating
Recreation and Existence Values of Sea Otter
Expansion in California Using Benefit Transfer,”
Coastal Management 34(4), 2006, 387-404.
13. See, for example, Donald H. Rosenthal and
Robert H. Nelson,“Why Existence Value Should
Not Be Used in Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 11(1) 1992,
116–122; and Raymond J. Kopp,“Why Existence
Value Should Be Used in Cost-Benefit Analysis,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 11(1)
1992, 123–130. One practical problem is that the
estimates of values are quite sensitive to the em-
pirical model used, see, for example,Aurelia
Bengochea-Morancho,Ana M. Fuertes-Eugenio,
and Salvador del Saz-Salazar,“A Comparison of
Empirical Models to Infer the Willingness to Pay
in Contingent Valuation,” Ecological Economics
30(1), 2005, 235–244.
1. A more formal treatment can be found in Alan
Randall,“Total and Nonuse Values,” in John B.
Braden and Charles D. Kolstad, eds., Measuring
the Demand for Environmental Quality (New
York: North-Holland, 1991), 303–321.The origi-
nal analysis of the importance of the sequence of
valuation can be found in J. R. Hicks, A Revision
of Demand Theory (Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press, 1956), 169–179.
2. Though we use compensating variation as a mea-
sure of the dollar value of utility here because we
find it most intuitive, equivalent variation, which
measures welfare changes relative to the utility
level after the price change, is generally consid-
ered a superior money metric for utility because
it provides an unambiguous ordinal measure for
ranking price changes.
If U~ is the utility after the price change,
then the equivalent variation is:
e(q1, p2, . . . , pn; U~)  e(p1, p2, . . . , pn; U~)
where e(q1, p2, . . . , pn; U~)  B.
Compensating and equivalent variation
typically differ by a small amount due to income
effects. In the case of quantity changes of public
goods, however, the size of their difference also
depends on the availability of close substitutes
for the public good. See W. Michael Hanemann,
“Willingness-to-Pay and Willingness-to-Accept:
How Much Can They Differ?” American
Economic Review 81(3) 1991, 635–647.
APPENDIX NOTES
244

Existence Value
3. Of course, the value of TEV will depend on
whether it is measured in terms of compensating
variation or equivalent variation.
4. John P. Hoehn and Alan Randall,“Too Many
Proposals Pass the Benefit Cost Test,” American
Economic Review 79(3) 1989, 544–551.
5. If E is a public good, then we would interpret
pe as the tax per unit of E that the person 
pays. As everyone would have to consume the
same quantity, the person would not be able to
choose the value of E so that the optimization of
utility would be over only X and Z.
6. The partial derivatives of L with respect to E, X,
Z, and  give four equations in four unknowns.
Although these first-order conditions cannot be
solved analytically, they can be rearranged so
that E, X, and Z are each expressed as a function
of  and parameters.A solution can be found by
guessing values of  until a value is found that
implies values of E, X, and Z that satisfy the bud-
get constraint.
7. If we assume that E is fixed at its initial level,
the more realistic case in evaluating an existing
wilderness area, then the existence value equals
only $5.47. It is smaller than in the example be-
cause the person does not have the opportunity
to purchase more E when X is not available. This
assumption changes neither the TEV nor the ex-
istence value as estimated by the use-existence
partition.
8. It may seem strange to partition in this way be-
cause one would normally think of existence as
being a prerequisite for use. Some types of
uses, however, could be provided without main-
taining existence value. For example, through
stocking it may be possible to provide game
fishing without preserving a stream in its nat-
ural form.
9. Using equivalent variation rather than compen-
sating variation as the consumer surplus measure
leads to the following:
Existence-use partition:
existence value  100.00  94.68  5.32 
use value  94.68  84.10  10.58
Use-existence partition:
use value  100.00  89.00  11.00 
existence value  89.00  84.10  4.90
Independent summation:
existence value  100.00  94.68  5.32 
use value  100.00  89.00  11.00
TBev  16.32
TEVev = 100.00 - 84.10 = 15.90
e(pe = 0.5, px = q, pz = 2; Q = 1; U' = 33.81) = 94.68
e(pe = q, px = 1, pz = 2; Q = 1; U' = 33.81) = 89.00
e(pe = 0.5, px = 1, pz = 2; Q = 1; U' = 33.81) = 84.10
e(pe = q, px = q, pz = 2; Q = 1; U' = 33.81) = 100.00
245

246

The Social Discount Rate1
Form Chapter 10 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
247

The Social Discount Rate1
W
hen evaluating government policies or projects, analysts must decide on the
appropriate weights to apply to policy impacts that occur in different years.
Given these weights, denoted by wt, and estimates of the real annual net so-
cial benefits, NBt, the estimated net present value (NPV) of a project is given by:2
(1)
In effect, the weights make costs, benefits, or net benefits that occur in the future
commensurable with (i.e., comparable to) costs, benefits, or net benefits realized by
society today so that we can aggregate them to obtain a single measure of the value of
a project, the NPV.This chapter deals with theoretical issues pertaining to the selection
of an appropriate set of weights to use in equation (1).
Discounting reflects the generally accepted idea that resources available at some
future date are worth less today than the same amount available right now. This is for
two basic reasons. First, through investment, a given amount of currently available re-
sources can be transformed into a greater amount of resources in the future. This re-
flects the opportunity cost of the resources. Second, people are impatient: they prefer to
consume a given amount of resources now rather than in the future. For these two rea-
sons, it is generally accepted that the weights decline over time: 0  wn  wn1  . . . 
w1  w0  1. However, there is less agreement about the specific values of the weights.
These weights are referred to as social discount factors.To see this, note that equa-
tion (1) is a more general version of the formulas for calculating the NPV of a project.
These equations are equivalent if, for all t:
(2)
The term on the right-hand side of equation (2) is, in general, called a discount factor.
If i (0) is the real social discount rate (SDR), then it is called a social discount factor.
The social discount factor for period t measures the social value of one dollar of net
benefit arising at that time relative to the same amount arising now (time zero).
Selecting a set of weights (social discount factors) to use in equation (1) is equiva-
lent to selecting the real SDR. If equation (2) holds then 
where t  0 
wt =
wt - 1
(1 + i),
wt =
1
(1 + i)t
NPV = a
n
t=0
wt NBt
and w0  1. In this case, the weights decline geometrically: the weight in one period is
proportional to the weight in the previous period and this relationship is constant over
248

The Social Discount Rate
time. The rate of decline in the weights equals i, the SDR.3 The assumption that the
SDR is constant is appropriate for intra-generational projects. However, later in this
chapter we relax this assumption and discuss situations in which it is more reasonable
to assume that the weights do not decline at a constant rate; rather, there are time-de-
clining discount rates.
It is possible to do CBA without knowing the theoretical issues pertaining to the
choice of the social discount rate. Indeed, as we discuss near the end of this chapter, the
Office of Management and Budget or some similar government agency usually pre-
scribes the discount rate that should be used by government agencies. However, while
you might therefore be able to compute the NPV, you would not be able to give advice
or answer questions about the choice of the discount rate you were using unless you
read this chapter.
It is generally accepted that society’s choices, including the choice of weights,
should be based on individuals’ choices. But there are three fundamental unre-
solved issues. The first issue is whether observed market interest rates can be used
to represent how individuals weight future consumption relative to present con-
sumption. The second issue is whether society’s choices today should reflect the
wishes of individuals from unborn future generations in addition to individuals who
are alive today. The third issue is whether society attaches the same value to a unit
of investment as to a unit of consumption. Different views on these issues lead to
different methods for estimating the SDR and to different values (or set of values)
of the SDR.
The next section of this chapter shows that the choice of the SDR does matter: a
different social discount rate leads to a different policy recommendation. We then
present the theory behind the appropriate SDR. We begin with a simple two-period
model with no taxes and no market failures. In this situation, the choice of SDR
would be obvious and would equal the market interest rate. However, in the absence
of perfect markets, there are a number of plausible market interest rates upon which
to base the SDR. To resolve this problem we adopt an alternative approach that de-
rives the consumption rate of interest (CRI)—the rate at which society is willing to
trade current consumption for future consumption—from an optimal growth model.
Traditionally, though, the value of the SDR was based on market interest rates. We
discuss the merits of different market-based rates, the circumstances under which
each is most applicable, and provide our best judgment about their specific values.
Private-sector investment returns are generally higher than the CRI. To avoid a mis-
allocation of resources when using the CRI, positive or negative investment flows
should be multiplied by the shadow price of capital prior to discounting. The next
section discusses problems with using market-based rates to derive the SDR and
proposes values of the CRI based on the optimal growth model.The final major issue
concerns intergenerational discounting. Again, we discuss the main issues and pre-
sent our recommended values. Finally, we contrast our recommended rates with ac-
tual practice.
One issue that invariably arises in the discussion of the social discount rate is the
treatment of risk and uncertainty. One approach is to add a risk premium to the dis-
count rate to reflect the risk.We do not favor this approach. In our view, the best way to
handle risk is to use certainty equivalents.Thus, throughout this chapter, we assume that
249

The Social Discount Rate
benefits and costs are measured in terms of certainty equivalents.4 The key issue is to
determine the rate at which analysts should discount certainty equivalents that arise in
different years.
DOES THE CHOICE OF DISCOUNT RATE MATTER?
The choice of the SDR is one of the most important topics in CBA. Its importance has
recently been driven home in the debate over the Stern Review on the economics of cli-
mate change.5 This widely reported study argues that current policies could lead to the
cost of climate change amounting to 5% of global gross domestic product (GDP) each
year, now and forever. Accordingly, it argues for an immediate current sacrifice of 1%
of global GDP. However,William Nordhaus argues that this conclusion is based on “an
extreme assumption about discounting” and that if “we substitute more conventional
discount rates used in other global-warming analyses . . . the Review’s dramatic results
disappear.”6 Although the SDR does not have as dramatic an impact on most policy
questions as it does on global warming, it nearly always plays an important role in
determining the present value of the net benefits of public investments and, therefore,
on the recommended policy alternative.
Different discount rates can lead to different policy recommendations.To see how
the value of the SDR can change the ranking of projects, consider a government
agency with a budget of only $100,000 that can be spent on one of three potential pro-
jects. The annual net benefits of these projects are shown in Table 1. Choosing the
lower discount rate (2 percent) would favor project C, while the higher discount rate
(10 percent) would favor project B. Thus, the ranking of projects depends crucially on
the choice of discount rate.
Generally, a low discount rate favors projects with the highest total benefits, irre-
spective of when they occur, because all of the social discount factors (weights) are
close to 1 (i.e., high). Increasing the discount rate applies smaller weights to benefits or
costs that occur further in the future and therefore weakens the case for projects with
benefits that are back-end loaded (such as project C) and strengthens the case for pro-
jects with benefits that are front-end loaded (such as project B).
TABLE 1
Annual Net Benefits and Net Present Values for Three Alternative
Projects
Year
Project A
Project B
Project C
0
80,000
80,000
80,000
1
25,000
80,000
0
2
25,000
10,000
0
3
25,000
10,000
0
4
25,000
10,000
0
5
25,000
10,000
140,000
NPV
(i  2%)
37,836
35,762
46,802
NPV
(i  10%)
14,770
21,544
6,929
250

The Social Discount Rate
THE THEORY BEHIND THE APPROPRIATE SOCIAL DISCOUNT RATE
Welfare economics frames policy choices as an attempt to maximize social welfare – an
aggregation of the well-being or utility of the individuals that make up the society. It
also generally assumes that well-being depends ultimately on consumption (of both
privately consumed goods and services, such as food, as well as public goods, such as
environmental goods).As individuals, we tend to prefer immediate consumption bene-
fits to those occurring in the future. More formally we have a positive marginal rate of
time preference. Also, we face an opportunity cost of forgone interest when we spend
dollars today rather than invest them for future use, given that the marginal rate of re-
turn on private investment is positive.These considerations provide a basis for deciding
how costs and benefits realized by society in the future should be discounted.
This section first introduces the concept of an individual’s marginal rate of time pref-
erence.We then show that in a simple two-period model with perfect markets, every indi-
vidual’s marginal rate of time preference would equal the market interest rate.In this case
the choice of the SDR would be obvious.We then generalize the model to a small,isolated
country and introduce production. The main results still hold in perfect markets: The so-
cial marginal rate of time preference, the rate of return on investment, and the market in-
terest rate would all be equal. Again, the value of the SDR would be obvious. Then we
show that, due to taxes, risk and transaction costs, the three rates listed above are unlikely
to be equal in a real economy. In these circumstances, the choice of SDR would not be
clear.For this reason,and due to other problems that occur in basing the value of the SDR
on market interest rates (which we discuss later), we examine an alternative theoretical
approach for deriving the SDR that is based on optimal growth in consumption model.
An Individual’s Marginal Rate of Time Preference
Most of us would not be willing to lend someone $100 today in return for a promise of
payment of $100 in a year’s time, even if there were no inflation. We generally value
$100 today more than the promise of $100 next year in real terms, even if we are certain
that the promise will be carried out. Perhaps $90 is the most that we would be willing to
lend today in return for a promise of payment of $100 in a year’s time. Economists
refer to our preference to consume sooner rather than later as time preference.The rate
at which an individual makes marginal trade-offs is called an individual’s marginal rate
of time preference (MRTP).
The concept of time preference can be easily understood in the context of borrow-
ing and lending. Imagine that you are a graduate student who will receive a stipend of
$10,000 this year and $15,000 next year.Your rich uncle offers to give you some money
and asks if you would rather have $1,000 this year or $1,200 next year. Suppose that
you are indifferent between the gifts; that is, you are just willing to sacrifice $200 addi-
tional consumption next year in order to consume the extra $1,000 this year rather
than next year.7 In this case, you would have an MRTP of 20 percent. Put another way,
your MRTP tells us that you require more than 20 percent more next year in order to
decrease your current consumption by a small amount.
Absent a rich uncle, you might be able to consume more today through borrowing.
Although many banks may not be interested in lending you money because they fear
you may not pay them back, let us assume that your local credit union will lend you
251

The Social Discount Rate
money at an annual interest rate of 10 percent. That is, you can borrow $1,000 if you
promise to pay back this amount plus $100 in interest next year. If you were willing to
give up $200 to get an additional $1,000 immediately from your uncle, then you would
surely take advantage of the loan that requires you to give up only $100 in consump-
tion next year in order to consume $1,000 more this year.
Once you take out the loan, you will have $11,000 to spend this year and $13,900 to
spend next year. Now that you have reduced the gap between what you have to spend
this year relative to next year, you probably have an MRTP of less than 20 percent.
After taking out the loan you may now, if given the choice, prefer a gift of $1,200 next
year over a gift of $1,000 this year. If so, this indicates your MRTP is now less than
20 percent.This example illustrates that your MRTP changes as you shift consumption
from one year to another year.
Equality of Discount Rates in Perfect Markets
As long as you can borrow as much as you like, you can shift consumption from the fu-
ture to the present until your MRTP falls to the rate of interest you must pay. If banks
offer a rate of interest in excess of your MRTP, then you will happily save now and
defer some consumption to the future. For example, if you are indifferent between an
additional $1,000 today and an additional $1,050 next year but can deposit $1,000 for
one year to obtain an additional $1,060 next year, then you would want to make the de-
posit. Only when the rate of interest you earn just equals your MRTP will you be indif-
ferent between spending or depositing an additional dollar.
In a perfectly competitive capital market every individual’s MRTP equals the market
interest rate. To see this, suppose that a consumer’s utility is a function of consumption
over two years:C1 denotes consumption in this year (year 1) and C2 denotes consumption
in next year (year 2).The consumer maximizes her utility,denoted by U(C1,C2),subject to
a budget constraint in which T denotes the present value of total income available to
be spent over the two years and i denotes the market interest rate:
(3)
(4)
This problem is represented graphically in Figure 1.
The curves labeled U1 and U2 are indifference curves. Each curve represents com-
binations of current and future consumption that provide the individual with the same
level of utility. Thus, the individual is indifferent between any two points on an indif-
ference curve. All points on the curve U2 are preferred to all points on the curve U1;
that is, the preference directions are north and east.
The slope of each indifference curve is negative, reflecting the fact that consumers
require more consumption in the next period in order to give up consumption in this
period. If you are indifferent between an additional $1,000 today and an additional
$1,050 next year, for example, then the slope of your indifference curve equals
1,050>1,000  1.05. The absolute value of the slope of the indifference curve
measures the rate at which an individual is indifferent between substituting current
s.t. C1 +
C2
1 + i = T
Max U(C1, C2)
252

The Social Discount Rate
•A
U1
U2
C*1
C*2
T(1 + i)
Slope at A = – (1 + p)
Indifference curves
Future
consumption, C2 
Current 
consumption, C1 
Slope = – (1 + i)
T
FIGURE 1
Equality of MRTP and the Market Interest Rate
consumption for future consumption and is called the consumer’s marginal rate of sub-
stitution (MRS) between consumption this year and consumption next year.
In this example, the individual wants 5 percent more next year in order to defer
consumption; therefore his or her marginal rate of time preference equals 0.05. In gen-
eral, if you require 1  p more units in the future in order to give up one unit of current
consumption, then the slope of your indifference curve is (1  p); your marginal rate
of substitution is 1  p; and your marginal rate of time preference is p. In the relevant
range, p > 0 and the slope of the indifference curve is greater than 1 in absolute value.
As consumption in the current period increases, the indifference curve becomes
flatter, indicating that the consumer requires relatively smaller additional amounts of
future consumption in order to forgo a given amount of current consumption. Put an-
other way, as current consumption increases, the consumer’s marginal rate of substitu-
tion and the consumer’s marginal rate of time preference decrease.
The individual receives all of his or her income in the first period and can invest all
or part of it at interest rate i.8 Thus, the individual could spend all of his or her income in
year 1, which means C1  T and C2  0; the individual could spend all of it in year 2, in
which case C1  0 and C2  (1  i)T;or he or she could consume at any other point on the
budget constraint represented by the straight line with slope (1  i). Each additional
unit of consumption in period 1 costs (1  i) units of consumption in period 2 and each ad-
ditional unit of consumption in period 2 costs 1>(1  i) units of consumption in period 1.
253

The Social Discount Rate
To determine the optimal consumption level, we find the point at which the budget
constraint is tangential to an indifference curve. This occurs at point A in Figure 1
where the optimal consumption levels are denoted C1* and C2*. At this point the slope
of the indifference curve, (1  p), equals the slope of the budget constraint.
Rewriting the budget constraint, equation (4), thus:
(5)
implies that its slope equals (1  i).9 Thus at the optimum consumption level, point
A, p  i, that is, the market interest rate equals the consumer’s MRTP.10
This result holds generally in perfect markets where individuals can borrow or
lend as much as they want to and have “well-behaved” preference functions.11 Every
individual would have an MRTP equal to the market interest rate. Because all con-
sumers face the same market interest rate, all consumers would have the same MRTP.
Everyone is willing to trade current and future consumption at the same rate. Because
this rate equals the market interest rate, it would be natural to use the market interest
rate as the social discount rate. Later we discuss the appropriateness of using market
interest rates as the social discount rate when markets are not perfect.
A Simple Two-Period Model with Production
We now present a more general two-period model that pertains to a group of individ-
uals in a hypothetical country.We assume that this country does not trade with another
country. Moreover, as before, we ignore taxes and transaction costs associated with
making loans (although we come back to them later). Consequently, anyone who wants
a loan can borrow the desired amount at the market interest rate. In addition, except
when explicitly indicated otherwise, we ignore market failures, such as externalities
and information asymmetry, which could cause private and social discount rates to di-
verge from one another.
The economy of our hypothetical country is depicted in Figure 2. The horizontal
axis indicates consumption during the current period and the vertical axis indicates con-
sumption during the future period. The major difference between this model and the
previous model is that this model incorporates production. The curve labeled CPF is a
consumption possibility frontier that represents all the combinations of current and fu-
ture consumption that are feasible if the country utilizes its resources efficiently.
Suppose that at the beginning of the first period, the country has T units worth of re-
sources, which can be allocated between current consumption and investment.As before,
there are two extremes.At one extreme, which is represented by point T on the horizontal
axis,“society” (i.e. the country’s citizens in aggregate) could consume all T units in the cur-
rent period, invest none, and therefore have no future consumption.At the other extreme,
society could consume no units in the current period,invest all T units,and consume S units
in the future period, which is represented by point S on the vertical axis. Note that S  T,
which implies a positive rate of return on all resources invested in the current period.
Point X represents a more realistic intermediate position where current consump-
tion equals C*t and future consumption equals C*t 1. At this point, society would relin-
quish for investment It  T  C*t units of potential consumption in the current period.
C2 = T(1 + i) - (1 + i)C1
254

The Social Discount Rate
Future
consumption
CPF
S
0
C*t +1
C*t
It
R
It
T
Current
consumption
45˚
SIC1
SIC2
SIC3
W
X
Z
FIGURE 2
The Optimal Levels of Consumption and
Investment in a Two-Period Model
In the future period society would consume C t*1  It  R units, where It represents the
amount invested in the first period and R represents the return on this investment.
Future consumption can be partitioned into two components by drawing a 45° line from
point T to the line between X and C*t on Figure 2.The lower segment corresponds to It
and the upper segment corresponds to R.
Implicitly, there is a portfolio of investment projects. The investment, It, can be
thought of as a number of small investments that sum to It. The average rate of return
on these investments, which we denote as r, equals R>It. This average return is higher
than the marginal return on (a small) investment at X, denoted rx.To see this, note that
when viewed from below, the CPF curve is concave (i.e., it bows outward).This implies
that as the economy moves along its CPF curve from T toward S and more resources
are invested in the first period, equal increments in investments engender successively
smaller increases in future consumption; in short, it assumes society makes the best
investments first.
The set of three curves labeled SIC in Figure 2 are social indifference curves. Each
curve represents a combination of current and future consumption that provides soci-
ety with an equal level of utility. For example, society is indifferent between points X
and W on SIC2. The negative slope of the SICs implies that society is only willing to
give up some units of current consumption if future consumption is increased. The
social marginal rate of time preference (SMRTP) is the extra amount of future con-
sumption that society requires as compensation for giving up one unit of current con-
sumption.At X, society requires at least 1  px units in the future to give up one unit of
current consumption, and the SMRTP equals px.
255

The Social Discount Rate
The First-Best Solution in the Two-Period Model
Society, of course, desires to reach the highest possible indifference curve.As can be seen
in Figure 2, this curve is SIC2 given the CPF and an initial endowment of T units.
Although SIC3 is preferable to SIC2, the country’s resources are insufficient to reach
SIC3. Indeed, the country’s economy can only reach SIC2 at a single point, X.At X, SIC2
and the CPF curve are tangential and their slopes are equal. Consequently, at point X:
Accordingly, were the economy to operate at point X, the SMRTP would equal the
marginal rate of return on investment. Furthermore, these rates would equal the
economy-wide market rate of interest, denoted by i. In addition, if the rates of interest
for borrowing and lending were equal and available to all individuals, then every
member of society would have the same marginal rate of time preference, which
would also equal the economy-wide market interest rate. As all of these rates would
be equal, the choice of SDR at X would be both obvious and unambiguous. Point X is,
therefore, the “first-best” solution.
To see why everybody would have the same MRTP, suppose that an individual ini-
tially had a MRTP in excess of i; that is, she wanted to consume more now.This person
could borrow at i, a lower rate than she is willing to pay, and thereby increase her cur-
rent consumption at the expense of her future consumption. This increase in current
consumption would increase the relative value of future consumption, causing her
MRTP to decline until it eventually equaled i.Analogously, another individual with an
MRTP below i would willingly postpone some current consumption in exchange for in-
creased future consumption. By doing so her MRTP would rise until it equalled i.Thus,
at X every individual would have the same MRTP, equal to i.
Problems with Real Economies: The Second Best
Point X in Figure 2 is the socially optimal point in a perfectly competitive market with
no taxes, no externalities and no transaction costs. Economies in real countries are un-
able to operate at point X. In practice, an actual economy with taxes and transaction
costs would be more likely to function at point Z, which is a “second-best” outcome.
Here, society would underinvest (actual investment  It); it would only be able to
reach SIC1, not SIC2; and the marginal return on investment would exceed the mar-
ginal rate of time preference (rz  pz).12
To illustrate the wedge between pz and rz, consider a firm that earns a one-year
rate of return of 6 percent on an investment of $100 provided by a shareholder. In the
presence of taxes and transaction costs, not all of the $6 earned by the firm would be
returned to the shareholder. If the firm faced a corporate tax rate of 40 percent, then it
would pay $2.40 to the government and give only $3.60 to the shareholder. But a share-
holder facing a personal income tax rate of 30 percent would have to pay $1.08 of the
$3.60 to the government, leaving her with only $2.52. Further, imagine that the share-
holder faced transaction costs (searching for the investment opportunity, gathering
information about its risks, taking steps to reduce the risk, etc.) of $0.52.The actual re-
turn realized by the shareholder would be only $2. Thus, the 6 percent rate of return
1 + px = 1 + rx,  or  px = rx
256

The Social Discount Rate
on the investment would only elicit an investment from an individual with an MRTP of
2 percent or less.
Because different individuals and different firms have different preferences,
face different tax rates, and the transactions costs associated with investments vary
across investment projects and across individuals, numerous values exist for both
the marginal rate of time preference and the marginal rate of return on investment.
Thus, there is no obvious choice for the SDR that can be derived from these values.
An Infinite-Period Model: Discounting and the Optimal Growth Rate
In 1928, Frank Ramsey proposed a model with infinite periods in which society (or a
single representative individual) attempts to maximize a social welfare function that
reflects the values that society places on per capita consumption over time.13
Through investment, consumption increases over time. Policy makers choose the
amount of public investment in order to maximize the well-being of society now and
in the future. Following Ramsey, a number of economists have shown that maximiza-
tion of such a social welfare function implies that, on the optimal growth path, the
SDR (i.e., society’s marginal rate of time preference, px) would equal the sum of two
components: one reflecting impatience and the other reflecting society’s preference
for smoothing consumption flows over time.14 Specifically, px should equal the pure
rate of time preference, d, plus a term multiplying the long-run rate of growth in per
capita consumption, g, by a constant, e:
(6)
where d, g, e  0.
Society discounts future consumption for two reasons. First, like the individuals
that make up it, society is impatient and prefers to consume now rather than in the
future, ceteris paribus. Suppose that there is no growth. Further suppose, as we did
earlier, that the market is perfectly competitive (there are no taxes or transactions
costs) and, for illustrative convenience, suppose that there are only two periods.
Then, as shown in Figure 3, the CPF is symmetric and OS  OT. In this situation, so-
ciety would discount the utility derived from its consumption of future goods using a
“pure” rate of time preference, denoted by d. Because society is impatient, current
consumption would exceed future consumption, such as at point X, which is below
the 45° line.
This brings us to the second reason for discounting. Since this model assumes that
there is economic growth, society can consistently enjoy higher per capita consump-
tion in the future than it does today. This model further supposes that it is reasonable
to assume that individuals have declining marginal utility of consumption. Societal
welfare would be increased if consumption were “smoothed out” (made more equal)
over time. Put another way, the future should have a lower weight than the present as
incrementally higher levels of consumption are less valuable to them. The parameter
e is an elasticity that measures how fast the social marginal utility of consumption falls
as per capita consumption rises. Setting e equal to zero (with d  0) implies no dis-
counting of future consumption: society treats each unit of consumption received in
px = d + ge
257

The Social Discount Rate
S
X
SIC
CPF
T
Current  
consumption
Future 
consumption 
Ct+1
Ct
0
450
FIGURE 3
Optimal Levels of Consumption and Investment
in a Two-Period Model without Growth
the future as identical to a unit of consumption in the present, signifying a complete
lack of concern for our current lower wealth and, therefore, for intergenerational in-
equality. In contrast, as e approaches infinity, society completely discounts each unit
of consumption received in the (richer) future, signifying an overwhelming desire to
equalize per capita consumption over time.When e equals one, the relative weight on
society’s consumption in each time period equals the inverse of its relative per capita
consumption. Thus, a 10 percent reduction in consumption today, for example, from
$40,000 to $36,000, is an acceptable trade-off for a 10 percent increase in consump-
tion at a richer, future time, for example, from $80,000 to $88,000. Society weighs the
loss of $1 of consumption today as twice as important as a gain of $1 to its future self,
because the future society is twice as rich.
It is possible to show that on the optimal growth path of the economy, the value
of the marginal rate of return on investment must equal the value of the SMRTP,
that is:
(7)
As before, the x subscript indicates that this result holds for the first-best, or optimal,
growth path.
rx = px = d + ge
258

The Social Discount Rate
DERIVING THE SOCIAL DISCOUNT RATE 
FROM MARKET RATES: FOUR ALTERNATIVES
This section discusses four ways to derive the SDR based on observable, market rates,
and it presents values of those rates for use in CBAs.15 All four methods presume that
a public-sector project should be undertaken if its benefits would exceed the opportu-
nity cost of the resources; otherwise, it should not.This is essentially the CBA compen-
sation test: is it better to invest in a government project or invest in the private sector
and then use the returns to compensate the potential beneficiaries of the project?
The first way uses the marginal rate of return on private-sector investments, rz.The
second uses a value equal to the social marginal rate of time preference, pz. The third
uses a value equal to the government’s real borrowing rate, i. The fourth uses a
weighted average of pz, rz, and i, where the weights reflect the amount of the project’s
resources that are financed by consumption, investment, and foreign borrowing, re-
spectively. We continue to use the subscript z on p and r to emphasize that we are dis-
cussing a real economy that is at a “second-best” point such as Z in Figure 2 (rather
than at X), and as a consequence, the marginal rate of time preference is not equal to
the marginal rate of return on investment.
Using the Marginal Rate of Return on Private Investment
The argument for using the marginal rate of return on private investment, rz, as the
SDR is that before the government takes resources out of the private sector, it should
be able to demonstrate that society will receive a greater return in the public sector than
it would have received had the resources remained in the private sector.The most com-
pelling case for the use of rz was made in an influential article by Arnold Harberger.16
Harberger analyzed a closed domestic market for investment and savings, such as the
one presented in Figure 4. In the absence of taxes and government borrowing, the de-
mand curve for investment funds by private-sector borrowers is represented by D0, and
the supply curve of funds from lenders (savers) is represented by S0.
Now consider the introduction of a corporate income tax and a personal income
tax. The tax on corporate profits would shift the demand curve down to DI because
part of the returns from investments must now be paid to the government, whereas
the tax on interest income would shift the supply curve up to SS because part of the in-
terest on savings must now be paid to the government.Thus, both taxes would reduce
investment.
Given the initial demand and supply curves and these taxes, the market-clearing
interest rate would be i. That is, investors would pay an interest rate of i to borrow
funds, and savers would receive an interest rate of i prior to paying taxes. However,
the marginal rate of return on investment before taxes (i.e., the opportunity cost of
forgone private-sector investment) would be rz, with the gap between rz and i repre-
senting taxes paid by investors. The opportunity cost of forgone consumption or,
equivalently, the marginal rate of time preference, pz, would equal the marginal return
on savings after taxes (i.e., there would be a gap between pz and i representing taxes
paid by savers on interest income).Thus, as previously discussed, taxes would cause rz
to exceed pz.
259

The Social Discount Rate
Price
rz
i′
i
pz
0
Savings,
investment
Ss
DI
D′I
S0
D0
FIGURE 4
The Effects of Taxes and Government Borrowing on
Savings and Investment
Now consider the effects of a government project that is financed entirely by bor-
rowing in a closed, domestic financial market. Suppose the demand for funds for the
new project shifts the market demand curve up to DI	. The market rate of interest
would rise from i to i	. Private-sector investment would fall by 
I, and private-sector
savings would increase by 
C. Because the increase in private-sector savings would ex-
actly equal the decrease in private-sector consumption, the project would “crowd out”
both investment (by 
I) and consumption (by 
C).
Harberger suggests that the social discount rate should be obtained by weighting
rz and pz by the respective size of the relative contributions that investment and con-
sumption would make toward funding the project. That is, he suggests that the SDR
should be computed using the weighted average cost of capital,WSOC:
(8)
where a  
I(
I  
C) and b  (1  a)  
C(
I  
C).
Finally, Harberger asserts that savings are not very responsive to changes in inter-
est rates. Some empirical evidence supports this assertion, implying that the SS curve is
close to vertical, and as a consequence, 
C is close to zero.17 This, in turn, suggests that
WSOC = arz + bpz
260

The Social Discount Rate
the value of the parameter a is close to 1 and the value of b is close to 0. In other words,
almost all of the resources for public-sector investment would be obtained by crowding
out private-sector investment. Harberger, therefore, argues that the marginal rate of
return on investment is a good approximation of the SDR.
Numerical Values of rz.
Probably the best proxy for the marginal rate of return on pri-
vate investment, rz, is the real, before-tax rate of return on corporate bonds, although
some analysts argue for using an average return that also includes the rate of return on
equities.
There are four reasons for using a bond rate rather than a measure of the average
return on equities. The first is that doing so avoids the problem of having to estimate
the effective marginal corporate tax rate. Because a firm can deduct the interest it pays
to its bondholders before calculating its taxable income, it will equate (on the margin)
its expected before-tax return on an investment with the before-tax rate it must pay on
its bonds. So the real bond yield is a good direct proxy for rz. Second, the measure
should proxy the marginal pre-tax return on private investment. Using a measure based
on average returns to equities would lead to too high a rate, as the return on a marginal
investment is lower than the average return. The interest rate on bonds represents the
marginal borrower’s willingness-to-pay, and this should equal the return on the mar-
ginal investment. Third, bond yields are available contemporaneously, while the aver-
age return on equities must be calculated by looking back over some historical period
(and will vary greatly according to the period chosen). Finally, as we discussed earlier,
we want to use a risk-free rate of return, and returns to equity investments contain a
risk premium, typically measured as the difference between the observed ex post real
return to a diversified equity portfolio and the real return to a (default-risk free) gov-
ernment bond.18 Although bond rates of return contain a risk premium, it is lower than
the equity risk premium.
Taking the yields on Moody’s AAA-rated corporate bonds or the yields on all
Moody’s rated corporate bonds and then adjusting for inflationary expectations suggests
that the before-tax return on corporate bonds is approximately 4.5 percent. Based on this
estimate, 4.5 percent is a reasonable value for rz.
Criticisms of the Calculation and Use of rz.
Several factors suggest that use of an
SDR of 4.5 percent is too high. Some of these criticisms pertain to the estimation of
rz while others pertain to the strong assumptions made by Harberger. First, private-
sector rates of return may be pushed upward by market distortions caused by nega-
tive externalities and market prices that exceed social marginal cost.19 Second, even
low-risk private-sector bonds incorporate a small default risk premium that is not
likely to apply to the government because it holds a broader, more diversified port-
folio of projects.20 In practice, therefore, actual government borrowing rates are
lower.21 Third, the project might be financed by taxes, rather than by loans, in which
case consumption is more likely to be crowded out than investment. The reason is
that most taxes are collected from individuals through income, payroll, and con-
sumption taxes, which mainly affect consumption, especially if savings rates are
fairly low. Fourth, the project may, in fact, be partially financed by borrowing from
overseas. Fifth, there may not be a fixed pool of investment so that government 
261

The Social Discount Rate
investment may not replace private investment dollar-for-dollar. Indeed, govern-
ment infrastructure projects can raise the private return to capital.22 If the economy
is not fully employing all its resources, then complete crowding out is unlikely. For
all these reasons, using values of the SDR of about 4.5 percent should be viewed as
close to the upper limit of the SDR.
Using the Social Marginal Rate of Time Preference
Many analysts hold that the SDR should be thought of as the rate at which individuals
in society are willing to postpone a small amount of current consumption in exchange
for additional future consumption (and vice versa), that is, at a consumption rate of in-
terest (CRI). In principle, pz represents this rate.Another way to justify using this rate
is to assume that a project is financed entirely by domestic taxes and to assume that
taxes reduce consumption but not investment. Then, it is appropriate to set a  0 and
b  1 in equation (8), yielding a SDR equal to pz.
Numerical Values of pz.
In practice, the best return that many people can earn in ex-
change for postponing consumption is the real, after-tax return on savings. Therefore,
an obvious candidate for the pz is the return to individuals from holding government
bonds, the class of assets that have the lowest risk.
Two possible starting points to use to obtain a value of pz are the average
monthly yield on one-year U.S. government Treasury notes or that on medium-term
(10-year) Treasury bonds.23 These nominal, pre-tax average monthly yields must
then be converted to real, after-tax rates by adjusting for taxes and inflation. In
practice, it is difficult to know exactly what effective tax rate faces the marginal
saver. John Shoven and Michael Topper argue that the personal tax rate on savings
in the United States is 30 percent.24 The rate of inflation that consumers and savers
expected while holding these assets was obtained from the Livingston survey. Based
on these data, we estimate that the real, expected after-tax savings rates have typi-
cally fluctuated between 1 and 2 percent per annum. The real, after-tax returns to
ten-year Treasury bonds, which employ explicit ten-year ahead inflation forecasts,
probably provide the best estimate. Given these estimates, tempered with the longer-
term historical results, we recommend using 1.5 percent as the value of pz, with sensi-
tivity analysis at 1.0 percent and 2.0 percent (approximately plus or minus one stan-
dard deviation, given the most recent measures of volatility).
Criticisms of the Calculation and Use of pz.
There are three main criticisms pertain-
ing to the computation and use of pz. First, as we discussed above, due to taxes and
transaction costs, pz  rz. If we used pz as the SDR then governments may engage in
long-term investments that provide low returns at the expense of higher-return private
projects, thereby harming allocative efficiency.
Second, individuals differ in their preferences and opportunities.25 While some
are saving at low rates, others are borrowing at high rates. Some save by reducing their
debt. Because consumer borrowing rates exceed savings rates and because reducing
262

The Social Discount Rate
some forms of debt is not taxed, consumers who save by reducing their debt earn a
higher real, after-tax return than other savers. For example, the real after-tax return of
paying down one’s mortgage has historically been about 3 percent.26 People who save
by paying down the balance on their credit cards earn very high returns, often higher
than 15 percent in real terms. It is not obvious how to aggregate these different indi-
vidual rates into a single, social discount rate. Furthermore, some individuals are
screened out of legitimate credit markets altogether due to informational asymme-
tries. Thus, their preferences are not reflected by market rates; in effect, they are not
“counted.”
Third, individuals are not always consistent and rational.27 This weakens the nor-
mative argument for basing social choices on market behavior. There are three
strands of behavioral evidence to support this assertion. First, some individuals
simultaneously lend and borrow: they pay down mortgages, buy government and
corporate bonds and stocks for retirement, borrow on their credit cards. It is unreason-
able to assume that these individuals have a single marginal rate of time preference.28 A
study of retirement offers of annuities or lump-sum payments made to U.S. military
personnel found implied rates of time preference averaging over 25 percent! These
rates varied between 0 and 30 percent by age, race, number of children, education,
and rank.29 Second, individual preferences appear to be what is described as “time
inconsistent.” For example, individual rates of time preference and implied discount
rates appear to decline over the horizon to which they are applied.30 As a result,
choices made at one time might be overturned later even if no new information be-
comes available. Similarly, projects that appear socially valuable at the time of an
initial decision might later appear to be a mistake, even though nothing has changed
except the passage of time. Third, there is a strand of evidence demonstrating that
the framing of intertemporal choice affects individuals’ implicit rates of time prefer-
ence. Thus, individuals use different rates to discount large amounts versus small
amounts, losses versus gains, choices involving the near future as against choices far-
ther out in time, and choices between speeding up versus delaying consumption.
Using the Government’s Borrowing Rate
Some economists argue that the government should discount projects using its long-
term borrowing rate, i, because this rate reflects the actual cost of financing the mar-
ginal project.
Numerical Values of i.
To obtain a specific value of the government’s borrowing rate,
i, we begin with the average monthly yield on 10-year U.S. Treasury bonds for the pe-
riod April 1953 to December 2001, which was 6.71 percent. Adjusting for inflation
using the CPI, which increased at 3.89 percent per annum during this period, yields a
real return on these bonds equal to 2.71 percent. This suggests using a value of i equal
to 2.7 percent with a plausible range for sensitivity analysis of 1.7 to 3.7 percent.
Criticisms of the Calculation and Use of i.
Like rz, i may be upwardly biased due 
to market failures. Also, government projects may be funded by taxes rather than 
263

The Social Discount Rate
borrowing, a point we discuss in more detail in the following section. Furthermore,
even if projects were deficit financed, even open economies, such as the United States,
may not be able to borrow at an unchanging real interest rate. We also expand on this
point in the next section.
Using the Weighted Average Approach
Proponents of using rz as the SDR assume that resources for government investment
come from borrowing that crowds out domestic investment dollar-for-dollar.Advocates
of pz assume that resources come from taxes that crowd out current domestic consump-
tion dollar-for-dollar. Others argue that projects are financed by government borrowing
from foreigners.31
In practice, resources may come from all three sources. Some economists have pro-
posed that the SDR should be calculated in terms of the social opportunity cost of the
different sources weighted according to the relative contribution of each source. If a is
the proportion of the project’s resources that crowd out private domestic investment, b
is the proportion of the resources that displace domestic consumption, and 1  a  b is
the proportion of the resources that are financed by borrowing from foreigners,then the
weighted social opportunity cost of capital (WSOC) method computes the SDR as the
weighted average of these rates:
(9)
As pz  i  rz, it follows that pz  WSOC  rz. Obviously, the previous methods are
special cases of this more general approach.
Numerical Values of WSOC.
As previously discussed, reasonable U.S. values for rz,
pz and i are 4.5 percent, 1.5 percent, and 2.7 percent, respectively. Values of a, b, and,
hence, (1  a  b) may vary from project to project, depending on how it is
financed.32
Proponents of the WSOC method tend to argue that a is large, b is small and
(1  a  b) is something in-between. They tend to believe Harberger’s argument that
funding comes at the expense of private-sector investment, but recognize that some fi-
nancing might come from consumption or by borrowing from overseas.
However, prior to the 2008–2009 financial crisis, governments and the public in
most developed countries usually viewed new federal expenditures as necessitating
additional taxes, and they viewed reductions in debt levels as enabling tax reduc-
tions (and vice versa). In the United States, almost all state governments are subject
to requirements that they run balanced budgets. Thus, in most circumstances one
can assume that government projects are tax financed. Furthermore, the majority of
taxes are obtained from consumers.33 And, there is fairly strong evidence that in
“normal times,” changes in consumers’ disposable incomes lead to changes in con-
sumption rather than changes in savings.34 Hence, b would be large, a would be
small, and (1  a  b) would be zero. Placing precise values on these parameters is
WSOC = arz + bpz + (1 - a - b)i
264

The Social Discount Rate
difficult. However, it would be reasonable for a tax financed project to suppose that
a  0.2 and b  0.8, suggesting that the value of WSOC would be about 2.5 percent.
When the government does resort to deficit financing, such as during the global
financial crisis that began in 2008, it is likely to be when the economy is operating
below full potential. In such circumstances, marginal public sector investments are
unlikely to crowd out private investment.
Some specific projects are largely or completely deficit financed. A government
may issue a bond to finance a specific project. Most developed countries are fairly
open economies. Whether or not the economy is operating at its full potential, gov-
ernment can borrow from abroad at the government’s borrowing rate. Increased
borrowing may raise domestic interest rates, which would appreciate the exchange
rate (under a flexible exchange rate regime). Net exports would fall, and given the
supply of savings, some private-sector investment would be crowded out. Although
there is little evidence on how responsive the supply of foreign funds is to the inter-
est rate, analysts can probably assume that the effect on interest rates, the exchange
rate, and investment are quite small, especially for a small project. The effect on
consumption is likely to be even smaller because, as previously suggested, the bal-
ance of the evidence suggests that it is not very responsive to changes in market in-
terest rates. Thus, for a specifically deficit financed project, (1  a  b) would be
large, a would be small, and b would be very small. Consequently, the value of WSOC
would be about 2.75 percent.
Criticisms of the Calculation and Use of the WSOC.
The criticisms pertaining to the
use of pz, rz, or i as the social discount rate generally also apply to the WSOC.There is,
however, one other consideration. The previous approaches each resulted in a single
social discount rate. In contrast, the value of WSOC depends on the sources of a pro-
ject’s resources, which may vary from one project to another. In practice, governments
prefer a single social discount rate because of the difficulty of monitoring assumptions
about the sources of resources required for specific projects and of explaining why
different discount rates are used on different projects.
THE SHADOW PRICE OF CAPITAL
As we discussed above, social welfare depends on consumption and the SDR should
reflect society’s willingness to trade off future consumption for present consumption.
Thus, there is a strong theoretical justification for choosing a CRI as the social discount
rate. However, resources invested in the private sector generally earn a higher return
than the consumption rate of interest: rz  pz. If the government used a lower discount
rate than the private sector, then it would undertake projects that the private sector
would not undertake and it would grow undesirably large. Also, whether or not a pro-
ject was undertaken would depend on whether the assets were state owned or pri-
vately owned and not exclusively on the merits of the project.
In order to overcome these problems, recall that, a public-sector project should
be undertaken if its benefits would exceed the opportunity cost of the resources; oth-
erwise, it should not. To ensure that government projects pass this test, changes in
265

The Social Discount Rate
private-sector investment flows are weighted by a parameter, which is greater than 1,
called the shadow price of capital (SPC) and denoted by .This parameter converts in-
vestment flows (in or out) into their consumption equivalents. In the SPC discounting
method, these consumption equivalents, like consumption flows themselves, are then
discounted at pz.35
Consumption and investment are treated differently because consumption pro-
vides an immediate benefit while investment generates a stream of benefits that occur
in future periods.To see this, suppose a dollar is invested in the private sector for an in-
definite period. Suppose also that it earns a return of rz each period and this return is
consumed each period, while the original dollar is reinvested.Thus, rz is consumed each
period in perpetuity. The present value of this perpetual consumption flow, using the
formula for a perpetuity, is:
(10)
Because rz is greater than pz, the value of is greater than 1 reflecting the situation
that, at the margin, displaced private-sector investment is more costly to society than dis-
placed consumption and that increments to private-sector investment are more beneficial
than increments to consumption. By multiplying flows into and out of private-sector in-
vestment by , we convert them into their consumption equivalents.
To explore the shadow price approach a bit further, suppose that a project yields
real annual benefits of B per year indefinitely. If all of these benefits are consumed as
they arise then the present value of this perpetual consumption flow discounted at pz
is B>pz.
Now consider two extreme cases. If the project’s capital cost, C, is paid in year 0
and all these funds are raised from consumption, then the NPV rule implies the project
should be undertaken if B>pz  C. Thus, in this extreme situation, the SPC method is
equivalent to discounting benefits and costs at the SMRTP.
Next suppose instead that all the costs, which still occur in year 0, displace private
investment. Under this assumption, the NPV rule implies the project should be under-
taken if B>pz  C  (rz>pz)C or, equivalently, if B>rz  C.This condition is equivalent
to discounting the benefits and costs at the rate of return on private investment, as
Harberger suggested.
u
u =
rz
pz
The expression for the SPC in equation (10) is based on several simplifying
assumptions. One is that the investment will not depreciate. Another is that the entire
return from the investment will be consumed when it occurs. More likely, some of the
return will be consumed when it is generated and some will be reinvested.
Consideration of these possibilities leads to a more general expression for the SPC:
(11)
where  is the depreciation rate of the capital invested; f is the fraction of the gross re-
turn that is reinvested; and, as before, pz is the SMRTP and rz is the net return on cap-
ital after depreciation.36 Note that in the absence of reinvestment and depreciation
(i.e., if f  0 and   0) this formula reduces to equation (10).
u =
(rz + d)(1 - f)
pz - rzf + d(1 - f)
266

The Social Discount Rate
Numerical Values of 
To apply equation (11), we need values for pz, rz, f, and .We have already discussed pz
and rz; thus, we need consider only f and .To obtain a value for , the depreciation rate
of capital, we rely on Charles Hulten and Frank Wykoff, who found that the annual de-
preciation rate for manufacturing equipment was 13.3 percent and for structures used
in manufacturing was 3.4 percent.37 Weighting these rates by the relative proportions
of equipment (67 percent) and structures (33 percent) in U.S. capital stock (figures that
are available from the United States Statistical Abstracts) gives an average annual de-
preciation rate of [0.67  0.133  0.33  0.034]  10 percent.
The gross investment rate (the ratio of real gross fixed investment to real GDP)
provides a rough estimate of f, the fraction of the gross return that is reinvested. It av-
eraged 13.0 percent for 1947–2002, based on quarterly real GDP data with a range be-
tween 10.6 and 18.5 percent. A more recent five-year average was 17.6 percent. Based
on these results, we choose 17 percent as our best estimate of f in the future.
Plugging these estimates into equation (11) yields a value of   1.33, implying that
one dollar of private-sector investment would produce a stream of consumption benefits
with an NPV equal to $1.33. If we had used equation (10) instead, then this would yield
a value of  equal to 3.0.
Earlier, we suggested using a range for rz of 4.0 to 5.0 percent and a range for pz
of 1.0 to 2.0 percent. Using different combinations of these values, with f  17 percent
and   10 percent, results in values for  of between 1.21 and 1.47. For sensitivity
analysis, the larger of these values (  1.47) should be used with pz  1.0 percent and
the smaller (  1.21) with pz  2.0 percent.
Using the Shadow Price of Capital with pz
The SPC method requires that discounting be done in four steps. First, the costs and
benefits in each period are divided into those that directly affect consumption and
those that directly affect investment. Second, flows into and out of investment are mul-
tiplied by the SPC, , to convert them into consumption equivalents. Third, changes in
consumption are added to changes in consumption equivalents. Fourth, the resultant
consumption equivalents and the original consumption flows are discounted at pz.
To illustrate how to apply the SPC, consider a project to improve the physical plant
of a city’s schools that is financed by a bond issue of $3 million.38 We assume that the
bonds would be purchased solely by city citizens and would be paid for by local resi-
dents at 4 percent (real) interest through five equal annual installments of $673,854.
Benefits from the project are estimated to be $700,000 a year over a five-year period
and $0 thereafter. Following Harberger, we assume that the entire amount borrowed,
which would be repaid over five years, would displace private-sector investment.39
Given that the loan is repaid over five years at 4 percent interest, the equal annual
installments are $673,854. For the first year, $120,000 (0.04  3,000,000) is interest on
the loan and $553,854 (673,854  120,000) is repayment of principal. Consequently, at
the end of the first year, immediately after the first annual payment, the loan balance
equals $2,446,146 (3,000,000  553,854). Extending this logic to the second and subse-
quent years, it follows that $576,008 (673,854  .04  2,446,146) is paid toward the cap-
ital portion of the loan at the end of the second year, and $599,048, $623,010, and
267

The Social Discount Rate
$648,080 are paid toward the loan at the end of years 3, 4, and 5, respectively. By the
end of the fifth year the loan is completely paid off (553,854  576,008  599,048 
623,010  648,080  3,000,000). Again, we assume that the full amount of each of the
loan principal repayments goes toward increasing investment. In summary, under
these assumptions, the net changes in investment each year are:
There are three types of changes in consumption: the project benefits of
$700,000 per year during each of the five years, the $673,854 loan repayment during
each year, and the interest on the loan, which varies each year. The first year’s inter-
est on the loan is $120,000 as just discussed. For years 2, 3, 4 and 5, the interest
equals $97,846, $74,806, $50,844, and $25,923, respectively. We assume that these
amounts are entirely consumed, rather than reinvested. Thus, the net changes in
consumption are:
Using pz  1.5 as the discount rate, the present value of the changes in consump-
tion is $481,031 and the total present value of the changes in investment is $134,571.
With shadow pricing, the latter figure would be multiplied by   1.33 to convert it to
its consumption equivalent and, hence, would equal $178,979. Thus, with shadow
pricing, the project’s NPV would be $302,052 ($481,031  $178,979). If shadow pricing
were ignored, the NPV would increase to $346,460 ($481,031  $134,571).
Although this method has strong theoretical appeal, it is somewhat difficult to use
in practice and there are few examples of it actually being used to evaluate public-
sector projects. One could certainly argue that there is no need to use the SPC if all
of the impacts affect consumption, not investment. We argued above that in “normal
times” most funds for government projects are obtained from taxes and that taxes
tend to displace consumption, rather than investment, and therefore, as long as there
are not other large effects on private-sector investments, one might be tempted to
ignore the SPC. Sometimes, including during times of crisis, projects are deficit
financed. However, in an open economy, deficit financing is not likely to have a big
impact on domestic investment and so, again, one might discount using pz, and ignore
the SPC.40
The case for using the SPC is strongest for deficit-financed projects in a closed econ-
omy where the supply of savings and foreign funds are very unresponsive to the interest
rate. It is also strong for CBAs of regulatory impacts. The social costs of abiding by
 ¢C5 = $700,000 - $673,854 + $25,923 = $52,146.
 ¢C4 = $700,000 - $673,854 + $50,844 = $76,146,
 ¢C3 = $700,000 - $673,854 + $74,806 = $100,952,
 ¢C2 = $700,000 - $673,854 + $97,846 = $123,992,
 ¢C1 = $700,000 - $673,854 + $120,000 = $146,146,
 ¢C0 = $0
 ¢I3 = $599,048, ¢I4 = $623,010, ¢I5 = $648,080.
 ¢I0 = -$3,000,000, ¢I1 = $553,854, ¢I2 = $576,008,
268

The Social Discount Rate
a regulation are generally borne by firms and reduce the amount of resources available
for investment.
Criticisms of Calculation and Use of 
The SPC method accounts for increases and displacement of private investment and
consumption in a theoretically appropriate fashion, which is an important advan-
tage over other methods. Nonetheless, one can raise several objections. First, as op-
posed to just choosing a discount rate and using it in the NPV formula, it is difficult
to explain to policy makers how the NPV calculations are made, let alone why.
Second, the information requirements are more substantial than for the other dis-
counting approaches. Third, as the previous example suggests, judgment plays an
important role in deciding how to allocate benefits and costs between investment
and consumption. Finally, as the NPV depends on , which in turn depends on rz and
pz, the results are subject to the criticisms that pertain to the calculation of these
parameters.
USING THE OPTIMAL GROWTH RATE APPROACH TO DISCOUNTING
Problems with Using Market Rates to Derive the SDR
Earlier we argued that the SDR should be based on the rate at which individuals are will-
ing to trade current consumption for future consumption. We also showed that in some
circumstances individual marginal rates of time preference, the marginal return on in-
vestment and the market rate of interest would all be equal and the choice of the SDR
would be obvious. This has led some economists to argue that one can infer the SDR
from market rates of interest. Also, as some market rates of return may reflect the op-
portunity cost of the resources used in a government project, it has been proposed that
they can be used to infer the SDR.However,many economists now reject the notion that
the SDR can be inferred from market interest rates.We discussed some of these reasons
in the section on the calculation and use of pz. One reason is that that there are many dif-
ferent market rates and it is not clear which rate to use or how to aggregate them.Also,
evidence indicates that individuals do not behave rationally and consistently. Another
reason is that market rates of return may overestimate the SDR due to market power
and negative externalities, which we discussed in our critique of the use of rz.
A final reason why analysts should not use market rates is that they only reflect
the preferences of individuals currently alive, not those not yet born. This is espe-
cially problematic when a project’s impacts span generations. Those yet unborn do
not have a direct voice in current markets, yet we may believe that they should have
standing in our (current) CBAs.41 Members of the current generation may fail to ac-
count appropriately for the effects of long-term projects on the welfare of future
generations. For these and other reasons, Nicholas Stern concluded that for projects
addressing climate change it is “entirely inappropriate” to use market rates of re-
turn as a basis for the SDR.42 The optimal growth rate method does not suffer from
these problems.43
269

The Social Discount Rate
Numerical Values of the SDR Using the Optimal 
Growth Rate Method
We described the optimal growth rate model to determine the SDR earlier in this
chapter. It implies that the SDR can be given by equation (6).To derive px by the opti-
mal growth rate method, we need values of the elasticity of the social marginal utility
of consumption with respect to per capita consumption, e, the pure rate of time prefer-
ence, d, and the growth rate in per capita consumption, g.
Using annualized per capita quarterly data on real consumption expenditures for
1947–2002, we estimate that the average growth rate of consumption per head in the
United States was 2.3 percent per annum.44 It is difficult to predict the future long-run
growth rate, especially as recent historical growth rates have varied substantially.
However, we think that future growth rates will fall somewhat and therefore recommend
using g equal to 2.0 percent, with sensitivity analysis at 1.5 and 2.5 percent.
There are a variety of ways to estimate or prescribe a value for e. Most proposed
values range between 1 and 4.45 Empirical estimates of e that are based on the pro-
gressivity built into the income tax schedule are about 1.5. Based on a variety of con-
siderations, we recommend setting e  1.3, with sensitivity analysis at 1.0 and 2.0.
There has been considerable debate about the value of d since Ramsey’s original
article. It may seem reasonable for society to discount consumption next year rela-
tive to consumption this year because of pure time preference, or impatience.
However, when applied to long-term projects with intergenerational impacts, this
would be equivalent to treating the utility of future generations as less valuable than
the utility of the current generation. Ramsey himself thought that it is ethically inde-
fensible to use a positive value. However, Kenneth Arrow shows that weighting all gen-
erations’ welfare equally results in very high rates of savings being required of the cur-
rent (or even of every) generation.46 He demonstrates that, under reasonable
parameter values, the current generation could be required to save approximately two-
thirds of its income! To avoid this result, a positive pure rate of time preference should
be employed. Arrow suggests a figure of around 1.0 percent for d, which we use in the
following calculations.
With g  2.0 percent, e  1.3, and d  1.0 percent, px is approximately equal to 3.5
percent. Sensitivity analysis with e ranging between 1.0 and 2.0 and with g varying be-
tween 1.5 and 2.5 percent implies px ranges from 2.5 percent and 6.0 percent. Thus, we
recommend using a value of px equal to 3.5 percent with sensitivity analysis at 2.0 and
6.0 percent.47
Criticisms of the Optimal Growth Rate Method and Rate
There are several criticisms of this approach and of the estimated parameter values.
First, as mentioned above, it is hard to predict the future long-run growth rate in con-
sumption, g. Second, we use national income accounts to measure the growth rate in
real (aggregate) consumption expenditure per person, but this may not accurately mea-
sure what economists mean by consumption. For example, this consumption measure
includes purchases of consumer durables, which most analysts believe should be inter-
preted as investment. Also, it does not include the consumption of public goods. Third,
the parameters e and d are based on value judgments about intergenerational equality.
270

The Social Discount Rate
The Shadow Price of Capital, , for Use with the 
Optimal Growth Rate Discount Rate
The optimal growth rate method derives a CRI. As mentioned above, if this rate is less
than the rate that can be earned in the private sector, then society may underinvest in
private-sector projects. To overcome this problem, private-sector investment flows
should be converted to consumption equivalents by multiplying them by the shadow
price of capital before discounting.In doing this, must be recomputed by replacing pz in
equation (10) or (11) with px. Using equation (11) with px  3.5 percent, rz  4.5 percent,
f  17 percent, and   10 percent, then   1.1 approximately.48 Given our recom-
mended range for px of between 2 and 6 percent and for rz of between 4 and 5 percent, 
can be as small as 1.0 and as large as 1.32. For sensitivity analysis, the smaller of these two
values should be used with px  6 percent and the larger value with px  2 percent.
In summary, for intragenerational projects we recommend discounting using the op-
timal growth rate method with px  3.5 percent and sensitivity analysis at 2 percent and
6 percent. Flows in or out of private-sector investment should first be multiplied by the
shadow price of capital , equal to 1.1 with sensitivity analysis of  equal to 1.0 when px  6
percent and  equal to 1.32 when px  2 percent. These values are likely to be applicable
in most developed countries.49
INTERGENERATIONAL DISCOUNTING
Reasons for Using a Time-Declining Discount 
Rate for Intergenerational Discounting
So far we have considered only constant (time-invariant) SDRs.We have assumed, for
example, the same SDR is used to discount costs and benefits between years 401 and
400 as between years 1 and 0. There are at least four reasons to consider using a time-
declining SDR (i.e., to use lower rates to discount costs and benefits that occur farther
in the future). Most of these considerations become relevant when project effects cross-
generational lines. However, there is no obvious way to decide when a project is intra-
generational or intergenerational. In many circumstances, those as yet unborn when a
project is initiated will live to be affected by it, whether as beneficiaries, taxpayers, or
both. Those alive bear some of the startup costs, but may not live to reap the benefits.
Nonetheless, both the serious ethical dilemmas and the practical differences that occur
when considering long-term projects do not begin before a span of about 50 years.
Thus, for discounting purposes, it is reasonable to define an intragenerational projects
as one whose effects occur within a 50-year horizon.50 Projects with significant effects
beyond 50 years are considered intergenerational.
The first reason, which we briefly discussed earlier, is that individuals appear to be
“time inconsistent.”51 Empirical behavioral evidence suggests that individuals apply
lower rates to discount events that occur farther into the future, that is, they have de-
creasing time aversion. Exhibit 1 presents evidence that individual MRTPs for saving
lives now versus saving lives in the future decline as the time horizon extends farther into
the future. David Laibson cites evidence that individuals’ discount functions are approx-
imately hyperbolic, implying that they engage in hyperbolic discounting.52 He explains
that individuals recognize that, if they do not commit to saving, then on a day-to-day basis
271

The Social Discount Rate
EXHIBIT 1
Maureen Cropper and colleagues have con-
ducted surveys to measure how participants are
willing to trade off lives saved today with lives
saved in the future. In round numbers, this re-
search suggests that people are indifferent be-
tween one life saved today and two lives saved in
5 years’ time, three lives saved in 10 years’ time,
six lives saved in 25 years’ time, eleven lives
saved in 50 years’ time, and forty-four lives saved
In 100 years’ time.More precisely,and expressing
(using a high short-term discount rate), they will never save as much for the future as
they know they should (using a low long-term discount rate). Recognizing their lack of
self-control, individuals may commit to savings plans with large penalties for early with-
drawals, while using their available credit to otherwise maximize their current consump-
tion. They may simultaneously save by purchasing an illiquid asset with a relatively low,
after-tax real return (such as a government savings bond), make predetermined monthly
mortgage payments, and borrow short-term on a credit card at a high real interest rate.
These observed patterns of saving and borrowing simply reflect individuals’ recognition
of their lack of self-control and the time-declining discount rates that result from this.
The second reason pertains to evaluating decisions with impacts that occur far in
the future, such as environmental effects, including reforestation, efforts to mitigate
global warming by greenhouse gas abatement, preserving biodiversity through the pro-
tection of unique ecosystems, and the storage of radioactive waste. Discounting at a
time-constant discount rate can pose ethical dilemmas.With a constant SDR the social
discount factors decline geometrically. Even using a modest SDR, costs and benefits
that occur sufficiently far in the future have a negligible value.53 The use of a constant
discount rate much in excess of 1.0 or 2.0 percent implies that it is not allocatively effi-
cient for society to spend even a small amount today in order to avert a very costly en-
vironmental disaster, provided that the disaster occurs sufficiently far into the future.
For example,if greenhouse gas buildup imposes a huge cost of say $1 trillion in 400 years’
time, this has an NPV of less than $336 million today at a constant discount rate of 2 per-
cent, and an NPV of less than $113,000 at a discount rate of 4 percent.Thus, if CBA used
a discount rate of more than 2 percent, we would conclude that it is not worth spending
$113,000 today to avert a major disaster with a cost of $1 trillion in 400 years. In contrast,
with a time-declining SDR, the NPV may well imply that it is indeed worth averting the
$1 trillion cost that will be incurred four centuries from now.
A third reason for using a time-declining SDR is to place greater weight on future
generations than would otherwise occur.As we discussed above, some authors argue on
ethical grounds that all generations should be weighted equally and that the SDR
should be zero.Although the optimal growth rate method permits explicit consideration
the results in terms of marginal rate of time pref-
erence (MRTP), the research found an implicit
marginal rate of time preference of 16.8 percent
over a 5-year horizon,11.2 percent over a 10-year
horizon, 7.4 percent over a 25-year horizon, 4.8
percent over a 50-year horizon, and 3.8 percent
over a 100-year horizon. These results suggest
that individual MRTPs are significantly greater
than zero, but they decline as the time horizon
extends farther into the future.
Source: Adapted from Maureen L. Cropper, Selma K.Aydede, and Paul R. Portney,“Rates of Time Preference for Saving
Lives,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 82(2) 1992, 469–472.
272

The Social Discount Rate
of the welfare of future generations, the most common social welfare function used with
this method treats society as a single, representative individual whose well-being is
equal to the discounted sum of the utility derived from present and future per capita
consumption.This may make sense for evaluating 50-year investments;but it loses much
of its relevance for evaluating 400-year or 10,000-year investments, such as for green-
house gas abatement or the storage of radioactive waste.
The fourth reason for using a time-declining SDR is that the farther we look into
the future, the greater is the inherent uncertainty as to the future growth rate of the
economy and future market rates of interest. Allowing for this uncertainty means that
lower and lower discount rates should be used to discount consumption flows that
occur farther and farther in the future. To see why effective discount rates decline as
they apply to benefits or costs that occur farther out in time when there is uncertainty
about future discount rates, consider the following example. Suppose a project delivers
a single benefit of $1 billion in 400 years. Suppose further that there is a 50 percent
chance that the appropriate (constant) discount rate over this period will be 7 percent and
a 50 percent chance that it will be 1 percent. One might imagine that we should average
these two rates to obtain the expected discount rate, 4 percent, and then use this average
rate to compute the expected NPV of the future benefit as $1 billion  e(0.04)  400,which
is approximately $110. However, this is incorrect. The expected NPV equals $1 billion 
[(0.5e(0.07)400)  (0.5e(0.01)400)], which is approximately $9,157,800.This is equivalent to
using a single, certain discount rate of approximately 1.2 percent. It is the discount factors
of e(0.07)400 and e(0.01)400 that should be averaged.The values of these two discount fac-
tors are 6.9  1011 percent, which is a very small number, and 0.183, respectively. In ef-
fect, the larger discount rate almost completely discounts itself out of the average.This ef-
fect grows as time horizons become longer, resulting in a time-declining schedule of
discount rates. In the distant future, only the very lowest possible rate matters; all of the
higher rates result in discount factors that approach zero. Note that this motivation for
time-declining rates is due solely to uncertainty and does not imply time inconsistency in
social choices.
Numerical Values of Time-Declining Discount Rates
Based on research by Richard Newell and William Pizer,54 we suggest the following
time-declining rate schedule based on the optimal growth rate model: 3.5 percent from
year 0 to year 50, 2.5 percent from year 50 to year 100, 1.5 percent from year 100 to year
200, 0.5 percent from year 200 to year 300, and 0 percent thereafter. For a single benefit in
year 300, this schedule is equivalent to applying a single, constant rate of 1.67 percent.
This schedule allow the effects on far future generations to be given more weight than
time-invariant discount rates.After a given period of time, all future generations are es-
sentially treated alike.
THE SOCIAL DISCOUNT RATE IN ACTUAL PRACTICE
Current discounting practices in governments vary considerably. There is some evi-
dence that many government agencies do not discount at all. For example, a survey of
90 U.S. municipalities with populations over 100,000 found that only 43 percent use
273

The Social Discount Rate
discounting in evaluating projects.55 At the federal level, U.S. government agencies
appear to have less choice over whether to discount or not but there is considerable
variation over the discount rate and procedure.56
The prescribed rates in the U.S. federal government have tended to be fairly high,
but they have been trending lower. For example, in the 1970s and 1980s, the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) required most agencies to use a real discount rate of
10 percent.57 More recently, the OMB has revised this rate downward to 7 percent.58
The OMB advises agencies that wish to use either the consumption rate of interest
with the shadow price of capital method or the optimal growth rate method to consult
with the OMB prior to conducting their analyses.
In Canada, the pattern has been similar. In 1976, the Federal Treasury Board
Secretariat (TBS) recommended the use of a real discount rate of 10 percent, with sensi-
tivity analysis at 5 and 15 percent.In 1998,the TBS reaffirmed the 10 percent rate,but nar-
rowed sensitivity analysis to plus or minus 2 percent.59 In 2007 the TBS revised its guide-
lines and recommended an SDR of 8 percent, with sensitivity analysis using 3 percent and
10 percent.60 Sometimes, however, the TBS allows much lower discount rates (0 to 3 per-
cent) for health and environmental cost-benefit analyses,although this does not appear to
be official policy. Some provincial government guidelines have led the federal guidelines
in terms of adopting lower rates. For example, the British Columbia Crown Corporations
Secretariat has recommended a real SDR of 8 percent since the early 1990s.61
These relatively high rates reflect the OMB’s and TBS’s preferences for basing the
SDR on market rates. OMB’s original 10% real rate was intended to approximate the
opportunity cost of capital. The more recent 7 percent rate is based on low-yielding
forms of capital (e.g., housing), as well as high-yielding corporate capital.The Canadian
TBS’s rates are based on the WSOC method with a high weight on the return to pri-
vate sector investment. This was 75% in 1976 and 1998, but fell to 46 percent in 2007.
Even if one thinks that it is appropriate to discount using market-based methods
reflecting the opportunity cost of capital, the rates proposed by the OMB and the TBS
are too high. The private-sector does not achieve a real marginal before-tax return on
investment of 10 percent, or even 7 percent. We estimate that this return is only about
4.5 percent, with sensitivity analysis at 4.0 and 5.0 percent.
Both the General Accountability Office (GAO) and the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) use a lower rate than the OMB.The CBO has estimated the real histori-
cal yield on U.S. government securities at 2 percent, and uses this rate plus or minus
2 percentage points.The GAO uses the average nominal yield on Treasury debt matur-
ing between one year and the life of the project, less the forecast rate of inflation. GAO
uses the same rate for all applications, while the CBO and OMB have a number of
exceptions.62
A proposal by the U.S. Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine rec-
ommends the use of a 3 percent discount rate for cost-effectiveness studies, with sensi-
tivity analysis at rates between 0 percent and 7 percent.63
Guidelines published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency recommend
using a SDR based on the optimal growth rate method.They propose an value of pz of
2 to 3 percent.64 They believe that because capital is relatively mobile and most envi-
ronmental projects are relatively small, EPA projects are not likely to displace private-
sector investment. Therefore, they do not suggest using the shadow price of capital,
274

The Social Discount Rate
unless there are strong reasons to believe that private-sector investment is displaced.
However, correspondence with the EPA indicates that they have commonly annual-
ized the capital costs of an environmental rule using the marginal rate of return on pri-
vate investment and then discounted this flow using pz. This is equivalent to using the
shadow price of capital under the simple assumptions of equation (10).65 Using our
point estimates and equation (10) would result in a shadow price of capital equal to 3.0.
In contrast, using the more sophisticated approach in equation (11) would suggest that
the shadow price of capital equals 1.33.
In 2003, the British Treasury issued recommendations for discounting that are sim-
ilar to those recommended in this chapter. The specific recommendation is for a dis-
count rate of 3.5 percent, which is based on the optimal growth rate method.They also
suggest using a time-declining discount rate for projects with effects that occur after 30
years.After 300 years,the recommended discount rate reaches a minimum of 1 percent.66
In France, a group of experts commissioned by the Ministry of Finance recommended a
reduction in the SDR from 8% to 4% for most public-sector projects.67
CONCLUSION
There has been considerable debate as to the appropriate method of discounting, as
well as the specific value of the SDR.There is now widespread agreement that the cor-
rect conceptual method of discounting is to shadow price investment flows and to
discount the resulting consumption equivalents and the consumption flows using a
consumption-based discount rate.We believe that the most appropriate method to de-
termine the value of the SDR is the optimal growth rate method.We advocate the use
of time-declining discount rates in projects with significant intergenerational impacts.
Our discussion should have made it clear that analysts are unlikely to have complete
confidence in whatever discount rate they use. It is almost always desirable, therefore,
to test the sensitivity of ones results to changes in the parameters used in discounting.
Nonetheless, in conducting CBA, choices must be made.
Our main conclusions are as follows. First, flows in and out of private-sector invest-
ment during the first 50 years of a project should be weighted by the shadow price of cap-
ital, , which equals 1.1. Second, the resultant consumption equivalents and the con-
sumption flows should be discounted, based on the optimal growth rate method, at a real
SDR of 3.5 percent. Sensitivity analysis should be conducted with the SDR equal to 2
percent (and  equal to 1.3) and with the SDR equal to 6 percent (and  equal to 1.0).
Intergenerational impacts, whether they affect investment or consumption, should be dis-
counted at 2.5 percent (for years 50–100), 1.5 percent (for years 100–200), 0.5 percent
(for years 200–300), and 0 percent (for years over 300).
We do not recommend using a SDR derived from market-based interest rates
(rather than using the optimal growth method). However, should you wish to do this,
we suggest that, first, flows in and out of private-sector investment during the first 50
years of a project should be weighted by the shadow price of capital, , which equals
1.33. Second, the resultant consumption equivalents and the consumption flows
should be discounted at a real SDR of 1.5 percent. Sensitivity analysis should be con-
ducted with the SDR equal to 1 percent (and  equal to 1.5) and with the SDR equal
275

The Social Discount Rate
to 2 percent (and  equal to 1.0). Intergenerational impacts, whether they affect invest-
ment or consumption, should be discounted at 1.0 percent (for years 50–100), 0.5 per-
cent (for years 100–200), and 0 percent (for years over 300).
EXERCISES
1.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) The following table gives cost and benefit
estimates in real dollars for dredging a navigable channel from an inland port to the open sea.
Year
Dredging and 
Patrol Costs 
($)
Saving to
Shippers
($)
Value of Pleasure
Boating
($)
0
2,548,000
0
0
1
60,000
400,000
60,000
2
60,000
440,000
175,000
3
70,000
440,000
175,000
4
70,000
440,000
175,000
5
80,000
440,000
175,000
6
80,000
440,000
175,000
7
90,000
440,000
175,000
The channel would be navigable for seven years, after which silting would render it un-
navigable. Local economists estimate that 75 percent of the savings to shippers would be di-
rectly invested by the firms or their shareholders, and the remaining 25 percent would be
used by shareholders for consumption. They also determine that all government expendi-
tures come at the expense of private investment.The social marginal rate of time preference
is assumed to be 1.5 percent, the marginal rate of return on private investment is assumed to
be 4.5 percent, and the shadow price of capital is assumed to be 1.33.
Assuming that the costs and benefits accrue at the end of the year they straddle and
using the market-based interest rate approach, calculate the present value of net benefits of
the project using each of the following methods.
a.
Discount at the marginal rate of return on private investment, as suggested by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget.
b.
Discount at the social marginal rate of time preference, as suggested by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
c.
Discount using the shadow price of capital method.
d.
Discount using the shadow price of capital method. However, now assume that the so-
cial marginal rate of time preference is 2.0 percent, rather than 1.5 percent.
e.
Discount using the shadow price of capital method. However, now assume that the
shadow price of capital is 1.1, rather than 1.33.Again assume that the social marginal
rate of time preference is 1.5 percent.
f.
Discount using the shadow price of capital method. However, now assume that only
50 percent of the savings to shippers would be directly invested by the firms or their
shareholders, rather than 75 percent. Again assume that the social marginal rate of
time preference is 1.5 percent and that the shadow price of capital is 1.33.
2.
An analyst for a municipal public housing agency explained the choice of a discount rate
as follows:“Our agency funds its capital investments through nationally issued bonds.The
276

The Social Discount Rate
effective interest rate that we pay on the bonds is the cost that the agency faces in shifting
revenue from the future to the present. It is, therefore, the appropriate discount rate for
the agency to use in evaluating alternative investments.” Comment on the appropriate-
ness of this discount rate.
3.
Assume the following: Society faces a marginal excess tax burden of raising public revenue
equal to METB; the shadow price of capital equals ; public borrowing displaces private in-
vestment dollar for dollar; and public revenues raised through taxes displace consumption
(but not investment). Consider a public project involving a large initial capital expenditure,
C, followed by a stream of benefits that are entirely consumed, B.
a.
Discuss how you would apply the shadow price of capital method to the project if it is
financed fully out of current taxes.
b.
Discuss how you would apply the shadow price of capital method to the project if it is
financed fully by public borrowing, which is later repaid by taxes.
4.
Assume a project will result in benefits of $1 trillion in 500 years by avoiding an environ-
mental disaster that otherwise would occur at that time.
a.
Compute the present value of these benefits using a time-constant discount rate of 3.5.
b.
Compute the present value of these benefits using the following time-declining dis-
count rate schedule: 3.5 percent, years 1–50; 2.5 percent, years, 51–100; 1.5 percent,
years 101–200; 0.5 percent, years 201–300; and 0 percent thereafter.
NOTES
1. This chapter draws on Mark A. Moore,Anthony
E. Boardman,Aidan R.Vining, David L.Weimer,
and David H. Greenberg,“‘Just Give Me a
Number!’ Practical Values for the Social Discount
Rate,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
23(4) 2004, 789–812  and Anthony E. Boardman,
Mark A. Moore and Aidan R.Vining,“The Social
Discount Rate for Canada Based on Future
Growth in Consumption,” Canadian Public
Policy 36(3), 2010 (forthcoming).We thank Mark
Moore for his many contributions to this chapter.
2. Throughout this chapter we assume that impacts
(costs and benefits) and discount rates are all
measured in real dollars.
3. That is, 
w >wt  i.
4. In practice, analysts usually do not convert net
benefits to certainty equivalents or option prices.
Specifically, they use expected values rather than
option prices because the former can be estimated
from observable behavior, while the latter requires
contingent valuation surveys. Unless strong as-
sumptions are made about individuals’ utility
functions, even the sign, let alone the magnitude,
of the difference between expected values and
option prices is usually theoretically uncertain,
except in the case of uncertainty about income. It
is important, however, both conceptually and in
practice, to treat risk and discounting separately.
Nonetheless, in order to compensate for risk, an-
alysts sometimes discount expected net benefits
using a higher rate than they would in the absence
of risk. Unfortunately, this procedure generally
results in an incorrect estimate of the NPV. For
example, suppose that a project has a relatively
large expected terminal cost that is subject to
risk. Using a higher rate to account for this risk
will reduce, rather than magnify, the present
value of this cost, making a positive NPV more,
rather than less, likely. In contrast, the certainty
equivalent for a negative net benefit is a more
negative net benefit.As this example illustrates,
it is inappropriate to attempt to take account of
risk by adjusting the discount rate.
For other reasons why doing this is problematic,
see Coleman Bazelon and Kent Smetters,
“Discounting Inside the Washington D.C.
Beltway,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
13(4) 1999, 213–228.
5. Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate
Change:The Stern Review (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2007).
6. William D. Nordhaus,“A Review of the Stern
Review on the Economics of Climate Change,”
Journal of Economic Literature 45(3) 2007, 682-
702. See also Partha Dasgupta,“Commentary:
277

The Social Discount Rate
The Stern Review’s Economics of Climate
Change.” National Institute Economic Review
199(1) 2007, 4–7 and Martin L.Weitzman,“A
Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of
Climate Change.” Journal of Economic Literature
45(3) 2007, 703–724.
7. Assume here that, in order to reveal your true
preferences, there is no arbitrage opportunity,
that is, you could not borrow or lend money.
Arbitrage means that you can simultaneously buy
something in one market and sell it in another
market and thereby make a guaranteed profit. If
interest rates were less than 20 percent and arbi-
trage were allowed, you could say that you would
rather have the $1,200 next year and then imme-
diately borrow between $1,000 and $1,200 from
the bank.Thus, you would say that you would
prefer to have the $1,200 next year even though
you would actually prefer to have $1,000 now.
8. It would make no conceptual difference if the
consumer received income in both periods.
9. The (absolute value of the) slope of the budget
constraint exceeds 1, indicating that the con-
sumer earns positive interest (at rate i) on the
part of income saved the first year.
10. To solve this problem formally we set up the fol-
lowing Lagrangian:
and then take derivatives with respect to C1
and C2:
Consequently,
Now, by definition,
where p  marginal rate of time preference.
Therefore, i  p at the optimum.
11. Formally, the result holds as long as the problem
has an interior solution.A very impatient person
MRS K 0U>0C1
0U>0C2
= 1 + p
0U>0C1
0U>0C2
= 1 + i
 Lc = 0U
0C2
-
l
1 + i = 0
 Lc1 = 0U
0C1
- l = 0
L = U(C1, C2) + lcT - C1 -
C2
1 + 1 d
has an MRTP  i, which leads to a corner solu-
tion on the C1 axis. For simplicity, we ignore this
possibility.
12. At point Z, in Figure 2, the absolute value of the
slope of the CPF, (1  rz), exceeds the absolute
value of the slope of the SIC, (1  pz).
13. Frank P. Ramsey,“A Mathematical Theory of
Saving,” Economic Journal 38(152) 1928, 543–559.
14. Mathematically, they assume society (or a repre-
sentative individual) maximizes social welfare
which is given by:
Here, U(c) is the utility that society (or a repre-
sentative individual) derives from public and pri-
vate per capita consumption at any moment in
time,
is the discount factor for utility of con-
sumption at period t, e is the exponential func-
tion, and is the rate at which future utility is dis-
counted to the present. See Stephen A. Marglin,
“The Social Rate of Discount and the Optimal
Rate of Investment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 77(1) 1963: 95–111; James A. Mirrlees
and Nicholas Stern,“Fairly Good Plans,” Journal
of Economic Theory 4(2) 1972: 268–288;W. R.
Cline. The Economics of Global Warming.
(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics, 1992); Kenneth J.Arrow,
“Intergenerational Equity and the Rate of
Discount in Long-Term Social Investment.”
Paper presented at the IEA World Congress,
1995.Accessed 11 February 2008 at http://www-
econ.stanford.edu/faculty/workp/swp97005.pdf;
Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate
Change:The Stern Review (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2007).
15. The estimated values of these rates, which were
based on U.S. data, were obtained from Moore,
Boardman,Vining,Weimer, and Greenberg,
“‘Just Give Me a Number!’ Practical Values for
the Social Discount Rate.” For estimated values
for Canada, see Boardman, Moore and Vining,
“The Social Discount Rate for Canada Based on
Future Growth in Consumption,” Canadian
Public Policy (forthcoming).
16. Arnold C. Harberger,“The Discount Rate in
Public Investment Evaluation,” Conference
Proceedings of the Committee on the Economics
of Water Resource Development (Denver, CO:
r
e-rt
L
q
0
e-rt U(ct) dt
278

The Social Discount Rate
Western Agricultural Economics Research
Council, Report No. 17, 1969).
17. See, for example, John Muellbauer and Ralph
Lattimore,“The Consumption Function:A
Theoretical and Empirical Overview,” in M. H.
Pesaran and M. R.Wickens, eds., The Handbook
of Applied Econometrics: Macroeconomics
(Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1995), 221–311.
18. Historical studies using U.S. data find this equity
risk premium to be in the neighborhood of 6 to 7
percent; see R. Mehra and E. C. Prescott,“The
Equity Premium in Retrospect,” in G.M.
Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz, eds.,
Handbook of the Economics of Finance
(Amersterdam: Elsevier, 2003). However, many
researchers consider this amount is too high, a re-
sult known as the equity premium puzzle. Recent
research by Glen Donaldson, Mark Kamstra and
Lisa Kramer suggest that it is only about 3.5 per-
cent; see R. Glen Donaldson, Mark J. Kamstra
and Lisa A. Kramer,“Estimating the Equity
Premium,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis (forthcoming).
19. See P. Dasgupta, K. Maler, and S. Barrett,
“Intergenerational Equity, Social Discount
Rates, and Global Warming,” in P. Portney and J.
Weyant, eds., Discounting and Intergenerational
Equity (Washington, D.C.: Resources for the
Future, 1999), 51–78.
20. K. J. Arrow and R. C. Lind, “Uncertainty and
the Evaluation of Public Investment Decisions,”
American Economic Review 60(3) 1997, 364–378.
21. However, Klein argues that the government pays
a lower rate on its debt because it enjoys the co-
ercive power of taxation and money creation,
thus guaranteeing that it can always pay its debt
Obligations; see M. Klein,“The Risk Premium
for Evaluating Public Projects,” Oxford Review
of Economic Policy 13(4) 1997, 29–42.
22. C. J. Morrison and A. E. Schwartz,“State
Infrastructure and Productive Performance,”
American Economic Review 86(5) 1991, 1095–1111.
23. Unless otherwise indicated, all our data are from
the DRI Basic Economics macroeconomic data-
base (formerly CITIBASE), viewed June 20, 2003.
24. J. B. Shoven and M.Topper,“The Cost of Capital
in Canada, the United States and Japan,” in J. B.
Shoven and J.Whalley, eds., Canada–U.S.Tax
Comparisons (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992), 217–235.As high- income individuals
do most of the personal saving, their rates are
likely the most appropriate.
25. If you think you have only a short time to live,
then you will value the present very highly be-
cause, quite literally, there may be no tomorrow
for you.Thus, it is reasonable to expect that older
people have a higher MRTP rate than younger
people. See Maureen L. Cropper, Sema K.
Aydede, and Paul R. Portney,“Rates of Time
Preference for Saving Lives.” American
Economic Review 82(2) (1992), 469–472, who
found a positive relationship between age and
the MRTP but found no significant relationship
between respondents’ MRTP and their sex, edu-
cation, marital status, or income.
26. From April 1971 through December 2001, the
average nominal primary conventional mortgage
rate was 9.79 percent. Using the CPI-U (All
Items) inflation rate of 4.85 percent and the tax
rate of 30 percent, and accounting for the tax
deductibility of interest paid on mortgages, the
real, after-tax return to paying down a mortgage
averaged 1.91 percent.Adjusting for the CPI
overstatement of inflation and rounding yields
an estimate of 3 percent. Similar calculations for
2001 and 2000 give estimates of 3.3 and 2.2 per-
cent, respectively.
27. S. Frederick, G. Loewenstein, and T.
O’Donoghue,“Time Discounting and Time
Preference:A Critical Review,” Journal of
Economic Literature 40(2) 2002, 351–400.
28. Laibson explains that individuals may have pre-
committed themselves to saving a certain amount
of their income in an illiquid asset, while borrow-
ing for current consumption from ready sources
of credit. However, they are still not equating
their marginal rates of time preference to a single
market rate. See David Laibson,“Golden Eggs
and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112(2) 1997, 443–477.
29. John T.Warner and Saul Pleeter.“The Personal
Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
Downsizing,” American Economic Review 91(1)
2001, 33–53.
30. George Loewenstein and Drazen Prelec,
“Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence
and an Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107(2) 1992, 573–597.
31. See, among others, Robert C. Lind,“Reassessing
the Government’s Discount Rate Policy in Light
279

The Social Discount Rate
of New Theory and Data in a World Economy
with a High Degree of Capital Mobility,” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management
18(2) 1990, S8–S28.
32. For Canada, Jenkins and Kuo suggests a  .46, b 
.15 and 1  a  b  .39. Glenn P. Jenkins and C.-Y.
Kuo,“The Economic Opportunity Cost of Capital
for Canada—An Empirical Update,” Queen’s
Economics Department., February 2008).
33. In the United States, for example, since 1980 in-
dividual income tax provides about 46 percent of
revenues while corporate income taxes provide
about 10 percent of revenues; see http://www.
gpoaccess.gov/usbudget/fy10/sheets/hist02z1.xls
(accessed 13 Feb 2010).
34. Dynan and colleagues find that marginal propen-
sities to save out of disposable income vary be-
tween 2.4 and 11 percent in the United States (K.
E. Dynan, J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes,“Do the
Rich Save More?” Federal Reserve Board,
Financial and Economic Discussion Series, 2000).
Souleles (2002) finds that the Reagan tax cuts of
the 1980s had very strong effects on current con-
sumption when enacted (rather than when an-
nounced), inducing marginal propensities to con-
sume out of nondurables of between 0.6 and 0.9
(N. S. Souleles,“Consumer Response to the
Reagan Tax Cuts,” Journal of Public Economics
85(1) 2002, 99–120). Even predictable tax re-
funds are largely spent when received, indicating
that consumption is very responsive to the ac-
tual, rather than the predictable, permanent level
of income, contrary to standard economic theory.
See N. S. Souleles,“The Response of Household
Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,” American
Economic Review 89(4) 1999, 947–958.
35. This approach was first suggested by Otto
Eckstein and systematically developed by David
Bradford. See Otto Eckstein, Water Resource
Development:The Economics of Project
Evaluation (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1958) and David F. Bradford,“Constraints
on Government Investment Opportunities and
the Choice of Discount Rate,” American
Economic Review 65(5) 1975: 887–899.
36. Understanding the derivation of equation (11)
clarifies the meaning of f. Suppose an investment
of $1 yields a gross (before depreciation) return
of r in the first period.Then, with a savings rate
of f, f
is reinvested and (1  f)
is consumed.
r
r
With depreciation of d in this period, the total
amount invested in the second period equals 1 
f  . Similarly, in the second period the return
is (1  f  ) of which f(1  f  ) is rein-
vested and (1  f)(1  f  ) is consumed.
With depreciation of (1  f  ) in the second
period, the total amount invested in the third pe-
riod equals [1  f  ]  [f(1  f  )]  [(1
 f  )]  (1  f  )2.And so on.
Consumption in period 1 is (1  f), consump-
tion in period 2 is (1  f)(1  f  ), consump-
tion in period 3 is (1  f)(1  f  )2, and so
forth.This consumption stream is a perpetuity
[with annual benefits of (1  f)] that grows at a
constant rate, f  . Discounting this stream at
pz gives:
In this formulation, rz is the net return on capital
after depreciation, that is,
Substituting for  in the above equation yields
equation (11). For more information see
Randolph M. Lyon, “Federal Discount Policy,
the Shadow Price of Capital, and Challenges
for Reforms,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 18(2) 1990,
S29–S50, Appendix I.
37. Charles R. Hulten and Frank C.Wykoff,“The
Measurement of Economic Depreciation” in R.
Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the
Taxation of Income from Capital (Washington,
D.C.: Urban Institute Press, 1981), 81–125. See
also B. M. Fraumeni,“The Measurement of
Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts,” Survey of Current Business
77(7) 1997, 7–23.
38. For a more detailed illustration see Mark A.
Moore,Anthony E. Boardman, and David H.
Greenberg,“The Social Discount Rate in
Canada,” in A. R.Vining and J. Richards, eds.,
Building the Future: Issues in Public
Infrastructure in Canada (Toronto, ON: C. D.
Howe Institute, 2001), 73–130.
39. If the loans for the project were obtained from
persons residing outside the community instead of
local citizens, one might believe that benefits and
r = rz + d.
u =
r - fr
pz + d - fr
280

The Social Discount Rate
costs accruing to these persons are irrelevant to its
investment decisions and, therefore, ignore them
in computing the project’s net present value.Also,
if there was the possibility of borrowing from
abroad, then there will be less than complete
crowding out of domestic private investment.
Private investment may also be less than com-
pletely crowded out if there were unemployed
resources in the local economy.
40. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Guidelines
for Preparing Economic Analyses (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2000),
48. See also R. C. Lind,“Reassessing the
Government’s Discount Rate Policy in Light 
of New Theory and Data in a World Economy
with a High Degree of Capital Mobility.”
41. For a discussion of this issue, see Daniel W.
Bromley,“Entitlements, Missing Markets, and
Environmental Uncertainty,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management
17(2) 1989, 181–194. Note, however, the willing-
ness of people to pass inheritances to their chil-
dren and to pay to preserve certain natural re-
sources indicates indirect standing to future
generations.
42. Nicholas Stern, 2008.“The Economics of Climate
Change,” American Economic Review: Papers
and Proceedings 98(2) 2008, 1–37.
43. Otto Eckstein, Water Resource Development:
The Economics of Project Evaluation; Edmund
Phelps,“The Golden Rule of Accumulation:
A Fable for Growthmen,” American Economic
Review 51(4) 1961, 638-643; Stephen Marglin,
“The Social Rate of Discount and the Optimal
Rate of Investment”; Kenneth J.Arrow,
“Intergenerational Equity and the Rate of
Discount in Long-Term Social Investment”;
P. Dasgupta, K. Maler, and S. Barrett,
“Intergenerational Equity, Social Discount
Rates, and Global Warming.”
44. This value was obtained by regressing the natural
logarithm of real per capita consumption on
time. Comparably, Prescott (p. 5) argues the secu-
lar growth rate of the U.S. economy in the twen-
tieth century was 2 percent. See E. Prescott,
“Prosperity and Depressions,” American
Economic Review 92(2) 2002, 1–15.
45. See Martin L.Weitzman,“A Review of the Stern
Review on the Economics of Climate Change.”
Arrow et al. suggest that e is between 1 and 2.
K. J.Arrow,W. R. Cline, K. G. Maler, M.
Munasinghe, R. Squitieri, and J. E. Stiglitz,
“Intertemporal Equity, Discounting and
Economic Efficiency,” in J. P. Bruce et al., eds.,
Climate Change 1995 (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1995), 128–144.
46. Kenneth J. Arrow, “Intergenerational Equity
and the Rate of Discount in Long-Term Social
Investment.”
47. Kula estimates or argues g  2.3 percent, e 
1.89, and d  0.9, and therefore he suggests px 
5.2 percent. See E. Kula,“Derivation of the
Social Time Preference Rates for the United
States and Canada,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 99(4) 1984, 873–882. Cline, assuming
the likely future world growth rate is 1 percent,
d  0, and e 1.5, estimates px  1.5 percent. See
W. R. Cline, The Economics of Global Warming
(Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics, 1992).
48. Cline proposes using a value of  equal to 1.56
and then discounting using px measured at 1.5
percent for all CBAs, including greenhouse gas
abatement projects. His estimate of  uses rz
8.0 percent, assumes that all investments have
15-year lives, and that f  0.2. See W. R. Cline,
The Economics of Global Warming.
49. See also Evans and Sezer who provide theoreti-
cally grounded estimates of the SDR for a variety
of countries. D. J. Evans and H. Sezer,“Social
Discount Rates for Six Major Countries,” Applied
Economic Letters 11(9) 2004, 557–560, and D. J.
Evans and H. Sezer,“Social Discount Rates for
Member Countries of the European Union,”
Journal of Economic Studies 32(1) 2005, 47–60.
50. One rationale for this 50-year cutoff is that most
equipment, structures, and buildings will not last
much longer than 50 years. Depreciation rates
appear to range between 3.4 and 13.3 percent
per year, implying that between 80 percent and
virtually everything has depreciated after 50
years.Thus, there are likely to be few public in-
vestments that are intergenerational in our sense.
Another argument is that 50 years corresponds
approximately to two generations—our genera-
tion and our children’s—and that events beyond
this time period truly belong to future genera-
tions. See C. R. Hulten and F. C.Wykoff,“The
Measurement of Economic Depreciation”; and
M. Nadir and I. Prucha,“Estimation of the
281

The Social Discount Rate
Depreciation Rate of Physical and R&D Capital”
Economic Inquiry 34(1) 1996, 43–56.A third ra-
tionale is provided by Newell and Pizer, which
we discuss later. R. G. Newell and W.A. Pizer,
“Discounting the Distant Future: How Much do
Uncertain Rates Increase Valuations?” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management
46(1) 2003, 52–71.
51. After reviewing the literature on counterexam-
ples to constant discounting, George
Loewenstein and Drazen Prelec conclude that
“unlike the EU [expected utility] violations,
which in many cases can only be demonstrated
with a clever arrangement of multiple choice
problems (e.g., the Allais paradox), the coun-
terexamples to DU [constant discounting] are
simple, robust, and bear directly on central as-
pects of economic behavior.” See George
Loewenstein and Drazen Prelec,“Anomalies in
Intertemporal Choice: Evidence and an
Interpretation,” at p. 574.
52. David Laibson,“Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic
Discounting.”
53. With constant discounting, impacts that arise in
year n are weighted by the discount factor (1 
i)n, which declines geometrically.Thus, impacts
that occur far in the future have a low weight.
For example, $1 in 100 years has an NPV of less
than $0.01 using an SDR of more than 4 percent.
54. Newell and Pizer (“Discounting the Distant
Future: How Much do Uncertain Rates Increase
Valuations?”) adopt an approach based on the
historical behavior of interest rates.Their model
captures the uncertainty in forecasting the rates
that will prevail in the far future.They examine
the U.S. government’s real, long-term bond rate
over the past 200 years and find the data do not
clearly distinguish between a random-walk and a
mean-reversion model.They prefer the random-
walk version and use it to simulate the future
path of the bond rate, from both a 4 percent and
a 2 percent initial value.They generate thousands
of different time paths and use these to construct
expected discount factors.This results in a time-
declining scale of effective discount rates.
Hepburn, Koundouri, Panopoulou, and Pantelidis
apply this method to four other countries. See 
C. Hepburn, P. Koundouri, E. Panopoulou, and 
T. Pantelidis,“Social Discounting Under
Uncertainty:A Cross-Country Comparison,”
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 57(2) 2009, 140–150. In an alterna-
tive approach,Weitzman surveyed almost 2,200
economists, asked each to provide a single, real
rate to use in discounting the costs and benefits
of global climate change, and found that the
frequency distribution of the respondents’ rates
approximated a gamma distribution. His main
finding is that even if every respondent believes
in a constant discount rate, the widespread of
opinion results in the SDR declining significantly
over time. Based on the distribution of his re-
spondents’ preferred discount rates,Weitzman
suggests a scale for SDRs that approaches zero
after 200 years. See M.Weitzman,“Gamma
Discounting,” American Economic Review 91(1)
2001, 260–271. Newell and Pizer derive rates that
are generally higher than Weitzman’s rates and
fall more slowly, with the declining rate kicking
in after about 50 years.
55. Richard O. Zerbe Jr. and Dwight Dively,“How
Municipal Governments Set Their Discount
Rate: Do They Get It Right?” (manuscript,
University of Washington, 1990).
56. Edward R. Morrison,“Judicial Review of
Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-Benefit
Analysis,” The University of Chicago Law
Review 65(4) 1998, 1333–1363. For a review of
discounting in various U.S. government agencies,
see Coleman Bazelon and Kent Smetters,
“Discounting Inside the Washington D.C.
Beltway.”
57. OMB (Office of Management and Budget,
Circular A-94), 1972.
58. OMB,“Economic Analysis of Federal Regulations
Under Executive Order 12866” (Office of
Management and Budget:Washington, D.C.), 1996.
59. Treasury Board Secretariat, Benefit-Cost
Analysis Guide Regulatory Programs (Ottawa,
Ontario, March 1976), Discounting.The 1998
Guidelines are no longer available.
60. Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, Canadian
Cost-Benefit-Cost Analysis Guide: Regulatory
Proposals (Interim) (Ottawa, ON:Treasury
Board Secretariat, 2007).Also available at 
http://www.regulation.gc.ca/documents/gl-ld/
analys/analystb-eng.asp.
61. See British Columbia Crown Corporations
Secretariat, Multiple Account Evaluation
Guidelines (Victoria, BC, 1993).
282

The Social Discount Rate
62. Both the OMB and CBO use private-sector rates
for asset divestitures. If they did not, they would
be using a lower discount rate than the private
sector, implying that the NPV of assets is higher
in the public sector than in the private sector.
Assuming no efficiency differences between pub-
lic and private ownership, this would imply that
the government should never divest any assets.
63. M. C.Weinstein, J. E. Siegel, M. R. Gold, M. S.
Kamlet, and L. B. Russell,“Recommendations of
the Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and
Medicine: Consensus Statement,” Journal of the
American Medical Association 276(15) 1996,
1253–1258.
64. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Guidelines
for Preparing Economic Analyses, p. 48.
65. See Jeffrey A. Kolb and Joel D. Scheraga,
“Discounting the Benefits and Costs of
Environmental Regulations,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 9 (1990), 381–390.
66. HM Treasury, Green Book,Appraisal and
Evaluation in Central Government:Treasury
Guidance (London: HM Treasury, 2003), and
Annex 6.Available at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/
economic_data_and_tools/greenbook_ index.cfm.
67. D. Lebegue, et al., “Révision Du Taux
D’Actualisation Des Investissements Publics.”
Rapport du Groupe d’Experts Présidé par
Daniel Lebegue, (Commissariat General du
Plan 2005).
283

284

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
Form Chapter 11 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
285

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
C
ost-benefit analysis assesses the efficiency of alternative courses of action. It re-
quires prediction of the impacts of the alternatives and their monetization.This
chapter provides methods and resources for actually completing these tasks in
practice.This chapter provides a brief overview of the various approaches to prediction
and monetization.
Keep in mind that good CBA predicts and monetizes all the impacts of the alter-
native policies being considered. Some impacts, such as the use of real resources to
implement policies, can usually be predicted with considerable confidence in fairly
straightforward ways and monetized directly with market prices. Other impacts, espe-
cially those involving people changing their behaviors, can only be predicted indi-
rectly, often based on statistical inference or perhaps even theory alone, and therefore
they may be very uncertain. Furthermore, monetizing often requires analysts to use
shadow prices, such as willingness to pay for reductions in mortality risk, that are not
directly revealed in markets and thus also uncertain. CBA requires analysts to accept
these uncertainties to produce a comprehensive assessment of alternative policies.
Imagine that you have identified the alternative policies, determined standing, and
catalogued the relevant impacts with appropriate units of measure. Next you must pre-
dict the impacts of each alternative and monetize them. Much of the effort in a typical
CBA goes into these two steps. Unlike most social science research, where one can
choose to focus on some impacts, perhaps because data are available to support esti-
mation of past effects as the basis for prediction, you do not have the luxury of focus-
ing on some impacts and ignoring others. You must make predictions of all impacts
even in the absence of strong supporting evidence.To do this, you should use policy re-
search, relevant theory, and, when all else fails, learn about the subject and make in-
formed guesses. By all means be self-conscious about your uncertainties and be forth-
right in presenting them. Because of these uncertainties, Monte Carlo simulation and
other forms of sensitivity analyses are essential components of almost any CBA for
conveying the degree of certainty in the ultimate CBA prediction of net benefits.
PREDICTING IMPACTS
Prediction concerns impacts occurring in the future. Yet, the primary basis for predic-
tion is usually what has happened in the past. Sometimes policy analysts, but more
often policy researchers working in universities and research institutes, use observed
286

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
data to assess the consequences of past policy changes. Their inferences about the ef-
fects of these prior policy changes drawn from evaluations can inform predictions
about what is likely to happen if the policy were continued, terminated, expanded, or
replicated. Obviously, analysts must move beyond this evaluation-as-the-basis-for-
prediction approach when predicting the consequences of either novel policies or poli-
cies in place that have not been evaluated. Perhaps a similar policy intervention that
has been evaluated can be found to provide at least some guidance for prediction. Or
perhaps estimates of elasticities made in other contexts can be used to predict impacts.
Three major sources of error arise during the application of CBA.1 First, omission
errors, the exclusion of impacts with associated costs or benefits, prevent CBAs from
being comprehensive. Sometimes impacts are not anticipated. Other times they are
anticipated but not included in the analysis for lack of quantitative predictions of
their magnitudes or plausible shadow prices for monetizing them.The inability or un-
willingness to predict or monetize forces a retreat to qualitative CBA. In cases in
which only one major impact cannot be predicted or monetized, the analyst may first
calculate net benefits without it and then ask the question: how large would the mon-
etized value of the excluded impact have to be to change the sign of net benefits? 
Second, forecasting errors arise simply because we cannot predict the future with
certainty. The past, which is the empirical focus of the social sciences, is an imperfect
guide to the future. The larger and more novel is the policy being assessed, the greater
the danger that the future will differ from the past. Much of the discussion that follows
considers the ways that the past can be used as a basis for making predictions.As noted
below, psychological biases of individuals tend to make some types of forecasts overly
optimistic. There may also be unanticipated difficulties and adaptations that make ac-
tual experience deviate from forecasts. Forecasts of the real resources required for
large and complex infrastructure projects are often too low because of the need for re-
design as implementation reveals information about the site and the actual perfor-
mance of the capital equipment employed. Forecasts of regulatory impacts are often
too large because they fail to anticipate offsetting behaviors that reduce either risk re-
ductions2 or compliance costs.3
Third, valuation errors occur because we often do not have confident estimates of
appropriate shadow prices for converting each predicted impact into an opportunity
cost or a WTP. As with forecasting, the more novel is the impact being monetized, the
greater is the challenge of finding an appropriate shadow price. Plausible shadow
prices can often be gleaned from available research but sometimes they must be devel-
oped and defended by the analyst.
Analysts must often be clever and bold to complete comprehensive CBAs. They
should also anticipate the errors inherent in their efforts and consciously assess them
to the greatest extent possible.
Simplify by Predicting Incremental Impacts 
Relative to the Status Quo
Good policy analysis always keeps the status quo as a potential option in case none
of the alternatives under consideration are superior to it. CBA also keeps the status
287

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
quo as an alternative, albeit usually implicitly. It does so by predicting the incremen-
tal impacts of policy alternatives relative to those that would occur under the status
quo policy. The most efficient alternative project has both the largest net benefits
among the alternatives to the status quo and has positive net benefits to ensure that
it offers larger net benefits than the status quo.
For example, imagine that the alternatives being assessed will have four types of im-
pacts, Z1, Z2, Z3, and Z4. If an alternative policy and the status quo have logically identi-
cal impacts Z1 and Z2, then assessing the alternative relative to the status quo obviates
the need to predict these impacts quantitatively because they net out when the pre-
dicted impacts of the status quo are subtracted from the predicted impacts of the alter-
native. The analyst would have to predict the difference in impacts Z3 and Z4 between
the alternative and the status quo. For example, suppose an alternative criminal justice
policy would use the same real resources as the status quo policy: the incremental re-
sources required would be zero. However, if the alternative would reduce crime relative
to the status quo, then it would be necessary to predict this difference quantitatively.
Predict Using Data from an Ongoing Policy
Policies often take the form of programs for specific populations, such as those in a
particular geographic area or those with a particular condition. These existing poli-
cies may provide data useful for predicting the impacts of their own continuation or
their replication for other populations. True experiments with random assignment of
subjects into treatment and control groups, with the latter continuing under the sta-
tus quo, generally provide the most confident inferences of the impacts that a policy
has actually produced. Quasi-experiments with non-random assignment into treat-
ment and control groups generally provide less confident assessment of impacts and
often require statistical adjustments to account for nonrandom assignment. In any
event, an evaluation of an existing program provides at least some basis for predict-
ing its impacts in the future, or of the impacts likely to result from its replication.
Even in the absence of an experimental or quasi-experimental evaluation, investi-
gation of the policy in place may prove useful in identifying the resources needed to
implement it. Also, in the case of social programs, data may be available on relevant
outcomes for at least program participants. To make use of these program measures,
the analyst must find a relevant “comparison” group (sometimes also called a “con-
trol” group) to answer the question,“Compared to what?”
Consider, for example, an intervention aimed at supporting schizophrenics in
community living situations that keeps track of the contacts of participants with the
criminal justice system, their hospitalizations, their employment records, and their
suicides. Absent an explicit control or comparison group as part of an experimental
or quasi-experimental design, analysts may take population averages or reports from
specific studies as a basis for comparison. With respect to hospitalizations, for in-
stance, a study of California Medicaid recipients with schizophrenia found annual
rates of psychiatric hospitalizations of 27 percent and medical hospitalizations of 11
percent.4 A first cut at an estimate of the impact of the intervention on rates of
288

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
hospitalizations would be to subtract the observed rates for those in the intervention
from these reported rates for California. A more sophisticated approach might use
the statistical model presented in the article to estimate what the hospitalization
rates would have been for a group with the demographic characteristics of those in
the intervention. It would also be important to consider if there are likely to be any
systematic differences between California schizophrenics participating in the
Medicaid program from 1998 to 2000 and the schizophrenics in the intervention. The
estimate that results after taking account of these sorts of considerations would be
the basis for predicting the effect of the intervention on hospitalizations if it were to
be continued or replicated.
Predict Based on Single Evaluation of a Similar Policy
An evaluation of a policy similar to the one being analyzed may be available. Its value
as a basis for prediction depends on how closely it matches the policy being considered
and how well the evaluation was executed.
Policies can be similar in the sense of having the same underlying model, but dif-
fer in the intensity and type of inputs used and their target populations. Consider, for
example, two visiting nurse programs aimed at reducing child abuse in at-risk fami-
lies. One might involve one-hour visits every two weeks by public health nurses to
families with adults who are suspected of having abused their children. The other
might involve one-hour visits ever month by nurse’s aids to families with adults who
were formally found to have abused their children. Which of these differences are
relevant in using the evaluation of one program to predict the consequences of the
other? These two programs may have too many differences to allow confident pre-
diction. Perhaps if they differed only in terms of the frequency of visits, the analyst
could make various assumptions about the relationship between frequency of visits
and impacts to get a range of plausible predictions. So, if a linear relationship were
assumed, a program with half the frequency would be predicted to produce half the
impact. Assumptions of nonlinear relationships would yield different predictions.
Analysts must fall back on their substantive knowledge and theory to decide how to
take account of such differences.
The quality of the evaluation design is especially important to consider when using
a single study as the basis for prediction. In general, true experimental designs with
random assignment of subjects to treatment and control groups are most desirable.
However, randomization can fail to provide comparable treatment and control groups
if the number of subjects is small or the mechanism for randomization is flawed. Quasi-
experimental designs in which comparisons are made without random assignment to
the treatment and control groups can produce poor inferences for a variety of reasons.
Even when its evaluation design is sound, basing prediction on a single study risks
making incorrect predictions for several reasons. First, there is the bias of academic
journals to publish studies with statistically significant results, while, in fact, there may
be other unpublished studies that did not find statistically significant effects.5
Consequently, the one published study may show an unrepresentative effect.
289

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
Second, people tend to bring cognitive biases to their decision making, including
forecasting decisions, that tend to lead to overoptimistic predictions.6 These cognitive
biases, as well as more careful implementation when the evaluator is closely associated
with the policy than is likely in replication, tend to make findings of positive effects
somewhat overly optimistic.7 Analysts should guard against this optimism bias when
they are predicting the consequences of policies they favor. For the same reason, some
analysts routinely discount the size of effects from studies in which the evaluator was
closely associated with the design or implementation of the program.8
Third, although rarely taken into account in practice, the most appropriate statis-
tical inference about what has happened may not correspond to the best prediction of
what will happen. The common approach for analysts seeking to predict impact from
evaluations is to interpret the estimated effect, perhaps a mean difference in an ex-
periment or a coefficient in a regression analysis, as the predicted impact. However,
when the sample size is small or the fit of the model to the data is poor, the estimated
effect may give a prediction that is too large (in absolute value sense) from the per-
spective of being likely to be close to the impact that will actually result from a repe-
tition of the experiment.9 Consequently, a more reliable prediction may result if the
estimated impact is “shrunk” in proportion to the poorness of the fit of the model to
the data. In a regression context, for example, a recommended heuristic is to shrink
the coefficient by (F-1)/F, where F is the F-statistic for the fit of the model to the
data.10
Simply relying on standard statistical approaches can also lead to an underesti-
mation of effects. It is common for social scientists to treat estimated impacts as
zero if the probability of observing them if they were truly zero is more than 5 per-
cent. In other words, impacts that are not statistically significant at conventional lev-
els are treated as zero. This may be an appropriate approach in the social sciences
where researchers wish to have overwhelming evidence before rejecting a null effect
in favor of some alternative theory. However, it is generally not the right approach
in CBA where the estimated effect, perhaps shrunk, is likely to be a better predic-
tion than zero. The standard error of the estimated effect conveys the degree of un-
certainty in its value and should be used in Monte Carlo simulations of net benefits.
Indeed, the distribution of net benefits resulting from Monte Carlo simulations
provides the basis for investigating the hypothesis of interest: predicted net bene-
fits are positive.
Predictions Based on Meta-Analyses of Similar Policies
Some policy interventions are replicated in many locations and evaluated with experi-
mental or quasi-experimental research designs. In some policy areas a sufficient num-
ber of these evaluations are made public to permit a statistical assessment of their com-
bined results. This process, called meta-analysis, seeks to use the information in the
studies to find an effect size and its variation.11 Drawing information from multiple
evaluations reduces the chances that the overall result will suffer from the limitations
of any one of the evaluations.
Meta-analysis begins with an identification of the relevant evaluations that are
the sources of its data. Social science researchers often limit the evaluations they
290

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
consider to those found in articles published in refereed journals. Policy analysts
seeking to apply CBA may choose to include unpublished evaluations of relatively
new or unusual interventions, if there are few published evaluations. The quality of
the source of the evaluation can itself be a variable in the meta-analysis, along with
direct classifications of the quality of the research design. In general, published stud-
ies, which have undergone peer review, are more credible. However, the reviewing
process tends to bias publication decisions toward articles showing statistically sig-
nificant effects, which potentially makes the pool of available published articles
overly optimistic.12 In addition, the delay in the publishing process from initial sub-
mission of manuscripts to publication of articles may be several years, so that relying
solely on published studies may miss the most recent, and perhaps most relevant,
findings.
A standardized measure of effect size is determined and extracted from each study
so that findings based on somewhat different measures can be combined. For example,
different achievement tests may be used in evaluations of a classroom intervention.
These results may be standardized in terms of their underlying distribution so that the
units of measure become standard deviations. For example, an evaluation of the effect
of tutoring on student performance measured the effect size as the difference between
the test scores for the treatment and control groups divided by the standard deviation of
scores for the control group.13 Measures of the variation of effect size in each study are
also extracted from the studies. In the simplest approach, the standardized effect sizes
and their variances are combined to find an average effect size and its variance. More
sophisticated approaches may use multivariate regression to estimate an average effect
size and variance controlling for the qualities of the studies, variations in composition of
subject populations in the studies, and differences in the details of implementation of
the intervention.
The Washington State Institute for Public Policy (WSIPP), which does analysis at
the request of the state legislature, makes exemplary use of meta-analysis to support
its application of CBA to prospective policies.14 For example, consider the efforts of
a team of its analysts to assess the costs and benefits of interventions in K–12 school-
ing policies. The team conducted a meta-analysis of 38 evaluations of class size re-
ductions and a meta-analysis of 23 evaluations of moving from half-day to full-day
kindergarten.15 Measuring effect size in standard deviations of test scores, the meta-
analysis of class reduction evaluations found an effect size of reducing classes from
20 to 19 students of 0.019 standard deviations for kindergarten through grade 2, 0.007
standard deviations for grades 3 through 6, and no statistically significant effect for
higher grades.The team used these effects as a starting point for their analysis, allow-
ing for annual decay of effects in later grades.They then related improved test scores
to lifetime earnings and other social effects.
When multiple evaluations relevant to predicting impacts for a CBA are avail-
able, it is worth considering whether to invest substantial resources to complete a
competent meta-analysis. Even when only a few evaluations are available, it is worth-
while using meta-analysis methods to combine their effects. Indeed, with only a small
number of available studies the costs of implementing the meta-analysis are likely to
be low. Of course, analysts can take advantage of meta-analyses performed by others,
whether they are directly related to CBA as are many of those done by the Washington
291

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
State Institute for Public Policy, or they summarize the research relevant to predicting
a specific impact.
Predict Using Generic Elasticities
Evaluations of policies similar to the alternative being analyzed often provide evi-
dence relevant to prediction of all or many of the impacts. In their absence, analysts
must seek out a variety of evidence to support their predictions. One common
approach is to search for relevant elasticities. Often policies or programs change the
effective prices of goods, either directly through changes in their price or indirectly
through changes in the convenience of consumption. In these cases the impact is the
change in the quantity of the good consumed. If an estimate of the price elasticity of
demand is available, then methods can be used to translate the change in effective
price to a change in consumption.
Consider, for example, a program that would lower the price seen by its partici-
pants for access to health care. Absent any available evaluation of this or similar poli-
cies, an analyst might predict a change in medical care utilization caused by the reduc-
tion in price based on a price elasticity of demand of 0.2 as estimated using data from
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment.16 Although finding a relevant elasticity or
other empirical basis for prediction from experiments may seem somewhat fortuitous,
it is often worth searching for them among the over 240 major social policy experi-
ments that have been completed in the United States.17
Much empirical work in the social sciences, medicine, and many other fields makes
use of observational data. In economics, for instance, price and quantity variation can
be observed over time or across jurisdictions with different taxes. Researchers often
take advantage of such natural (unplanned) variation to estimate elasticities and other
parameters useful in prediction. Analysts can find these studies by searching in both
general (e.g., ECONLIT, Google Scholar, JSTOR, and Proquest Digital Dissertations)
and substantively specific (e.g., ERIC for education and PubMed for health) electronic
databases of articles. The World Wide Web not only makes it easier to access these
databases, but also provides a way of potentially finding unpublished studies that, al-
though not vetted by referees or editors, might provide estimates of elasticities not
available elsewhere.
Some of the common elasticities that have been estimated many times have been
assessed in meta-analyses. For example, meta-analyses of the price elasticity of demand
for gasoline,18 electricity,19 residential water,20 and cigarettes21 are available. Other
meta-analyses review tax elasticities for corporate behavior and tax elasticities for eco-
nomic development,22 and price, service quality, income, gasoline price, and car owner-
ship elasticities for the demand for public transportation.23
It may be possible to identify a chain of elasticities that link an immediate policy
impact to other impacts, including some future impacts, that should also be valued. For
example, high school completion has a variety of potentially relevant effects ranging
from greater success in the labor market to reduced crime to better informed fertility
choices.24 Or consider an early childhood intervention that increases readiness for
school. Although the increased readiness may have some direct value to children and
parents, it may also have effects on the course of education, which in turn have other
292

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
valued impacts—one can imagine the increased achievement in early grades contribut-
ing to a higher likelihood of high school completion and its relevant effects. Of course,
the longer is the chain of causality linking the initial estimated impact to the predic-
tions of future impacts, the less certain the predictions.
Guesstimate
Sometimes it is not possible to find any existing quantitative evidence to predict an im-
pact.As a prediction must be made—excluding the impact is equivalent to predicting it
is zero with certainty—one can turn to logic or theory to specify its plausible range. For
example, if a policy will increase the price of some good, then it is almost certainly rea-
sonable to assume that the amount consumed with not go up. You may be able to put
an upper bound on reduction in consumption with an estimate of the price elasticity of
demand of some other good that you can argue is likely to be more price elastic. The
assumed range can be used in a Monte Carlo simulation to take account of your uncer-
tainty of the magnitude of the impact. When your guesstimate has a very large range,
you may also want to do sensitivity analysis in which, taking account of all other im-
pacts first, you determine how large or small a value it would have to have to change
the sign of net benefits.
If none of the above approaches is acceptable, you may obtain advice from experts
who have developed tacit knowledge that allows you make guesstimates. An expert,
such as a highway engineer, may be able to provide fairly confident ranges of predic-
tions for project costs based on her experience in using the prevalent rules-of-thumb,
without conducting a major and perhaps quite expensive study. In some circumstances,
there may be value in consulting multiple experts in a systematic way.The best-known,
approach for doing this is the Delphi Method, which was originally developed by the
RAND Corporation to aid in the analysis of national defense issues. It requires partici-
pation by a number of experts.Each expert is consulted by the group coordinator in sev-
eral rounds. In each round following the first, the coordinator provides feedback to the
experts in the form of unattributed summaries of the answers provided by the fellow ex-
perts in the previous round. The final product is a statistical summary of the answers.
The Delphi Method is sometimes used to generate input for economic analyses.25
MONETIZING IMPACTS
CBA requires that the quantitatively predicted policy impacts be valued in terms of a
common money metric based on the relevant national or regional currency, such as the
dollar or Euro. The fundamental principles of WTP and opportunity cost provide the
conceptual bases for monetizing. Depending on the impact being valued, monetization
can be relatively straightforward and certain or, like much of prediction, indirect and
uncertain.
Monetizing when Impacts Change Quantities Consumed in Markets
Policies that change consumption of market goods are relatively straightforward 
to monetize. These changes should be monetized as the algebraic sum of the 
293

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
corresponding changes in social surplus, changes in government revenue, and the
marginal excess tax burden of the changes in government revenue. In the simplest
case, the policy involves purchasing an input in an undistorted market with a per-
fectly elastic supply schedule—the change in quantity of the input consumed in the
market is monetized with the market price. Markets with less than perfectly elastic
supply, distorted markets, or markets that exhibit both conditions, require careful
accounting of changes in social surplus, including those external to the market, and
changes in government revenue. In general, impacts occurring in such markets are
not monetized by directly observed market prices but rather by shadow prices tak-
ing account of the all the relevant effects in the market. As long as the market sup-
ply and demand schedules and, if relevant, the social marginal benefit and social
marginal cost schedules have been predicted, the monetization is still relatively
straightforward. Further, the monetization itself in such cases does not add uncer-
tainty beyond that inherent in the predictions of the relevant schedules.
Monetizing Impacts in Missing Markets
Most public policies, but especially those addressing social and environmental problems,
have impacts that do not correspond to changes in consumption in well-functioning
markets. Monetizing these impacts requires shadow prices. Researchers have to be
clever in finding ways to estimate these shadow prices. Hedonic pricing and asset valu-
ation methods can often be used to make inferences about the social value of impacts
from the indirect effects they have on observable behaviors. However, sometimes the
impacts, such as changes in the availability of goods with an existence value, cannot be
linked to observable behavior and therefore can only be estimated through contingent
valuation surveys or other stated preference methods.
Fortunately, researchers have estimated a number of shadow prices for commonly
encountered impacts. Some shadow prices, such as the willingness to pay for reductions
in mortality risk (a basis for estimating the value of a statistical life), the social cost of
noise, or the opportunity cost of commuting time, have been estimated in a sufficiently
large number of studies to make meta-analyses possible. Other shadow prices must be
gleaned from smaller numbers of studies and often differ in terms of their comprehen-
siveness. For example, an important impact of many social policies is reduction in
crime. A comprehensive shadow price would include not only the direct costs to vic-
tims and the use of resources in the criminal justice system, but also the costs that fear
of crime imposes on potential victims. Improving these key shadow prices is an impor-
tant project for social scientists wishing to promote the application of CBA.26
As with prediction, even a single relevant study can provide an empirical basis
for determining a needed shadow price. For example, imagine that you faced the task
of monetizing an impact that pertains to children. Perhaps you have a plausible
shadow price for adults. If so, then you might use the findings from a study by Mark
Dickie and Victoria L. Messman that parents appear willing to pay twice as much for
294

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
reductions of flu symptoms for their young children as for themselves.27 (Interestingly,
the ratio falls to one by the time children reach the age of 18—a result probably very
plausible for parents of teenagers!) Of course, the more the impact you are trying to
monetize differs from flu symptoms, the less confident you should be about using ratios
from this particular study.
More generally, empirically derived shadow prices should be treated as uncertain
predictions. In calculating net benefits, analysts must usually multiply an uncertain pre-
diction of effect by an uncertain shadow price. Again, the importance of Monte Carlo
simulations to assess uncertainty in net benefits should be clear.
ILLUSTRATION: WSIPP CBA OF THE NURSE–FAMILY 
PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM
The Washington State legislature asked WSIPP to identify programs that could be im-
plemented in Washington to reduce the number of children entering and remaining in
the child welfare system. We briefly review the approaches to prediction and moneti-
zation used by the analysts to conduct a CBA of one particular intervention, the
Nurse–Family Partnership for Low-Income Families (NFP).
Aside from providing a rich illustration of approaches to predicting and mone-
tizing, familiarity with the work of WSIPP is valuable for CBA analysts for several
reasons. First, WSIPP demonstrates how CBA can actually be conducted and pre-
sented to influence public policy.28 Second, its CBAs are exemplary in their system-
atic use of empirical evidence through careful meta-analyses. Third, although the
complicated methods it uses are sometimes difficult to follow as presented, it does
strive to make them as transparent as possible. Finally, its meta-analyses are excellent
resources for analysts assessing social policies.
The NFP is intended to promote child development and parenting skills through
intensive visitation by nurses to low-income women during pregnancy and the two
years following the birth of first children.29 The following prediction strategy, summa-
rized in Table 1, was employed by the analysts: First, a meta-analysis of the available
evaluations of the implementation of the NFP in two sites was done to estimate the
mean effect size for child abuse and neglect.That is, taking account of all the available
studies, how much on average do NFP programs reduce abuse and neglect? This mean
effect size is the predicted effect.
Second, the analysts conducted meta-analyses of studies linking child abuse and
neglect to other impacts of interest. These meta-analyses provided estimates of the
mean effect sizes of child abuse and neglect on the secondary impacts of crime, high
school graduation, K–12 grade repetition, births and pregnancies for mothers under 18
years, test scores, illicit drug use, and alcohol abuse.
Third, the predicted effects of an NFP program on each of the secondary impacts
was obtained by multiplying the effect size of an NFP on child abuse and neglect by the
secondary impact mean effect size. So, following an example provided in the report,
consider a target population with a lifetime child abuse and neglect rate of 13.7 percent
and a high school graduation rate of 70 percent. Participation in an NFP program
would reduce the lifetime child abuse and neglect rate by 2.7 percentage points.30
295

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
TABLE 1
Prediction and Monetization for the NFP Program
Impact per
Participant
Prediction 
(Meta-Analyses)
Monetization
Child Abuse 
and Neglect 
(CAN)
Experimental evaluations  
of two NFP programs in 
Colorado and New York;
lifetime prevalence of CAN 
in general population 
estimated from 10 studies 
(10.6 percent)
Welfare system costs: model of case 
processing and service use in 
Washington State
Medical and mental health care costs and 
quality of life costs: based on estimates 
from study of juvenile violence in 
Pennsylvania1
Crime
10 studies of impact of CAN 
on crime
Criminal justice system costs: case processing 
model for Washington State
Victim costs: personal expenses,
property losses, mortality2
High School 
Graduation
3 studies of impact of CAN 
on high school graduation
Discounted lifetime money earnings gain
from high school graduation based on 
data from Census Bureau’s Current
Population Survey
Test Scores
7 studies of impact of CAN 
on test scores
Rate of return per standard deviation of 
test score gain based on review article3
multiplied by earnings of those with a high 
school degree but no college degree based 
on Current Population Survey
K–12 Grade 
Repetition
2 studies of impact of CAN 
on grade repetition
Cost of a year of schooling multiplied by the 
probability of high school completion to 
take account of elimination of year at end 
of schooling
Alcohol 
Abuse
4 studies of impact of CAN 
on alcohol abuse
After-tax lifetime earnings loss due to
mortality and morbidity
Treatment, medical, motor vehicle 
crashes, fire destruction, welfare 
administrative costs4
Illicit Drug 
Abuse
4 studies of impact of CAN 
on illicit drug abuse
After-tax lifetime earnings loss due to 
mortality and morbidity
Treatment, medical, motor vehicle crashes,
fire destruction, welfare administrative 
costs5
Program 
Costs
Based on program 
descriptions
Washington State wage and benefit rates
1Ted R. Miller, Deborah A. Fisher, and Mark A. Cohen,“Costs of Juvenile Violence: Policy Implications,”
Pediatrics 107(1) 2001, e3 (7 pages).
2Miller,Ted R., Mark A. Cohen and Brian Wiersema, Victim Costs and Consequences:A New Look
(Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1996).
3Eric A. Hanushek,“The Simple Analytics of School Quality,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper W10229, January 2004.
4Based on: Henrick J. Harwood,“Updating Estimates of the Economic Costs of Alcohol Abuse in the
United States.” Report prepare by Lewin Group for the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, 2000.
5Based on: Office of National Drug Control Policy, The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the United States
1992–1998 (Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, 2001).
296

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
Eliminating (that is, reducing the rate by 100 percentage points) child abuse and neglect
would increase the rate of high school graduation by 7.9 percentage points. Multiplying
these two percentage-point rate changes together yields a predicted increase in the
probability of high school graduation of about 0.2 percentage points.
The analysts used a variety of approaches to monetize the predicted impacts. For
example, the social cost of a case of child abuse and neglect was estimated in two major
components. The first component was an estimate of the average cost to the
Washington State child welfare system of a substantiated child abuse or neglect case. It
was based on a model of the welfare system that took into account the real resource
costs and probabilities of the steps in processing child abuse complaints and the possi-
ble services provided to victims.The second component was an estimate of the medical
and mental health treatment costs and quality of life costs resulting from a case of child
abuse. These costs were estimated from a study of adult on juvenile crime conducted
by researchers using Pennsylvania data from 1993.31 As usually the case when analysts
gather data from published studies, the results must be translated into current dollars
using the Consumer Price Index.
As the entries in Table 1 indicate, the analysts used a variety of sources for esti-
mating shadow prices for the other predicted impacts: models of processes within
Washington State, national economic data, and empirical findings reported in research
articles. Along the way, they had to make many assumptions to move from available
evidence to the needed shadow prices.Their efforts are commendable both in terms of
their creativity and transparency.
CONCLUSION
The range of quality of available evidence to support the prediction and monetiza-
tion of policy impacts is very wide.Very rarely, multiple evaluations employing rigor-
ous experimental designs provide the basis for making fairly confident predictions of
the magnitudes of the impacts that would result from continuation or replication of
policies and these impacts can be monetized with readily available and widely ac-
cepted shadow prices. More often, analysts must piece together evidence to support
predictions from a variety of sources and use shadow prices with varying degrees of
provenance. Doing so well requires both a sound conceptual grounding in CBA and
the courage to predict and monetize even when the supporting evidence is weak. It
also demands that analysts make their assumptions and uncertainties transparent,
both in presentation and through Monte Carlo and other methods to take account of
uncertainties.
EXERCISES
1.
Review the following CBA: David L.Weimer and Mark A. Sager,“Early Identification and
Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease: Social and Fiscal Outcomes,” Alzheimer’s & Dementia
5(3) 2009, 215–226. Evaluate the empirical basis for prediction and monetization.
2.
Imagine that a project involves putting a high-voltage power transmission line near residen-
tial property. Discuss how you might predict and monetize its impact on residents.
297

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
NOTES
1. For more detail see Anthony E. Boardman,
Wendy L. Mallery, and Aidan R.Vining,
“Learning from Ex Ante/Ex Post Cost-Benefit
Analysis Comparisons:The Coquihalla Highway
Example,” Socio-Economic Planning Sciences
28(2) 1994, 69–84.
2. For example, see Darren Grant and Stephen M.
Rutner,“The Effect of Bicycle Helmet
Legislation on Bicycling Fatalities,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 23(3) 2004,
595–611 at 606.
3. Winston Harrington, Richard D. Morgenstern, and
Peter Nelson,“On the Accuracy of Regulatory
Cost Estimates,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 19(2) 2000, 297–322
4. Todd P. Gilmer, Christian R. Dolder, Jonathan P.
Lacro, David P. Folsom, Laurie Lindamer, Piedad
Garcia, and Dilip V. Jeste,“Adherence to
Treatment with Antipsychotic Medication and
Health Care Costs among Medicaid
Beneficiaries with Schizophrenia,” American
Journal of Psychiatry 162(4) 2004, 692–99. Note:
rates calculated using data in article on hospital-
ization rates for drug compliance categories and
the fraction of subjects in the categories.
5. David L.Weimer,“Collective Delusion in the
Social Sciences,” Policy Studies Review 5(4) 1986,
705–708.
6. Charles R. Schwenk,“The Cognitive Perspective
on Strategic Decision Making,” Journal of
Management Science 25(1) 1988, 41–55.
7. Anthony Petrosino and Haluk Soydan,“The
Impact of Program Developers as Evaluators on
Criminal Recidivism: Results from Meta-
Analysis of Experimental and Quasi-
Experimental Research,” Journal of
Experimental Criminology 1(4) 2005, 435–450.
8. For example, analysts at the Washington State
Institute for Public Policy routinely halve the
intervention effects reported for programs in
which the evaluator was closely involved in the
design or implementation of the program. See,
for instance, Steve Aos, Jim Mayfield, Marna
Miller, and Wei Yen, Evidence-Based Treatment
of Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health Disorders:
Potential Benefits, Costs, and Fiscal Impacts for
Washington State (Olympia:Washington State
Institute for Public Policy, 2006), Appendix A3.c.
9. For an intuitive introduction to this issue, see
Bradley Efron and Carl Morris,“Stein’s Paradox in
Statistics,” Scientific American 236 1977, 119–127.
10. Copas, J. B. (1997) Using Multiple Regression
Models for Prediction: Shrinkage and Regression
to the Mean. Statistical Methods in Medical
Research 6(2), 167–183.
11. For an excellent introduction to doing meta-
analysis, see Mark W. Lipsey and David B.
Wilson, Practical Meta-Analysis (Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, 2001).
12. Weimer,“Collective Delusion in the Social
Sciences.”
13. Peter A. Cohen, James A. Kulik, and Chen-Lin 
C. Kulik,“Educational Outcomes of Tutoring:A
Meta-Analysis of Findings,” American
Educational Research Journal 19(2) 1982, 237–248.
14. For an overview of the WSIPP approach, see
Elizabeth K. Drake, Steve Aos, and Marna G.
Miller,“Evidence-Based Public Policy Options 
to Reduce Crime and Criminal Justice Costs:
Implications in Washington State,” Victims and
Offenders 4(2) 2009, 179–196.Analysts may 
find useful information in their own CBAs 
from those available on the WSIPP web page,
www.wsipp.wa.gov.
15. Steve Aos, Marna Miller, and Jim Mayfield,
Benefits and Costs of K–12 Educational Policies:
Evidence-Based Effects of Class Size Reductions
and Full-Day Kindergarten (Olympia:
Washington State Institute for Public Policy,
Document No. 07-03-2201, 2007).
16. Willard G. Manning, Joseph P. Newhouse,
Naihua Duan, Emmitt B. Keeler, and Arleen
Leibowitz,“Health Insurance and the Demand
for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment,” American Economic Review 77(3)
1987, 251–77.
17. David H. Greenberg and Mark Shroder, Digest
of Social Experiments 3rd ed. (Washington, D.C.:
Urban Institute Press, 2004).
18. Molly Espey,“Gasoline Demand Revisited:An
International Meta-Analysis of Elasticities,”
Energy Economics 20(3) 1998, 273–95; Martijn
Brons, Peter Nijkamp, Eric Pels, and Piet
Rietveld,“A Meta-Analysis of the Price Elasticity
of Gasoline Demand:An SUR Approach,”
Energy Economics 30(5) 2008, 2105–22.
298

Predicting and Monetizing Impacts
19. James A. Espey and Molly Espey,“Turning on
the Lights:A Meta-Analysis of Residential
Electricity Demand Elasticities,” Journal of
Agricultural and Applied Economics 36(1) 2004,
65–81.
20. Jasper M. Dalhuisen, Raymond J. G. M. Florax,
Henri L.T. de Groot, and Peter Nijkamp,“Price
and Income Elasticities of Residential Water
Demand:A Meta-Analysis,” Land Economics
79(2) 2003, 292–308.
21. Craig A. Gallet and John A. List,“Cigarette
Demand:A Meta-Analysis of Elasticities,”
Health Economics 12(10) 2003, 821–35.
22. Ruud A. de Mooij and Sjef Ederveen,
“Corporate Tax Elasticities:A Reader’s Guide to
Empirical Findings,” Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 24(4) 2008, 680–97; Joseph M. Philips and
Ernest P. Goss,“The Effects of State and Local
Taxes on Economic Development:A Meta-
Analysis,” Southern Economic Journal 62(2)
1995, 320–33.
23. Johan Holmgren,“Meta-Analysis of Public
Transport Demand,” Transportation Research:
Part A, Policy and Practice 41(10) 2007, 1021–35.
24. For demonstrations of this approach, see Robert
Haveman and Barbara Wolfe,“Schooling and
Economic Well-Being:The Role of Nonmarket
Effects,” Journal of Human Resources 19(3)
1984, 377–407 and Wolfe, Barbara and Robert
Haveman,“Accounting for the Social and Non-
Market Benefits of Education.” In John F.
Helliwell, ed., The Contribution of Human and
Social Capital to Sustained Economic Growth
and Well Being (Vancouver, BC: University of
British Columbia Press 2001), 221–250.
25. Jon Landeta,“Current Validity of the Delphi
Method in the Social Sciences,” Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 73(5) 2006,
467–482.
26. For a discussion of a number of shadow prices
that would be useful in applying CBA to social
programs, see David L.Weimer and Aidan R.
Vining, Investing in the Disadvantaged:Assessing
the Benefits and Costs of Social Policies
(Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University
Press, 2009).
27. Mark Dickie and Victoria L. Messman,“Parental
Altruism and the Value of Avoiding Acute
Illness:Are Kids Worth More than Parents?”
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 48:3 (2004), 1146–1174. For a gen-
eral discussion of the issues, see Sandra
Hoffmann,“Since Children Are Not Little
Adults—Socially—What’s an Environmental
Economist to Do?” Duke Environmental Law &
Policy Forum 17(2) 2006, 209–232.
28. For a discussion of WSIPP, see David L.Weimer
and Aidan R.Vining,“An Agenda for Promoting
and Improving the Use of CBA in Social Policy.”
In Investing in the Disadvantaged, 249–271.
29. Stephanie Lee, Steve Aos, and Marna Miller,
Evidence-Based Programs to Prevent 
Children from Entering and Remaining in 
the Child Welfare System: Benefits and Costs 
for Washington (Olympia:Washington State
Institute for Public Policy, Document No.
08-07-3901, 2008).
30. Effect size for a dichotomous variable (e.g.,
abuse/no abuse) is approximated by
where ES is the effect size, pc is the frequency in
the control group, and pe is the frequency in the
treated population.With an estimate of ES and
pc it is possible to solve for pe, the predicted fre-
quency for program participants.
A similar procedure can be used for contin-
uous variables (e.g., test scores) to predict effects
using the following formula
where Mc is the mean effect in the control group,
Me is the mean effect in the treatment group, Ve
is the square of the standard deviation in the
treatment group, and Vc is the square of the stan-
dard deviation in the control group. See Lipsey
and Wilson, Practical Meta-Analysis.
31. Miller,Ted R., Mark A. Cohen, and Brian
Wiersema, Victim Costs and Consequences:A
New Look (Washington, D.C.: National Institute
of Justice, 1996).
ES = (Me - Mc)>[(Ve + Vc)>2].5
ES = ln{[pe(1 - pc)]>[pc(1 - pe)]}>1.65
299

300

Valuing Impacts from Observed
Behavior: Experiments and 
Quasi Experiments
Form Chapter 12 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
301

Valuing Impacts from Observed
Behavior: Experiments and 
Quasi Experiments
T
his chapter focuses on estimating the benefits and costs of program interven-
tions by using experimental and quasi-experimental designs.1 The chapter first
describes experimental and quasi-experimental designs, indicating how they
are used in estimating the impacts of social programs—for example, health, education,
training, employment, housing, and welfare programs.The chapter then describes how
these impacts are incorporated into CBA of employment and training programs. The
chapter concludes by examining actual CBAs of employment and training programs
that were targeted at welfare recipients. The chapter provides numerous illustrations
of how additional concepts can be used in actual cost-benefit analyses.
ALTERNATIVE EVALUATION DESIGNS
CBAs of any intervention require comparisons between alternatives: the program or
policy that is subject to the CBA is compared to the situation that would exist without
the program (the so-called counterfactual), and impacts are measured as differences in
outcomes (e.g., in health status or earnings) between the two situations. The term
internal validity refers to whether this measured difference can be appropriately attrib-
uted to the program being evaluated. Internal validity, in turn, depends on the particu-
lar way in which the comparison between the program and the situation without the
program is made. There are numerous ways in which this comparison can be made.
Researchers usually refer to the specific scheme used for making comparisons in order
to measure impacts as an evaluation design.
Diagrams that represent five commonly used evaluation designs,2 as well as brief
summaries of the advantages and disadvantages of each of these designs, appear in
Table 1. In these diagrams, the symbol O represents an outcome measurement point, X
represents a treatment point, and R indicates that subjects were assigned randomly to
treatment and control groups.
The evaluation designs that are listed in Table 1 are not the only ones that exist.
There are numerous others. But these designs provide a good sampling of the major
alternatives. So that we can make our discussion of them as concrete as possible, we
302

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
TABLE 1
Five Commonly Used Evaluation Designs
Type
Structure1
Major Advantages
Major Disadvantages
Design 1: Comparison of net
changes between treatment
and true control groups
R: O1 X O2
R: O3
O4
Random assignment guards
against systematic differences
between control and treat-
ment groups so highest 
internal validity
Direct and ethical costs 
of random assignment;
as with all evaluations 
external validity may be 
limited
Design 2: Comparison of post-
treatment outcomes between
true control and treatment
groups
R: X O2
R:
O4
Random assignment guards
against systematic differ-
ences between control and
treatment groups so high 
internal validity
Direct and ethical costs 
of random assignment;
danger that a failure of 
randomization will not 
be detected
Design 3: Simple before/
after comparison
O1 X O2
Often feasible and 
relatively inexpensive;
reasonable when factors
other than treatment are 
unlikely to affect outcome
Does not control for 
other factors that may 
cause change
Design 4: Comparison of post-
treatment outcomes between
quasi-control and treatment
groups
X O1
O2
Allows for possibility of 
statistically controlling 
for factors other than 
treatment
Danger of sample selection
bias caused by systematic
differences between 
treatment and quasi-control
groups
Design 5: Comparison of net
changes between treatment
and quasi-control group
O1 X O2
O3
O4
Allows for possibility of 
statistically controlling for
factors other than treatment;
permits detection of measur-
able differences between
treatment and quasi-control
groups
Danger of sample selection
bias caused by systematic
differences between 
treatment and quasi-control
group in terms of nonmea-
surable differences
O—observation 
X—treatment 
R—random assignment
1Draws on notation introduced by Donald T. Campbell and Julian Stanley, Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for
Research (Chicago: Rand McNally College Publishing Company, 1963).
assume that they all pertain to alternative ways in which a program for training the
unemployed might be evaluated. In this context, “being in the treatment group”
means enrollment in the training program.
Design 1: Classical Experimental Design
Design 1 is a classical experimental design. The symbols indicate that unemployed per-
sons are randomly allocated between a treatment group and a control group. Members
of the treatment group can receive services from the training program, while persons in
the control group cannot. The way this might work in practice is that after the training
program is put into place, unemployed persons are notified of its existence. Some of
these persons apply to participate in it. A computer is used, in effect, to flip a fair coin:
Heads the applicant is selected as a member of the treatment group and, consequently,
becomes eligible to participate in the program; tails the applicant becomes a member of
303

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
the control group. Control group members are not eligible to participate in the program
but can receive whatever other services are available for the unemployed.
The procedure just described for establishing treatment and control groups is
called random assignment.3 Random assignment evaluations of social programs—for
instance, a training program—are often called social experiments.
To see how well the training program works,data on outcomes are collected for both
the treatment group and the control group, both before the treatment is administered
and after. Using the collected data, members of the experimental and control groups are
then compared.4 For example,the earnings of the two groups can be compared sometime
after the training is completed to measure the size of the program’s impact on earnings.5
Although it is sometimes impractical or infeasible to use,6 design 1 is the best of
the five design schemes summarized in Table 1 for many types of evaluations. Its major
advantage is the use of random assignment. Because of random assignment, the char-
acteristics of people in the treatment and control groups should be similar, varying
only by chance alone.As a result, random assignment helps ensure that the evaluation
has internal validity; that is, members of the experimental groups can be directly com-
pared in terms of such outcomes as earnings, and any differences that are found be-
tween them can be reasonably attributed to the treatment.
It is important to recognize, however, that although design 1 helps ensure internal va-
lidity, like the other evaluation designs discussed in this section, it may not provide
external validity. That is, there is no assurance that findings from the evaluation, even
though valid for the group of persons who participated in the evaluated program, can be
generalized to any other group.The reason for this is that personal and community char-
acteristics interact in complex ways with the services provided by a program.As a result,
the program may serve some persons more effectively than others. For example, findings
for a training program for unemployed, male, blue-collar workers who live in a commu-
nity with low unemployment may provide little information concerning how well the pro-
gram would work for unemployed female welfare recipients who live in a community with
high unemployment. In addition, the findings may also not hold for future time periods.
Design 2: Classical Experimental Design without Baseline Data
Design 2 is similar to design 1 in that random assignment is also used to allocate indi-
viduals between the treatment and control groups, and both are referred to as
experimental designs. The difference between the two designs is that collection of pre-
treatment, baseline information on members of the treatment and control groups is not
part of design 2 but is part of design 1. The problem with not collecting pretreatment
information is that there is no way of checking whether the treatment and control
groups are basically similar or dissimilar.
For the comparison between the two groups to measure program effects accu-
rately, the groups should, of course, be as similar as possible. Yet, as previously men-
tioned, they could be dissimilar by chance alone. This is more likely if each group 
has only a few hundred members, as is sometimes the case in social experiments. It is
also possible that those running an experiment fail to implement the random assign-
ment process correctly. If information is available on pretreatment status—for exam-
ple, on pretreatment earnings—then statistical adjustments can be made to make the
304

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
comparison between the treatment and the control groups more valid. Hence, there
is less certainty concerning internal validity with design 2 than design 1.
Nonetheless, design 2 may be more appropriate than design 1 when it is possible
that the collection of pretreatment information predisposes the participants to certain
relevant behaviors. For example, pretreatment questions about knowledge of health
risks may make the treatment group in a study of health education more prone to
learning than the general public would be.
Design 3: Before and After Comparison
Design 3 is by far the worst of the five designs, relying as it does on a simple before and
after comparison of the same group of individuals. For example, the earnings of a group
of individuals that went through a training program are compared with their earnings
before going through the program. The problem with this design is that there is no in-
formation on what would have happened without the program. Consequently, there is
no way to ensure internal validity. For example, the average earnings of people going
into a training program are likely to be very low if most of these people are unem-
ployed at the time of entry.That, perhaps, is why they decided to go into the program in
the first place. Even without the program, however, they might have found jobs even-
tually. If so, their average earnings would have gone up over time even if the program
did not exist.With a before and after comparison, this increase in earnings would be in-
correctly attributed to the program.
Before and after comparisons, however, do offer certain advantages.They provide a
comparatively inexpensive way of conducting evaluations. Moreover, when valid infor-
mation is not available for a comparison group, a before and after comparison may be
the only feasible way of conducting an evaluation. Such a comparison is obviously most
valid when nonprogram factors are not expected to affect the outcomes of interest (for
example, earnings) or can be taken into account through statistical adjustments.
Design 4: Nonexperimental Comparison without Baseline Data
Design 4 is based on a comparison of two different groups: one that has gone through a
program and the other that has not. Unlike design 2, however, membership in the two
groups is not determined by random assignment. For example, the comparison group
could be made up of people who originally applied for training but ultimately decided not
to participate. Alternatively, the comparison group could be drawn from a geographical
area where the program does not exist. Because such a comparison group is not selected
through random assignment, it is sometimes called a quasi-control group, and design 4 is
called a quasi-experimental design. Use of a quasi-control group may be necessary when
obtaining a comparison group through random assignment is infeasible or impractical.
Unfortunately, with this design there is no means of controlling for those differ-
ences between the two groups that existed prior to the treatment and, hence, no way
to ensure internal validity. Perhaps, for example, at the time of application for train-
ing, those who ultimately went through the program had been unemployed for a
longer period of time than persons in the comparison group, suggesting that in the ab-
sence of training they would have fared worse in the job market than members of the
305

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
comparison group. But if at the end of training it is observed that they actually did just
as well as persons in the comparison group, this suggests the training had an effect: It
pulled the trainees up even with the comparison group. However, with design 4, there
is no way to know the difference in the length of unemployment prior to training. As
a result, it would just be observed that, after training, members of the treatment group
were doing no better than people in the comparison group.This finding is subject to a
bias known as sample selection bias that results because systematic differences be-
tween the treatment and quasi-control group are not, and indeed cannot be, taken
into account. In this instance, sample selection bias is important because it could lead
to the incorrect conclusion that the training made no difference.
Design 5: Nonexperimental Comparison with Baseline Data
Design 5 utilizes both a treatment group and a control group. In addition, both pre-
treatment and posttreatment data are collected.This provides information on how the
treatment group differed from the comparison group prior to the training (for exam-
ple, in terms of length of unemployment). This information can be used in a statistical
analysis to control for pretreatment differences between the treatment and control
groups. For this reason, design 5 offers greater opportunity to obtain internal validity
than either design 3 or 4.
Even so, because this design, which like design 4 is a quasi-experimental design, does
not randomly assign individuals to the treatment and control groups, a major problem
occurs if people in the treatment and the comparison groups differ from one another in
ways that cannot be measured readily.Then it becomes very difficult to adjust statistically
for differences between the two groups. Perhaps, for example, unemployed persons who
enter training are more motivated than unemployed persons who do not. If so, they
might receive higher earnings over time even without the training. If analysts cannot
somehow take account of this difference in motivation—in practice, sometimes they can,
but often they cannot—then they may incorrectly conclude that higher posttraining earn-
ings received by the trainees are due to the training when, in fact, they are really due to
greater motivation on the part of the trainees. In the evaluation literature, such a situa-
tion creates a threat to internal validity that is known as the selection problem.7
The occurrence of selection problems can be greatly reduced by using design 1 or
2.The reason is that when random assignment is used, people assigned to the treatment
group should not differ from members of the control group in terms of characteristics
such as motivation except by chance alone. Because of this advantage, an increasing
number of evaluations of social programs that embody experimental designs have
been conducted since the early 1960s.8 However, large numbers of evaluations that uti-
lize nonexperimental designs, such as designs 3, 4, and 5, also continue to be done
either because costs or administrative factors prevent randomization or evaluations
are initiated after the program has begun operating.
CBAs OF EXPERIMENTS AND QUASI EXPERIMENTS
Although numerous evaluations that have utilized the designs outlined above have
been conducted, formal CBAs have been carried out for only a minority of them.
Often the evaluations focus instead on only one or two outcomes of interest. For 
306

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
example, in the housing or health areas, they might focus on whether the evaluated
program could be administered effectively or whether housing or health status im-
proved, and not attempt to measure other benefits and costs. In relatively rare in-
stances, social experiments have been used to estimate demand or supply relationships.
Though these estimates can be used in CBAs, the experiments themselves were not
subjected to CBA. Two especially important examples of such social experiments are
described in Exhibits 1 and 2.
CBAs OF EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING 
PROGRAMS: AN INTRODUCTION
Many of the evaluations of social programs that have been subjected to CBA have 
focused on programs that attempt to increase the employment or earnings of unem-
ployed or low-skilled workers,especially the welfare population.9 The services provided
EXHIBIT 1
How the consumption of medical care changes
as a function of the cost of care to users is cen-
tral to many public policy questions, especially
those relating to universal health insurance. To
address this question, the federal government
funded a social experiment, the Rand Health
EXHIBIT 2
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the U.S.
government funded four income maintenance
experiments. These experiments focused on
how income transfers affected the supply of
labor (equivalently the demand for leisure) of
low-income persons. Data from these experi-
ments were used to obtain estimates of wage
and income elasticities. Based on averages of
separate estimates from the numerous studies
that have relied on data from these experi-
Insurance Experiment, between 1974 and
1977. Analysis of the data from the six experi-
mental sites by Willard Manning and colleagues
suggests that the price elasticity of demand for
health care services is in the range of -0.1 to
-0.2.
Source: Adapted from Willard G. Manning, Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler,Aileen Leibowitz, and
Susan Marquis,“Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,”
American Economic Review 77(3) 1987, 251–277.
ments, Gary Burtless derived a number of elas-
ticity values. The compensated wage elasticities
are 0.09 for married men, 0.24 for married
women, and 0.14 for single women.The uncom-
pensated wage elasticities are -0.02 for married
men, 0.17 for married women, and -0.04 for
single women.The income elasticities are -0.11
for married men, -0.07 for married women, and 
-0.18 for single women.
Source: Adapted from Gary Burtless,“The Work Response to Guaranteed Income:A Survey of Experimental Evidence,”
in Alicia Munnell, ed., Lessons from the Income Maintenance Experiments (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
1986), 22–52.
307

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
by these programs have varied considerably but have included job search assistance,
remedial education, vocational training, subsidizing private-sector employers in ex-
change for hiring program participants, financial incentives to work, and the direct
provision of public-sector jobs to participants. Although the individual programs that
provide such services often differ greatly from one another, such programs are com-
monly referred to as employment and training (E&T) programs.10
E&T programs are often viewed as investments in the human capital of partici-
pants (i.e., attempts to improve their skills and abilities). Thus, the major economic ra-
tionale for funding them revolves around assertions that E&T programs help correct
market or institutional failures that cause underinvestments in human capital. For ex-
ample, low-income people may not have the resources to invest in certain kinds of
training, such as classroom vocational training. Their access to private financing may be
limited by a lack of collateral and a high risk of default.Moreover,public training may be
justified as compensating for inadequacies in the public education system or as providing
a second chance to those who prematurely terminate formal schooling because of imper-
fect foresight or a high subjective rate of time preference. In addition, E&T programs
may help correct imperfect information among participants about human capital invest-
ment opportunities by guiding them into activities that yield the highest payoff for them.
A distinct rationale for E&T programs stems from a widely accepted value that, all
else equal, it is better to receive income from employment than from transfer pro-
grams. To meet this goal, increasingly stringent requirements to participate in E&T
programs have been imposed on welfare and unemployment insurance recipients since
the early 1980s.
THE CBA FRAMEWORK IN THE EDUCATION 
AND TRAINING CONTEXT
The basic CBA accounting framework has been described in previous chapters.
However, different policy areas have developed variations of the basic CBA frame-
work that address issues specific to each area. The particular accounting framework
that is used today in conducting most CBAs of E&T programs was originally devel-
oped during the late 1960s and refined in the early 1980s. A stylized version of this
framework appears in Table 2. Although details concerning the specifics of the frame-
work vary somewhat from one E&T CBA to another, depending upon the specific na-
ture of the services provided, the table lists those benefits and costs that are typically
measured.
This framework offers several advantages: It is readily understandable to policy
makers; by displaying benefits and costs from the perspectives of both participants and
nonparticipants, it suggests some of the distributional implications of the program
being evaluated; and, possibly most important, because measures of each cost-benefit
component listed can actually be obtained from data collected during the evaluation, it
is operationally feasible. Indeed, despite shortcomings in the framework, it is difficult
to find practical alternatives to it.
In Table 2, plus signs indicate anticipated sources of benefits and minus signs
anticipated sources of costs from different perspectives. The first column (A) shows
308

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
TABLE 2
Stylized Cost-Benefit Framework Showing the Impacts of E&T
Programs
Society 
(A) 
(B  C)
Participant
(B)
Nonparticipant
(C)
Output produced by participant
In-program output

0

Gross earnings


0
Fringe benefits


0
Participant work-related expenditures
Tax payments
0
—

Expenditures on child care,
transportation, etc.


0
Use of transfer programs by participants
Welfare payments
0


Other transfer payments
0


Program operating costs

0

Use of support programs by participants
Support services received by 
participants

0

Allowances received by participants
0


Program operating costs

0

aggregate benefits and costs from the perspective of society as a whole. The re-
maining columns show the distribution of benefits and costs to the two groups that
are typically relevant in assessing E&T programs: participants or clients served by
the evaluated program (B); and nonparticipants, including taxpayers who pay for
the program (C).
Benefits and costs to society are simply the algebraic sum of benefits and costs to
participants and to nonparticipants because society is the sum of these two groups.
Hence, the table implies that if a program causes transfer payments received by partic-
ipants (e.g., unemployment compensation or welfare payment receipts) to decline,
then this should be regarded as a savings or benefit to nonparticipant taxpayers, a cost
to program participants (albeit one that may be offset by earnings), and neither a ben-
efit nor a cost to society as a whole but simply income transferred from one segment of
the population to another.
This approach is consistent with the standard one used in CBA. As we have seen,
in standard CBA “a dollar is a dollar,” no matter to whom it accrues.Thus, in Table 2, a
dollar gained or lost by an E&T participant is treated identically to a dollar gained or
lost by a nonparticipant. Consequently, if an E&T program caused the transfer dollars
received by participants to fall, then this would be viewed as not affecting society as a
whole because the loss to participants would be fully offset by benefits to nonpartici-
pants in the form of reductions in government budgetary outlays.
309

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Typically, however, E&T participants have much lower incomes, on average, than
nonparticipants. A case can sometimes be made for treating the gains and losses of
low-income persons differently from those of higher-income persons. This is almost
never done in CBAs of E&T evaluations, however. Instead, as can be seen in Table 2,
they simply lay out the results so that the distributional consequences of a particular
program can be observed.
Table 2 divides the benefits and costs associated with E&T programs into four
major categories. The first two categories pertain to effects that result if a program
increases the work effort or productivity of participants—for example, by providing
them work in a public-sector job where they perform useful services, providing them
skill training, or helping them find private-sector employment through job search as-
sistance. On the one hand, the value of the output they produce will rise, which in the
private sector should be reflected by increases in earnings and fringe benefits. On the
other hand, if hours at work rise, expenditures on child care and transportation will
also increase. And if earnings rise, tax payments will increase. The third major cost-
benefit category in Table 2 pertains to decreases in dependency on transfer payments
that may result from an E&T program. Such reductions in dependency should cause
both the amount of payments distributed under transfer programs and the cost of ad-
ministering these programs to fall.The fourth major category refers to expenditures on
the services received by program participants. Obviously, such expenditures increase
when an E&T program is implemented. However, this increase will be partially offset
because participants do not need to obtain similar services from other programs.
Three of the subcategories listed in Table 2 pertain to job-related expenditures and
require clarification: participant expenditures on child care, transportation, and so
forth; support services received by participants; and allowances received by partici-
pants.The first of these subcategories refers to total job-required outlays by E&T par-
ticipants on such items as child care, transportation, and uniforms. The subcategory of
support services pertains to the direct provision of such goods by a government agency,
and the allowances subcategory refers to government reimbursement of job-required
expenditures by participants. Table 2 reflects the philosophy that all program-
induced increases in job-required expenditures should be treated identically, as re-
source costs to society engendered in producing goods and services. Of course, to the
extent the government directly provides support services to participants, client outlays
for this purpose will be smaller. In a CBA, this would be reflected by a smaller dollar
amount appearing under the participant expenditures on job-related outlays and a
larger dollar amount appearing under the subcategory of support services received by
participants. Job-required expenditures are further discussed later in the chapter.
As previously indicated, all of the cost and benefit items listed in Table 2 would be
measured as the difference between outcomes with and without the E&T program. In
practice, many of the services offered by an E&T program may also be offered under
other programs. For example, training provided by the programs may also be avail-
able through community colleges. Consequently, estimates of program effects on par-
ticipants do not measure impacts of the receipt of service against the nonreceipt of
services. Rather, such estimates attempt to determine the incremental effect of the
program over the environment that would exist without the program. Similarly,
310

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
the measure of program operating services is an estimate of the cost of running the
program being evaluated less the cost of the services program participants would re-
ceive without the program.11
Benefits and costs that are sometimes referred to as intangible effects but are
rarely, if ever, actually estimated in evaluations of E&T programs do not appear in
Table 2. Examples of intangible effects include the values of leisure forgone and self-
esteem from working. Almost by definition, intangible effects are difficult to measure,
but they may be important. In fact, the nonmeasurement of important intangible costs
and benefits is a key problem in conducing CBAs of most social programs.12 In the
next section, we examine the implications of not measuring certain intangible effects in
conducting CBAs of E&T programs.
CONCEPTUAL ISSUES IN CONDUCTING CBAs
OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMS
We now turn to a number of limitations of the accounting framework illustrated in
Table 2. Because these limitations can result in incorrect policy conclusions, comparing
some of the operational measures of benefits and costs typically used in conducting
CBAs of E&T programs with their conceptually correct counterparts appears useful.
In doing this, it is helpful to examine measures of benefits and costs associated with
E&T programs separately from the participant and the nonparticipant perspectives,
keeping in mind that social benefits and costs are simply the algebraic sum of benefits
received and costs incurred by these two groups.
The Participant Perspective
Two Alternative Measures.
The standard E&T framework, as Table 2 suggests, esti-
mates participant net benefits as net changes in the incomes of program clients—that
is, as increases in earnings and fringe benefits minus increases in taxes, decreases in
transfer payments, and increases in work-related expenditures that result from partici-
pation in the program. However, the conceptually appropriate measure of participant
net benefits is net changes in the surplus of program participants, not net changes in
their incomes. As will be seen, the difference between these two measures can be sub-
stantial.
The extent to which the two measures diverge depends on the precise mechanism
through which E&T programs influence earnings. For instance, E&T programs may ei-
ther increase the hourly wage rates of participants (e.g., by imparting new skills) or in-
crease the hours they work (e.g., by aiding in job search or increasing the obligations
that must be met in exchange for transfer payments). Numerous E&T programs have
been found to increase hours worked. Meaningful impacts on wage rates are rarer but
have occurred. In the discussion that follows, we compare the two alternative measures
of net benefits from the perspective of several different hypothetical E&T participants,
each of whom is assumed to respond differently to the program.
311

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Wage rate
Hours of work
h1
h0
W0
W1
S
A
0
B
C
FIGURE 1
Social Surplus Change Resulting from an Induced Wage
Increase
The first participant is represented in Figure 1. Curve S is the labor supply sched-
ule of this participant, an individual who is assumed to have successfully participated in
an E&T program that increased her market wage from W0 to W1.13 As a result, the in-
dividual increases her hours of work from h0 to h1. In the diagram, area A represents
the increase in participant surplus (earnings) that would have resulted from the wage
increase even if the participant had not increased her hours. Area B C represents an
additional increase in participant earnings that resulting from the increase in hours
that actually takes place at the higher wage. However, area C is fully offset by the indi-
vidual’s loss of leisure.14 Consequently, although areas A, B, and C are counted as ben-
efits when using the net income change measure of E&T effects, only A and B are
counted in the conceptually correct (producer) surplus change measure.
In Figure 1, the first E&T participant was assumed to be in equilibrium both be-
fore entering the program and upon completing the program; that is, it was assumed
that at both points she was able to work the number of hours she desired to work at her
market wage. Many E&T participants, however, are not in equilibrium prior to enter-
ing a program. Indeed, many persons participate in E&T specifically because they are
unemployed.
Such a situation is assumed to face the second participant, an individual who is rep-
resented in Figure 2. In this figure, the individual has a market wage of W0 prior to en-
tering E&T but is able to obtain only h0 hours of work instead of the desired h1 hours.
Assume now that, although participating in E&T does not affect the participant’s mar-
ket wage, it does permit him to increase his hours of work from h0 to h1. As a result of
this hours increase, the participant enjoys an earnings increase equal to areas A  B
but a (producer) surplus increase equal to only area A. Thus, once again, the net 
312

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Wage rate
Hours of work
h1
h0
W0 = W1
0
A
S
B
FIGURE 2
Social Surplus Change Due to an Induced Increase in Hours Worked
income change measure of E&T benefits is larger than the conceptually more appro-
priate (producer) surplus change measure.
Our findings for the first two E&T participants imply that while any earnings in-
creases that result from wage increases should be fully credited to the program, only
part of earnings increases resulting from increases in hours should be credited. In
Figure 3, we turn to a more complex situation facing a third E&T participant: a welfare
recipient who, as a condition for receiving her welfare grant, is required to work at a
public-sector job for h* hours each month, where h* is determined by dividing her
grant amount by the minimum wage. Similar arrangements, which are often referred to
as workfare, have sometimes been used in administering welfare programs. The wel-
fare recipient’s market wage is assumed to equal Wm, the minimum wage, while curve
S0 represents her supply schedule in the absence of workfare. (Ignore curve S1 for the
moment.) Figure 3 implies that in the absence of workfare, Wr
0, the welfare recipient’s
reservation wage (i.e., the lowest wage at which she would be willing to work) would
exceed her market wage.Thus, she would choose not to work.
Now imagine that the welfare recipient is enrolled in workfare in two distinct steps.
In the first step,her welfare grant is withdrawn.This loss of income would cause her labor
supply curve to shift to the right from S0 to S1. As a consequence, her reservation wage
would fall from Wr
0 to Wr
1, a value below the minimum wage. In the second step, she is of-
fered the opportunity to work h* hours at a public-sector workfare job at a wage of Wm.
In other words, she is given the opportunity to earn back her welfare grant, which in the
diagram corresponds to the rectangular area Wmah*h0.15 Because Wm exceeds Wr
1, the
participant represented in Figure 3 would prefer workfare to not working at all.
313

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Wage rate
Hours of work
h1
h*
h0
S0
S1
W0 = W1 = W m
W1
r
W0
r
a
b
c
FIGURE 3
Social Surplus Change Due to Workfare
If the welfare recipient accepts the workfare offer, then the net income change and
social surplus change measures of program impacts have quite different implications.
Assuming she has no opportunities to work in addition to h*, her net income would be
unchanged from what it was prior to the program; consequently, the measure based on
changes in net income would imply that she is no worse off. However, the social surplus
change measure does imply that she is worse off. Specifically, her social surplus would
decline by an amount represented by the area Wr
1ch*h0 an amount equal to the value
that the recipient places on her lost leisure.16
So far, the focus has been on benefits received by and costs incurred by welfare
recipients while they are participating in workfare. Now let us consider a different situ-
ation: The benefits and costs associated with a participant’s move from welfare to a
regular private-sector job. This is, of course, one of the major objectives of programs
such as workfare, and Figure 3 implies that the program would in fact have the desired
effect on the participant.Although in the absence of the workfare she would prefer not
to work at all, given a choice between participating in workfare (point a) or working at
a regular minimum-wage job (point b), the participant would select the latter. By re-
stricting her hours to h*, workfare causes the participant to be “off her labor supply
curve.” Only by finding a regular job can she work h1 hours, the number of hours she
would desire to work at the minimum wage. In actual practice, the participant might
move directly from welfare to the job upon being confronted with the workfare re-
quirement, or alternatively, she might first participate in workfare while seeking pri-
vate-sector employment.
314

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
A comparison of the net income change measure of workfare’s impact on a partic-
ipant who moves directly to private-sector employment with the corresponding con-
ceptually correct measure of the change in social surplus yields an interesting finding.
On the one hand, the net income change measure implies that the participant repre-
sented in Figure 3 enjoys a net gain. Her transfer payments fall from Wmah*h0 to zero,
but her earnings increase from zero to Wmbh1h0, resulting in a net increase in income
of abh1h*. On the other hand, the participant suffers a net social surplus loss because
her gain in surplus from working, area WmbWr
1, is exceeded by the value of her lost
transfer Wmah*h0. Thus, under the circumstances represented in Figure 3, the net in-
come change measure suggests a conclusion that is the diametrical opposite from that
implied by the conceptually more correct social surplus change measure.
In measuring the impacts of E&T programs from the participant perspective, three
rules can be drawn from the preceding analyses of the three illustrative E&T partici-
pants. First, the full value of reductions in transfer payments should be counted as a cost
to E&T participants. Second, the full value of increases in earnings that result from wage
rate increases should be counted as a benefit to E&T participants. Third, only part of the
value of earnings increases that result from hours increases should be counted as a ben-
efit to E&T participants; namely, the part that represents an increase in participant sur-
plus should be counted, while the part that is offset by reductions in leisure should not.
In conducting CBAs of E&T programs, the first two of these rules are straight-
forward to implement. Implementing the third rule, however, requires an estimate of
the percentage of earnings changes attributable to increases in hours that should be
counted. The relatively few studies that have attempted to do this have found that
the part of the earnings increase that should not be counted is potentially large and,
if erroneously counted is likely to result in a substantial overstatement of estimated
net benefits.17
Improvements in Self-Esteem.
It is sometimes suggested that E&T programs can im-
prove the self-esteem of E&T participants. For example, programs may impart skills
that increase financial independence. If so, then this is a program benefit that should, in
principle, be included in CBAs of E&T programs, although it is difficult to do so di-
rectly. However, to the extent an increase in the self-esteem of an E&T participant
manifests itself as an increase in willingness to work (for example, because he or she is
less concerned about rejection when seeking employment), the participant’s labor sup-
ply curve will shift to the right. The resulting gain in surplus is represented graphically
as the gap between the old and new supply curves below the market wage upon com-
pletion of training. Program benefits that are measured as increases in participant
earnings, instead of as increases in surplus, will also be larger than if the curve does not
shift. However, the increase in earnings will not correspond very well to the increase in
surplus. Moreover, at most, only part of the benefits from an improvement in self-es-
teem is likely to be reflected by a shift in the labor supply curve. Indeed, it is easy to
imagine E&T participants who enjoy increases in self-esteem as a result of participat-
ing in the program but whose willingness to work does not change.
Job-Required Expenditures.
As discussed earlier, in the framework traditionally
used in cost-benefit analyses of E&T programs, increases in job-related expenditures
315

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
such as child care and transportation that result from program participation are
counted as a social cost of the program, regardless of whether paid for by E&T partic-
ipants or the government. As discussed next, however, this approach can sometimes
result in double counting.
For illustrative purposes, we focus on child care, although a similar analysis
could be made for other work-related costs such as transportation. Figure 4(a) per-
tains to an individual who participated in an E&T program that increased her wage
from W0 to W1. The supply curve, S, indicates the hours the individual would work if
she must pay for child care. The diagram implies that, as a result of the program-en-
gendered wage increase, she would go from not working to working h1 hours. Thus
the program would engender an increase in earnings equal to area W1ah10 and a
smaller surplus gain equal to area W1aWr. Panel (b) illustrates the E&T partici-
pant’s demand for child care. P0 represents the market-set price for child care. As
indicated in the figure, the demand curve for child care would shift out from D0 to
D1 as a result of the wage increase and the increased hours worked resulting from
the E&T.
As the reader may have noticed, Figure 4(b) is very similar to the diagrams of pri-
mary and secondary markets. This is hardly surprising. The direct effects of E&T pro-
grams typically occur in labor markets, while a complementary relationship exists be-
tween work effort and child care. Hence, the primary market is the labor market for
E&T participants, while the market for child care is a secondary market.
FIGURE 4(a)
Labor Market Effects of an
E&T Program
Hourly
wage
0
h1
Hours of
work
S
a
W1
Wr
W0
FIGURE 4(b)
Child Care Market Effects of
an E&T Program
Price
per day
Days of
child care
v
z
u
d1
d2
D1
d0
D0
P0
0
316

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Effects in undistorted secondary markets should usually be ignored if program
benefits in primary markets are measured in terms of changes in surplus. Specifically,
the individual represented in Figure 4 will presumably consider the child care expenses
she will incur in determining the number of hours she would be willing to work at each
wage rate. Thus, in using her labor supply curve to measure her surplus gain from par-
ticipating in the E&T program, area W1aWr, her child care expenditures are already
fully taken into account. Consequently, her increase in expenditures in the secondary
market represented in panel (b)—that is, area uvd1d0—should be ignored, as should the
area between the two demand curves in panel (b). Not doing so will result in double
counting.
As emphasized earlier, benefits to E&T participants are traditionally measured
as changes in net income, rather than as changes in surplus. To obtain this measure,
increases in expenditures on child care would, of course, be subtracted from earnings
increases. As indicated in Figure 4(a), the increase in earnings overstates the gain in
surplus resulting from the E&T program by an amount represented by area Wrah10.
Subtracting the increase in day care expenditures, area uvd1d0, from the increase in
earnings offsets this overstatement. However, area uvd1d0 could be either larger or
smaller than area Wrah10. Thus, the net income measure could be either larger or
smaller than the more appropriate social surplus measure.
We next consider benefits and costs if the government directly provides child care
or reimburses individuals for their expenditures on child care. A rather natural way to
examine such a policy is to compare the earnings increases that result from the gov-
ernment subsidizing child care with the government’s cost. As will be seen, however,
this approach is incorrect.
For illustrative purposes, we assume that child care is provided free to subsidized
individuals, but the government pays the market price of P0.As previously discussed, at
a market wage of W1, the demand curve for child care for the individual represented in
Figure 4 would be D1. Thus, if child care was provided to her free, she would consume
d2 units of child care.
Because the direct effects of the government’s subsidy occur in the market for
child care, it should now be viewed as the primary market for purposes of analysis,
while the labor market should be viewed as the secondary market. Thus, although the
government’s provision of subsidized child care would shift the labor supply curve to
the right, and this, in turn, would affect earnings,18 these effects should be ignored.
Instead, the effects of the policy on individuals are best examined by measuring surplus
changes in the primary market. For example, the individual represented in Figure 4
would enjoy a surplus gain corresponding to area d1vd2. However, the cost to the gov-
ernment, which is represented by area d1vzd2, would be considerably greater, resulting
in dead-weight loss equal to area vd2z.19
The Nonparticipants’ Perspective20
Several categories of benefits and costs accrue to nonparticipants: intangible benefits,
benefits from in-program output, and costs resulting from the displacement of public-
sector and private-sector workers.
317

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Intangible Benefits Received by Nonparticipants.
The preceding section emphasized
that in measuring the benefits and costs of E&T programs to participants it is changes
in their surplus that should be estimated rather than changes in their money income.
Thus, the effects on participant surplus of E&T-induced reductions in participant
leisure time should be taken into account.
The same concept applies in measuring benefits and costs of E&T programs to
nonparticipants. For example, if nonparticipants positively value the substitution of
earnings for welfare payment in and of itself, then the increase in surplus they received
will exceed any reductions in their tax obligations that might result from E&T pro-
grams targeted at welfare recipients. Thus, in principle, it is changes in the surplus of
nonparticipants that result from E&T programs, rather than changes in their incomes,
that should be measured. In view of the practical difficulty of doing this, however, it has
never been attempted.
Changes in Taxpayer Excess Burden.
Taxes result in losses of economic efficiency
that economists refer to as deadweight loss or excess burden. If taxes increase, ex-
cess burden also rises; but if they fall, excess burden also diminishes. A particular
E&T program could cause taxes to either increase or decrease, depending on
whether the program results in net costs or net benefits to the government. This
would be determined as part of a CBA of the program. Once determined, the pro-
gram’s effect on deadweight loss—that is, its marginal excess tax burden—must be
estimated. Doing this requires an estimate of the efficiency cost of one dollar more
of taxes or of one dollar less.The value of this variable can be multiplied by the gov-
ernment's net benefits or net costs to determine the change in deadweight loss re-
sulting from the E&T program.
Benefits from In-Program Output.
Some E&T programs involve the provision of
public-sector jobs. Perhaps the best-known example of this is the Works Projects
Administration (WPA), which operated in the United States during the Great
Depression and was intended to absorb some of the massive number of workers who
were unemployed during this period. More recently, the Comprehensive Employment
and Training Act provided as many as 750,000 public-sector jobs for unemployed per-
sons during the late 1970s. In still more recent years, as discussed earlier, welfare recip-
ients in some states have been required to perform work at government and nonprofit
agencies in exchange for their payments.
How should the value to taxpayers of the in-program output produced by E&T
participants be assigned to public-sector jobs? Ideally, this would be done by deter-
mining what taxpayers would be willing to pay for this output. Typically, this is in-
feasible, however, because the output is not purchased in market transactions.
Consequently, an alternative approach is used that determines what the labor re-
sources required to produce the output would have cost if purchased on the open
market. Because agencies that “employ” E&T participants usually pay nothing for
the services of these people, researchers use the wage rate that would have been
318

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
paid to similar workers hired in the open market. Once an appropriate wage rate is
determined, the basic calculation involves multiplying the number of hours E&T
participants work by this wage and perhaps adjusting to account for differences be-
tween the average productivity of the E&T workers and workers hired in the open
market.
This procedure can result in an estimate that either overstates or understates the
true value of the in-program output produced by E&T participants.The reasons for this
can be seen by examining a key assumption that underlies this valuation method:that the
decisions of the public-sector agencies that employ E&T workers closely reflect the
desires of taxpayers. More specifically, an analogy is drawn with the behavior of private-
sector firms and consumers under perfect competition, and it is assumed that the
amount that an agency would be willing to pay to employ an additional worker corre-
sponds to the value that taxpayers would place on the additional output that the worker
could potentially produce. Although this is not an appropriate place to assess the per-
fect competition analogy or discuss the extent to which bureaucratic behavior reflects
taxpayer preferences, it should be obvious that a rather strong assumption is required to
value output produced by E&T workers.21
The implications of this assumption can be explored by use of Figure 5, which de-
picts the demand curve for workers by a public-sector agency that might potentially be
assigned E&T participants and the supply curve the agency faces in hiring workers in a
competitive labor market. In using this diagram, we first examine a situation in which
the assumption that bureaucratic behavior reflects taxpayer preferences is valid and
then one where it is not.
In Figure 5, the horizontal line, S, represents the supply curve, which is set at the
level of the market-determined wage, W, that must be paid to each regular worker
hired by the agency; the downward-sloping line, D, represents the demand curve, which
is assumed to slope downward as a result of diminishing returns and (as implied by the
assumption about bureaucratic behavior) because the agency prioritizes its tasks so
that, as its budget expands, successively less important services are performed. (Ignore
curve D* for the moment.) This demand curve reflects the willingness to pay for work-
ers by the agency and, in keeping with the assumption concerning bureaucratic behav-
ior, the area under this curve is presumed to measure the value to taxpayers of output
produced by workers hired by the agency.
Figure 5 indicates that in the absence of E&T workers the agency would hire R
regular workers; however, if P E&T participants were assigned to the agency, a total of 
R  P workers would be employed. Thus, if the bureaucratic behavior assumption is
valid, the value to taxpayers of the output added by the E&T workers would equal
area A.
Unfortunately, however, area A typically cannot be directly measured.The reason for
this is that the output produced by public-sector agencies is rarely sold in market transac-
tions and, consequently, the agency’s derived demand curve for labor, which is depicted
in Figure 5, cannot actually be observed. However, even though government and non-
profit agencies that “employ” E&T participants pay nothing for the services of these
people, the area under the supply curve between R and R  P can be valued by simply
determining the wages that would have to be paid to similar workers hired on the open
319

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Wage rate
Number of
employees
R
A
B
C
D
D*
S
W
R + P
FIGURE 5
Demand for Workers by a Public-Sector Agency
market to do the work performed by E&T participants. Consequently, it is the area under
the supply curve—that is, area A plus area B—that is usually used in practice as the mea-
sure of the value of in-program participant output. As a glance at Figure 5 suggests, the
size of the resulting overstatement of the value of the output produced by E&T participa-
tion,which is represented by area B, depends upon the slope of the agency demand curve.
So far, we have assumed that agency behavior simply reflects the value that tax-
payers would place on the agency’s output. Let us now look at one of the numerous
possible situations where this is not the case.The specific example we examine is one in
which the agency, perhaps because of budget constraints resulting from the public
goods characteristics of whatever services it provides, produces less output than tax-
payers collectively desire. These circumstances are represented in Figure 5 by two de-
mand curves. As before, curve D indicates agency willingness to pay for workers, but
the value that taxpayers place on the output produced by the agency is now repre-
sented by the area under demand curve D*. Consequently, the value of the additional
output produced by the P E&T participants now equals area A plus area B plus area C.
Thus, under these circumstances, the measure based on the supply curve of the output
produced by E&T workers, which as previously indicated equals area A plus area B,
understates the true value by an area equal to C.
Costs from Public-Sector Labor Displacement.
So far, our discussion has been based
on the assumption that the E&T workers made available to a public-sector agency
would simply be added to the regular workforce that the agency would hire in the ab-
sence of the program. However, the agency might instead substitute E&T workers for
320

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
regular workers. In terms of Figure 5, this behavior on the part of the agency, which is
usually referred to as displacement, would mean that agency employment would in-
crease by less than the P workers provided by E&T. Indeed, with 100 percent displace-
ment, the agency’s workforce would remain at R, rather than increase to R  P.
Consequently, at first blush, it would appear that displacement leads to overstatement
of the value of output produced by E&T participants.22
The issue is actually a bit more subtle and complex, however. If the displaced
workers have a similar risk of joblessness as E&T participants, then increases in output
produced by E&T participants assigned to public-sector agencies may be entirely off-
set by losses in the output formerly produced by those workers who are displaced.This
need not be the case, however, if the E&T participants are exceptional in terms of lack
of skills or if they face exceptional barriers to labor market access. Moving such per-
sons directly into jobs under these circumstances will change the characteristics of the
general pool of unemployed in ways that may allow a reduction in the net incidence of
joblessness, especially if local labor market conditions are tight.Thus, to the extent that
E&T participants are unskilled relative to those they replaced, the labor market conse-
quences will differ from a simple one-for-one replacement.
Costs from Private-Sector Labor Displacement.
A major objective of most E&T
programs is to increase the unsubsidized private-sector employment of program par-
ticipants.To the extent these efforts are successful, some participants undoubtedly end
up in jobs that would otherwise have been held by nonparticipants. If, as a result, these
nonparticipants become unemployed or accept lower-wage jobs, their earnings obvi-
ously fall. This earnings reduction, which is another type of displacement effect, is po-
tentially a cost of E&T programs to nonparticipants. Because there is little agreement
concerning the magnitude of private-sector labor displacement, it has rarely been
taken into account in CBAs of E&T programs.23
The failure to take account of private-sector displacement may not be very serious,
however. CBA usually assumes that full employment is maintained. If it is, then it
should be relatively easy for displaced nonparticipants to find alternative job opportu-
nities (although this may take some time), and E&T programs will raise the feasible
employment level. Nonetheless, if E&T programs add workers with a particular set of
skills to the workforce, they may still depress the wages of workers with similar skills.
Private-sector displacement is a more serious issue if unemployment is high. Even
then, however, it is possible that E&T programs may impart skills that allow trainees to
leave slack occupational labor markets for tight ones. If they do, then they will de-
crease the competition for job vacancies in the slack labor markets, making it easier for
unemployed workers who remain in these markets to find jobs. To the extent this oc-
curs, E&T programs will again raise feasible employment levels.
CHOOSING PREDICTION PARAMETERS
In using the cost-benefit framework illustrated in Table 2, it is necessary to take ac-
count of the fact that some benefits and costs of E&T programs are likely to extend
beyond the period for which postprogram data on outcomes are collected, which is
321

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
typically only two or three years after participants leave the program. For example,
as a result of having participated in an E&T program, some individuals could poten-
tially enjoy increased earnings but pay higher taxes, incur greater job-required ex-
penses, and receive fewer transfer payments over the remainder of their working
lives. These streams of future benefits and costs must be incorporated into the CBAs
of the program. Doing this requires that three important parameters be specified: the
social discount rate, the discounting time horizon, and the decay rate of program ef-
fects. The other two parameters are discussed in turn next. Because E&T programs
are typically funded through taxes, the shadow price of capital does not have to be
used.
The Discounting Time Horizon
The time horizon is the period over which benefit and cost streams are estimated. In
CBAs of E&T programs, benefits and costs beyond the specified time horizon are as-
sumed equal to zero. One procedure for determining the length of the time horizon in
CBAs of E&T programs is to subtract the age of program participants at the time they
entered the program from the age at which they are expected to retire from the work-
force. Often, however, a shorter, somewhat arbitrarily selected time horizon—for ex-
ample, five years—is used instead. Doing this is simply an acknowledgment on the part
of analysts that because they do not possess crystal balls, uncertainty increases the fur-
ther one attempts to extrapolate beyond the period for which evaluation data was col-
lected. However, because most E&T operating costs are generally incurred shortly
after program entry, basing a CBA of an E&T program demonstration on a short time
horizon will understate E&T benefits relative to program operating costs if the key po-
tential benefit, earnings improvements, persists well beyond the time horizon.
This understatement of benefits relative to costs could be substantial. Table 3
shows the present discounted value of an improvement of $1 in annual earnings under
alternative assumptions about time horizons over which the improvement persists 
and for the value of the discount rate. The figures in the table have two important im-
plications. First, it is evident that the magnitude of benefit and cost estimates are quite
TABLE 3
The Sensitivity of a $1 Improvement in
Annual Earnings to Alternative Time
Horizons and Discount Rates
Discount Rate
Time Horizon
3%
5%
5 years
$4.58
$4.33
10 years
8.53
7.72
20 years
14.85
12.46
30 years
19.60
15.37
322

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
sensitive to the choice of the time horizon. For example, if a 5 percent discount rate and
a five-year time horizon are used for extrapolation purposes, the present value of an
improvement of $1 in earnings equals $4.33. But if a 5 percent discount rate and a 20-
year time horizon are used instead, the present value equals $12.46, almost a threefold
increase. Second, the longer the time horizon that is used, the more sensitive are pro-
jections of benefits and costs to the choice of the discount rate. Hence, if a short time
horizon is used, cost-benefit findings are less likely to be sensitive to the choice of a dis-
count rate than if a long time horizon is used.
How long are program effects on earnings likely to last for actual E&T programs?
While evidence on this topic is sketchy, a recent study that pooled findings from a large
number of E&T evaluations indicates that program effects on earnings continue to
exist for about six years for adult men and about four years for youth after they com-
plete an E&T program, while program effects continue indefinitely for adult women.24
However, results that are based on random assignment evaluations alone suggest that
program earnings effects may last somewhat longer for adult men. Findings from a sep-
arate study that is based solely on random assignment evaluations of E&T programs
targeted at female welfare recipients suggest that the effects of these programs on
earnings continue for five to six years.25
Taken together, this evidence seems to suggest that, except for adult women par-
ticipating in E&T programs, using fairly short time horizons in CBAs of these pro-
grams is probably appropriate. It is important to recognize, however, that these find-
ings are based on averages for a variety of evaluated programs. The effects of a
particular program could last for either a longer or a shorter period of time depending
on its particular features.
The Decay Rate
A decay rate is necessary in extrapolating E&T effects that persist beyond the period
over which postprogram data on outcomes are collected in order to take account of the
possibility that the size of these effects may change over time. For example, it is usually
argued that programs that provide training or job placement for low-wage workers ini-
tially may give them a competitive advantage in the labor market, but this advantage
may decay over time. In the case of training, however, one could alternatively argue
that doors are opened on the job that allow participants to obtain additional training
after leaving an E&T program and, consequently, the program’s effects on earnings
will grow over time.
Unfortunately, only limited empirical evidence exists as to whether the earnings ef-
fects of E&T programs tend to grow or decay over time, let alone the magnitude of the
actual rate of decay or growth. Because policy makers are often anxious for findings
from evaluations of E&T programs, data on program outcomes are usually limited to
three years or less, making predictions of decay rates highly subject to forecasting error,
a common CBA problem.26 However, one of the studies found that earnings effects for
adult men, adult women, and youth who participated in E&T programs all initially grew
after they completed training but only for a short period of time (perhaps a year or so).
They then declined for the men and youth but remained constant for the women.27
323

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
The other study indicated that the earnings effects of programs targeted at welfare re-
cipients increased for two or three years and then begin declining until they disap-
peared altogether after five or six years.28 It is again important to recognize that these
patterns pertain to a “typical” program and may not hold for a particular program that
is being subjected to a CBA.
Once values for the discount rate, time horizon, and decay rate are chosen, equa-
tions A.6 and A.7 from Chapter 6 can be used to compute present values. In using these
formulas, care must be taken to use a negative value for g if it is determined that the ef-
fects of the E&T program will decay over time and a positive value for g if it seems
likely that these impacts will grow over time. For benefit and cost components that nei-
ther grow nor shrink over time, g should, of course, be set equal to zero.
CBAs OF WELFARE-TO-WORK EXPERIMENTS
Virtually every U.S. state operates programs that attempt to increase the employment
of welfare recipients and thereby reduce their dependency on transfer payments.
Similar to other E&T programs, the specific components of these welfare-to-work pro-
grams varied but included one or more of the following: assessment of basic skills,
structured job search, training and education, financial incentives to work, and subsi-
dized employment in the public or private sector.
CBA Results
Table 4 presents summary results from CBAs of 26 welfare-to-work programs.29 These
programs were all targeted at single parents who participated in the Aid for Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, which at the time the CBAs were con-
ducted was the major cash welfare program in the United States. Most of the programs
were mandatory in the sense that AFDC benefits could be reduced or even terminated
if a parent did not cooperate. The CBAs were all conducted by MDRC, a well-known
nonprofit research firm using a similar framework and the classical experimental de-
sign denoted as design 1 earlier in the chapter. The estimates in Table 4, which have
been converted to 2006 dollar amounts using the U.S. Consumer Price Index, should be
viewed as program impacts on a typical member of the treatment group in each of the
listed programs.
The first three columns in the table present estimated benefits and costs from the
participant perspective and the next four from the nonparticipant perspective.
Columns A and D, respectively, report total net gains (or losses) from these two per-
spectives, while columns B, C, E, F, and G provide information on the benefit and cost
components that together account for these gains (or losses). For example, column B
reports the estimated net gain by participants from employment under each program,
that is, estimates of the sum of increases in earnings, fringe benefits, and any work-re-
lated allowances paid under the program less the sum of tax payments and participant
job-required expenditures on child care and transportation. Column C indicates
changes in AFDC and other transfer benefits received by participants. Column E
324

TABLE 4
Summary of Cost-Benefit Estimates from MDRC’s Evaluations of Selected Welfare-to-Work Experiments 
(in 2006 dollars)
Participant Perspective
Nonparticipant Perspective
Net 
Present 
Value 
A  B  C
Changes in 
Income 
Attributable 
to Employment
Changes in
Transfer
Payments
Net 
Present 
Value 
DE FG
Value of 
In-Program
Output
Changes 
Tax 
Transfer 
Amounts
Operating 
Costs
Net Social
Gain (or 
Loss) 
H A  D
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Mandatory Work 
Experience Programs
Cook County WIN 
Demonstration (n = 11,912)
686
282
405
-183
182
-308
-57
503
San Diego (n = 3,591)
310
1,113
-804
1,411
409
1,142
-140
1,721
West Virginia CWEP 
(n = 3,694)
-163
-12
-151
1,424
1,752
177
-505
1,261
Mandatory Job-Search-First 
Programs
Atlanta LFA NEWWS 
(n = 4,433)
-14
3,026
-3,040
-932
0
3,878
-4,809
-946
Grand Rapids LFA 
NEWWS (n = 4,554)
-2,867
2,434
-5,301
3,521
0
5,925
-2,405
653
Los Angeles Jobs-First 
GAIN (n = 15,683)
509
4,863
-4,354
3,044
0
4,765
-1,721
3,552
Riverside LFA 
NEWWS (n = 8,322)
-1,606
3,605
-5,211
1,870
0
5,888
-4,018
264
SWIM (San Diego) 
(n = 3,227)
-49
3,383
-3,432
2,599
333
3,958
-1,692
2,549
Mandatory Education-First 
Programs
Atlanta HCD NEWWS 
(n = 4,433)
398
2,375
-1,977
-3,943
0
2,689
-6,632
-3,545
Columbus Integrated
NEWWS (n = 7,242)
-1,975
2,537
-4,513
295
0
5,357
-5,062
-1,680
(Continued )
325

Columbus Traditional 
NEWWS (n = 7,242)
1,423
1,839
3,263
-781
0
3,684
-4,465
-2,204
Detroit NEWWS (n = 4,459)
196
1,674
-1,478
-401
0
2,084
-2,485
-205
Grand Rapids HCD 
NEWWS (n = 4,554)
-2,443
1,226
-3,668
-374
0
4,192
-4,566
-2,817
Riverside HCD NEWWS 
(n = 3,135)
-3,686
2,201
-5,888
735
0
6,268
-5,533
-2,951
Mandatory Mixed-Initial-
Activity Programs
Butte GAIN (n = 1,234)
1,829
4,608
-2,778
197
120
4,129
-4,053
2,026
Portland NEWWS 
(n = 4,028)
-1,167
6,371
-7,538
6,337
0
9,804
-3,467
5,169
Riverside GAIN 
(n = 5,626)
2,117
7,115
-4,997
4,104
8
6,324
-2,229
6,221
San Diego GAIN 
(n = 8,224)
1,026
3,895
-2,869
1,277
208
3,737
-2,668
2,303
Tulare GAIN (n = 2,248)
2,020
2,189
-169
-3,162
-8
661
-3,815
-1,142
Project Independence 
(Florida) (n = 18,237)
-579
902
-1,481
100
0
1,705
-1,605
-478
Alameda GAIN (n = 1,205)
1,218
3,815
-2,597
-4,153
107
3,550
-7,811
-2,935
Los Angeles GAIN 
(n = 4,434)
-2,229
800
-3,030
-4,811
-8
3,275
-8,079
-7,041
Earnings Supplement 
Programs
MFIP (Minnesota) 
(n = 3,208)
10,144
1,185
8,958
-10,958
0
-11,299
341
-814
SSP Applicants (Canada) 
(n = 2,371)
6,589
4,719
1,870
-580
0
817
-1,398
6,009
SSP Long-Term Recipients 
(Canada) (n = 4,852)
4,614
1,828
2,786
-2,363
0
-1,123
-1,240
2,251
WRP (Vermont) (n = 5,469)
241
-208
448
-228
0
-513
284
13
Source: Based on Appendix Table B-2 through Appendix Table B-16 in David Greenberg,Victoria Deich, and Gayle Hamilton, Welfare-to-Work Program
Benefits and Costs (New York: MDRC, 2009).
TABLE 4
(Continued )
326

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
presents MDRC’s valuations of in-program output. Column F is the sum of tax in-
creases paid by participants, reductions in transfer payments paid to participants,
and reductions in transfer program operating costs, all of which may be viewed as
benefits to nonparticipants. Column G shows the government’s cost of operating
the treatment programs. Finally, column H, which is computed by summing the
benefit-cost components reported in columns B, C, E, F, and G, presents the overall
CBA results.
As can be seen from column H, 15 of the 26 reported estimates indicate overall
net gains and 11 imply net losses. Nonetheless, most of the total net gains and losses
for either participants or nonparticipants that are implied by columns A and D are
not especially large; all but six are well under $3,000 per program participant in 2006
dollars.
Table 4 distinguishes between five distinct types of welfare-to-work programs. As
summarized below, the cost-benefit findings for different program types vary consider-
ably and are quite relevant to policy.
• Mandatory work experience programs, which assigned welfare recipients to un-
paid jobs, appear to be worthy of consideration as a component of a comprehen-
sive welfare-to-work program.These program were implemented for persons
who, after a period of time, could not find unsubsidized jobs through job search.
These programs are not costly to the government and do little harm to partici-
pants. Moreover, society as a whole can reap some benefit from the output pro-
duced at work experience jobs.
• Mandatory job-search-first programs require individuals to look for jobs immedi-
ately upon being assigned to the program. If work is not found, then they are as-
signed other activities. Such programs appear worthy of consideration when gov-
ernments want to reduce their expenditures.These programs tend to be less
expensive than mandatory mixed-initial-activity programs and, thus, to have a
more salutary effect on government budgets. However, they are unlikely to in-
crease the incomes of those required to participate in them.
• The sorts of mandatory education-first programs that have been tested experi-
mentally—ones that require individuals to participate in GED completion and
Adult Basic Education prior to job search—do not appear to be cost-beneficial.
They do little to either increase the incomes of participants or save the govern-
ment money.
• Mandatory mixed-initial-activity programs require individuals to participate ini-
tially in either an education or training activity or a job search activity.The first
six of these programs that are listed in Table 4 enrolled both short-term and long-
term welfare recipients, while the last two enrolled only long-term welfare recipi-
ents. Four of the former were cost-beneficial from a societal perspective, but nei-
ther of the latter were.
• Earnings supplement programs provide individuals with financial incentives or
earnings supplements intended to encourage work.The CBA findings suggest
that they are an efficient mechanism for transferring income to low-income fami-
lies because participants gain more than a dollar for every dollar the government
spends.
327

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
RANDOM ASSIGNMENT EXPERIMENTS IN HEALTH
Much of this chapter focuses on cost-benefit analyses of social programs, especially
E&T programs, that have been based on random assignment experiments. Random as-
signment, of course, has also been used extensively to assess medicine and medical pro-
cedures. Health experiments, in fact, have been conducted for considerably longer than
social experiments. And like social experiments, they sometimes provide the basis for
CBAs, although they are used far more frequently in cost-effectiveness and cost-utility
analyses.
Health experiments, especially those involving new drugs, differ from social exper-
iments in an important respect. In experimentally testing new drugs, subjects in the
control group are usually given a placebo and members of the treatment and control
groups do not know whether they are receiving the new drug or the placebo. In fact,
those administering the drug may not know either. If neither the patient nor the re-
searchers know who is in the treatment and control groups, then the experiment is
referred to as a “double-blind experiment.” In social experiments, in contrast, it is
rarely feasible to keep assignment to treatment and control groups hidden (placebo
social programs are difficult to envision). Thus, there is the risk that the behavior of
people in the control group may be affected by knowledge of the fact that they missed
out in receiving the treatment. For example, in the case of an E&T experiment, some
members of the control group may be discouraged, while others may be goaded into
finding alternative sources of the services offered by the experimental program. It is
also possible that some control group members are inappropriately provided some
program benefits by sympathetic administrators.
CONCLUSION
The analysis presented in this chapter suggests that CBAs of E&T programs are more
difficult both to conduct successfully and to interpret than they may first appear, even
when the CBA is based on a classical experimental design. Nevertheless, as the findings
drawn from Table 4 illustrate, they can provide useful insights. However, some uncer-
tainty exists concerning the reported values, both because of uncertainty over how long
the program impacts persisted and because of benefits and costs that were not esti-
mated, such as the value of reductions in the leisure time of participants, changes in the
self-esteem of program participants, possible labor displacement resulting from the
programs, and society’ preference for work over welfare.
EXERCISES
1.
Using the scheme shown in Table 1, diagram the evaluation design used in the CBA of each
of the following programs.
a.
To evaluate a government training program that provides low-income, low-skilled, disad-
vantaged persons job-specific training, members of the target population are randomly
assigned to either a treatment group that is eligible to receive services under the program
or to a control group that is not. Data are collected on the earnings, welfare receipts, and
so forth of both groups during the training period and for two years thereafter.
328

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
b.
To evaluate a government training program that provides low-income, low-skilled, dis-
advantaged persons job-specific training, members of the target population who live in
the counties in the eastern half of a large industrial state are assigned to a treatment
group that is eligible to receive services under the program, while members of the tar-
get population who live in the counties in the western half of the state are assigned to a
quasi-control group that is not. Information is collected on the earnings, welfare re-
ceipts, and so forth of both groups for one year prior to the beginning of training, dur-
ing the training period, and for two years thereafter.
c.
To evaluate a government training program that provides low-income, low-skilled, dis-
advantaged persons job-specific training, information is collected on the earnings, wel-
fare receipts, and so forth of those persons who receive training.This information is
collected for the year prior to the beginning of training, during the training period, and
for two years thereafter.
2.
Consider a government training program that provides low-skilled men job-specific training.
To evaluate this program, members of the target population were randomly assigned to ei-
ther a treatment group that was eligible to receive services under the program or to a control
group that was not. Using this evaluation design, the following information was obtained:
•
Members of the treatment group were found to remain in the program an average of
one year, during which time they received no earnings but were paid a tax-free stipend
of $5,000 by the program to help them cover their living expenses. During the program
year, the average annual earnings of members of the control group were $10,000, on
which they paid taxes of $1,000. During the program year, the welfare and unemploy-
ment compensation benefits received by the two groups were virtually identical.
•
Program operating costs (not counting the stipend) and the cost of services provided by
the program were $3,000 per trainee.
•
During the two years after leaving the program, the average annual earnings of mem-
bers of the treatment group were $20,000, on which they paid taxes of $2,000. During
the same period, the average annual earnings of members of the control group were
$15,000, on which they paid taxes of $1,500.
•
During the two years after leaving the program, the average annual welfare payments
and unemployment compensation benefits received by members of the treatment group
were $250. During the same period, the average annual welfare payments and unem-
ployment compensation benefits received by members of the control group were $1,250.
a.
Using a 5 percent discount rate, a zero decay rate, and a five-year time horizon,
compute the present value of the net gain (or loss) from the program from the
trainee, nonparticipant, and social perspectives. In doing this, ignore program im-
pacts on leisure and assume that all benefits and costs accrue at the end of the year
in which they occur.
b.
Once again ignoring program impacts on leisure, recompute the present value of
the net gain (or loss) from the program from the trainee, nonparticipant, and social
perspectives, assuming that at the end of the two-year follow-up period program
impacts on earnings and transfer payments begin to decay at the rate of 20 percent
each year.
3.
Perhaps the most careful effort to measure the effects of compensatory preschool education
was the Perry Preschool Project begun in Ypsilanti, Michigan, in 1962. Children, mostly
three years old, were randomly assigned to treatment (58 children) and control (65 chil-
dren) groups between 1962 and 1965. Children in the treatment group received two acade-
mic years of schooling before they entered the regular school system at about age five, while
children in the control group did not. The project collected information on the children
through age 19, an exceptionally long follow-up period. Using information generated by the
329

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
study, analysts estimated that two years of preschool generated social net benefits (1988 dol-
lars) of $13,124 at a discount rate of 5 percent. (For a more complete account, see W. Steven
Barnett, “Benefits of Compensatory Preschool Education,” Journal of Human Resources
27(2) 1992, 279–312.)
a.
Before seeing results from the project, what would be your main methodological con-
cern about such a long follow-up period? What data would you look at to see if the
problem exists?
b.
Benefit categories beyond the age of 19 included crime reduction, earnings increase,
and reductions in welfare receipts. If you were designing the study, what data would
you collect to help measure these benefits?
4.
Five years ago a community college district established programs in ten new vocational
fields. The district now wants to phase out those programs that are not performing success-
fully and retain those programs that are performing successfully. To determine which pro-
grams to drop and which to retain, the district decides to perform CBAs.
a.
What perspective or perspectives should be used in the studies? Are there any issues
concerning standing?
b.
Using a stylized cost-benefit framework table, list the major benefits and costs that are
relevant to the district’s decision and indicate how each affects different pertinent
groups, as well as society as a whole.Try to make your list as comprehensive and com-
plete as possible, while avoiding double counting.
c.
What sort of evaluation design should the district use in conducting its CBAs? What
are the advantages and disadvantages of this design? Is it practical?
d.
Returning to the list of benefits and costs that you developed in part b, indicate which
of the benefits and costs on your list can be quantified in monetary terms. How would
you treat those benefits and costs that cannot be monetized?
e.
What sort of data would be required to measure those benefits and costs that can be
monetized? How might the required data be obtained?
NOTES
1. For a detailed review of cost-benefit analyses of
social policies, see David L. Weimer and Aidan
R. Vining, eds. Investing in the Disadvantaged:
Assessing the Benefits and Costs of Social
Policies (Washington, D.C., Georgetown
University Press, 2009).
2. This method of diagramming evaluation designs
was developed a number of years ago by Donald
Campbell and Julian Stanley, Experimental and
Quasi-Experimental Designs for Research
(Chicago: Rand-McNally, 1963).
3. On randomization, see Leslie L. Roos Jr.,
Noralou P. Roos, and Barbara McKinley,
“Implementing Randomization,” Policy Analysis
3(4) 1977, 547–559; and Larry L. Orr, Social
Experiments: Evaluating Public Programs with
Experimental Methods (Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications, Inc., 1999).
4. Sometimes some members of the treatment
group do not actually receive program services.
For example, in the case of a training program,
they may take a job before the training course
begins. If so, then the comparison is said to esti-
mate the effect of the program on the “intent-to-
treat.” If all members of the treatment group ac-
tually receive program services, then the
comparison is said to estimate program effects
on the treated.
5. Sometimes a problem occurs when some mem-
bers of the two groups cannot be located for pur-
poses of collecting postprogram information on
outcomes or refuse to provide the information.
This problem, which can occur with all five of the
sample designs listed in Table 1 and is known as
sample attrition, can bias the impact estimates if
those who can and cannot be located systemati-
cally differ from one another in terms of the post-
program outcome measures. For example, those
who can be located may have higher earnings, on
average, than those who cannot be located.
330

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
6. For discussions of issues and problems that arise
in conducting social experiments, see Gary
Burtless,“The Case for Randomized Field Trials
in Economic and Policy Research,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(2) 1995, 63–84; James S.
Heckman and Jeffrey A. Smith,“Assessing the
Case for Social Experiments,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(2) 1995, 85–110; and
David H. Greenberg and Stephen Morris,
“Large-Scale Social Experimentation in Britain:
What Can and Cannot Be Learnt from the
Employment Retention and Advancement
Demonstration,” Evaluation 11(2) 2005, 151–171.
7. The name stems from the fact that in the absence
of random assignment people select themselves
to participate or not participate in a program on
the basis of such unobservable characteristics as
motivation. If appropriate statistical adjustments
cannot be made to control for this—as the text
indicates, sometimes this is possible, but often it
is not—then sample selection bias results. For
further information on the selection problem
and econometric techniques that are used to
attempt to adjust for it, see William H. Greene,
Econometric Analysis, 4th ed. (New York:
Macmillan Publishing Company, 2000);
Christopher H.Achen, Statistical Analysis of
Quasi-Experiments (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1986); and Guido W. Imbens and
Jeffrey M.Wooldridge,“Recent Developments in
the Econometrics of Program Evaluation,”
Journal of Economic Literature 47(1) 2009, 5–86.
8. For a survey of the social experiments conducted
between 1962 and 1996, see David Greenberg,
Mark Shroder, and Matthew Onstott,“The Social
Experiment Market,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13(3) 1999, 157–172. For two-to
three-page summaries of each of the known 143
social experiments that were completed in the
United States by the end of 1996, see David
Greenberg and Mark Shroder, The Digest of
Social Experiments, 3rd ed. (Washington, D.C.:The
Urban Institute Press, 2004). For abstracts of more
recent social experiments, see David Greenberg
and Mark Shroder, editors, Randomized Social
Experiments eJournal, Social Science Research
Network.
9. In recent years, there has been increasing inter-
est in using CBA to assess social programs for
young people. For example, see E. Michael
Foster and E.Wayne Holden,“Benefit-Cost
Analysis in the Evaluation of Child Welfare
Programs,” Focus 23(1) 2004, 44–49 and Robert
Plotnick,“Using Benefit-Cost Analysis to Assess
Child Abuse Prevention and Intervention
Programs,” Child Welfare 78(3) 1999, 381–407.
Further examples appear in David L Weimer and
Aidan R.Vining, eds., Investing in the
Disadvantaged:Assessing the Benefits and Costs
of Social Policies.
10. For summaries of findings from evaluations of
E&T programs and methodological issues associ-
ated with these evaluations, see Robert J. LaLonde,
“The Promise of Public Sector-Sponsored Training
Programs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2)
1997, 149–168; Daniel Friedlander, David H.
Greenberg, and Philip K. Robins,“Evaluating
Government Training Programs for the
Economically Disadvantaged,” Journal of
Economic Literature 35(4) 1997, 1809–1855; James
Heckman, Robert LaLonde, and Jeffrey Smith,
“The Economics and Econometrics of Active
Labor Market Programs,” in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999),
1865–2097; and David H. Greenberg, Charles
Michalopoulos, and Philip K. Robins,“A Meta-
Analysis of Government Training Programs,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57(1) 2003,
31–53. For summaries of evaluations of E&T pro-
grams specifically targeted at welfare recipients, see
Judith M. Gueron and Edward Pauly, From Welfare
to Work (New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
1991); and Karl Ashworth,Andreas Cebulla, David
Greenberg, and Robert Walker,“Meta-Evaluation:
Discovering What Works Best in Welfare
Provision,” Evaluation 10(3) 2004, 193–216.
11. For a detailed description of how the operating
costs of E&T programs can be estimated, see
David H. Greenberg and Ute Appenzeller, Cost
Analysis Step by Step:A How-to Guide for
Planners and Providers of Welfare-to-Work and
Other Employment and Training Programs, New
York: MDRC, 1998.
12. Several recent studies have discussed this prob-
lem in some detail and suggested possible ways
of addressing the problem, especially by the use
of contingent valuation.These studies include
David L.Weimer and Aiden R.Vining, Investing
in the Disadvantaged:Assessing the Benefits and
331

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
Costs of Social Policies; Brian Maskery and Dale
Whittington,“Measuring What Works:The
Feasibility and Desirability of Additional Cost-
Benefit Analysis for Sixteen ‘Social Programs
that Work,’” Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina, 2007; and Lynn A. Karoly,“Valuing
Benefits in Benefit-Cost Studies of Social
Programs,” Santa Monica, CA: Rand
Corporation, 2008.
13. The supply curve in Figure 1 should be viewed as
an equivalent variation supply curve—that is, it
incorporates substitution, but not income, effects.
For reasons discussed in Appendix 3A, this is the
appropriate curve for measuring changes in
worker surplus resulting from wage changes.
However, as Exhibit 2 suggests, wage changes
may engender substantial income, as well as sub-
stitution, effects.
14. The word leisure, as commonly used by econo-
mists and as used here, refers to all activities that
take place outside the labor market. Many of
these activities (e.g., child care, home repair, and
education) may, of course, be quite productive.
15. Because the hours the recipient is required to
work are computed by dividing her welfare grant
by the minimum wage (i.e., h* = grant/Wm), her
grant equals Wmh*, a value that in Figure 3 is
represented by area Wmah*h0.
16. Notice that because the supply curve first shifts
from S0 to S1, and then, in response to this shift
the participant adjusts the number of hours she
works, the surplus loss is measured using S1
rather than S0.
17. Stephen H. Bell and Larry L. Orr, “Is
Subsidized Employment Cost Effective for
Welfare Recipients? Experimental Evidence
from Seven State Demonstrations,” Journal of
Human Resources 19(1) 1994, 42–61. David H.
Greenberg, “The Leisure Bias in Cost-Benefit
Analyses of Employment and Training Programs,”
Journal of Human Resources 32(2) 1997,
413–439; and David H. Greenberg and Philip K.
Robins, “Incorporating Nonmarket Time into
Benefit-Cost Analyses of Social Programs: An
Application to the Self-Sufficiency Project,”
Journal of Public Economics, 92(3) 2007,
766–794.
18. As with Figures 1, 2, and 3, the labor supply
curve in Figure 4 should be viewed as an equiva-
lent variation supply curve.
19. As mentioned earlier in the chapter, having as
many able-bodied individuals work as possible is
considered an important social goal by many U.S.
citizens.Thus, even though subsidizing child care
may be economically inefficient, it may still be
justified if it helps meet this goal. Moreover, it is
sometime argued that subsidies are needed to
correct market failures in the market for child
care that results in a lower quality of services
than is socially optimal. For example, there may
be information asymmetries because parents
have difficulty in judging the quality of child
care. In addition, viewing children as third par-
ties, positive externalities may exist in the market
for child care if parents are more concerned with
convenience and price than with quality. See
Suzanne W. Helburn and Barbara R. Bergmann,
America’s Child Care Problem:The Way Out
(New York: Palgrave, 2002).
20. This section borrows heavily from David
Greenberg,“Conceptual Issues in Cost-Benefit
Analysis of Welfare-to-Work Programs,”
Contemporary Policy Issues 10(4) 1992, 51–63.
21. For a review of what bureaucrats actually maxi-
mize, see David L.Weimer and Aidan R.Vining,
Policy Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 5th ed.
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2011),
178–185.
22. A recent review of studies of public-sector labor
displacement finds that these studies suggest that
such displacement is fairly high, perhaps on the
order of 30 to 60 percent. David Greenberg,
“General Equilibrium Effects,” (unpublished
manuscript, 2009).
23. The review mentioned in the previous endnote
found that most of these studies suggest that
private-sector displacement is probably moder-
ate, perhaps well under 20 percent. However, the
findings from different studies vary greatly and
the study methodologies are subject to important
weaknesses.
24. David H. Greenberg, Charles Michalopoulous,
and Philip K. Robins,“What Happens to the
Effects of Government-Funded Training
Programs Over Time?” Journal of Human
Resources 39(1) 2004, 277–293.
25. David Greenberg, Karl Ashworth,Andreas
Cebulla, and Robert Walker,“Do Welfare-to-
Work Programmes Work for Long?” Fiscal
Studies 25(1) 2004, 27–53.
332

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Experiments and Quasi Experiments
26. The CBA of the Baltimore Options program
provides an interesting example of this sort of
forecasting error.A CBA from the participant
perspective that was based on 42 months of data
found that the net benefits of the program were
nearly three times as large as an earlier CBA
based on 18 months of data.The entire differ-
ence in these findings is attributable to the first
study assuming that the program effect on earn-
ings would decline between months 18 and 42,
whereas the effect actually grew over these
months. Daniel Friedlander, Gregory Hoerz,
David Long, and Janet Quint, Maryland: Final
Report on the Employment Initiatives Evaluation
(New York: MDRC, 1985); and Daniel Friedlander,
Maryland: Supplemental Report on the Baltimore
Options Program (New York: MDRC, 1987).
27. See David H. Greenberg, Charles
Michalopoulous, and Philip K. Robins, “What
Happens to the Effects of Government-Funded
Training Programs Over Time?” Greenberg,
Michalopous, and Robins’ findings for random
assignment evaluations imply that the growth
period may last well over a year. For a summary
of the scant earlier evidence, see Friedlander,
Greenberg, and Robins,“Evaluating Government
Training Programs for the Disadvantaged,”
p. 1836.
28. David Greenberg, Karl Ashworth,Andreas
Cebulla, and Robert Walker,“Do Welfare-to-
Work Programmes Work for Long?”
29. A synthesis of the cost-benefit findings that are
summarized in Table 4 appears in David
Greenberg,Victoria Deich, and Gayle Hamilton,
Welfare-to-Work Program Benefits and Costs
(New York: MDRC, 2009), which also lists the in-
dividual reports from which the findings are
drawn.These reports provide detailed descrip-
tions of the programs to which the CBA findings
pertain, as well as presenting the findings them-
selves. For a meta-analysis of the findings in
Table 4, as well as those for other welfare-to-
work programs, see David Greenberg and
Andreas Cebulla,“The Cost-Effectiveness of
Welfare-to-Work Programs:A Meta-Analysis,”
Public Budgeting & Finance, 28(2) 2008, 112–145.
333

334

Valuing Impacts from Observed
Behavior: Direct Estimation 
of Demand Curves
Form Chapter 13 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
335

A
key concept for valuing policy impacts is change in social surplus. Changes in
social surplus are represented by areas, often as triangles or trapezoids,
bounded by supply and demand curves. Measurement of changes in social sur-
plus is relatively straightforward when we know the shapes (functional forms) and posi-
tions of the supply and demand curves in the relevant primary market, before and after
the policy change. In practice, however, these curves are usually not known. Analysts
have to estimate them or find alternative ways to measure benefits and costs. Recall how
such information can be gathered from demonstrations. In this chapter, we discuss direct
estimation of these curves.
We focus on estimating demand curves because, in practice, analysts are more inter-
ested in estimating changes in consumer surplus than estimating changes in producer
surplus.There are three main reasons. First, changes in producer surplus are often offset
by changes in consumer surplus, and thereby constitute transfers. Second, they are often
negligible.Third, for ex post CBA, changes in producer surplus can usually be computed
more easily from changes in profits, which can often be obtained directly from affected
firms.There are, however, two major situations when it is important to estimate the sup-
ply curve.One pertains to unemployed labor.The second arises when the government in-
tervenes in otherwise efficient markets for capital, foreign exchange, labor, and other
productive assets.
For goods traded in well-functioning markets, we can usually observe the market-
clearing price.We may also observe the aggregate quantity bought and sold so that we
have the point of intersection of the demand and supply curves.The task in this chapter
is to estimate changes in social surplus where there is limited information.We consider
three situations. First, we suppose that we have only one observation on the demand
curve but previous research provides knowledge of its shape (functional form), and 
either its elasticity or slope. Second, we suppose that we have a few observations
(points) on the demand curve. Third, we suppose that we have many observations of
prices and quantities from different regions or from different time periods. In the first
two situations we can make simple extrapolations. In the third situation we will
apply standard econometric techniques to estimate the demand curve. Appendix A
contains an introduction to multiple regression analysis and ordinary least squares es-
timation, which is applicable to demand curve estimation.
Valuing Impacts from Observed
Behavior: Direct Estimation 
of Demand Curves
336

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
KNOWING THE SLOPE OR PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND
Many municipalities charge annual fees for household refuse collection that do not de-
pend on the quantity of refuse disposed of by households. In such communities, the
marginal private cost (MPC) of an additional unit of garbage collected is effectively
zero, whereas the marginal social cost (MSC) of collecting and disposing of it is shared
equally among all households.1 This divergence between MPC and MSC leads to free
riding and a socially excessive amount of refuse disposal. Raising the price of refuse
disposal would reduce the quantity of refuse disposed of by households and thereby
reduce the social surplus loss from excess refuse disposal.
Imagine that you have been asked to measure the social benefits that would result
if a town,Wasteville, which currently does not charge households by volume for refuse
collection, imposes a fee of $1 for each 30-gallon container.That is, households would
be charged $1 for each such container put at the curbside for emptying by the sanita-
tion department. As a 30-gallon container holds about 20 pounds of waste, the new
policy implies a price increase from zero to about $0.05/lb, assuming the containers
were full.
From the sanitation department’s records, you find that the current refuse disposal
rate averages 2.60 pounds per person per day (lb/p/d), and the MSC of each ton of
refuse collected is approximately $120 per ton, or $0.06/lb. (One ton equals 2,000 pounds
in the United States.) This MSC is the sum of the marginal collection costs of $40 per
ton and the tipping fee at the landfill of $80 per ton. Although the fee still leaves the
MPC, the actual price, below the MSC, the socially optimal price, you expect it will pro-
duce a gain in social surplus by reducing the amount of waste generated.
To measure the social surplus gain, however, you need to know the demand curve
for garbage collection. You know only one point on the demand curve: 2.60 lb/p/d of
garbage at a price equal to zero. To progress any further, you must find a way of esti-
mating the rest of the demand curve. Usually, demand curves are assumed to be linear
or linear in logarithms.To begin, we assume the demand curve is linear.
Linear Demand Curve
A market demand curve for a good indicates how many units of the good consumers
wish to purchase at each price. A linear functional form assumes that the relationship
between the quantity demanded and the price is linear; that is, the (ordinary) demand
curve can be written as:
(1)
where q is the quantity demanded at price p, 0 is the quantity that would be demanded
if the price were zero (the intercept on the q axis), and 1 indicates the change in the
quantity demanded as a result of a one-unit increase in price (the slope).
For Wasteville, q is measured in terms of quantity demanded per person per day.
Therefore, we can assume 0  2.60 (the amount of refuse disposed of daily by each
person at a price of zero). Although we do not know the slope, 1, we do know that
other researchers have addressed this problem and have either estimated the slope or
the price elasticity of demand.
q = a0 + a1p
337

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
Using a Slope Estimate.
If you conducted some research, you might turn up a
study that gave you an estimate of the slope of the demand curve for refuse dis-
posal. Indeed, Robin Jenkins conducted such a study.2 She based her estimate on
data from nine U.S. communities that employed a variety of refuse fees, ranging
from zero to $1.73 per 30- to 32-gallon container, over the period from 1980 to 1989.
She estimated that each dollar increase in the price of a 30- to 32-gallon container
reduced waste by 0.40 lb/p/d, that is, 1  0.40. Using this estimate leads to a pre-
diction that if Wasteville imposed a fee of $1 (in 1985 dollars) per container
($0.05/lb), then residential waste disposal would fall by 0.40 lb/p/d from 2.60 lb/p/d
to 2.20 lb/p/d.
Figure 1 shows the demand curve implied by Jenkins’s slope estimate: q  2.60 
0.4p, drawn in the usual way with price on the vertical axis.3 This curve goes through
the status quo point of 2.60 lb/p/d at zero dollars per pound (point c) and the predicted
point of 2.20 lb/p/d at $0.05 per pound (point d).
This curve can be used to estimate the change in social surplus. Remembering that
the socially optimal price is $0.06 per pound, the area of the triangle abc, $0.5(2.60 
2.12)(0.06  0.00)  $0.0144 per pound per day (p/d), is the social surplus loss per per-
son at a price of $0, and the area of the small triangle aed, $0.0004/p/d, is the social sur-
plus loss per person at the price of $0.05/lb.Thus,the area of trapezoid debc, $0.0140/p/d,
is the gain in social surplus per person that would result from the price increase from
1.96
0
0.01
•
•
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
2.04
2.12
2.28
a
e
b
c
d
2.36
2.44
2.52
2.20
Waste disposal (lb/p/d)
Price per pound (dollars)
2.60
FIGURE 1
Social Surplus Gain from Refuse Fee
338

zero to $0.05/lb. If the population of Wasteville is 100,000 people, then the annual gain in
social surplus from imposing a container fee of $1 is ($0.0140/p/d)(365 days)(100,000
persons)  $511,000. To obtain the net social benefit of this policy we would have to
subtract the administrative cost of collecting the fee and take into account gains due to
reducing taxation, if any.
Using a Price Elasticity Estimate.
Suppose now that the analyst has a valid estimate
of the price elasticity of demand for garbage disposal in Wasteville and, as above, the
demand curve is linear. The price elasticity of demand, Ed, measures the responsive-
ness of the quantity demanded to changes in price. For a linear demand curve as in
equation (1), the price elasticity of demand equals:
(2)
It is always negative because 1 < 0 (demand curves slope down), and p and q > 0, and it is
always nonconstant—it varies with both price and quantity.By rearranging equation (2) we
can estimate the slope of an ordinary demand curve, 1, if we have an estimate of its price
elasticity and also know the price and quantity at which the elasticity was estimated:
(3)
Returning to our garbage example, suppose Jenkins had not provided an estimate of the
slope but instead had reported an estimate of the price elasticity of demand for residential
refuse disposal of 0.12, which had been estimated at the average price charged by those
communities in her sample that had nonzero fees, $0.81/container, and at the average res-
idential waste disposed of by the communities in her sample, 2.62 lb/p/d.4 Substituting
this information into equation (3) gives 1  (0.12) 
The general point is that construction of a linear demand curve to measure
changes in social surplus requires either a direct estimate of the slope itself or an esti-
mate of the price elasticity of demand and the price and quantity at which the elasticity
was estimated.
Validity.
When using a slope or elasticity estimate from previous research, it is im-
portant to consider issues of internal validity and external validity. Internal validity in-
volves evaluation design issues, as well as issues related to the proper use of economet-
ric techniques, which we discuss later in this chapter. External validity concerns the
appropriateness of using estimates derived from data collected at other times, in other
places, and with different populations. Applying estimates to circumstances similar to
those under which they were obtained has high external validity. Specifically, the closer
Wasteville is in economic, policy, demographic, and geographic characteristics to the
communities in Jenkins’s sample, the more confident we can be in the accuracy of our
estimated change in waste disposal following the introduction of a volumetric user fee
in Wasteville. The fact that her estimate comes from the 1980s is of some concern 
because there has been considerable time for other unmeasured variables  that affect
(2.62)>(0.81)  -0.40.
a1 = Ed
q
p
Ed = a1
p
q
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
339

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
people’s behavior, such as the level of environmental awareness or recycling infra-
structure, to have changed.
Constant Elasticity Demand Curve
The market demand curve may not be linear. Economists have found that many goods
have a constant elasticity demand curve, that is:
(4)
where q denotes quantity demanded at price p, as before, and 0 and 1 are parame-
ters. In order to interpret 1 it is useful to take the natural logarithm, denoted by ln, of
both sides of equation (4), which gives:
q = b0pb1
EXHIBIT 1
Erik Lichtenberg and David Zilberman wished
to estimate the costs and benefits of govern-
ment regulations that reduced pesticide use in
agriculture.Their study covered three important
crops: corn, cotton, and rice. There have been
numerous empirical studies of price elasticities
in agricultural markets. After reviewing this lit-
erature, they came up with “consensus values”
for the elasticity of supply of 0.3 (corn), 0.5 (cot-
ton), and 0.8 (rice), and for the elasticity of de-
mand of 0.5 (corn), 0.41 (cotton), and 0.43
(rice). The supply and demand functions for all
three crops were assumed to have constant elas-
ticity forms.
Source: Adapted from Erik Lichtenberg and David Zilberman,“The Welfare Economics of Price Supports in U.S.
Agriculture,” American Economic Review 76(5) 1986, 11351141.
We see immediately that the constant elasticity demand curve is linear in logarithms.5
Furthermore, 1, the slope of this demand curve, equals Ed, the price elasticity of de-
mand.6 As Ed equals the slope of a linear curve, which is a constant, it follows that the
price elasticity of demand is constant; hence the name of this demand curve—a con-
stant elasticity demand curve.
With quantity on the vertical axis and price on the horizontal axis, the slope of
the constant elasticity demand curve is not constant; specifically, it equals 1q/p.7
Similar to other demand curves, it slopes downward and 1 < 0. It is also asymptotic
to both the price and quantity axes, that is, as price becomes infinite, the quantity
demanded approaches zero, and as price approaches zero, the quantity demanded
approaches infinity. Because we are most often interested in the region of the
demand curve where price is finite and greater than zero, and the estimates of elas-
ticities are based on data in this range, these asymptotic extremes are usually not
relevant to our analysis.
As an illustration of how to use a constant elasticity demand curve, consider the
following situation.A community (not Wasteville) currently charges a refuse collection
lnq = lnb0 +  b1lnp
340

2.0
0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
0.12
0.10
0.08
Demand curve: q = 1.44p –0.15
0.06
0.04
0.02
Waste disposal (lb/p/d)
Price per pound (dollars)
Slope of the demand curve at a = – 6.75
a
d
c
g
h
f
e
b
FIGURE 2
Constant Elasticity Demand Curve
fee of $0.05/lb, and waste disposal is 2.25 lb/p/d.This status quo point is labelled point a
in Figure 2.We have been asked to estimate the change in consumer surplus that would
result if the collection fee were raised to $0.08/lb, assuming that the demand for refuse
collection and disposal has a constant elasticity functional form. This change in con-
sumer surplus is represented by area fbag in Figure 2.
After some research we find an applicable study that reports an estimate of the
price elasticity of demand of 0.15. Substituting this estimate of the price elasticity
into equation (3.4) and setting P*  $.05/lb and X*  2.25 lb/p/d suggests that the loss
in consumer surplus is approximately $0.0645/p/d. For a town with a population of
100,000, the annual loss in consumer surplus would be approximately $2.35 million
(0.0645  365  100,000).
It is possible to obtain a more exact estimate of the loss in consumer surplus, but it
is a bit more complicated. For a constant elasticity demand curve, it can be shown that
the change in consumer surplus is given by:
(5)
¢CS = (p1q1 - p0q0)>(1 + b1)
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
341

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
This formula requires estimates of the price and quantity after the price increase (p1
and q1).To estimate q1 we first need to estimate 0, which we can obtain from equation
(4): 0  (2.25)>(0.05)0.15  1.44.This gives q  1.44 p0.15 as the underlying demand
curve for our application.8 Consequently, if fees were raised to $0.08/lb, demand for
waste disposal would fall to 2.10 lb/p/d (1.44(.05)0.15).This point is labelled as point b
in Figure 2. Now, substituting into equation (5) implies that the reduction in consumer
surplus would be $0.0653/p/d (0.08  2.1  0.05  2.25)>(1  .15). For a town with a
population of 100,000, the annual loss in consumer surplus would be $2.38 million
(.0653  365  100,000).This estimate is very slightly higher than our original estimate.
A third approach begins with the fact that the area under a constant elasticity de-
mand curve from quantity q0 to quantity q1, which is given (exactly) by:9
(6)
where   1  (1/1).This equation implies that the area under the demand curve where
q ranges from 2.10 lb/p/d to 2.25 lb/p/d,which is equivalent to the dark-shaded area badc,
equals $0.0097/p/d. If we now subtract area hadc, which measures the reduction in fee
payments due to the reduction in quantity [($0.05/lb)(2.25 lb/p/d  2.10 lb/p/d) 
.0075/p/d], we obtain an estimate of area bah equal to $0.0022/p/d. Finally we add area
fbhg, the increase in fee payments on the quantity remaining after the price increase
[($0.08  $0.05)(2.10 lb/p/d)  0.063/p/d], to provide an estimate of overall loss in con-
sumer surplus equal to $0.0652/p/d.10 For a town with a population of 100,000, the con-
sumer surplus lost annually would be $2.38 million.
A complication arises when we wish to use an elasticity estimated from a constant
elasticity functional form to predict the effect of raising a price from zero to some pos-
itive level. As the constant elasticity demand curve is inconsistent with an observation
of zero price, there is no fully satisfactory way to make use of the elasticity estimate.We
are forced to postulate some other functional form that goes through the status quo
point (price equals zero) and use the constant elasticity estimate as a rough guide for
specifying its parameters. This expediency should be thought of as an informed guess
that can serve as the starting point for sensitivity analysis.
EXTRAPOLATING FROM A FEW OBSERVATIONS
Recent policy or other fortuitous changes (at least from the analyst’s perspective) often
provide a basis for predicting the impacts of future policy changes. For example, imagine
that we wish to predict the effect of a fare increase on bus ridership. If the last fare
increase of $0.25 resulted in 1,000 fewer riders per day, then it may be reasonable to as-
sume that a further increase of $0.25 would have a similar effect. Here we are treating the
observations as if they resulted from a simple before and after quasi-experimental design.
Two considerations are important in determining the appropriateness of extrapolat-
ing from the effects of a previous change. The first consideration concerns the assumed
functional relationship between the outcome and the policy variable or, specifically,
the functional form of the demand curve. Linear functional forms can produce very
Area = a 1
b0
b
1>b1
aqr
1 - qr
0
r
b
342

2.12
0
2.2
2.28
2.36
2.44
2.52
0.07
Constant elasticity demand curve
d
b
a
c
Linear demand curve
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
Waste disposal (lb/p/d)
Price per pound (dollars)
FIGURE 3
Imputing a Demand Curve from Two Points
different predictions than constant elasticity functional forms, for instance. This is illus-
trated in Figure 3. Suppose that another municipality, Twopointsville, has been experi-
menting with waste disposal charges. When these residents were charged $0.01/lb for
refuse, they disposed of 2.52 lb/p/d (point a), and when the fee was raised to $0.025/lb,
they disposed of only 2.40 lb/p/d (point b).We would like to know how much waste dis-
posal would occur in Twopointsville if the fee were raised further to $0.05/lb. If we fitted
a linear demand curve to the two known points (a and b), then we would predict that
waste would fall by 0.20 lb/p/d to 2.20 lb/p/d (point c). If, instead, we fitted a constant
elasticity demand curve to the two points, then we would predict that waste would fall
by a smaller amount, 0.09 lb/p/d, to 2.31 lb/p/d (point d).11 Note that each of these func-
tional forms fits the two observed data points equally well—perfectly. In fact, there are
an infinite number of curves that fit the two observed points perfectly.
Note also that Figure 3 illustrates an important point: The further we extrapolate
from past experience, the more sensitive are our predictions to assumptions about func-
tional form. In the absence of theoretical guidance or other empirical evidence, we
have no basis for choosing between the two widely different predictions shown in
Figure 3.
The second consideration concerns the validity of attributing the change in the
outcome to the change in the policy variable.We are implicitly assuming that no other
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
343

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
variable of relevance to the outcome changed during the time period under considera-
tion. It is possible, for example, that the fall in bus ridership from a to b resulted in part
from the opening of a major new highway. If this were the case, then it is unlikely that
a similar further change in fare would produce as large a reduction in ridership as oc-
curred after the earlier fare change.
One way to control for changes in other variables and to gain greater confidence
about the appropriate functional form is to collect more observations and use econo-
metric techniques to estimate key parameters.
ECONOMETRIC ESTIMATION WITH MANY OBSERVATIONS
If many observations of quantities demanded at different prices are available, then it may
be possible to use econometric techniques to estimate demand curves or demand func-
tions.The linear regression model typically serves as the starting point for such efforts.We
assume here that the reader is familiar with the basic concepts of linear regression.Readers
unfamiliar with these concepts, or desiring to review them, should read Appendix A.
Readers requiring a fuller treatment should consult a basic econometrics text.12
Model Specification
The starting point for econometric estimation of demand functions is to specify the im-
portant explanatory (or independent) variables, such as price and income, that affect
the quantity demanded and the functional form of the relationship.13 For example, we
may have theoretical reasons to believe that the demand for a particular good, q, is a
function of the price of that good, p, income, I, and temperature, T:
(7)
The functional form, represented by f, may be linear, linear in logarithms, or have some
other form.
Sometimes the set of explanatory variables varies slightly from one study to an-
other. Remember, however, that we should not include the prices of substitutes or comple-
ments as explanatory variables. With this exception, the model should include all vari-
ables that affect demand in theory. Even though we may not have a substantive interest
in some of the explanatory variables, such as temperature, they should be included to
“control” for their effects on the dependent variable and thereby allow us to isolate the
independent effects of the variables of interest, such as price and income. For example,
and returning to waste disposal, a study by James Strathman, Anthony Rufolo, and
Gerard Mildner assumed that the demand for waste disposal depended on the tipping
fee, manufacturing income, and construction employment.14 In this study, construction
employment was included as a control variable.
In practice, the set of included explanatory variables is usually limited for three rea-
sons. First, measures of variables may not be available at reasonable cost. For example,
the demand for waste disposal may depend on attitudes toward recycling that we cannot
measure without a costly specialized survey. Second, some variables may have relatively
small expected effects.For example,temperature may be anticipated to have only a small
q = f(p, I, T)
344

effect on the demand for a good. Third, a variable may be excluded because it is too
highly correlated with other explanatory variables—the problem of multicollinearity,
which we discuss in Appendix A.
The seriousness of excluding a theoretically important variable depends on two
factors. First, it depends on the degree to which the excluded variable is correlated with
an included variable of interest—one whose coefficient we require for predicting pol-
icy effects.15 The higher the correlation, the greater the bias in the estimated coefficient
of the included variable.16 Bias results because the estimated coefficient would incor-
porate part of the effect of the excluded variable with which it is correlated. Second, it
depends on the true coefficient of the excluded variable if it were included. If this is
very small, then the bias from excluding it is likely to be small.
After identifying the theoretically important and practically available variables,
the next task is to specify the functional form of the model. As previously discussed,
linear and constant elasticity forms are the most commonly used. Sometimes we have
theoretical reasons for choosing between them; other times we simply see which fits
the observed data better.
Assuming the model represented by equation (7) has a linear functional form
gives the following model:
(8)
where 
denotes an error term. This model can be estimated by ordinary least
squares (OLS), assuming no simultaneity (i.e., identification) problem, which we
discuss later.
A linear model may still contain nonlinear functions of the explanatory variables.
For example, by adding the square of temperature as an explanatory variable along
with temperature itself, we allow for a nonlinear relationship between the quantity de-
manded and temperature. We can also allow for the possibility of different demand
curves for different subgroups in our sample by introducing interaction terms. For ex-
ample, if we have individual-level data and we suspect that men have a steeper demand
curve than women, we could include a new variable that is the product of price and the
dummy variable (or indicator variable) for gender (e.g., “0” for men and “1” for
women). We would then interpret the coefficient of price as the slope of the demand
curve for men, and the sum of the coefficient of the price variable and the coefficient of
the price-gender interaction variable as the slope of the demand curve for women.The
general point is that we can have quite complicated functional forms within the basic
linear specification that can be estimated by OLS.
Assuming the model represented by equation (7) has a constant elasticity func-
tional form gives the following model:
(9)
where the s are parameters to be estimated, e is the base of the natural logarithm, and
is the unobserved random error. Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of this
equation gives:
(10)
lnq = lnb0 + b1lnp + b2lnI + b3lnT + P
P
q = b0pb1Ib2Tb3eP
P
q = a0 + a1p + a2I + a3T + P
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
345

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
This linear model can be estimated by OLS with lnq as the dependent variable and lnp,
lnI, and lnT as explanatory variables.The parameters, the s, can be interpreted in the
standard way, noting that the intercept is an estimate of ln0 rather than 0.The coeffi-
cient of the variable lnp is the price elasticity of demand, and the coefficient of the vari-
able lnI is the income elasticity of demand.
Types of Data
Data availability is usually the limiting factor in estimating demand schedules.
Researchers sometimes have sufficient resources to assemble their own data. More
often, however, resource limitations force researchers to rely on convenience samples,
that is, data that happen to be available at acceptable cost. These include previously
published data, data collected by researchers for other purposes, and samples of ad-
ministrative records or program clients. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile briefly reviewing
the major considerations in the choice of data and their implications for demand func-
tion estimation.
Level of Aggregation.
The first major consideration is the level of aggregation.
Individual-level data measure the behavior of persons, families, households, or other
consuming units. Aggregate-level data measure the combined (aggregate) behavior of
groups of consumers, usually organized by geographic jurisdictions or demographic
characteristics.
Consumer theory is based on models of individual utility maximization. Individual-
level data are generally preferable because they provide a close congruence between
theory and data. Furthermore, theoretically important variables, such as income, can
often be measured directly with individual-level data. In contrast, when using aggre-
gate-level data, a mean or median typically serves as the measure of income.
In using aggregate data, there is a risk of making serious errors about the effects
of policy-relevant variables on demand. For example, suppose that we use individual-
level data from different states to estimate the price elasticity of demand for each
state. Further suppose, as expected, each of these price elasticity estimates is negative.
Now suppose that another less-fortunate researcher has only aggregate-level data that
consist of one observation for each state (such as the average price and average quan-
tity demanded in each state). He might hope that his estimated price elasticity is
approximately a weighted average of the price elasticities of demand for each state and
that his estimates of the effects of price changes are reasonably accurate. It is possible,
however, that his estimated price elasticity is very different from the price elasticities
that we estimate for each state. In fact, depending on the aggregate-level price and
quantity observations, it could have the wrong sign.17
In practice, however, individual-level data are often not available. For example,
in estimating the “demand” for criminal acts, an important theoretical variable is
the “price,” which depends on the perceived probability of arrest. We cannot
directly observe the probability of arrest perceived by an individual, but we can as-
sume that it is related to the objective (group) probability, which can be estimated
as the fraction of crimes that result in arrest within a region or among a group of
individuals.
346

Cross-Sectional Data versus Time Series Data.
The second major consideration in se-
lecting data concerns the choice between cross-sectional data and time series data. A
cross section involves observations on a number of comparable units at the same point
in time, whereas a time series involves making repeated observations on the same unit
at several points in time. For example, if we wished to determine the price elasticity of
demand for wine, we might take advantage of different excise tax rates across different
states. Using observations for each of the 50 states for a particular year, we would
regress per capita consumption of wine on after-tax retail prices and other explanatory
variables, such as average state levels of income and education.Alternatively, if the real
price of wine has varied over time, we might estimate a price elasticity by regressing
national per capita consumption in each year on the real price of wine in each year and
other variables, such as real per capita income in each year. Cross-sectional and time
series data are prone to different types of econometric problems and yield coefficient
estimates that have somewhat different interpretations.
Cross-sectional data generally provide estimates of long-run elasticities, whereas
time series data usually provide estimates of short-run elasticities. In estimating elas-
ticities from cross sections, we usually assume that the variations in demands across
units reflect long-run adjustments to previous price changes.Thus, we obtain estimates
of long-run elasticities. Only if we make our observations shortly after a major price
change would we interpret the elasticity obtained from a cross-section as a short-run
elasticity. In estimating elasticities from time series data, we observe responses to price
changes occurring as frequently as the time unit of the observations.Thus, annual data
provide estimates of annual elasticities, and monthly data provide estimates of monthly
elasticities. For most goods, monthly elasticities would be interpreted as short run.
Annual elasticities, however, may be either short run or long run, depending on the ex-
tent to which full adjustment to price changes requires changes in capital goods, loca-
tion, and other factors that consumers alter gradually.
We would expect short-run price elasticities to be smaller in absolute value than
long-run price elasticities because, by definition, there is less time for consumers to ad-
just to price changes. Indeed, based on a review of 120 empirical studies, Molly Espy
found an average short-run price elasticity of demand for gasoline of 0.26 and an av-
erage long-run price elasticity of 0.58, and an average short-run income elasticity of
0.47 and an average long-run income elasticity of 0.88.18 P. B. Goodwin reviewed 120
empirical studies and reported average elasticities of the demand for automobile “traf-
fic” with respect to motor fuel prices were 0.16 in the short run and 0.33 in the long
run.19
Cross-section and time series data tend to suffer different econometric problems.
Cross sections, especially when they consist of units of different sizes, often have error
terms with different variances—the heteroscedasticity problem. For example, the vari-
ance in the number of accidental deaths from fire is likely to be larger among larger
cities, such as New York City, than among smaller cities, such as Utica, New York. If the
variances of the error terms are unequal, then the OLS estimates of the coefficients are
unbiased but their calculated standard errors are smaller than the true standard errors.
That is, the reported precision of OLS estimates would be overly optimistic. If the rela-
tive sizes of the variances of the error terms were known, then estimating the model by
generalized least squares (GLS) would give more precise estimates of the coefficients.
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
347

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
Discussions of tests for detecting heteroscedasticity and for appropriate estimation
procedures can be found in most econometrics texts.
Time series data also suffer from a common problem with the error term.
Remember that the effects of excluded explanatory variables are incorporated into the
error term. If an excluded variable tends to change gradually over time, then it may
produce correlation between successive error terms. This is one example of the more
general problem of autocorrelation, which often exists in one form or another in time
series data. It has similar effects to heteroscedasticity: OLS coefficient estimates,
though unbiased, are not as precise as reported. More precise estimates can be ob-
tained by using GLS if the pattern of the autocorrelation is known. The most widely
used test for autocorrelation is the Durbin-Watson statistic, which should always be a
component of time series analysis. Again, discussions of methods for detecting auto-
correlation and correcting for it can be found in econometrics texts.
It is also possible to pool cross-sectional and time series data, for example, by using
data from each state for each of a number of years.Though modeling with pooled time
series and cross-sectional data can be quite complex and cannot be discussed here, two
points are worth noting. First, pooled data provide a rich source of information.
Second, pooled data are vulnerable to the econometric problems encountered with
both cross-sectional and time series data.
Identification
In a perfectly competitive market, price and quantity result from the simultaneous in-
teraction of supply and demand. Changes in price and quantity can result from shifts in
the supply curve, shifts in the demand curve, or both. In the absence of variables that
affect only one side of the market, it may not be possible to estimate separately the
supply and demand curves. Indeed, if quantity supplied and quantity demanded de-
pended only on price, then the equation for both the demand curve and the supply
curve would look identical. Determining whether we are estimating a demand curve or
a supply curve is one example of the problem of identification. It occurs in multiple
equation models in which some variables, such as price and quantity, are determined si-
multaneously. Such variables are called endogenous variables. In contrast, variables
that are fixed or are determined outside of the model are called exogenous variables.
In order to identify a demand curve we need to have a variable that affects supply
but not demand. Consider a competitive and unregulated market for wheat. If rainfall
affects the supply of wheat but not the demand for wheat, then including rainfall in the
supply equation but not in the demand equation identifies the demand equation. The
reason is that changes in rainfall result in systematic shifts in supply but not demand,
which will trace out the demand curve. Similarly, if income affects demand but not
supply, then including income in the demand equation but not in the supply equation
allows us to examine systematic shifts in the demand curve, which will trace out the
supply curve.In general,a two-equation model will be identified if there is one exogenous
variable that belongs in the first equation but not in the second equation, and another
exogenous variable that belongs in the second equation but not in the first equation.
By belong, we mean that it has a nonzero coefficient; by not belong, we mean that it has
a zero coefficient. The zero coefficient conditions are most important. One cannot
348

identify a model by excluding an exogenous variable from an equation that theoreti-
cally belongs in that equation.
Identification of demand curves tends to be less of a problem in the markets typi-
cally of interest to cost-benefit analysts than in markets generally. One reason is that
CBA often deals with markets that are subject to exogenous government interventions.
For example, the demand for cigarettes is probably easily identified in cross-sectional
analysis because differences in state excise taxes shift the supply curve by a different
amount in each state.
Another reason is that the identification problem does not arise in markets where
the price is set exogenously. In some markets of interest to cost-benefit analysts, the
government either provides the product or service, as is often the case with municipal
waste disposal, or regulates the prices charged, as is the case with electricity.When gov-
ernment supplies a good or effectively sets price, there is no supply curve—price is ex-
ogenous, and we avoid the identification problem.
Confidence Intervals
The standard errors of the estimated coefficients of a model can be used to construct
confidence intervals for the coefficients.A 95 percent confidence interval is commonly
interpreted as there being a 95 percent chance that the true value of the coefficient lies
within the interval. Strictly speaking, this is an incorrect interpretation. The correct in-
terpretation is that if we were to repeat our estimation procedure many times, with a
new data sample for each repetition, the estimated confidence intervals would contain
the true value of the coefficient in about 95 percent of the repetitions. Nevertheless,
confidence intervals provide some guidance for sensitivity analysis. Most analysts
would consider it reasonable to treat the ends of a 95 percent confidence interval as
best and worst cases.
Prediction versus Hypothesis Testing
As a final topic on estimating demand functions, it is important to keep in mind the dis-
tinction between hypothesis testing and estimation. Social scientists are typically inter-
ested in testing hypotheses about one or more coefficients in a regression model. If the
estimated coefficients are not statistically significantly different from zero, then social
scientists do not reject the null hypothesis that the variables have no effect on the de-
pendent variable. In other words, there is not a statistically convincing case that the
variables have any effect.
As cost-benefit analysts, however, we have to make a prediction. For such purposes
we should use the estimated value of the coefficient, even if it is not statistically signifi-
cant from zero at conventional levels. Although we may not be very confident that the
true value of the coefficient is not zero, the estimated coefficient may be our best esti-
mate of the true value. If so, it will give the best predictions. Sensitivity analysis should
reflect the imprecision of our estimate. If we were to use only the statistically significant
coefficients from an estimated model, we would bias our prediction. Eliminating statis-
tically insignificant variables and reestimating the model may or may not be appropri-
ate, depending on the theoretical strength of their inclusion in the original model.
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
349

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
CONCLUSION
Estimating the net social benefits of a policy requires estimates of the change in social
surplus. Changes in social surplus require knowledge of the appropriate market de-
mand and supply curves. This chapter concerns estimation of these curves, focusing on
demand curves.
Sometimes, project revenues can be used as a measure of (gross) benefits.This has
relatively limited requirements: It requires the existence of a market for the primary
outcome of the project and knowledge of expenditures in this market. However, pro-
ject revenues are often an inappropriate measure of benefits, and we may need to esti-
mate consumer surplus. In these situations, we need to estimate the relevant market
demand curve. Direct estimation of the demand curve is possible if we know at least
one point on the demand curve, its functional form, and either its slope or the price
elasticity of demand. In many practical situations we do not know the slope or the price
elasticity of demand. We may be able to infer such information from a few observa-
tions. Preferably, there may be many observations, and the analyst can use econometric
techniques to estimate the demand curve. It is important to consider the advantages
and potential limitations of these different estimation methods.
350

APPENDIX A
An Introduction to Multiple 
Regression Analysis
Linear regression provides a manageable way to
examine statistically the effects of one or more
explanatory variables on a variable of interest—
the dependent variable.1 Its use requires us to
assume that the effects of the various explana-
tory variables on the dependent variable are ad-
ditive, that is, the model has the following func-
tional form:
where y is the dependent variable, x1, x2, . . ., xk
are k explanatory (or independent) variables,
0, 1, 2 . . ., k are parameters (coefficients) to
be estimated, and is an error term that incorpo-
rates the cumulative effect on y of all the factors
not explicitly included in the model. The basic
model assumes that the explanatory variables are
nonrandom and are measured without error.
P
y = b0 + b1x1 + b2x2 + Á + bkxk + P
random error, represented in our model by . If
the values of 
are small in absolute value, then
the true regression line fits the data well in the
sense that the actual observations are close to it.
Estimating the Parameters of the Model
The most commonly used procedure for fitting a
line to the data is the method of ordinary least
squares (OLS). When we have only one ex-
planatory variable so we can plot our data on a
two-dimensional graph, the OLS procedure
picks the line for which the sum of squared ver-
tical deviations from the estimated line to the
observed data is smallest.
Suppose we denote the OLS estimates of
the k  1 parameters by “hats”: Nb0, Nb1, Á , Nbk.
P
P
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
The intercept parameter, 0, also called the
constant, is the expected value of y if all of the ex-
planatory variables equal zero.The other parame-
ters, 1,2,...,k, which are called slope parameters,
measure the marginal impact of an explanatory
variable on the dependent variable. If, for in-
stance, we were to increase x1 (NOTE: the 1
should be a subscript) by one unit while holding
the values of the other explanatory variables con-
stant, then y would change by an amount 1.
Imagine that we set the values of all the ex-
planatory variables except x1 equal to zero. We
could then plot y against x1 in a two-dimensional
graph. The equation y  0  1x1 would repre-
sent the true regression line.The slope of this line
is 1; it measures the magnitude of the change in
y that will result from a one-unit change in x1.
The actual observations will usually not lie ex-
actly on the line. The vertical deviation between
an observed point, and the line will equal the
provides an estimate of the change in y due
to a small (one unit) change in xj holding all
other variables constant. For the ith observation
(yi, xi1, xi2, . . . , xik), the predicted value of the
dependent variable is
and the ith prediction error or residual is
Thus, the residual is the observed value of the de-
pendent variable minus the value we would predict
for the dependent variable based on our estimated
parameters and the values of our explanatory vari-
ables.OLS selects the parameter estimates to min-
imize the sum of squares of these residuals.2
The square of the correlation between the
actual and predicted values of the dependent
variable, R2, is commonly used as a measure of
NPi = yi -
Nyi i = 1, Á , n
 i = 1, . . . , n
 Nyi =
Nb0 +
Nb1xi1 +
Nb2xi2 + Á + Nbkxik
Nbj
351

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
the goodness-of-fit of a regression. The R2,
which ranges between 0 and 1, measures the
percentage of variation in the dependent vari-
able that is explained by the estimated model. It
can be used to help select between alternative
model specifications when theory is ambiguous,
or to test alternative theories.
Multicollinearity
As long as the number of observations in our
sample exceeds the number of coefficients that
we want to estimate, computer regression soft-
ware packages will usually enable us to obtain
the OLS estimates. However, when one explana-
tory variable can be written as a linear combina-
tion of the others, we have a case of perfect mul-
ticollinearity. A less severe but more common
form of the problem occurs when the explana-
tory variables in the sample are highly corre-
lated.This condition is called multicollinearity. If
two or more variables are highly correlated,
OLS has difficulty identifying the independent
effect of each explanatory variable on the de-
pendent variable. As a result, these parameter
estimates are not very reliable or, in the extreme
case, they cannot be estimated. When two ex-
planatory variables are highly correlated, the
sum of their estimated coefficients will be closer
to the sum of their true coefficients than will ei-
ther individual coefficient estimate be to its true
value. Often, researchers respond to a multicollin-
arity problem by excluding one or more ex-
planatory variables, though this may lead to 
biased estimates of some parameters. Two alter-
native ways to deal with multicollinearity prob-
lems include using ridge regression or combin-
ing collinear variables into indices using
principal components analysis.3
Properties of OLS Estimators
The OLS estimator will generally have a num-
ber of very desirable properties. (Note: An
estimator is the formula we use to calculate a
particular parameter from the data. The resul-
tant specific value is an estimate.) If all of the
explanatory variables are uncorrelated with the
error term,
, and if the expected value of the
error term is zero, then the OLS estimators will
be unbiased. To understand what it means for
an estimator to be unbiased, we must keep in
mind that a particular estimate depends on the
errors in the actual sample of data. If we were to
select a new sample, then we would realize dif-
ferent errors and, hence, different coefficient
estimates. When an estimator is unbiased, the
average of our estimates across different sam-
ples will be very close to the true coefficient
value. For example, if the price of gasoline had no
true effect on the quantity of gasoline demanded,
then we would almost certainly estimate its coef-
ficient to be positive or negative rather than ex-
actly zero. Repeating OLS on a large number of
samples and averaging our estimates of the coef-
ficient of gasoline price, however, would gener-
ally yield a result very close to zero. Indeed, by
adding more and more samples, we could get the
average as close to zero as we wanted.
The OLS estimator is also consistent, which
means that its variance approaches zero as we
increase the sample size.4 Consequently, as the
sample size increases, we become more confi-
dent about the accuracy of our estimates—the
confidence intervals become narrower.
A problem arises, however, if an important
variable is excluded from the estimation and
that variable is correlated with an included vari-
able. Suppose, for example, that the weather
(temperature) affects the quantity of gasoline
demanded, and that temperature is also corre-
lated with gasoline price, but that temperature is
excluded from the model. Now, the coefficient of
gasoline price will reflect both the effect of gaso-
line price on quantity demanded and the indi-
rect effect of temperature for which it serves as a
proxy. Other things being equal, the stronger the
true effect of temperature on quantity de-
manded, and the higher the absolute value of
the correlation between gasoline price and tem-
perature, the greater will be the bias in the coef-
ficient of gasoline price. This problem cannot be
solved by increasing the sample size.
P
352

Statistical Significance 
and Hypothesis Testing
It is often important to determine whether an
estimate deviates enough from zero for us to
conclude that the true value of the parameter is
not zero. If we make the reasonable assumption
that the error term for each observation can be
treated as a draw from a normal distribution
with constant variance, 2, then we can show that
the OLS estimators will be distributed according
to the normal distribution.5 Specifically, we can
interpret the particular numerical estimate of a
coefficient,
, as a draw from a random variable
having a normal distribution centered around
the true value of the coefficient, , with variance,
, which depends on 2. (The OLS estimator is
the random variable; the actual estimate based
on the data is a particular realization of that ran-
dom variable.) Because we want to know how
likely it is that we would observe a coefficient
estimate as large as we did if the true value of
the coefficient were zero, we now suppose that
the true value of the coefficient is zero (the null
hypothesis) so that the distribution of our esti-
mator is centered around zero. We then stan-
dardize our distribution to have a variance of
one by dividing our coefficient estimate by its
estimated standard deviation. The resultant sta-
tistic, called a t statistic, or t ratio, has a student’s
t distribution, or t distribution.6 The statistical
significance of our coefficient estimate can be
determined by comparing the t statistic to the
critical values in a table of the t distribution,
which can found in the appendix of almost any
statistics text. For example, we might decide that
we will reject the null hypothesis that the true
value of the coefficient is zero if there is less
than a 5 percent probability of observing a t
ratio (in absolute value) as large as we did if the
null hypothesis is true.7 If the sample size is
large we would reject this null hypothesis if the t
statistic were larger in absolute value than 1.96.
The t distribution is tabulated by degrees of
freedom. The OLS estimators have degrees of
freedom equal to the total number of observa-
tions, denoted by n, minus the number of coeffi-
s2
b
Nb
cients being estimated, k  1. As the degrees of
freedom increase, the student’s t distribution looks
more like a standardized normal distribution.
Returning to our gasoline example, suppose
that the analyst wants to test whether gasoline
price has a statistically significant effect on gaso-
line demand at the 5 percent level of significance.
She may specify a one-tailed alternative hypothe-
sis test or a two-tailed alternative hypothesis test.
For example,she may test the null hypothesis that
the true coefficient value is greater than or equal
to zero (the one-tailed alternative is that it is less
than zero), which means that the critical region
consists of the entire 5 percent in the negative
tail. Alternatively, she may test the null hypothe-
sis that the true coefficient value is equal to zero
(the two-tailed alternative is that it is less than or
greater than zero), which means that the critical
region consists of the 2.5 percent in the negative
tail and the 2.5 percent in the positive tail. Now
suppose that the t statistic for the coefficient of
gasoline price equals 1.84. Further suppose that
the sample size was 122, and there was only one
explanatory variable, so that only two parameters
were estimated (the intercept and slope) and
there were 120 degrees of freedom. The absolute
values of the critical values of the t distribution
with 120 degrees of freedom are 1.658 for the
one-sided alternative and 1.98 for the two-sided
alternative. Thus, at the 5 percent level of signifi-
cance, the analyst would reject the null hypothe-
sis if she had specified a one-sided alternative,but
she would accept the null hypothesis if she had
specified a twosided alternative.
Most regression software saves us the trouble
of looking up critical values in tables by directly
calculating the probability under the null hy-
pothesis of observing a t statistic as large as that
estimated, assuming we want to test the null hy-
pothesis that the true parameter equals zero
against a two-sided alternative. To do this classi-
cal hypothesis test on the coefficient, we simply
see if the reported probability is less than the
maximum probability of falsely rejecting the
null hypothesis that we are willing to accept. If it
is smaller, then we reject the null hypothesis.
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
353

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
EXERCISES
1.
Consider the example presented in Figure 3. Imagine that the current price of waste dis-
posal is $0.025/lb and the average waste disposal is 2.40 lb/p/d. As noted in the diagram,
when the price was previously $0.01/lb, the average waste disposal was 2.52 lb/p/d. Assume
that the marginal social cost of waste disposal is $0.06/lb, that marginal social costs are con-
stant with respect to quantity, and that the town has a population of 100,000.
a.
Fitting a linear demand curve to the two observed points, calculate the annual net ben-
efits of raising the price of waste disposal to $0.05/lb.
b.
Fitting a constant elasticity demand curve to the observed points, calculate the annual
net benefits of raising the price of waste disposal to $0.05/lb.
2.
(Regression software required; instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) An analyst
was asked to predict the gross social benefits of building a public swimming pool in Dryville,
which has a population of 70,230 people and a median household income of $31,500. The
analyst identified 24 towns in the region that already had public swimming pools. He con-
ducted a telephone interview with the recreation department in each town to find out what
fee it charged per visit (Fee) and how many visits it had during the most recent summer sea-
son (Visits). In addition, he was able to find each town’s population (Pop) and median
household income (Income) in the most recent census. His data are as follows:
a.
Show how the analyst could use these data to predict the gross benefits of opening a
public swimming pool in Dryville and allowing free admission.
b.
Predict gross benefits if admission is set at $1.00 and Dryville has marginal excess tax
burden of 0.25. In answering this question, assume that the fees are used to reduce
Visits
Fee
Income
Pop
1
168,590
0
20,600
36,879
2
179,599
0
33,400
64,520
3
198,595
0
39,700
104,123
4
206,662
0
32,600
103,073
5
170,259
0
24,900
58,386
6
209,995
0.25
38,000
116,592
7
172,018
0.25
26,700
49,945
8
190,802
0.25
20,800
79,789
9
197,019
0.25
26,300
98,234
10
186,515
0.50
35,600
71,762
11
152,679
0.50
38,900
40,178
12
137,423
0.50
21,700
22,928
13
158,056
0.50
37,900
39,031
14
157,424
0.50
35,100
44,685
15
179,490
0.50
35,700
67,882
16
164,657
0.75
22,900
69,625
17
184,428
0.75
38,600
98,408
18
183,822
0.75
20,500
93,429
19
174,510
1.00
39,300
98,077
20
187,820
1.00
25,800
104,068
21
196,318
1.25
23,800
117,940
22
166,694
1.50
34,000
59,757
23
161,716
1.50
29,600
88,305
24
167,505
2.00
33,800
84,102
354

taxes that would otherwise have to be collected from the citizens of Dryville to pay for
expenses incurred in operating the pool.
NOTES
1. More accurately, each household incurs a mar-
ginal private cost (MPC) of refuse disposal that is
only 1>n of the marginal social costs (MSC); that
is, MPC  MSC>n, where n is the number of
households.The MPC approaches zero for large n.
2. Robin R. Jenkins, The Economics of Solid Waste
Reduction:The Impact of User Fees (Brookfield,
VT: Edward Elgar Publishing Company, 1993).
3. Rearranging equation (1) gives the following in-
verse market demand curve:
The slope of this curve equals 
.The inter-
1>a1
p = -a0>a1 + (1>a1)q
(q>0)1>1 dq with q0 and q1 as the limits of 
integration.
10. The change in consumer surplus is the area
under the demand curve between p0 and p1, that
is, qdp  0p1dp with p0 and p1 as the limits
of integration.
11. Solve for 0 and 1 as follows: 1  ln(q0>q1)>
ln(p0>p1)  0.053, and 0  q0>(p0
1)  1.97.
12. For an excellent treatment of the econometric is-
sues raised in this section, see William H. Greene,
Econometric Analysis, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle
River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2008).
13. Thus far, this chapter has focused on demand
curves that relate quantity demanded to price.
Other variables also affect demand.A demand
function relates the quantity demanded to price
and other variables. Because a demand function
is more general than a demand curve, this section
focuses on demand functions. Sometimes we use
the term demand schedule to refer to demand
curves or demand functions.
14. They estimated an elasticity of disposal demand
with respect to tipping fees of 0.11 for commu-
nities in the region around Portland, Oregon,
over a seven-year period; see James G.
Strathman,Anthony M. Rufolo, and Gerard C. S.
Mildner,“The Demand for Solid Waste
Disposal,” Land Economics 71(1) 1995, 57–64.
15. If the estimated regression equation contains
more than one explanatory variable, then the
bias in the coefficient of a particular variable de-
pends on the partial correlation between that
variable and the omitted variable, controlling for
all other variables in the regression.
16. If an excluded variable is not correlated with
an included variable, then excluding it will not
bias the estimated coefficient of the included
variable. However, the overall fit of the model,
measured by its R2, will be poorer, and the
precision of the estimated coefficients will be
lower.
17. See, for example, Henri Theil, Principles of
Econometrics (New York:Wiley, 1971), 556–557.
18. Molly Espey,“Gasoline Demand Revisited:An
International Meta-Analysis of Elasticities,”
Energy Economics 20(3) 1998, 273–295.
Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
cept, 
, indicates the lowest price at which
the quantity demanded equals  zero; it is some-
times called the choke price. For the demand
curve shown in Figure 1, the inverse demand
curve is p  6.5  2.5q, and the choke price is
$6.50.
4. Jenkins, The Economics of Solid Waste Reduction:
The Impact of User Fees, pp. 88–90, 101.
5. Some economists call this functional form a log-
linear demand curve; others call it a log-log de-
mand curve or a double-log demand curve. In
order to minimize potential confusion, we will
not to use any of these terms, but will refer to the
curve as linear in logarithms.
6. Because 1 is the slope of the linear in loga-
rithms demand curve, 1  	lnq>	lnp. By defini-
tion, the price elasticity of demand 
d 
	lnq/	lnp. Consequently, 
d  1.
7. The slope is given by:
8. Note that our estimate of 0  1.44 will generally
differ from the original estimate of 0 obtained
by the researchers from whom we took our price
elasticity estimate.This difference arises because
we force the demand curve to pass through point
a, our known data point, whereas the original, es-
timated equation probably will not pass through
point a.
9. The area is calculated by integrating the inverse
demand curve from q0 and q1, that is, as pdq 
0q>0p = b1b0pb1-1 = b1b0pb1>p = b1q>p.
a0>a1
355

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Direct Estimation of Demand Curves
19. P. B. Goodwin, “A Review of New Demand
Elasticities with Special Reference to Short and
Long Run Effects of Price Changes,” Journal of
Transport Economics and Policy 26(2) 1992,
155–170 at pp. 158–159. See also Tae Moon
Oum, W. G. Waters II, and Jong-Say Yong,
“Concepts of Price Elasticities of Transport
Demand and Recent Empirical Estimates,”
Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 26(2)
1992, 139–154.
APPENDICES NOTES
1. For a clear introduction to regression analysis,
see Jeffrey M.Wooldridge, Introductory
Econometrics:A Modern Approach (Boston:
South-Western Publishing, 2000).
2. Formally, OLS minimizes 
3. See Greene, Econometric Analysis. For an appli-
cation that presents both OLS and ridge regres-
sion estimates, see A. E. Boardman, S. Miller, and
A. P. Schinnar,“Efficient Employment of
Cohorts of Labor in the U.S. Economy:An
Illustration of a Method,” Socio-Economic
Planning Sciences 13(6) 1979, 297–302.
4. The OLS estimators are also efficient. Here, effi-
ciency means that among all estimators whose
formulas are linear in the dependent variable,
the OLS estimator has the smallest variance. It
therefore has the greatest “power” for rejecting
the null hypothesis that a coefficient is zero.
5. The central limit theorem tells us that the distrib-
ution of the sum of independent random vari-
ables approaches the normal distribution as the
a
n
i=1
NP2
i .
number in the sum becomes large.The theorem
applies for almost any starting distributions with
finite variances. If we think of the error term as
the sum of all the many factors excluded from
our model and, furthermore, we believe that
these excluded factors are not systematically re-
lated to one another or to the included variables,
then the central limit theorem suggests that the
distribution of the error terms will be approxi-
mately normal.
6. Student is the pseudonym of William Gosset, a
quality control engineer at the Guinness Brewery
in Dublin, who originally derived the t distribution.
7. The probability we choose puts an upward bound
on the probability of falsely rejecting the null hy-
pothesis. Falsely rejecting the null hypothesis is re-
ferred to as Type I error. Failing to reject the null
hypothesis when in fact the alternative hypothesis
is true is referred to as Type II error.We usually set
the probability of Type I error at some low level,
such as 5 percent. Holding the sample size con-
stant, the lower we set the probability of a Type I
error, the greater the probability of a Type II error.
356

Valuing Impacts from Observed
Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
G
enerally, estimation of changes in social surplus requires knowledge of entire
demand and supply schedules. Direct estimation of demand and supply curves
assumes that there is a market demand curve for the good in question, such as
garbage collection or gasoline, and we can observe at least one point on this demand
curve. In many applications of CBA, however, the markets for certain “goods,” such as
human life or pollution, do not exist or are imperfect. In these situations it may be im-
possible to estimate or inappropriate to use the market demand (or supply) curve di-
rectly. In the past, such goods were treated as “intangible,” and their impacts were ex-
cluded or analysts were restricted to qualitative CBA or multigoal analysis. However,
over the past 30 years, economists have devised methods to value these impacts, thus
enabling analysts to conduct (comprehensive) CBA.
In practice, the change in social surplus can often be estimated from knowledge of
the impact of a policy (e.g., number of affected persons) and the marginal social benefit
or the marginal social cost of one more unit of the affected good or service. In a perfect
market, the market price equals both the marginal social cost and the marginal social
benefit of an additional unit of a good or service.When a market does not exist or mar-
ket failure leads to a divergence between market price and marginal social cost, analysts
try to obtain estimates of what the market price would be if the relevant good were
traded in a market where the demand curve measured marginal social benefits and the
supply curve measured marginal social costs. Such an estimate is called a shadow price.
When a market for the good of interest does not exist, one of two major methods
of estimating shadow prices can be used.1 This chapter recognizes that although there
may not be a market for the good or service of interest, its value (shadow price) may
be reflected indirectly in the market for a related good.Through statistical analysis of
the related market, we can estimate the value of the nonmarketed good. The second
way to estimate a shadow price is to use contingent valuation (survey) methods.
The indirect market methods discussed in this chapter are based on observed be-
havior, that is, revealed preference. Basing valuations on observed behavior is impor-
tant because it means that people reveal their preferences without having to be asked.
Form Chapter 14 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
357

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
The chapter begins with a discussion of the market analogy method, which uses
information from private-sector markets to value publicly provided goods. It then
discusses estimation of shadow prices based on trade-offs, for example, the trade-off
between time and wages to value leisure time or the trade-off between salaries and the
risk of having a fatal accident to value a statistical life. Next, it discusses the intermedi-
ate good method, followed by the asset valuation method. All of these methods are
subject to potential estimation biases, including the omitted variables problem and
self-selection bias. After discussing these problems, we turn to the hedonic price
method, which attempts to overcome them. We then discuss the travel cost method
and, finally, the defensive expenditures method. Some of these methods involve esti-
mation of the whole demand or supply curve, whereas others provide only an estimate
of the shadow price.This chapter focuses on methods of estimating shadow prices.
MARKET ANALOGY METHOD
Governments supply many goods that are also provided by the private sector. For ex-
ample, housing, campsites, university education, home care, and adoption services are
often provided by both the public and private sectors. The government usually pro-
vides these services free or at significantly below market prices. Thus, the actual price
paid may not be on the market demand curve. However, it may be possible to obtain an
estimate of the entire demand curve using data from a similar good provided by the
private sector.
In some countries, the private-sector market may not be legal. For example, some
countries have no legal private-sector adoption services. Nevertheless, analysts may
turn to the black market to obtain an estimate of the value of such services.
Using the Market Price of an Analogous Good as a Shadow Price
Consider, for example, a local government project that provides housing for 50 fam-
ilies. The local government may charge a nominal rent of $200 per month so that
government revenue equals $10,000 per month. Clearly, this expenditure underesti-
mates (gross) benefits because all families would be willing to pay $200 per month
or more.
Suppose that comparable units in the private sector charge rent of $500 per month.
If we took this market price as the shadow price for the publicly provided units, then
the estimated total monthly benefits of publicly provided housing would be $25,000
per month. Using the market price would be an appropriate estimate of the value of the
publicly provided good if it equals the average amount that users of the publicly pro-
vided good would be willing to pay. In the case of government allocation at a lower-than-
market price, however, occupants of public units typically have lower-than-average
incomes and are probably willing to pay between $200 and $500 per month,that is,some-
where between $10,000 per month and $25,000 per month in aggregate.
The price of comparable private housing units might underestimate the value to
families in public housing if it were poorly targeted. Specifically, if the units were allo-
cated to moderately well-off people who, in the absence of obtaining publicly provided
358

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
housing, would have purchased similar or better private-sector units at market prices,
then the market price would be a lower bound for their willingness to pay (WTP) for
the public housing. Ironically, from the CBA perspective (considering only the direct
consumption benefits), the more poorly targeted public housing units are, the higher
their benefits.
Using Information about an Analogous Private-Sector Good 
to Estimate the Demand Curve for a Publicly Provided Good
Suppose a municipal government wants to measure the gross benefits of a swimming
pool that it owns and operates. Currently, the municipality does not charge an admission
fee, and the pool receives 300,000 visitors per year, shown as point a in Figure 1. In a
comparable municipality, a privately operated swimming pool charges $5 for admission
and receives 100,000 visitors per year (point b). If these two municipalities and pools
were comparable, it would be reasonable to assume that points a and b are both on the
demand curve. Further, assuming the demand curve is linear implies that it is given (in
both communities) by the line abc in Figure 1.
In these circumstances the consumer surplus for users of the municipal pool is the
area under the entire demand curve, which equals $1,125,000 ($7.5  300,000>2). Using
100
0
0
200
b
a
c
d
e
300
10.00
7.50
5.00
2.50
Attendance ('000)
Revenue at private
pool $500,000
Price (dollars)
•
•
FIGURE 1
Demand Curve for Visits to a Municipal Swimming Pool
359

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
revenues at the private pool ($500,000) would underestimate the benefits of the public
pool because it omits the consumer surplus of those willing to pay more than the $5,
the area of triangle cbd, as well as of those willing to pay something less than $5, but
more than $0, the area of triangle bae.
In order to regard the observed price and quantity at the private pool as a point on
the demand curve for the municipal pool, the pools and their communities should be
reasonably similar. For example, the pools should be similar in terms of changing room
facilities, hours of business, the friendliness of the staff, and levels of crowding, and the
two communities should be similar in terms of population, income, and tastes. If these
assumptions do not hold, then adjustments should be made along the lines suggested
later in the section on hedonic pricing.
THE TRADE-OFF METHOD
Economists may use the opportunity cost—the value of what one gives up to get
something—as a measure of its value. For example, early CBAs used the after-tax
wage as the value of travel time saved. The basic idea is that if you reduce your travel
time by an hour then you can increase your income by the after-tax wage rate and vice
versa. Put another way, people make trade-offs between time and money wages, and
we can use the rate at which they make this trade-off to value time. Similarly the
trade-off people are willing to make between changes in fatality risk, and wages can
be used to measure the value of a statistical life. Analysts can examine the trade-off
people are willing to make between cash expenditures and increased safety from air
bags, smoke detectors, or other risk-reducing goods and can use this information to
impute the value of a statistical life.
The Value of Time Saved, Including the Value of Travel Time Saved
Many government projects affect people’s time, whether it is time spent traveling or in
a queue waiting for provision of a government service. In the absence of market im-
perfections and taxes, the market-clearing wage equals the social value of an additional
hour of work, and it equals the opportunity cost of an additional hour of work. If the
inframarginal person would enjoy an additional hour of leisure if he or she worked one
less hour, then the wage rate would indicate the value of an additional hour of leisure.
Time saved in any other way would also be valued at the wage rate.The value of a gov-
ernment project that saves an hour for a person who earns $20 per hour is worth $20 to
that person and to society as a whole.
Setting the value of time saved equal to the wage rate is relatively easy.
However, serious problems exist in using the wage rate to value time saved by gov-
ernment projects.
First, wages ignore benefits.As benefits are a form of compensation for work, they
should be added to wages.The social value of saving an hour of someone who is work-
ing equals their before-tax wage plus hourly benefits.
Second, we must take account of taxes.Although it is reasonable to view the value
to society of an hour of work as the before-tax wage rate plus benefits, when deciding
360

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
whether to work, individuals consider the after-tax compensation. Usually, this equals
the after-tax wage rate only, because benefits are usually fixed and do not vary with
time worked.Thus, when a government project increases or reduces someone’s leisure
time it should usually be valued at their after-tax wage rate, not the before-tax wage
rate plus benefits.
Third, this approach assumes that people do not work while they are traveling or
standing in line. In practice, some people multitask: They work and drive or fly at the
same time. If they do so, then an hour of travel time saved is worth less than the wage
rate. Of course, this does not apply truck drivers, who are obviously working while they
are driving. For them, it does make sense to value their time saved at their before-tax
wage rate plus benefits.
Fourth, people are willing to pay different amounts to save an hour doing differ-
ent things. For example, the value of time saved while traveling may be worth less
than the value of an hour saved while waiting in line. Some people like traveling, es-
pecially through spectacular scenery, such as along the highway from Banff to Jasper.
These people derive consumption benefits from traveling and are willing to pay for
the experience of traveling itself. (Consider, for example, the “busman’s holiday.”) In
contrast, many people dislike waiting in line or in traffic jams and are willing to pay a
lot to avoid it. Thus, the value of time saved depends on what one is doing. Because
people generally do not dislike traveling, analysts value an hour of travel time saved
for recreational travelers at a fraction (typically about 45 percent) of the after-tax
wage rate.
Fifth, the wage rate may not be an appropriate shadow price for time saved be-
cause it assumes working hours are flexible. In practice, there are structural rigidities in
the labor market. For example, some people involuntarily work overtime and, as a re-
sult, are “off their labor supply curve.” Also, market failures or government failures,
such as minimum wages and the monopoly power of unions, may distort the labor mar-
ket. Consequently, everyone who wants to work at the market wage may not be able to
find work at that wage. Indeed, for some people, such as retirees, no wage rate can be
observed.
Finally, firms may not pay their employees the marginal social value of their out-
put. For example, firms with market power may share their profits with employees in
the form of higher-than-market wages. Of course, if an industry generated negative
(positive) externalities, then the wage rate would exceed (be less than) the marginal so-
cial value of an hour saved.
Because of the serious nature of these problems, valuing time saved at the wage
rate is only a first approximation to its social value. Later in this chapter, we present
better methods for valuing time saved.
The Value of a Statistical Life
Valuing life is a contentious issue. Society often spends fortunes to rescue trapped min-
ers or to give heart transplants to specific individuals. Yet it may not spend money to
make obvious gains in mine safety or to reduce the risk of heart disease. In order to
allocate resources efficiently in the health care sector or to determine the benefits of
projects that save lives, analysts require a monetary value of a life saved.
361

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
Forgone Earnings: An Inappropriate Method.
Early efforts by economists to value
life followed a similar method to the one discussed earlier concerning the value of time.
Specifically, if one accepts that a person’s value to society for one hour equals that per-
son’s wage, then one might reason that the value of that person to society for the rest of
his or her lifetime equals the present value of his or her future earnings. One would thus
conclude that the value of a life saved equals that person’s discounted future earnings.
This is the forgone earnings method of valuing a life saved.2 It is still used by the courts
in some U.S. states and in some other countries to award compensation in cases involv-
ing death due to negligence.This method generates a higher value of life for people with
higher incomes than for people with lower incomes. On average, it also generates higher
values for younger people than for older people and for men than for women.
The forgone earnings method provides unsatisfactory estimates of the value of a
life saved for reasons similar to those discussed previously concerning the value of
time saved. It assumes full employment, although the method can be adjusted to reflect
expected lifetime earnings under average employment expectations. It also assumes
people are paid their marginal social product, although often they are not.The lives of
full-time homemakers and volunteers who are not paid for their services are unreason-
ably valued at zero.
A fundamental problem with the forgone earnings method is that it ignores indi-
viduals’ WTP to reduce the risk of their own deaths. This point was made clearly by
Thomas Schelling, who observed, “[t]here is no reason to suppose that a person’s fu-
ture earnings . . . bear any particular relation to what he would pay to reduce some
likelihood of his own death.”3 Schelling also distinguished between the deaths of iden-
tifiable individuals and statistical deaths. A safety improvement to a highway, for exam-
ple, does not lead ex ante to the saving of the lives of a few identifiable individuals, but
rather to the reduction in the risk of death to all users: It leads to statistical lives saved.
In order to value the benefit of proposed safety improvements, analysts should ascertain
how much people are willing to pay for reductions in their risk of death that are of the
same magnitude as the reduced risk that would result from the proposed safety improve-
ments. Such reasoning has led to a series of consumer purchase and labor market stud-
ies that have attempted to compute the value of a statistical life (VSL).
Simple Consumer Purchase Studies.
Suppose airbags were not standard in new cars but,
for $300, you could purchase and install an airbag at the time you purchased your new
car.4 The airbag would increase your survival rate from use of the car from p to p  .
Would you buy the airbag? This problem is represented as a decision tree in Figure 2.
If a person is indifferent between the two alternatives, then the expected value of
the upper-branch alternative (spending the $300 more and increasing the probability
of surviving by ) and the expected value of the lower-branch alternative (not spend-
ing the $300 and surviving with probability p), that is
 V(life) = $300>v
 vV(life) = $300
(p + v)V(life) - pV(life) = $300
(p + v)V(life) - $300 = pV(life)
362

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
If we know that   1/10,000; that is, if 10,000 people buy airbags, then one statisti-
cal life will be saved, then, for a person who is indifferent between buying the airbag
or not:
This method for estimating the VSL has been applied not only to the purchase of
airbags but also to the purchase of other safety-enhancing devices, such as smoke de-
tectors, safer cars, and fire extinguishers.
Simple Labor Market Studies.
Simple labor market studies examine the additional
wage people require in compensation for exposing themselves to greater risk of
death on the job (job fatality risk). Suppose, for example, one type of construction
job has a 1/1,000 greater chance of fatal injury in a year than another type of con-
struction job. Further suppose that the riskier job offers a salary that is $3,500/year
higher than the safer job. If workers are indifferent between these two types of job,
then this implies:
 V(life) = $3.5 million
 (1>1,000)V(life) = $3,500
V(life) = ($300)>(1>10,000) = $3 million
Buy airbag
Live (p + )
Live (p)
– $300
Not buy airbag
Die (1 – p – )
Die (1 – p)
V (life)
0
V (life)
0
FIGURE 2
Decision Tree for Airbag Purchase
363

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
In general, if $a is the amount workers are willing to accept in order to compensate for
greater risk, and  is the change in fatality risk, then the VSL is given by:
(1)
Problems with Simple Consumer Purchase and Wage-Risk Studies
One problem with simple consumer purchase and wage-risk studies is that they assume
workers have full information concerning the risks, that is, . For example, in addition
to knowing that the chance of dying in a risky job is 1/1,000 higher than in the less risky
job, workers have to know what this means. Evidence suggests that people suffer from
cognitive biases that limit their ability to make rational judgments in such situations. For
example,some studies suggest that people over-estimate the occurrence of low-probabil-
ity “bad” events, while other studies suggest that people underestimate such events.5
When people underestimate the fatality risk of a job (a bad event), then they will ac-
cept a lower risk premium to perform that job, and the VSL will be underestimated.
A second problem is that people who are relatively less risk averse (more risk
seeking) self-select into more risky jobs. The mean fatality risk in recent VSL studies
ranges from between about 3 in 100,000 to 22 in 100,000. However, the average U.S. fa-
tality rate for all occupations is about 4 in 100,000.6 Consequently, risk-averse individ-
uals may be underrepresented in wage-risk studies, which would cause such studies to
underestimate the VSL.
A third problem is that researchers may not have an accurate measure of the dif-
ference in fatality risk faced by different workers or consumers, the . Many U.S. wage-
risk studies use aggregated, industry level data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
These data do not reflect the difference in risk faced by workers in different occupa-
tions within the same industry. For example, a coal miner and a secretary in a coal min-
ing company have quite different fatality risks. Furthermore,  may be based on cur-
rently inaccurate historical data. Suppose that in a consumer purchase study $a equals
$800 and  equals 0.0002 so that the VSL equals $4 million. Now suppose that there
was one more death among 5,000 people, then  would equal 0.0004 and the VSL
would equal $2 million.
In general, people experience diminishing marginal utility for safety; that is, the
value of additional amounts of safety declines as the level of safety increases.The rela-
tionship between the WTP for increased safety and the level of safety (fatality risk) is
probably convex.The WTP for additional amounts of safety depends on both the base
level of safety and the magnitude of the change in the level of safety. A validity prob-
lem arises if the level of risk in the consumer purchase or wage-risk study used to ob-
tain the VSL differs substantially from the level of risk applicable to where the policy
is being applied.
Other problems with these methods are that they assume markets are efficient
and that all other factors that influence prices or wages are held constant. In prac-
tice, wage differences may depend partially on the relative bargaining power of
unions, on the different characteristics of the different jobs, or on different charac-
teristics (skills) of workers in different jobs. For example, as Adam Smith noted,
VSL = $a
v
364

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
“[t]he wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness or dirtiness,
the honourableness or dishonourableness of employment.”7 The omitted variables
issue, which is illustrated by Exhibit 1, is discussed in more detail later in this chap-
ter.
INTERMEDIATE GOOD METHOD
Some government projects produce intermediate goods, that is, goods that are used as
inputs to some other downstream business.For example,a government irrigation project
may provide water for farmers that is used in the production of avocados. If the inter-
mediate good—water—is sold in a well-functioning market, it may be possible to di-
rectly estimate the market demand curve for water by using econometric methods. If it
is not, we have to impute its value.The intermediate good method estimates the (gross)
benefit of a project based on its value added to the downstream activity. Specifically, the
value of the irrigation project can be measured by the increase in the incomes of avo-
cado farmers. More generally, the intermediate good method measures the annual ben-
efit of a project by the change in the annual incomes of the downstream businesses,thus:
The total benefit of a project can be computed by discounting these annual benefits over
the project’s life.
Annual Benefit = Income (with the project) - Income (without the project)
Are estimates of the value of life that rely on
wage premiums that workers receive for working
in risky jobs systematically understated? Robert
Frank and Cass Sunstein argue that they are un-
derstated by 18 to 75 percent if they are used to
measure WTP for government safety regulations
that improve the safety of all workers.According
to Frank and Sunstein, the reason is that workers
who decide to take relatively safe jobs pay for
their additional safety by bearing two costs: they
lose the wage premium they would receive if
they took a more dangerous job and they are
lower down in the wage distribution and thus
lose status. Both factors affect their WTP for
safety, although only the first is reflected in mea-
sures of the value of a statistical life that are
based on wage premiums. However, a safety reg-
EXHIBIT 1
ulation that is universally applied reduces risk for
everyone without affecting economic position.
Thus, workers would be willing to pay more for
such a regulation than the amount reflected by
wage premiums alone.
Thomas Kniesner and Kip Viscusi take issue
with this conclusion for several reasons. They
point out that estimates of wage premiums for
workplace risk differences are fairly small, on
the order of a few hundred dollars a year, and
thus are unlikely to have much of an effect on
economic status. Kniesner and Viscusi further
argue that, even if wage premiums do positively
influence status, these gains may be offset be-
cause relatively risky jobs are likely to affect
feelings of well-being adversely insofar as, by de-
finition, health and safety are lower in such jobs.
Source: Adapted from Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein,“Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position,” University
of Chicago Law Review 68(2) 2001, 323–374; and Thomas J. Kniesner and W. Kip Viscusi,“Cost-Benefit Analysis:Why
Relative Economic Position Does Not Matter,” Yale Journal on Regulation 20(1) 2003, 1–24.
365

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
The intermediate good method can be used to value the benefits of education and
training programs. Investment in the skills and abilities of human beings improves the
stock of human capital. Much of the economic successes of Japan and Switzerland, for
example, both of which are relatively poor in terms of physical natural resources, can
be attributed to their investments in human capital. The intermediate good method
measures the annual benefit of human capital programs by comparing the average in-
comes of those who have been enrolled in them and the average incomes of those who
have not. For example, the benefit of a college education can be measured by compar-
ing the before-tax incomes plus benefits of those with a college education and those
who graduated from high school. The total benefit of such a program is found by dis-
counting the annual benefits over the years people work after graduation and multi-
plying by the number of participants.
One problem with this method is that it assumes that differences in income capture
all the benefits of a project. Some intermediate goods, such as college education, may be
partially “final” goods. That is, they may have consumption value in addition to having
investment value. Some people may enjoy their college education so much that they
would pay for it even if it had no impact on their expected earnings. People’s WTP for
this consumption aspect should also be considered as a benefit of a college education.
Also, those with more education may subsequently enjoy better working conditions (as
well as higher salaries). Insofar as the intermediate good method excludes these con-
sumption benefits, it underestimates the value of college education. On the other hand,
this method does not control for other factors, such as ability or motivation.The higher
income of those with a college education may be partially attributable to greater ability
or motivation. Also, some employers may pay those with a college degree more simply
because they have better “credentials,” and may not necessarily have better skills.These
latter effects tend to bias upward estimates of the benefit to higher education. Exhibit 2
discussed the returns to education in different countries.
EXHIBIT 2
Many studies have used the intermediate good
method to value the social benefits from educa-
tion. These studies usually measure the social
benefits from a college education as the differ-
ence between the before-tax earnings of col-
lege graduates and those whose education
stopped after graduating from high school.
Some of these studies also estimate the cost of
education—tuition fees, tax revenues, dona-
tions, and earnings that are forgone while in
college. These estimates of benefits and costs
can be used to compute the rate of return to
different additional amounts of education.
George Psacharopoulos, for example, found
that the average rate of return to society from
secondary schooling is 10 percent in developed
countries, 18 percent in sub-Saharan countries,
and 11 to 13 percent in other developing coun-
tries. The estimated average rate of return to
society from investments in higher education is
9 percent in developed countries and 11 to 12
percent in developing countries. The rate of re-
turn to private individuals is higher than these
estimates because they capture the benefits,
whereas the cost is often subsidized by the gov-
ernment or donors.
Source: Adapted from George Psacharopoulos,“Returns to Investment in Education:A Global Update,” World
Development 22(9) 1994, 1325–1343.
366

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
Also, care must be taken in the application of this method to avoid double
counting. If the value of an intermediate good has been measured in some other
way, then its contribution to the value of downstream production should not be
counted as an additional benefit. For example, if the benefits of an irrigation project
were estimated based on the estimated demand curve for water, then including the
increased income of avocado farmers as an additional benefit would be double
counting.
ASSET VALUATION METHOD
Government projects often affect the prices of assets such as land, housing, and stocks.
The impacts are said to be capitalized into the market value of the assets. Observed in-
creases (decreases) in asset values can be used to estimate the benefits (costs) of pro-
jects. For example, returning to the irrigation project to provide water to avocado
farms, if the farms are the only users of the irrigation water and if the market for farm
land is competitive, then the full value of the irrigation project will capitalize into the
market value of avocado farms. Using the difference in the value of farms before and
after the irrigation project is a relatively quick and easy way to estimate the benefits of
a project.
A common application of the asset valuation method uses cross-sectional data on
house prices to impute values of particular attributes of houses or of the environment,
including negative externalities, such as noise or pollution. For example, the difference
in market prices between houses with a view and houses with no view provides an esti-
mate of how much households are willing to pay for a view.The difference between the
average price of houses in a neighborhood with a park and the average price of houses
in neighborhoods with no park provides an estimate of how much homeowners are
willing to pay for a park. Of course, similar to other methods discussed earlier, this
method assumes that house are similar in all other respects, and that no other factor af-
fects the difference in prices. The section on hedonic prices discusses ways to control
for other factors.
Event studies have now become an important method for estimating the costs or
benefits to shareholders of new policies or regulations that affect firms.8 Usually, re-
searchers estimate the abnormal return to a security, which is the difference between
the return to a security in the presence of an event and the expected return to the se-
curity in the absence of the event. These returns are calculated during an event win-
dow, that is, for the period during which the event is assumed to affect stock prices—
often a few days. A main advantage of using stock prices is that new information
concerning policy changes is quickly and, in theory, efficiently capitalized into stock
prices. Because the return to the security in the absence of the event is unobservable,
it is inferred from changes in the prices of other stocks in the market, such as the
Dow Jones Index or the FTSE 100. The estimated daily abnormal returns during the
event window can be aggregated to obtain the cumulative abnormal return, which
measures the total return to shareholders that can be attributed to the event.
Cumulative abnormal returns provide an estimate of the change in producer surplus
due to some new policy.
367

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
PROBLEMS WITH SIMPLE VALUATION METHODS
The valuation methods discussed earlier in this chapter have several potential limita-
tions, many of which were discussed earlier. This section focuses on the omitted vari-
able problem and self-selection bias.
The Omitted Variable Problem
All of the methods discussed thus far in this chapter implicitly assume that all other
explanatory variables are held constant, but this is unlikely in practice. Consider, for
example, using the intermediate good method to value irrigation. Ideally, analysts
would compare the incomes of farmers if the irrigation project were built with the in-
comes of the same farmers if the project were not built. In practice, if the project is
built, analysts cannot directly observe what the farmers’ incomes would have been if
it had not been built. One way to infer what their incomes would have been without
the project is to use the incomes of the same farmers before the project was built (a
before and after design) or the incomes of similar farmers who did not benefit from
an irrigation project (a nonexperimental comparison group design). The before and
after design is reasonable only if all other variables that affect farmers’ incomes re-
main constant, such as weather conditions, crop choices, taxes, and subsidies. If these
variables change, then the incomes observed before the project may not be good es-
timates of what incomes would have been if the project had not been implemented.
Similarly, the comparison group design is appropriate only if the comparison group is
similar in all important respects to the farmers with irrigation, except for the pres-
ence of irrigation.
As mentioned in Exhibit 2, salary differences between those with a college de-
gree and those with a high school degree may depend on ability, intelligence,
socioeconomic background, and other factors in addition to college attendance.
Similarly, in labor market studies of the value of life, differences in wages among
jobs may depend on variations in status among jobs, the bargaining power of differ-
ent unions or nonfatality accident risk in addition to fatality risk. In simple asset
price studies, the price of a house typically depends on factors such as its distance
from the central business district and size, as well as whether it has a view. Analysts
should take account of all important explanatory variables. If a relevant explanatory
variable is omitted from the model and if it is correlated with the included 
variable(s) of interest, then the estimated coefficients will be biased.
Self-Selection Bias
Another potential problem is self-selection bias. Risk-seeking people tend to self-se-
lect themselves for dangerous jobs. Because they like to take risks they may be willing
to accept lower salaries than other people in quite risky jobs. Consequently, we may
observe only a relatively small wage premium for dangerous jobs. Because risk seekers
are not representative of society as a whole, the observed wage differential may under-
estimate the amount that average members of society would be willing to pay to re-
duce risks and, hence, may lead to underestimation of the value of a statistical life.
368

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
The self-selection problem arises whenever different people attach different val-
ues to particular attributes.As another example, suppose we want to use differences in
house prices to estimate a shadow price for noise. People who are not bothered much
by noise, possibly because of hearing disabilities, naturally tend to move into noisy
neighborhoods. As a result, the price differential between quiet houses and noisy
houses may be quite small, which would lead to an underestimation of the shadow
price of noise for the “average” person.
HEDONIC PRICING METHOD
The hedonic pricing method, sometimes called the hedonic regression method, offers a
way to overcome the omitted variables problem and self-selection bias that arise in the
relatively simple valuation methods discussed earlier. Most recent wage-risk studies
for valuing a statistical life (also called labor market studies) apply the hedonic regres-
sion method. It can be used to value an attribute, or a change in an attribute, whenever
its value is capitalized into the price of an asset, such as houses or salaries.
Hedonic Regression
Suppose, for example, that scenic views can be scaled from 1 to 10 and that we want to
estimate the benefits of improving the (quality) “level” of scenic view in an area by one
unit. We could estimate the relationship between individual house prices and the level
of their scenic views. But we know that the market value of houses depends on other
factors, such as the size of the lot, which is probably correlated with the quality of
scenic view.We also suspect that people who live in houses with good scenic views tend
to value scenic views more than other people. Consequently, we would have an omitted
variables problem and self-selection bias.
The hedonic pricing method attempts to overcome both of these types of prob-
lems.9 It consists of two steps. The first step estimates the relationship between the
price of an asset and all of the attributes (characteristics) that affect its value.10 From
this it derives the marginal effect of an attribute (e.g., a better scenic view) on the value
of the asset, while controlling for other variables that affect the value of the asset. The
second step estimates the WTP for the attribute, after controlling for “tastes,” which
are usually proxied by socioeconomic factors. From this information, we can calculate
the change in consumer surplus resulting from projects that improve or worsen the
attribute.
Suppose we are interested in determining the hedonic price of a scenic view. The first
step estimates the relationship between the price of a house, P, and all of its attributes,
such as the quality of its scenic view, VIEW, its distance from the central business district,
CBD, its lot size, SIZE, and various characteristics of its neighborhood, NBHD, such as
school quality.A model of the factors affecting house prices can be written as follows:
(2)
This equation is called a hedonic price function or implicit price function.11 The
change in the price of a house that results from a unit change in a particular 
P = f(CBD, SIZE, VIEW, NBHD)
369

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
attribute (i.e., the slope) is called the hedonic price, implicit price, or rent differential
of the attribute. In a well-functioning market, the hedonic price can naturally be in-
terpreted as the additional cost of purchasing a house that is marginally better in
terms of a particular attribute. For example, the hedonic price of scenic views, which
we denote as rv, measures the additional cost of buying a house with a slightly bet-
ter (higher-level) scenic view.12 Sometimes hedonic prices are referred to as
marginal hedonic prices or marginal implicit prices. Although these terms are tech-
nically more correct, we will not use them in order to make the explanation as easy
to follow as possible.
Usually analysts assume the hedonic price function has a multiplicative functional
form, which implies that house prices increase as the level of scenic view increases but
at a decreasing rate. Assuming the hedonic pricing model represented in equation (2)
has a multiplicative functional form, we can write:
(3)
The parameters,1,2,3,and 4,are elasticities:they measure the proportional change in
house prices that results from a proportional change in the associated attribute.13 We ex-
pect 1 < 0 because house prices decline with distance to the CBD, but 2, 3, and 4 > 0
because house prices increase with increases in SIZE,VIEW, and NBHD.
The hedonic price of a particular attribute is the slope of equation (2) with respect
to that attribute. In principle, it may be a function of all of the variables in the hedonic
price equation.14 For the multiplicative model in equation (3), the hedonic price of
scenic views, rv, is:15
(4)
In this model, the hedonic price of scenic views depends on the value of the parameter
3, the price of the house, and the view from the house. Thus, it varies from one obser-
vation (house) to another. Note that plotting this hedonic price against the level of
scenic view provides a downward-sloping curve, which implies that the marginal value
of scenic views declines as the level of the view increases.
The preceding points are illustrated in Figure 3.The top panel shows an illustrative
hedonic price function with house prices increasing at a decreasing rate as the level of
scenic view increases. The slope of this curve, which equals the hedonic price of scenic
views, decreases as the level of the scenic view increases.The bottom panel shows more
precisely the relationship between the hedonic price of scenic views (the slope of the
curve in the top panel) and the level of scenic view.
In a well-functioning market, utility-maximizing households will purchase houses
so that their WTP for a marginal increase in each attribute equals its hedonic price.
Consequently, in equilibrium, the hedonic price of an attribute can be interpreted as
the willingness of households to pay for a marginal increase in that attribute. The
graph of the hedonic price of scenic views, rv, against the level of scenic view is shown
in the lower panel of Figure 3. Assuming all households have identical incomes and
tastes, this curve can be interpreted as a household inverse demand curve for scenic
views.
rv = b3 
P
VIEW 7 0
P = b0CBDb1SIZEb2VIEWb3NBHDb4eP
370

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
Yet, households differ in their incomes and taste. Some are willing to pay a con-
siderable amount of money for a scenic view; others are not.This brings us to the sec-
ond step of the hedonic pricing method. To account for different incomes and tastes,
analysts estimate the following willingness-to-pay (inverse demand) function for
scenic views:16
(5)
rv = W(VIEW, Y, Z)
FIGURE 3
The Hedonic Price Method
House
price (P)
Hedonic
price of
scenic
views (rv)
 rv1
 rv1
 rv2
 rv3
rv
 rv3
Hedonic price = rv2
Hedonic price
function
Level of scenic
view (V)
V1
W1
Locus of household
equilibrium
willingnesses to pay
W2
W3
V2
V3
Level of scenic
view (V)
V1
V2
V3
371

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
where rv is estimated from equation (4), Y is household income, and Z is a vector of
household characteristics that reflects tastes (e.g., socioeconomic background, race,
age, and family size). Three willingness-to-pay functions, denoted W1, W2, and W3, for
three different households are drawn in the lower panel of Figure 3.17 Equilibria occur
where these functions intersect the rv function. When incomes and socioeconomic
characteristics differ, the rv function is the locus of household equilibrium willing-
nesses to pay for scenic views.
Using established methods, it is straightforward to use equation (5) to calculate
the change in consumer surplus to a household due to a change in the level of scenic
view. These changes in individual household consumer surplus can be aggregated
across all households to obtain the total change in consumer surplus.
Using Hedonic Models to Determine the VSL
As we mentioned above, the simple consumer purchase and labor market studies that
we described previously may result in biased estimates of the value of a statistical life
due to omitted variables. For example, labor market studies that focus on fatality risk
(the risk of death) often omit potentially relevant variables such as injury risk (the risk
of nonfatal injury).This problem may be reduced by using the hedonic pricing method
and, for example, estimating the following nonlinear regression model:18
(6)
The inclusion of injury risk, job tenure, education, and age in the model controls
for variables that affect wages and would bias the estimated coefficient of 1 if they
were excluded. Using the procedure demonstrated in the preceding section, the analyst
can convert the estimate of 1 to a hedonic price of fatality risk and then estimate indi-
viduals’ WTP to avoid fatal risks, thereby controlling for self-selection problems. Most
of the empirical estimates of the value of life are obtained from labor market and con-
sumer product studies that employ models similar or analogous to the one described
here.
Problems with Hedonic Models
In theory, the hedonic pricing method can be used to determine the shadow price of
many goods that are not traded in well-developed markets, such as externalities and
public goods.19 It helps to overcome omitted variable and self-selection problems.
However, it does not overcome all problems. Here we mention six problems.
First, people must know and understand the full implications of the externality or
public good. For example, in order to use the hedonic pricing method to value pollution,
families should know, prior to the purchase of their house, the level of pollution to
which it is exposed and should also know the effect of different pollution levels on their
health. Similarly, in hedonic wage-risk studies, workers must correctly perceive the ac-
tual risks.W. P. Jennings and A. Kinderman observe that the rate of occupational fatali-
ties in most industries has fallen roughly 95 percent since 1920 and is now one-third of
 + b4ln(education) + b5ln(age) + P
 ln(wage rate) = b0 + b1ln(fatality risk) + b2ln(injury risk) + b3ln(job tenure)
372

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
the rate of accidental deaths in the home.20 They argue that “the current fatality rates
are so low and their individual causes so often random that statistical attempts to mea-
sure how fatalities affect wages are unlikely to meet with success.” Second, it is important
that the hedonic equations, such as equation (3) or equation (6), include correctly mea-
sured variables, as opposed to more readily obtainable but incorrect proxies. For exam-
ple, house values may depend on the quality of construction.As this variable is difficult
to determine without inspection, the researcher may use the year of construction as a
proxy for quality. In econometrics, this problem is referred to as the errors in variables
problem.Third, if the hedonic pricing model is linear, then the hedonic price of each at-
tribute is constant, which would make it impossible to estimate the inverse demand
function, such as equation (5).21 Fourth, the market should contain many different
houses so that families can find an optimal “package,” that is, a house with just the right
combination of attributes. In other words, there should be sufficient variety so that fam-
ilies can find a house that permits them to reach an equilibrium. This would be a prob-
lem if, for example, a family wanted a small, pollution-free house, but all of the houses in
pollution-free areas were large. Fifth, there may be multicollinearity problems in the
data. To use the same example, if expensive houses were large and located mainly in
areas free of pollution, but inexpensive houses were small and located mainly in pol-
luted areas, it would be difficult to estimate separate hedonic prices for pollution and
size. Sixth, the method assumes that market prices adjust immediately to changes in at-
tributes and in all other factors that affect demand or supply.
Dean Uyeno, Stanley Hamilton, and Andrew
Biggs used the hedonic pricing method to esti-
mate the cost of airport noise in Vancouver,
Canada. They estimated the following hedonic
price equation:
where lnH is the natural log of residential prop-
erty value, NEF is a measure of noise level (am-
bient noise levels are in the NEF 15–25 range,
“some” to “much” annoyance occurs in the NEF
25–40 range, and “considerable” annoyance oc-
curs above NEFs of 40), the Xj are house charac-
teristics (j  2, . . . , k), and is an error term.
Their 
results 
show 
that 
Vancouver
International Airport generates noise costs that
 lnH = b0 + b1NEF + a
k
j=2
bk lnXj + P
EXHIBIT 3
capitalize into residential house and condo-
minium prices. The estimated coefficient of the
noise variable implies that detached houses
very close to the airport with NEFs of 40 are
9.75 percent cheaper than houses far from the
airport with NEFs of 25.
The estimated noise depreciation sensitivity
is broadly consistent with previous studies,
leading the authors to conclude that “the simi-
larity of results spanning several decades and
several Western countries would seem to sug-
gest a broad and long-lived consensus on the
issue (of the impact of airport noise on prop-
erty values) . . .” (p. 14). In aggregate, the social
cost of noise from Vancouver International
Airport amounts to about $15 million in 1987
Canadian dollars.
Source: Adapted from Dean Uyeno, Stanley W. Hamilton, and Andrew J. G. Biggs,“Density of Residential Land Use and
the Impact of Airport Noise,” Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 27(1) 1993, 3–18.
373

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
TRAVEL COST METHOD22
Most applications of the travel cost method (TCM) have been to value recreational sites.
If the “market”for visits to a particular site is geographically extensive,then visitors from
different origins bear different travel costs depending on their proximity to the site.The
resulting differences in total cost, and the differences in the rates of visits that they in-
duce, provide a basis for estimating a demand curve for the site.
Suppose that we want to estimate the value of a particular recreational site.We ex-
pect that the quantity of visits demanded by an individual, q, depends on its price, p,
the price of substitutes, ps, the person’s income, Y, and variables that reflect the per-
son’s tastes, Z:
(7)
The clever insight of the TCM is that although admission fees are usually the same for
all persons (indeed, they are often zero), the total cost faced by each person varies be-
cause of differences in travel costs. Consequently, usage also varies, thereby allowing
researchers to make inferences about the demand curve for the site.
The full price paid by visitors to a recreational site includes the opportunity cost of
time spent traveling, the operating cost of vehicles used to travel, the cost of accommo-
dations for overnight stays while traveling or visiting, parking fees at the site, and the
cost of admission. The sum of all of these costs gives the total cost of a visit to the site.
This total cost is used as an explanatory variable in place of the admission price in a
model similar to equation (7).
Estimating such a model is conceptually straightforward. First, select a random
sample of households within the market area of the site. These are the potential visi-
tors. Second, survey these households to determine their numbers of visits to the site
over some period of time, their costs involved in visiting the site, their costs of visiting
substitute sites, their incomes, and their other characteristics that may affect their de-
mand. Third, specify a functional form for the demand schedule and estimate it using
the survey data. For an application of the TCM see Exhibit 4.
It is important to emphasize that when total cost replaces price in equation (7), this
equation is not the usual demand curve that gives visits as a function of the price of ad-
mission. However, as we show next, such models can be used to derive the usual mar-
ket demand curve and to estimate the average WTP for a visit.
Zonal Travel Cost Method
With the zonal travel cost method, researchers survey actual visitors at a site rather than
potential visitors.This is often more feasible and less expensive than surveying potential
visitors.Also, the level of analysis shifts from the individual (or household) to the area,
or zone, of origin of visitors, hence the name zonal travel cost method.
The zonal TCM requires the analyst to specify the zones from which users of the
site originate. Zones are easily formed by drawing concentric rings or iso-time lines
around the site on a map. Ideally, households within a zone should face similar travel
costs as well as have similar values of the other variables that would be included in an
individual demand function, including similar prices of substitutes, similar incomes, and
q = f(p, ps, Y, Z)
374

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
similar tastes. If residents from different regions within a zone have quite different
travel costs, then the zones should be redrawn. In practice, analysts often use local gov-
ernment jurisdictions as the zones because they facilitate the collection of data.
Assuming a constant elasticity functional form leads to the following model:
(8)
where V is the number of visits from a zone per period; POP is the population of the
zone; and 
denote the average values of p, ps, Y, and Z in each zone, re-
spectively.Again, when this equation is estimated, total cost replaces price.
Note that the quantity demanded is expressed as a visit rate. An alternative speci-
fication is to estimate the quantity demanded in terms of the number of visits, V, but to
include population, POP, on the right-hand side of the regression equation. Although
both specifications are plausible, the specification in equation (8) is less likely to in-
volve heteroscedasticity problems and is, therefore, more likely to be appropriately es-
timated by OLS.
Using estimates of the parameters of equation (8), it is possible to estimate the
change in consumer surplus associated with a change in the admission price to a site,
the total consumer surplus associated with the site at its current admission fee, and the
average consumer surplus per visit to the site.We illustrate how to do this using an ex-
ample for a hypothetical recreational wilderness area, using the data presented in the
first five columns of Table 1. This illustration assumes there are only five relevant 
p, ps, Y, and Z
lna
V
POP b = b0 + b1lnp + b2lnps + b4Y + b5Z + P
Kerry Smith and William Desvousges used the
travel cost method to estimate the average
household value of a trip to recreational sites
along the Monongahela River and the average
household value of improving water quality.
Their estimates of travel costs assumed the mar-
ginal cost of operating an automobile was $0.08
per mile in 1976. For the time cost component of
EXHIBIT 4
travel cost, they set the value of time equal to
the wage rate in a person’s particular occupa-
tion, which ranged from $2.75 per hour for fe-
male farmers to $7.89 per hour for male profes-
sional, technical, and kindred workers in 1977
dollars. Smith and Desvousges estimated many
models including the following relatively simple
travel cost model (t-statistics in parentheses):
lnV = -3.928 - 0.051TC + 0.00001Y + 0.058DO  (R2 = 0.225)
where V is the number of site visits, Y denotes
income, and DO is the percent saturation of dis-
solved oxygen in the water. Based on this model,
the authors estimated that the average annual
value of improving the water quality from boat-
able to game fishing would be $7.16 in 1981 dol-
lars (about $15 in 2004 dollars), and the average
annual value of improving the water quality
from boatable to swimming would be $28.86 in
1981 dollars (about $60 in 2004 dollars).
Source: Adapted from V. Kerry Smith and William H. Desvousges, Measuring Water Quality Benefits (Boston: Kluwer
Nijhoff Publishing, 1986), especially pp. 270–271.
(3.075)
(2.846)
(1.109)
(3.917)
375

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
zones from which people travel to the recreational site. To avoid unnecessary compli-
cations, we assume that demand depends directly only on total price, not on income,
the prices of substitutes, or any other variable.
In this example,the value of time for residents from different zones varies due to dif-
ferent income levels in different zones, as well as different travel times. Zone A is adja-
cent to the recreational area. Residents from zone A can, on average, pack up their
equipment, drive to the site, park, and walk to the entrance in approximately one-half
hour.Assuming the opportunity cost of their time is $9.40/hr and marginal vehicle oper-
ating costs are 15 cents/km, their total travel cost is $10 per round trip. Adding the ad-
mission fee of $10 per day yields a total cost of $20 per visit. Local residents make 15 vis-
its each year, on average. Zone B is about 30 km away, requiring two hours of total travel
time (including driving, parking, walking, and loading and unloading vehicles) for a
round trip.Assuming the value of time for these residents is $5.50/hr and they travel in-
dividually, their total cost per visit is $30. Zone B residents make 13 visits per year on av-
erage. Zone C is about 90 km away and requires two hours of travel time in each direc-
tion. Assuming the value of these residents’ time is $10.35/hr on average, and that their
travel costs are shared between two people, the total cost per person is approximately
$65 per visit. Zone C residents make six visits per year on average. Zone D residents live
on the other side of the metropolitan area and, on average, make three visits each year.
Assuming that their average wage rate is $8/hr and that two persons travel per vehicle,
their per-person cost is $80 per visit. Zone E residents have to cross an international
border. Though the distance is only slightly farther than from zone D, it takes almost
one-half hour to get through customs and immigration. The average zone E wage is
$8/hour. Assuming two persons per vehicle, the per-person cost is $90 per visit. On av-
erage, visitors from zone E make only one visit per year.
The data for average total cost per person visit (TC) and average visits per per-
son (V), which are in columns 4 and 5 of Table 1, are represented graphically in
Figure 4. The equation TC  95–5V fits these data perfectly. (In practice, ordinary
least squares would be used to fit a line to data points that would not all lie exactly
on the line.) This equation is the “representative” individual’s inverse demand
curve: it shows how much a typical visitor is willing to pay for a visit to the recre-
ational area (specifically, $90 for the first visit, $85 for the second visit, . . . , $20 for
the fifteenth visit).
TABLE 1
Illustration of the Travel Cost Method
Zone
Travel 
Time 
(hours)
Travel 
Distance
(km)
Average 
Total 
Cost per 
Person ($)
Average 
Number of 
Visits per 
Person
Consumer 
Surplus per 
Person
Consumer 
Surplus per 
Zone 
($ thousands)
Trips per 
Zone 
(thousands)
A
0.5
2
20
15
525
5,250
150
B
1.0
30
30
13
390
3,900
130
C
2.0
90
65
6
75
1,500
120
D
3.0
140
80
3
15
150
30
E
3.5
150
90
1
0
0
10
Total
10,800
440
376

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
Different individuals face different prices (costs) for their visits depending on their
zone of origin. It is cheaper for those who live closer.Therefore, individuals’ consumer
surplus varies according to their zone of origin. The consumer surplus for a particular
visit from a particular zone equals the difference between how much someone is will-
ing to pay for that visit, given by the point on the “representative” individual’s inverse
demand curve, and how much the person actually pays for a visit from that zone. As
mentioned previously, “representative” visitors are willing to pay $90 for their first
visit, $85 for the second, . . . $65 for their sixth. People from zone C actually pay only
$65 for each visit. Consequently, their consumer surplus equals $25 for the first visit,
$20 for the second visit, $15 for the third visit, $10 for the fourth visit, $5 for the fifth
visit, and $0 for the sixth visit.
The total consumer surplus for someone from zone C is obtained by summing the
consumer surpluses associated with each visit across all visits, which amounts to $75.
This amount is represented by the area of the shaded triangle in Figure 4.23 Similarly,
the consumer surplus is $525 per person for residents of zone A, $390 for residents of
zone B, $15 for residents of zone D, and $0 for residents of zone E. These amounts are
presented in the sixth column of Table 1. Clearly, people who live closer to the recre-
ational site enjoy more consumer surplus from it than people who live farther away.
FIGURE 4
“Representative” Individual’s Inverse Demand Curve for Visits
to a Recreational Area as a Function of Total Cost per Visit
$100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Visits per person (V)
Total cost per visit (TC)
11 12 13 14
15
E
D
C
B
A
Consumer surplus for
people from zone C = $75
Inverse demand curve
TC = 95 – 5V
377

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
From this information and knowledge of the populations of each zone, we can cal-
culate the total consumer surplus per year and the average consumer surplus per visit
for the site. Suppose zones A, B, D, and E have populations of 10,000 people, while
zone C has a population of 20,000 people. The consumer surplus per zone is obtained
by multiplying the consumer surplus per person in a zone by the population of that
zone, as shown in the fifth column in Table 1. Adding across all zones yields the total
annual consumer surplus for the site of $10.8 million. Adding admission fees of $4.4
million indicates that the annual (gross) benefit of the site to all visitors equals $15.2
million. If the government decided to use the site for some completely different pur-
pose, such as logging, this would be a measure of the lost annual benefits.
The total number of visits to the recreational area is 440,000, as shown in the last
column of Table 1. Dividing the total consumer surplus by the total number of visits
gives an average consumer surplus per visit of $24.55. If we now add the admission fee
of $10, then we obtain the average demand price per visit, which is the average maxi-
mum amount a visitor would pay for a visit to the site. In this example, the average de-
mand price is $34.55.
Estimating the Market Demand Curve for a 
Public Good Using the Zonal Travel Cost Method
It is possible to construct the market demand curve for a public good from estimation
of equation (8) where price is replaced with total cost.That is, we can derive an expres-
sion in which the admission fee is a function of the total number of visits to the site.This
curve can then be used to estimate total consumer surplus in the usual way.
Unfortunately, because each point on the demand curve has to be estimated separately,
precise computation is not straightforward.
For illustrative purposes, we continue with the previous example where TC 
95  5V. To begin, we know two points on the market demand curve. At an admission
price of $10, the current admission fee, there are 440,000 visits, represented by point c
in Figure 5. Now consider how high admission fees can be raised until demand is
choked off (equals zero). We know from the representative individual’s inverse de-
mand curve (TC  95  5V) that the maximum WTP (including all costs) is $95.
Subtracting the travel cost of users from zone A (who have the lowest travel cost) im-
plies that the maximum WTP for admission is $95  $10  $85. This is the intercept
(choke price) of the inverse market demand curve and is represented by point a in
Figure 5.
We can find other points on the market demand curve by assuming that the admis-
sion fee is increased or decreased and then predicting the visit rate from each zone at
the new price. Suppose, for example, the admission fee were raised from $10 to $20, so
that TC increased by $10 dollars. Because the individual demand curve can be written
as V  19  0.2TC (the inverse of TC  95  5V), a $10 increase in TC would 
reduce the number of visits per person by two. Thus, if the admission price were $20,
then the predicted number of visits would be 13 for zone A, 11 for zone B, 4 for zone C,
1 for zone D, and 1 for zone E. Because negative visits are not possible, we set the
number of visits per person for zone E to zero.The total number of visits demanded at
the new price is computed by multiplying the predicted visit rate for each zone by its
378

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
FIGURE 5
The Market Demand Curve for a Recreational Site Derived Using the
Zonal Travel Cost Method
population and summing these products (13  10,000  11  10,000  4  20,000  1 
10,000  330,000).Thus, at a price of $20 we would expect 330,000 visits.This is a third
point on the market demand curve.
With a sufficient number of points, the market demand curve can be sketched to any
desired level of accuracy.The market demand curve in Figure 5 is computed on the basis
of $10 price increments.The annual consumer surplus for the site is the area between the
curve and the current admission fee from zero visits to 440,000 visits. Assuming for sim-
plicity that the demand curve is linear between points a and b, and between points b and
c, we estimate the annual consumer surplus of the site equals $12.6 million,and the annual
(gross) benefit of the site equals $17.0 million.24 Due to the linear approximation and the
relatively few points on the demand curve, we slightly overestimate the benefits.
Limitations of the TCM
The usefulness of the TCM is limited in a number of ways. One limitation is that
the TCM provides an estimate of the WTP for the entire site rather than for spe-
cific features of a site. As we often wish to value changes in specific features of a site
(e.g., improvements in the hiking trails), the basic TCM does not provide the needed
information. However, if the residents of zones can choose from among a number of al-
ternative recreational sites with different attributes, then it may be possible to use the
hedonic travel cost method to find attribute prices.25 This method treats the total cost of
visiting a particular site from a particular zone as a function of both the distance from
90
60
70
80
50
40
30
20
10
0
Admission price ($)
Number of visitors per year (thousands)
d
b
a
c
e
f
100
200
400
300
500
379

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
that zone to the site and various attributes of the site. Its application raises a number of
issues beyond those previously discussed in the context of the basic hedonic pricing
model. Therefore, before attempting to apply the hedonic travel cost method, we rec-
ommend consulting other sources.26
Measuring the cost of a visit to the site may be difficult.27 Perhaps the most 
obvious problem is the estimation of the opportunity cost of travel time, which 
we have previously discussed.28 Even defining and measuring travel costs raises
some difficult issues. Some analysts include the time spent at the site, as well as the
time spent traveling to and from it, as components of total price. If people from dif-
ferent zones spend the same amount of time at the site, and if the opportunity cost
of their time is similar, then it does not matter whether the time spent at the site is
included or not—both the height of the demand curve and total price shift by the
same amount for each consumer so that estimates of consumer surplus remain
unchanged. If, however, people from different zones have different opportunity
costs for their time, or if they spend different amounts of time at the site, then in-
cluding the cost of time spent at the site would change the price facing persons from
different zones by different amounts and, thereby, change the slope of the estimated
demand curve.
Another problem arises because recreation often requires investment in fairly spe-
cialized equipment such as tents, sleeping bags, wet-weather gear, canoes, fishing rods,
and even vehicles. The marginal cost of using such equipment should be included in
total price. Yet, estimating the marginal cost of using capital goods is usually difficult.
As with time spent at the site, however, these costs can be reasonably ignored if they
are approximately constant for visitors from different zones.
Multiple-purpose trips also pose an analytical problem. People may visit the recre-
ational site in the morning and, for example, go river rafting nearby in the afternoon.
Sometimes analysts exclude visitors with multiple purposes from the data. Including
visitors with multiple purposes is usually desirable if costs can be appropriately appor-
tioned to the site being valued. If the apportionment is arbitrary, however, then it may
be better to exclude multiple users.
A similar problem results because the journey itself may have value.The previous
discussion assumes implicitly that the trip is undertaken exclusively to get to the recre-
ation site and travel has no benefit per se. If the journey itself is part of the reason for
the visit to the site, then the trip has multiple purposes.Therefore, part of the cost of the
trip should be attributed to the journey, not the visit to the recreation site. Not doing so
would lead to overestimation of site benefits.
A more fundamental problem is that the travel cost variable may be endogenous,
not exogenous. One neighborhood characteristic some people consider when making
their residential choices is its proximity to a recreational area. People who expect to
make many visits to a recreational area may select a particular neighborhood (zone)
partially on account of the low travel time from that neighborhood to the recreational
area. If so, the number of trips to a particular recreational area and the price of these
trips will be determined simultaneously. Under these circumstances equation (8) may
not be identified.29
Another econometric problem is that the dependent variable in the estimated
models is truncated. Truncation arises because the sample is drawn from only those
380

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
who visit the site, not from the larger population that includes people who never visit
the site. Application of ordinary least squares to the truncated sample would result in
biased coefficients. However, there are more complicated estimation methods that
overcome this problem.
There may also be an omitted variables problem. If the price of substitute recre-
ational sites varies across zones or if tastes for recreation varies across zones, then the
estimated coefficients may be biased if the model does not control for these variables.
As previously discussed, bias results when an excluded variable is correlated with an
included variable.
Finally, derivation of the market demand curve assumes that people respond to
changes in price regardless of its composition. Thus, for example, people respond to,
say, a $5 increase in the admission price in the same way as a $5 increase in travel cost.
This presumes that people have a good understanding of the impact of changes in the
prices of fuel, tires, and repairs on their marginal travel cost.
DEFENSIVE EXPENDITURES METHOD30
If you live in a smoggy city, then you will probably find that your windows often
need cleaning. If you hire someone to clean your windows periodically, the cost of
this action in response to the smog is termed a defensive expenditure—it is an
amount spent to mitigate or even eliminate the effect of a negative externality.
Suppose the city passes an ordinance that reduces the level of smog so that your
windows do not get as dirty. You would now have to spend less on window cleaners.
The reduction in defensive expenditures—the defensive expenditures avoided—has
been suggested as a measure of the benefits of the city ordinance. In other circum-
stances, the costs of a policy change might be measured by the increase in defensive
expenditures.
This method is an example of a broad class of production function methods. In
these methods, the level of a public good or externality (e.g., smog) and other goods
(window cleaners) are inputs to some production process (window cleaning). If the
level of the public good or externality changes, then the levels of the other inputs can
be changed in the opposite direction and still allow the quantity of output produced to
remain the same. For example, when the negative externality of smog is reduced, less
labor is required to produce the same number of clean windows.The change in expen-
ditures on the substitute input (window cleaners) is used as a measure of the benefit of
reduction of the public good or externality.
Suppose that the demand curve for clean windows is represented by the curve la-
beled D in Figure 6. Let S0 represent the marginal cost of cleaning windows initially,
that is, prior to the new ordinance. The initial equilibrium price and quantity of clean
windows are denoted by P0 and Q0, respectively.The effect of the new ordinance to re-
strict smog is to shift the marginal cost curve for clean windows down and to the right
from S0 to S1: because there is less smog, windows are easier to clean, so more windows
can be cleaned for the same price. At the new equilibrium, the price of clean windows
is P1 and the quantity of clean windows is Q1.The change in consumer surplus is repre-
sented by the area of the trapezoid P0abP1.
381

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
If households continued to consume the same quantity of clean windows after
the price shift as they did before the price shift, Q0, then the benefit of the ordinance
would be represented by the rectangle P0acP1. This would be the amount by which
consumers reduce their defensive expenditure. Consumers, however, would not
maintain their consumption levels at Q0, but would increase their consumption of
clean windows to level Q1. Individuals would spend area bQ1Q0c on the purchase of
Q1Q0 additional units of clean windows at a price of P1.The net change in spending
on window cleaning services equals the area of rectangle bQ1Q0c minus the area of
rectangle P0acP1. This net change in spending may be quite small. Indeed, if the de-
mand curve were a constant elasticity demand curve, with an elasticity equal to 1,
there would be no change in total expenditure on window cleaning services at all.Yet
there are obviously positive benefits to consumers. In general, the reduced spending
on defensive expenditures will underestimate the benefits of cleaner air or whatever
benefit is being estimated.31
There are at least four additional problems with the defensive expenditures
method. First, it assumes implicitly that individuals quickly adjust to the new equilib-
rium. It may actually take some time for individuals to adjust their purchases and re-
turn to equilibrium. Second, a defensive expenditure may not remedy the entire dam-
age so that reductions in this expenditure do not fully measure benefits. For example,
FIGURE 6
The Effect of an Ordinance Reducing Smog
on Expenditures for Window Cleaning
Q0
Q1
P1
P0
S0
a
b
c
D
S1
Quantity of clean windows
Price of clean windows ($)
382

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
expenditures on window cleaning do not “avoid” the whole problem of smog. Smog also
leads to dirtier shirts and to health problems. Defensive expenditures avoided on these
items should also be included. Exhibit 5 illustrates that there may be many categories of
defensive expenditures. It examines the costs of groundwater degradation and includes
five categories of costs, not just the cost of new purchases of bottled water.Third, the de-
fensive expenditures may have benefits other than remedying damage. For example, the
Charles W. Abdalla, Brian A. Roach, and
Donald J. Epp measured the costs of ground-
water degradation in the small Pennsylvania
borough of Perkasie (population 7,877) using
the defensive expenditures method. They  con-
ducted mail and telephone surveys to gather
information from a sample of residents on the
EXHIBIT 5
Category of Cost
Cost Based on Value 
of Leisure Time Equal 
to Minimum Wage ($)a
Cost Based on 
Value of Leisure Time 
Equal to Individual 
Wage Rate ($)a
Increased purchases of bottled water
11,100
11,100
New purchases of bottled water 
17,300
17,300
Home water treatment systems 
4,700
4,700
Hauling water 
12,500
34,000
Boiling water 
15,600
64,100
Total 
61,200
131,200
aCosts in original rounded to nearest hundred dollars.
actions they took in response to trichloroethyl-
ene (TCE) contamination of one of the bor-
ough’s wells between December 1987 and
September 1989.They estimated the total costs
to the community’s residents, including both
monetary costs and time expenditures, of each
of five defensive actions:
Note that the costs of hauling and boiling
water are very sensitive to the assumed oppor-
tunity cost of leisure. The researchers inter-
preted these total costs as a lower-bound esti-
mate of the true cost of the contamination to
residents because of the generally conservative
nature of the defensive expenditures method.
A specific factor suggesting that these de-
fensive expenditures represent a lower bound
is that only 43 percent of residents were
aware of the TCE contamination despite noti-
fication laws. Moreover, not all residents who
knew about the contamination took defensive
measures. Nevertheless, those who had more
information about the contamination, those
who perceived the cancer risk due to TCE to
be higher, and those who had children be-
tween 3 and 17 years old in the household
were generally more likely to take defensive
action than other residents. Among those who
took defensive action, having a child under 3
years of age seemed to be the most important
factor influencing the intensity of the defen-
sive actions taken.
Source: Adapted from Charles W. Abdalla, Brian A. Roach, and Donald J. Epp, “Valuing Environmental Quality
Changes Using Averting Expenditures: An Application to Groundwater Contamination,” Land Economics 68(2) 1992,
163–169.
383

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
cleaning necessitated by the smog may result in cleaner windows than one would oth-
erwise achieve. Fourth, not all of the defensive measures are purchased in markets.
Some people clean their own windows, and reductions in their opportunity costs
should also be included as benefits.
CONCLUSION
This chapter describes the major indirect market methods used in CBA for estimating
shadow prices. Some methods are not discussed because we believe that they are too
advanced for this book. Perhaps most notably, we have not discussed the use of ran-
dom utility models or probabilistic choice models to estimate demand, an approach
that is quite important in the transportation area.32 Also, we do not discuss recent
methods that estimate demand curves by combining survey data with data on observed
behavior.33 Nevertheless, the methods covered here provide a rich set of tools for prac-
tical valuation of impacts.
EXERCISES
1.
Child care services in a small midwestern city cost $30 per day per child. The high cost
of these services is one reason why very few mothers who are on welfare work; given
their low potential wages, virtually no welfare mothers are willing to pay these high
costs. To combat this problem, the city establishes a new program: in exchange for their
welfare benefits, a group of welfare recipients is required to provide child care for the
children of other welfare recipients who obtain private-sector employment. The welfare
mothers who use these child care services are required to pay a fee of $3 per day per
child. These services prove very popular; 1,000 welfare children receive them each day
and an additional 500 welfare children are on a waiting list. Do the mothers of the 1,000
children who receive services under the program value these services at $30,000 ($30 
1,000) a day, $3,000 a day ($3  1,000), or at a value that is greater than $3,000 but less
than $30,000? Explain.
2.
A worker, who is typical in all respects, works for a wage of $30,000 per year in a perfectly
safe occupation. Another typical worker does a job requiring exactly the same skills as the
first worker, but in a risky occupation with a known death probability of 1 in 1,000 per year,
and receives a wage of $36,000 per year. What value of a human life for workers with these
characteristics should a cost-benefit analyst use?
3.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) Happy Valley is the only available camp-
ing area in Rural County. It is owned by the county, which allows free access to campers.
Almost all visitors to Happy Valley come from the six towns in the county.
Rural County is considering leasing Happy Valley for logging, which would require that
it be closed to campers. Before approving the lease, the county executive would like to know
the magnitude of annual benefits that campers would forgo if Happy Valley were to be
closed to the public.
An analyst for the county has collected data for a travel cost study to estimate the benefits
of Happy Valley camping. On five randomly selected days, he recorded the license plates of
vehicles parked overnight in the Happy Valley lot. (Because the camping season is 100
days, he assumed that this would constitute a 5 percent sample.) With cooperation from the
state motor vehicle department, he was able to find the town of residence of the owner of
384

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
each vehicle. He also observed a sample of vehicles from which he estimated that each ve-
hicle carried 3.2 persons (1.6 adults), on average. The following table summarizes the data
he collected.
NOTES
1. When markets do exist but are imperfect due to
government intervention, it is necessary to make
adjustments to market prices in order to obtain
the appropriate shadow prices.
2. The net output method of valuing a life subtracts
the value of a person’s own consumption from
his or her forgone earnings. It measures the ben-
efit or cost the individual contributes to or im-
poses on the rest of society.The courts’ use of
this method to measure the loss to survivors of
someone’s death is somewhat arbitrary but per-
haps reasonable. However, it is clearly inappro-
priate to use this method in CBA to value a life
saved.Although a typical person’s net output will
be slightly positive over his or her entire lifetime,
it will be negative for a retired person.
3. Thomas C. Schelling, “The Life You Save May
Be Your Own,” in Robert Dorfman and
Town
Miles from 
Happy
Valley
Population
(thousands)
Number of 
Vehicles in 
Sample
Estimated 
Number of 
Visitors for 
Season
Visit Rate 
(visits per
1,000 
people)
A
22
50.1
146
3,893
77.7
B
34
34.9
85
2,267
65.0
C
48
15.6
22
587
37.6
D
56
89.9
180
4,800
53.4
E
88
98.3
73
1,947
19.8
F
94
60.4
25
666
11.0
Total
14,160
In order to translate the distance traveled into an estimate of the cost campers faced in using
Happy Valley, the analyst made the following assumptions. First, the average operating cost
of vehicles is $0.36 per mile. Second, the average speed on county highways is 50 miles per
hour.Third, the opportunity cost to adults of travel time is 40 percent of their wage rate; it is
zero for children. Fourth, adult campers have the average county wage rate of $9.25 per hour.
The analyst has asked you to help him use this information to estimate the annual bene-
fits accruing to Happy Valley campers. Specifically, assist with the following tasks.
a.
Using the preceding information, calculate the travel cost of a vehicle visit (TC) from
each of the towns.
b.
For the six observations, regress visit rate (VR) on TC and a constant. If you do not
have regression software available, plot the points and fit a line by sight. Find the slope
of the fitted line.
c.
You know that with the current free admission the number of camping visits 
demanded is 14,160. Find additional points on the demand curve by predicting the 
reduction in the number of campers from each town as price is increased by $5 incre-
ments until demand falls to zero.This is done in three steps at each price: first, use the
coefficient of TC from the regression to predict a new VR for each town. Second, mul-
tiply the predicted VR of each town by its population to get a predicted number of visi-
tors.Third, sum the visitors from each town to get the total number of predicted visits.
d.
Estimate the area under the demand curve as the annual benefits to campers.
385

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
Nancy S. Dorfman, eds., Economics of the
Environment: Selected Readings, 3rd ed. (New
York:W.W. Norton, 1993), pp. 388–408 at p. 402.
4. Other examples of risk-reducing goods include
detectors for smoke and carbon monoxide, fire
extinguishers, and bicycle helmets.
5. See, for example,W. Kip Viscusi,“Prospective
Reference Theory:Toward an Explanation of the
Paradoxes,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2(3)
1989, 234–264.
6. Jobs in finance, insurance, real estate, services, re-
tail and government all have fatality rates below
3 in 100,000 according to the U.S. Department of
Labor, Bureau of Statistics, Census of Fatal
Occupational Injuries, 2002.
7. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (New York:
Modern Press, 1776 reprinted 1937), p. 12.
8. See, for example,Anthony E. Boardman, Ruth
Freedman, and Catherine Eckel,“The Price of
Government Ownership:A Study of the Domtar
Takeover,” Journal of Public Economics 31(3)
1986, 269–285; John C. Ries,“Windfall Profits
and Vertical Relationships:Who Gained in the
Japanese Auto Industry from VERs?” Journal of
Industrial Economics 61(3) 1993, 259–276; Paul
H. Malatesta and Rex Thompson,“Government
Regulation and Structural Change in the
Corporate Acquisitions Market:The Impact of
the Williams Act,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 28(3) 1993, 363–379;
Anthony Boardman, Ilan Vertinsky, and Diana
Whistler,“Using Information Diffusion Models
to Estimate the Impacts of Regulatory Events on
Publicly Traded Firms,” Journal of Public
Economics 63(2) 1997, 283–300.
9. See Sherwin Rosen,“Hedonic Prices and
Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition,” Journal of Political Economy
82(1) 1974, 34–55.
10. The basic idea behind hedonic regression was
introduced in Kelvin L. Lancaster,“A New
Approach to Consumer Theory,” Journal of
Political Economy 74(1) 1966, 132–157.
11. In general, the hedonic price function can be
written: P  p(C1,C2, . . . , Ck, N1, . . . , Nm),
where C (i  1, . . . , k) denote k attributes of
the house and Nj (j  1, . . . , m) denote m
neighborhood characteristics.
12. Formally, rv =
0P
0VIEW.
13. In order to estimate the hedonic prices, analysts
usually take the natural logarithms, ln, of both
sides of equation (3) to obtain the hedonic re-
gression model: lnP  ln0  1ln(CBD) 
C2ln(SIZE)  3ln(VIEW)  4ln(NBHD).
The parameters of this model, which is linear in
logarithms, may be estimated by ordinary least
squares.
14. The hedonic price of Ci may be a function of all of
the variables in the hedonic price function. Given
the general hedonic price function presented in
note 11, P/Ci  f(C1, . . . , Ck, N1, . . . , Nm).
15. Formally,
16. The functional form of this model may be linear,
multiplicative, or have some other form.
17. These functions indicate households’ WTP, hold-
ing household characteristics constant.
18. Many researchers estimate linear models of the
following form:
If the dependent variable is the hourly wage 
rate, fatality risk is measured as the number 
of deaths per 10,000 workers and 1  0.3, then
researchers estimate the VSL  0.3  2,000
hours/yr  10,000  6 million. However, linear
hedonic models usually have identification 
problems as discussed below.
19. The seminal work on this topic, which actually
preceded the formal development of the hedonic
pricing method, is Ronald G. Ridker and John A.
Henning,“The Determinants of Residential
Property Values with Special Reference to Air
Pollution,” Review of Economics and Statistics
49(2) 1967, 246–257. For a review of studies that
have attempted to use the hedonic method to esti-
mate WTP for reductions in particulate matter in
air, see V. Kerry Smith and Ju-Chin Huang,“Can
Markets Value Air Quality? A Meta-Analysis of
Hedonic Property Value Models,” Journal of
Political Economy 103(1) 1995, 209–227.
20. W. P. Jennings and A. Kinderman,“The Value of
a Life: New Evidence of the Relationship be-
+ b3job tenure + b4education + b5age + P
wage rate = b0 + b1fatality risk + b2injury risk
= b3
P
VIEW
= b3b0CBDb1SIZEb2VIEWb3-1NBHDb4eP
rv =
0P
0VIEW
386

Valuing Impacts from Observed Behavior: Indirect Market Methods
tween Changes in Occupational Fatalities and
Wages of Hourly Workers, 1992–1999,” The
Journal of Risk and Insurance 70(3) 2003, 549–561.
21. For a discussion concerning identification and es-
timation of hedonic models, see Ivar Ekeland,
James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim,
“Identification and Estimation of Hedonic
Models,” Journal of Political Economy 112(1)
2004, S60–S109.
22. This method is often referred to as the Clawson
method, or the Knetsch-Clawson method.
However, it is now attributed to Harold
Hotelling; see Harold Hotelling,“Letter,” An
Economic Study of the Monetary Evaluation of
Recreation in the National Parks (Washington,
D.C.: National Park Service, 1949).
23. Note that computing the area of the triangle using
the formula ($95–$65)(6)>2  $90 provides a
slight overestimate of the consumer surplus, while
using the formula ($90–$65)(6)>2  $75 provides
the correct answer. In effect, if we treat the inter-
cept as $90 instead of $95, we obtain the correct
answer.The problem arises because the number
of visits is a discrete variable, while the equation
for the inverse demand function is continuous.
24. Area abc  $3.6 million, area dbfe  $4.8 million,
area bcf  $4.2 million.
25. Gardner Brown Jr. and Robert Mendelsohn,
“The Hedonic Travel Cost Model,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 66(3) 1984, 427–433.
26. For more detail, see Nancy G. Bockstael,
Kenneth E. McConnell, and Ivar Strand,
“Recreation,” in J. B. Braden and C. D. Kolstad,
eds., Measuring the Demand for Environmental
Quality (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991), 227–270;
and V. Kerry Smith and Yoshiaki Kaoru, “The
Hedonic Travel Cost Model: A View From the
Trenches,” Land Economics 63(2) 1987, 179–192.
27. Alan Randall,“A Difficulty with the Travel Cost
Method,” Land Economics 70(1) 1994, 88–96.
28. See also John R. McKean, Donn M. Johnson, and
Richard G.Walsh,“Valuing Time in Travel Cost
Demand Analysis:An Empirical Investigation,”
Land Economics 71(1) 1995, 96–105.
29. Also, the travel cost variable may not be inde-
pendent of the error term, thereby leading to 
ordinary least squares estimates that are biased
and inconsistent.
30. This method is also referred to as the avoided
cost method. For a review of the use of this
method to measure groundwater values, see
Charles Abdalla,“Groundwater Values from
Avoidance Cost Studies: Implications for Policy
and Future Research,” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 76(5) 1994, 1062–1067.
31. The accuracy of using changes in defensive ex-
penditures on a substitute to measure the bene-
fits of changes in the levels of externalities or
public goods depends on how these goods enter
the individual’s utility function and on the rela-
tionship between these goods and the market for
the substitute. For more discussion of this issue,
see Paul N. Courant and Richard Porter,
“Averting Expenditure and the Cost of
Pollution,” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 8(4) 1981, 321–329.Also see
Winston Harrington and Paul Portney,“Valuing
the Benefits of Health and Safety Regulation,”
Journal of Urban Economics 22(1) 1987, 101–112.
32. These models are also referred to as qualitative
response models. See, for example, G. S.
Maddala, Limited-Dependent and Qualitative
Variables in Econometrics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983); and Kenneth
Train, Qualitative Choice Analysis (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1986).
33. See, for example, David A. Hensher and Mark
Bradley,“Using Stated Preference Response
Data to Enrich Revealed Preference Data,”
Marketing Letters 4(2) 1993, 139–152.
387

388

Shadow Prices from 
Secondary Sources1
Form Chapter 16 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
389

Shadow Prices from 
Secondary Sources1
P
olicy analysts typically face time pressure and resource constraints.They naturally
wish to do cost-benefit analysis as efficiently as possible and without getting into
estimation issues beyond their competence.Anything that legitimately lowers the
cost of doing CBA increases the likelihood that any particular CBA will be worth
doing—in effect, it increases the chance that a CBA of doing a CBA will be positive.
In order to evaluate existing or proposed policies and projects, analysts require
credible measures of the social values of the impacts.Where these impacts occur in ef-
ficient markets, the value of these impacts can be estimated from changes in social sur-
plus. Estimating social surplus requires knowledge of the appropriate demand and sup-
ply curves. When knowledge of these curves is not readily available, there are
applicable methods to value impacts. Most of these methods, however, are expensive
and time consuming. What else could the analyst do? Two situations are worth dis-
cussing in more depth.
In the first situation, the analyst believes that it is necessary to estimate the de-
mand curve in order to measure consumer surplus. This is relatively easy if we know
one point on the demand curve and we have an estimate of its elasticity or slope at that
point. Fortunately, economists have estimated price elasticities of demand, cross-
elasticities, and income elasticities for a range of specific goods. Many elasticities have
been summarized in survey articles.2 Because these elasticities are based on the re-
sponses of people to similar price changes in the past, they provide an empirically
grounded basis for predicting the responses to proposed price changes. For example,
how consumers responded to a price increase for water in New Mexico can be reason-
ably used to estimate how they will respond to a similar price increase in Arizona. In
addition to own-price elasticities, estimates of cross-price elasticities, which identify
changes in the demand for a good that are likely to result from changes in the prices of
other goods, though less often available, are frequently useful. For example, are trans-
portation and various forms of communications (such as telecommuting and telecon-
ferencing) complements or substitutes?3 These cross-elasticities are important to
transport planners and policy analysts who are estimating the costs and benefits of trans-
port capital investments, assessing expected consumers’ responses to price changes, or
forecasting changes in demand for transportation. Existing estimates of income elastic-
ities can also be useful, especially when policies have strong distributional effects.
Elasticity estimates are scattered widely throughout the academic literature, usually in
the topic-specific journals. Therefore, analysts often garner them from the relevant
390

economic and policy journals on an ongoing basis, and we will not discuss them further
here.
In the second situation, analysts need to only predict the project’s impacts and
multiply them by the appropriate market prices or shadow prices. Many CBAs in-
volve some impacts that can be valued at current market prices and other impacts
that can be valued using shadow prices. Transportation and infrastructure project
analyses, for example, often use current market prices for construction resources
(materials, land, labor, and equipment) and ongoing operational costs (labor and
maintenance materials), but require shadow prices for the value of lives saved, in-
juries avoided, crashes avoided, time saved, air quality changes, and noise level
changes, to name only some. In order to obtain a shadow price, analysts might con-
duct their own valuation study. However, employing any of these methods to con-
duct a study is generally time consuming and resource intensive. The most straight-
forward, least-cost approach would be to use a previously estimated shadow price.
Such estimates can be “plugged into” a cost-benefit analysis. Consequently, we refer
to such estimates as plug-ins. More formally, using plug-ins in a CBA is known as
benefit transfer or sometimes information transfer.
The main purpose of this chapter is to survey the relevant literature and provide a
“best estimate” for a number of frequently used shadow prices. It focuses on impacts
that occur in many CBAs: the value of a statistical life, the cost of various kinds of
injuries (including those resulting from road crashes), the cost of crime, and the value
of time.4 We also review per-unit values of recreational activities, the environment, and
water and air pollution. Finally, we briefly discuss empirical estimates of the marginal
excess tax burden. Many of these plug-ins are particularly useful in the evaluation of
transportation projects, such as construction of new roads, better road lighting, altered
speed limits, or new vehicle safety features. They are also applicable in a host of other
areas including criminal justice, the environment, health, education, and training.
Most of the plug-ins discussed in this chapter are estimates of marginal values. For
example, we provide estimates of the marginal social cost of one ton of particulate mat-
ter pollution or the value of one additional hour saved. The marginal value is usually
the most useful value for policy purposes. However, some plug-ins are more accurately
thought of as average values. For example, the value of a life saved is the average value
in a population consisting of many people with different ages, incomes, and other char-
acteristics.
In practice, marginal values are not likely to remain constant as output levels
change. For example, the value of time saved is likely to increase as the time stuck in
traffic increases. Similarly, the marginal cost of pollution is likely to increase with the
level of pollution.When marginal costs are increasing or decreasing,it would be incorrect
to estimate total costs by multiplying the output level by our plug-in estimate of the
marginal cost.
The plug-ins we discuss are summarized in tables throughout this chapter. In order
to facilitate comparability and for ease of use, plug-in values are usually expressed in
2008 U.S. dollars.The units of each impact are usually in “dollars per person” or in “dol-
lars per event.” Other values are reported in terms of units produced, such as “per ton.”
We also report the relevant time unit, such as “per day” or “per year.”
Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
391

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Different people have different opportunities and different preferences.
Consequently, our plug-in values should ideally be adjusted to take account of the
preferences and characteristics of the affected population in a particular CBA. After
discussing the plug-ins, we briefly address some of the information transfer issues re-
lated to adjusting plug-ins to different situations or to new CBAs.
During the past two decades there have been an increasing number of meta-analyses.
These studies summarize the existing evidence about a particular topic, though they do
not necessarily attempt to determine a best estimate. Often, their primary purpose is to
explain why different studies obtain different estimates.5 For example, do certain esti-
mation techniques provide larger estimated values than other estimation techniques or
are valuations larger for some populations than for others? Answers to such questions
assist benefit transfer.The usual approach in a meta-analysis is to estimate the statistical
relationship between the plug-in estimate from each study and a number of characteristics
of that study, such as the methodology employed (e.g., contingent valuation study), data
source, and characteristics of the population (e.g., income).
THE VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE
Researchers have used several techniques to estimate the value of a statistical life(VSL).
Market-based techniques observe the “price”people are willing to pay (or accept) in order
to decrease (increase) the risk of a fatality in markets that embody this risk. Contingent
valuation (CV) methods elicit these amounts with hypothetical survey questions.The most
widely accepted market-based techniques are those that examine how much of a wage
premium people working in risky jobs must be given to compensate them for the addi-
tional fatality risk. Our purpose here is not to revisit methodological issues, but to summa-
rize the empirical estimates of the VSL.
The range in the VSL varies considerably across studies, sometimes between $0
and $30 million. Even when the outliers are discarded, the range is quite large.A num-
ber of important reviews were published around 1990.6 Most of the reliable estimates
of the VSL at that time ranged between $1.4 million and $4 million in 1990 dollars.
More recent estimates have been trending higher, even after adjusting for inflation.
Here we briefly review four relatively recent meta-analyses, one by Ted Miller, a sec-
ond by Janusz Mrozek and Laura Taylor, a third by W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy, and
a fourth by Ikuho Kocki, Bryan Hubbell, and Randal Kramer.7
The Miller Analysis of VSL Estimates
Ted Miller undertook a meta-analysis of 68 international studies of the VSL. He notes
that studies that do not use occupational-specific mortality risk or that do not use vari-
ables to control for occupational differences tend to overestimate the VSL. Studies
that use all-mortality risk (from employment and all other sources) tend to underesti-
mate the value of statistical life. Estimates of the VSL based on wage-risk studies and
those based on CV studies produce similar estimates to each another but are signifi-
cantly higher than those based on consumer behavior because consumers often under-
perceive the risks to which they are exposed. Miller estimates that the VSL in the
United States is $4.88 million in 2008 U.S. dollars, with a range of $4.4 to $6.1 million.
392

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
The Mrozek and Taylor Analysis of VSL Estimates
Janusz Mrozek and Laura Taylor undertook a meta-analysis of 33 international VSL
studies. The mean VLS was roughly $7.7 million in 2008 U.S. dollars. The explanatory
variables in their regression analyses include study design characteristics (model equa-
tion specifications, control of other risk factors), occupation (dummy variables for oc-
cupational attributes), and sample characteristics (blue-collar workers, sex, unionized
environment, and actual versus perceived risk levels). Also included are variables that
reflected the sources of the wage and risk data. Basic regression results for their full
dataset produce a mean VSL of $7.2 million U.S. dollars.
However, Mrozek and Taylor are suspicious of VSL estimates from labor market
studies that propose values in excess of $2.6 million to $3.8 million because they think
that previous research has not controlled well for unobservable factors that occur at the
industry level.To address this problem, Mrozek and Taylor include seven broad industry
classification dummy variables in a regression analysis in addition to the usual labor mar-
ket variables. These industry classification variables capture the effect of interindustry
wage differentials separately from the effect of occupational risks. For instance, a
secretary working for an oil firm in an urban environment may earn a higher wage
than a secretary in the same environment working for a nonprofit organization, even
though their job risk profiles would be very similar. Imposing this adjustment on studies
that did not do so originally yielded a predicted VSL of $3.3 million in 2008 U.S. dollars
for the “average worker.”
The Viscusi and Aldy Analysis of VSL Estimates
In their meta-analysis, W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy examine 49 wage-risk studies
published over the past 30 years. More than half of the studies were specific to the U.S.
labor market, and the remaining studies were international. Roughly half of the U.S.
labor market studies obtained estimates of the VSL that range between $6.22 million
and $14.92 million (2008 U.S. dollars). The median value of these studies is near $8.7
million.8 Viscusi and Aldy have most confidence in studies with estimates from $6.6
million to $7.8 million dollars.
Viscusi and Aldy conduct a number of meta-analysis regressions, replicating the
models used in previous meta-analyses.Their explanatory variables reflect whether the
workplace was unionized, the level of education, income, the mean risk, the type of
risk, and the type of study. They omit studies that did not contain an income measure.
Viscusi and Aldy use their regressions analyses to predict values of the VSL for each
study. The mean predicted VSL for the U.S. population ranges between $6.8 million
and $9.4 million. They also note that for most of the regression models the upper
bound of the 95 percent confidence interval is roughly two times greater than the lower
bound of the 95 percent confidence interval, or more.
The Kochi, Hubbell, and Kramer Analysis of VSL Estimates
Ikuho Kochi, Bryan Hubbell, and Randall Kramer conducted a recent meta-analysis on
a sample of 31 hedonic wage-risk studies and 14 contingent valuation studies that were
published between 1990 and 2002. These studies were carefully selected to minimize
bias in computing the mean VSL—for example, they only include studies conducted in
393

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
high-income countries, and they excluded contingent valuation studies with samples of
under 100 and hedonic wage-risk studies that were based entirely on individuals who
worked in extremely risky jobs, such as policemen, who may have risk preferences that
are very unrepresentative of the general population. In addition, in computing the mean
VSL, they give greater weight to VSL estimates with greater levels of statistical signifi-
cance than to studies with smaller levels of statistical significance.Although doing this is
commonplace in meta-analysis, it apparently had not been done previously in meta-
analyses of VSL estimates.
After making this adjustment, Kochi, Hubbell, and Kramer compute a mean VSL
of $6.8 million in 2008 U.S. dollars with a standard deviation of $3.0 million.
Interestingly, they find that there is a considerable difference between estimates pro-
duced by hedonic wage-risk studies and those resulting from contingent valuation
studies, with the former having a mean value of $12.0 million and the latter having a
mean value of $3.5 million.
Conclusion on the VSL
These four comparatively recent analyses produce different VSL estimates. Mrozek and
Taylor are lowest at $3.4 million; Miller is next with a best point estimate of $4.9 million
with a range between $4.4 million and $6.1 million; Kochi, Hubbell, and Kramer are
next at $6.8 million; and Viscusi and Aldy are highest with a mean estimated VSL for the
U.S. population of between $6.8 million and $9.4 million.9 Many authors suggest figures
at the lower end of this range for policy purposes, partially due to the methodological
problems discussed. In our opinion, the best point estimate of the VSL for policy pur-
poses in the United States is currently $5 million, with sensitivity analysis at around $3
million and $7 million, as shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1
The Value of a Statistical Life, Injury Costs, and Crash Costs (in 2008 U.S. dollars)
Plug-In Category (Impact)
Shadow Price Value
Comments
Value of a Statistical 
Life (VSL)
Best point estimate $5 million 
(sensitivity analysis at $2.4 
million to $7.2 million per 
life saved)
Based on Miller (2000), Mrozek and
Taylor (2002),Viscusi and Aldy (2003),
and Kochi, Hubbell and Kramer
(2006). Should adjust for risk level.
Value of a 
Life-Year (VLY)
$234,100 per person per year
Based on a VSL of $5 million,
40 year life expectancy, and a 
discount rate of 3.5%.
Monetary Injury Costs
1. Eventually fatal
2. Hospitalized (nonfatal)
3. Nonhospitalized (nonfatal)
4. Average cost of an injury
A. Motor vehicle injury
B. Falls
1. $623,441 per injured person
2. $67,298 per injured person
3. $1,015 per injured person
4. $5,460 per injured person.
A. $17,777 per injured person
B. $5,968 per injured person
Based on Rice, MacKenzie, and
Associates (1989). Includes monetary
costs only, not pain and suffering.
(Continued)
394

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
TABLE 1
(Continued )
Plug-In Category (Impact)
Shadow Price Value
Comments
C. Firearm injuries
D. Poisonings
E. Fire injuries and burns
F. Drownings and near drownings
G. Other
C. $105,773 per injured person
D. $9,900 per injured person
E. $5,080 per injured person
F. $127,740 per injured person
G. $2,286 per injured person
Cost of Work-Related
Occupational Injuries
A. Fatal injury
A. $4.1 million per injured 
worker
Based on Miller and Galbraith (1995).
Includes quality-of-life losses.
B. Nonfatal injury with 
compensable lost work
B. $2,640 per injured worker
C. Nonfatal injury with worker
non-compensable lost work
C. $1,093 per injured  worker
D. Nonfatal injury, no lost work
D. $21,040 per injured worker
E. Average injury cost
E. $21,040 per injured worker
F. Average motor vehicle work-
related injury cost
F. $123,750 per injured worker
Cost of Work-Related Injuries
Value of one year of work 
impairment due to injury
$160,204 to $248,946 per year
Based on Dillingham, Miller,
and Levy (1996).
Social Cost of Motor Vehicle
Crash Injuries
1. Spinal cord
1. $3.5 M per victim 
($1.2M– $5.3M for 
AIS 3–5)
Based on Zaloshnja, Miller,
Romano, and Spicer (2004).All
means are arithmetic and do not 
reflect the distribution of injury
severity within each body region.
M  million.
2. Brain
2. $1.4M per victim
($0.15M–$4.2M for 
AIS 1–5)
3. Lower extremity
3. $0.55M per victim
($0.01M–$1.32M for 
AIS 1–5)
4. Upper extremity
4. $0.18M per victim
($0.01M–$0.36M for AIS 1–3)
5. Trunk/abdomen
5. $0.34M per victim
($0.01M–$0.73M for AIS 1–5)
6. Other face, head, or neck
6. $0.46M per victim
($0.01M–$1.3M for AIS 1–4)
7. Minor external
7. $0.01M per victim
8. Burn
8. $0.64M per victim
($0.08M–$1.07M for 
AIS 1–5)
Motor Vehicle Accident Costs
1. PDO (Property 
damage only)
1. $3,150 per vehicle
Based on Blincoe et al. (2002).
These figures reflect the per-person
costs related to motor vehicle acci-
dents of varying severity.AIS 
Abbreviated Injury Scale.
2. AIS 1
2. $18,670 per injured person
3. AIS 2
3. $196,350 per injured person
4. AIS 3
4. $390,576 per injured person
5. AIS 4
5. $909,404 per injured person
6. AIS 5
6. $2,987,090 per injured person
7. AIS 6 (Fatal)
7. $4,184,651 per fatality
395

THE VALUE OF A LIFE-YEAR
The value of a life-year (VLY) is the constant annual amount, that, taken over a per-
son’s remaining life span, has a discounted value equal to his or her VSL.We can think
about the average VSL as the discounted value of the remaining life-years of the aver-
age member of society.Thus, assuming the VLY is constant, it can be computed from an
estimate of the average VSL, denoted 
:
(1)
where A(T  a, r) is the annuity factor based on the expected number of remaining
years of life (T  a) and the appropriate discount rate (r).Thus, using an average VSL
of $5 million (as indicated in Table 1), a discount rate of 3.5 percent, and a life
expectancy of 40 years implies the VLY equals $234,136. This estimate is higher than
many other estimates. For example, Eduard Zaloshnja, Ted Miller, Eduardo Romano,
and Rebecca Spicer suggest the VLY equals $114,000 based on a VSL of $3.7 million.10
Peter Abelson suggests the VLY for use by public agencies in Australia should be
$95,640 in 2008 U.S. dollars.11
Given the VLY, one can now compute the VSL for a person aged a as the dis-
counted sum of the value of the remaining life-years; specifically:
(2)
where a is current age, T is the expected age at death and T  a is life expectancy.
According to this model, the VSL declines with age.
The above formulation implies that the VLY is constant and the VSL declines with
age. There is considerable discussion in the literature about whether the VLY (or the
VSL) changes with age. One might expect that the VLY increases with age: if you ex-
pect you have only a few more years to live, then life-years are becoming scarcer and
you might be willing to pay more for an additional life-year than when you were
younger. The Science Advisory Board of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
points out that economic theory is inconclusive about the issue, and recent reviews of
the empirical literature differ considerably in their findings.12
A quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) weights the VLY by the quality of health dur-
ing that year:
(3)
where the weight (wt) equals 1 in perfect health, 0 in death, and is something else inbe-
tween.13 The purpose of a QALY is to account for the fact that not all years are lived
with the same vigor and enthusiasm. Some years are spent in better health than others.
For many ill people the weights decline over time as their condition becomes more
severe. In order to compare one intervention or policy with another, analysts compute
the discounted sum of future expected QALYs under each alternative, that is, VLY in
equation (2) is replaced with QALYt.
QALYt = wtVLY
VSL(a) = a
T-a
t=0
VLY
(1 + r)t
VLY =
VSL
N
A(T - a, r)
VSN L
Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
396

THE COST OF CRASHES AND THE COST OF INJURIES
Table 1 also summarizes five sets of estimates of the cost of injuries or the cost of
crashes in the United States, again standardized to 2008 dollars.The first set is based on
a major report prepared for Congress by Dorothy Rice, Ellen MacKenzie, and
Associates.14 It provides detailed estimates of the monetary costs of injuries from dif-
ferent causes and for three levels of severity. The second set, produced by Ted Miller
and Maury Galbraith, focuses on the cost of occupational injuries.15 The third set is
based on a wage-risk study by Alan Dillingham, Ted Miller, and David Levy that esti-
mates the value of an impaired work year.16 The fourth set, produced by Eduard
Zaloshnja, Ted Miller, Eduardo Romano, and Rebecca Spicer, focuses on motor vehi-
cle crash injuries.17 The fifth set is based on a report by Lawrence Blincoe et al. pre-
pared for the National Highway Safety Administration.18 It provides unit cost esti-
mates for seven categories of motor vehicle crashes with varying levels of personal
injury to occupants.
For relatively minor crashes, the cost of a motor vehicle crash per victim is higher
than the cost of a personal injury because motor vehicle crashes typically result in ad-
ditional costs, particularly property damage (vehicle) costs. However, for relatively se-
vere crashes, the cost of pain and suffering from injury is the largest component of
crash costs, often greater than half the total.
The Rice, McKenzie, and Associates’ Estimates of the Cost of Injuries
Dorothy Rice, Ellen MacKenzie, and their associates focus on the direct monetary cost
of injuries. Their estimates incorporate medical and rehabilitation costs and forgone
earnings (including an imputed value for household labor). Because these estimates
focus on monetary costs, they do not include pain and suffering and other dimensions
of unhappiness that people would pay to avoid. Also, these estimates do not include
property damage losses and other related social costs, such as court costs. Thus, the
study leads to very conservative estimates of the social cost of injuries. However, the
methodology and estimates are still widely cited.
The Miller and Galbraith Estimates of the Cost of Occupational Injuries
Ted Miller and Maury Galbraith estimate the cost of occupational injuries in the
United States using a methodology similar to that of Rice, MacKenzie, and Associates.
However, they include a measure of the willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid the disutility
associated with injury. Using incidences of injuries reported in the United States, pre-
dominantly through state worker’s compensation systems, the authors use a top-down
national accounting framework to estimate the cost of injury for all injuries, for fatal
injuries, and for three subclasses of nonfatal injuries (compensable lost work, noncom-
pensable lost work, and nonlost work). As the authors acknowledge, using a top-down
accounting method is less accurate than using incidence-based bottom-up estimation
techniques.
The estimated costs include the costs of medical and emergency services (hospital/
home care, physician services, rehabilitation services, ancillary items, police, fire/
paramedic response, and emergency transportation), wage and household work (lost
Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
397

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
wages, household work, and fringe benefits), administrative and legal costs (investigation,
insurance processing, record keeping, limited litigation costs), workplace disruption
(overtime pay, loss of specialized skills, recruitment and training associated with long-
term disability) and quality of life (reduced quality of life to workers and their families
who bear the nonmonetary losses associated with injury). Quality-of-life losses ac-
count for 43 percent of workplace injury costs, and the average cost per occupational
injury is $21,040 (2008 U.S. dollars), but note the large range between specific injury
categories as shown in Table 1.19
The Dillingham, Miller, and Levy Estimates of the Cost of Injuries
One problem with estimating the cost of injuries is that injuries come in a wide range
of severities, affect different parts of the body, and cause differe levels of pain and dis-
ability.Alan Dillingham,Ted Miller, and David Levy attempted to measure the cost of
injuries through a wage-risk study, looking at the implied WTP in order to avoid one
year of impairment to an individual’s work life.
They estimate that individuals are willing to pay around $160,200 to $249,000 per
year to avoid one year of impairment. However, there is no specific level of severity to
which to apply this measure. One important assumption is that a work-life shortened
by a fatal injury is equivalent to one that is shortened by a nonfatal but permanent
total disability. A specific advantage of their estimates is that they are transferable to
non-work-related injuries, allowing for the estimation of the WTP for safety improve-
ments in other markets, such as recreational activities.
The Zaloshnja, Miller, Romano, and Spicer Estimates 
of the Cost of Motor Vehicle Crash Injuries
Eduard Zaloshnja,Ted Miller, Eduardo Romano, and Rebecca Spicer estimate the social
cost of motor vehicle crash injuries for the year 2000, updating the estimates made by
Miller in 1993.20 The main purpose of this study is to provide a relatively comprehensive
estimate of the social cost of damage to a large spectrum of body parts injured in motor
vehicle crashes, such as the spinal cord or the brain.These cost estimates include medical
and emergency services, household and workplace productivity losses, insurance and
legal costs, property damage, and quality-of-life losses. Monetary costs are supplemented
by the addition of the WTP to avoid pain and suffering for each type of injury, based on
a VSL of $3.7 million (2008 U.S. dollars) and a VLY of $114,000.
Injuries to each body part are also broken down by level of severity, based on the
most severe (“maximum”) injury sustained by a person according to the Abbreviated
Injury Scale (AIS), sometimes referred to as the Maximum Abbreviated Injury Scale
(MAIS). This scale ranges from one (minor) to six (fatal); see Table 2.21 Following
Miller, the pain and suffering or the lost quality of life for an injury of a particular level
of severity is expressed as a fraction of the WTP to avoid a fatal injury, less the lost
human capital.22 The particular fractions proposed by Miller for each level of severity
are also shown in Table 2. This approach is not ideal because the fractions are some-
what arbitrary, but we are not aware of a better approach, and it has been adopted by
many regulatory bodies.23
398

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Table 1 presents the average cost of a motor vehicle crash injury to the 
spinal cord, brain, lower extremities, upper extremities, trunk/abdomen, and other
head/face/neck, as well as minor external injuries, burns, and fatal injuries. It also re-
ports in parentheses a range for each body part according to level of severity. For ex-
ample, the average cost of a motor crash that causes a brain injury is $1.44 million, but
it ranges from $148,800 for a brain injury of AIS 1 to $4.2 million for one of AIS 5.
Injury costs range from approximately $12,000 for a minor injury to a leg or foot to
$5.3 million to a critical injury (AIS 5) to the spinal cord. Note that the cost of the lat-
ter injury slightly exceeds the VSL.
The Blincoe and Colleagues Estimates of the Cost 
of Motor Vehicle Crashes
Lawrence Blincoe and his colleagues provide fully allocated costs for motor vehicle
crashes. These comprehensive estimates include property damage, the costs of emer-
gency and medical services, productivity losses, pain and suffering, and travel time
delay to other motorists. Blincoe and his colleagues present estimates of the cost of a
TABLE 2
AIS Classification System, Including Equivalent Proportion of VSL
AIS Code
Injury 
Severity
Fraction 
of VSL
Description of 
Common Injury
PDO
None
0.00
No injury
AIS 1
Minor
0.0020
Superficial abrasion or laceration of
skin, sprain, first-degree burn, head
trauma with headache or dizziness 
but no other symptoms
AIS 2
Moderate
0.0155
Significant abrasion or laceration of
skin, concussion with less than 15 min-
utes of lost consciousness, closed frac-
ture with or without dislocation, digit
crush/amputation
AIS 3
Serious
0.0575
Major nerve injury, multiple rib frac-
ture without chest collapse, bruise of
internal organ, hand/arm or foot
crush/amputation
AIS 4
Severe
0.1875
Spleen rupture, leg crush/amputation,
concussion with loss of consciousness
15 minutes to 24 hours, chest wall 
perforation
AIS 5
Critical
0.7625
Permanent spinal cord injury,
extensive burns (second or third 
degree), concussion with severe 
neurological signs
AIS 6
Fatal
1
Injuries which, if not immediately
fatal, ultimately result in death
Source: Adapted from Stephan Hoffer, Frank Berardino, Jack Smith, and Stuart Rubin, Economic Values
for Evaluation of FAA Investment and Regulatory Decisions, US DOT FAA-APO-98-8, Federal Aviation
Administration, June 1998.
399

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
crash based on the maximum AIS to an injured person. At the lowest level (property
damage only, PDO), there is no personal injury, but there is property damage, insur-
ance administrative costs, and police costs.The figures that are shown in Table 1 are per
(maximally) injured person, except for PDO (property damage only) crashes, which
are per vehicle.
Transportation economists often distinguish between direct costs, indirect costs,
and intangible costs. Direct costs include emergency treatment, initial medical costs
(including physician, hospital, prescription costs, and ancillary costs, such as adminis-
tration costs of processing medical payments to providers), rehabilitation costs, long-
term care costs (if required), legal costs, and employer/workplace costs. Other direct
costs are property damage to vehicles, cargo, and personal property. Indirect costs in-
clude productivity losses due to temporary and permanent disability and decreases in
household productivity. Intangible costs relate to pain and suffering or lost quality of life.
The individual components of crash costs for each level of severity appear in Table 3.
These components may be applicable to other settings where injuries occur at similar
severity levels.
Conclusion on the Cost of Injuries
The Rice, MacKenzie, and Associates study provides estimates of the monetary costs
of a wide range of injuries. However, these estimates are not particularly useful as
measures of social costs, especially for injuries that eventually prove fatal, as mone-
tary costs are likely to be only a fraction of total social costs. If injury costs are 
TABLE 3
The Cost of Components of Crashes by Level of Severity 
(2008 U.S. dollars)
AIS Level
PDO
1
2
3
4
5
6 (Fatal)
Medical
0
2,959
19,423
57,796
163,222
413,268
27,466
Emergency
38
120
263
457
1,032
1,058
1,036
Market 
Productivity
0
2,174
31,098
88,822
132,311
545,341
740,070
Household 
Productivity
59
712
9,102
26,197
34,818
185,600
238,099
Insurance Admin
145
922
8,588
23,485
40,195
84,773
46,144
Workplace Costs
64
313
2,428
5,303
5,839
10,182
10,817
Legal Costs
0
187
6,192
19,650
41,873
99,266
126,964
QALYs
0
5,538
113,290
159,246
476,650
1,624,488
2,969,915
Property 
Damage
1,846
4,778
4,915
8,452
12,223
11,742
12,770
Travel Delay
998
966
1,051
1,169
1,242
11,371
11,371
Total
3,150
18,670
196,350
390,576
909,404
2,987,090
4,184,651
Source: Adapted from Lawrence J. Blincoe,Angela G. Seay, Eduard Zaloshnja,Ted R. Miller, Eduardo O.
Romano, Stephen Luchter, and Rebecca S. Spicer, The Economic Impact of Motor Vehicle Crashes 2000,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, May 2002, p. 9 and 
p. 62.Available at www.nhtsa.dot.gov.
400

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
underestimated, then the benefits of safety-enhancing road improvements are re-
duced relative to the benefits of time-saving road improvements. It may thus appear
that it is better to be dead than to be stuck in traffic!24 This is usually not the case
when the numbers are estimated correctly.
The Miller and Galbraith and the Dillingham, Miller, and Levy studies focus on
the cost of work-related injuries, but the two studies focus on different measures. The
Zaloshnja and colleagues study provides comprehensive estimates of injuries sustained
in a motor vehicle crash. Blincoe and colleagues adopt a similar methodology to mea-
sure the total social cost of an accident.
THE COST OF CRIME
Many criminal justice and training programs have reduction of crime as one of their
goals. In order to estimate the benefits of crime reduction, it is necessary to estimate
the number of crimes of each type that will be avoided during each time period and
the social cost of each type of crime.25 Table 4 provides evidence on the cost of violent
crimes from three sources.Ted Miller, Mark Cohen, and Brian Wiersema estimate the
victim costs of crime in a report prepared for the National Justice Institute; Cohen es-
timates the cost of the criminal justice system; and Cohen and three colleagues esti-
mate WTP to reduce crime.26 Each set of estimates excludes criminal justice system
costs and prevention costs.
TABLE 4
The Cost of Crime and the Willingness to Pay for Crime Reduction (2008 U.S. dollars)
Shadow Price Value
Victim Cost 
Per Incident
Criminal Justice 
Cost Per Incident
Total Cost 
Per Incident
Willingness to
Pay Per Incident
Plug-In Category
Based on Miller 
et al. (1996)
Based on 
Cohen (1998)
Sum of First
Two Columns
Based on Cohen 
et al. (2004)
Burglary
$2,225
$3,225
$5,450
$31,250
Armed robbery
$30,125
$9,663
$39,788
$87,500
Serious assaults
$38,100
$6,438
$44,538
$290,000
Rape and sexual assaults
$138,113
$4,063
$142,175
$296,250
Murder
$4,625,000
$228,750
$4,853,750
$12,125,000
Drunk driving 
resulting in death
$4,500,000
NA
NA
NA
Drunk driving, no death
$25,440
NA
NA
NA
Arson resulting in death
$3,876,000
NA
NA
NA
Arson, no death
$53,040
NA
NA
NA
Child abuse, nonfatal
$84,000
NA
NA
NA
Larceny (or attempt)
$480
NA
NA
NA
Motor vehicle theft 
(or attempt)
$5,280
NA
NA
NA
NA: Not available
401

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
The Miller, Cohen, and Wiersema Estimates of the Cost of Crime
Ted Miller, Mark Cohen, and Brian Wiersema examine the consequences and cost of
crime. They focus on victims’ costs and ignore society’s response to victimizations,
including the real costs to the criminal justice system and other social costs, such as
fear. They examine rape, robbery, child abuse/neglect, assault, drunk driving (DWI),
arson, larceny, burglary, and motor vehicle theft. They further examine the number of
deaths resulting from these crimes and, if not fatal, whether there was injury.
Miller and colleagues include pain and suffering as well as direct costs. Direct costs
include lost productivity, medical/emergency care, mental health care, police/fire ser-
vices, social victim services, and property damage. The lost quality of life for a fatality
was based on a VSL of $3.82 million (2008 U.S. dollars). For nonfatal consequences, in-
tangible costs are based on jury awards to crime victims and burn victims. In the case of
multiple incidents of crime occurring to single individuals, the intangible costs of a sin-
gle incident were multiplied by the average number of victimizations per individual.
Miller and colleagues exclude criminal justice system costs and the cost of ac-
tions taken to reduce the risk of becoming a crime victim. These are two of the
largest costs associated with criminal behavior. Other omitted impacts include ex-
penses for processing insurance or welfare payments to totally disabled victims of
crime, long-term effects on earnings resulting from psychological injury, and “second-
generation costs,” which are described as crimes committed by persons who themselves
are victims of crime. Some “second-generation costs” are likely to be included implic-
itly, for example, property crime or assault that results from drug abuse (i.e., victimless
drug offenses).
As is often the case in social cost estimates involving personal injury, the intangible
costs are the largest component for all crime categories, except burglary, larceny, and
motor vehicle theft, where the likelihood of personal injury is low. The Miller, Cohen,
and Wiersema costs are presented per criminal incident. Their estimates are similar to
those from other studies conducted in the past 25 years.
The Cohen Estimates of Criminal Justice Costs
Mark Cohen uses administrative data to estimate criminal justice-related costs. These
costs are based on the probability that an offender will be detected and punished. As
Table 4 indicates, at least in the case of crimes involving a high risk of injury, these costs
are generally much smaller than the victim cost of crime.
The Cohen, Rust, Steen, and Tidd Estimates of 
WTP for Crime Control Programs
Mark Cohen, Roland Rust, Sara Steen and Simon Tidd conducted a contingent valua-
tion study with a nationally representative sample of 1,300 households using the di-
chotomous choice method.27 Each household was asked if they would be willing to
pay a particular price for a program that would reduce a particular crime (e.g., bur-
glaries) by 10 percent.This was then converted into an estimate of total WTP.The re-
sulting dollar figure was then multiplied by the number of household in the United
States and divided by the national number of crimes of the type under consideration
402

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
(e.g., burglaries) that would be prevented by a 10 percent reduction. Thus, the esti-
mates in Table 4 represent total national WTP for a reduction in one crime of each
type.
In principle, these estimates should incorporate any reductions in costs that respon-
dents consider in answering the questions—potentially reductions in direct costs, pain
and suffering, criminal justice system costs (if respondents considered tax savings from
reduced load within the system),costs resulting from actions taken to prevent crime (e.g.,
time spent locking doors, purchases of alarms, and hiring more police), psychological
costs resulting from worry over being a crime victim, and so forth. However, it is difficult
to know what respondents had in mind when they responded. It should also be kept in
mind that respondents probably answered on the basis of their personal judgment about
the risk of being a crime victim,rather than their actual risk.For example,if they believed
their risk of being murdered is larger than it really is, they may have indicated a larger
WTP for a reduction in the murder rate than if they knew the actual rate.
The WTP estimates for a reduction in crime shown in fourth column in Table 4 are
markedly larger than the total cost figures shown for the same crimes in the third col-
umn. Moreover, the WTP to reduce murders is considerably larger than the point VSL
estimates we earlier suggested using in CBAs. The reasons for the rather large esti-
mates of WTP for crime reduction are not entirely clear. The contingent valuation
study from which they were derived was carefully executed. One possible explanation
is, as already suggested, that WTP estimates capture some costs, such as crime preven-
tion costs, that are missed by the cost estimates.A second possible explanation, as also
previously suggested, is that individuals tend to inflate the risk of being a crime victim
above the actual risk.
Conclusion on the Cost of Crime
As can be seen in Table 4, the cost of crime varies depending on the nature of the
crime. Crimes with high personal injury rates, especially death, are much more costly
than less-violent criminal activity.
THE VALUE OF TIME
Time is a valuable commodity; as the saying goes, “time is money.” Change in travel
time is an important component of many CBAs, most obviously those concerned with
transportation.Though rarely a dominating cost or benefit, change in waiting time can
also be important in many nontransportation projects. For example, queuing time is an
important cost component of policies that ration goods or affect access to services, such
as motor vehicle registration, medical care, or social services.
Most of the empirical literature on the value of time has been concerned with esti-
mating the value of travel time. This is normally referred to as the value of travel time
savings (VTTS), reflecting the fact that many government projects expect to save travel
time. Recently, attention has been devoted to the value of saving time in other activities,
recognizing that it may differ from the VTTS. For example, people usually experience
considerably greater disutility from waiting time than from “pure” travel time.28 Even
403

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
the value of travel time saved depends on the travel conditions themselves, for example,
whether traffic has just slowed down or is stop-and-go. Often the value of time saved in
different activities or in different conditions is expressed as a multiple of the VTTS.
One might think that time saved simply reflects time saved, but it actually reflects
several related, but separable, entities.To begin, one should ask why drivers slow down
as traffic flow increases or density increases.29 Presumably drivers slow down because
they want to prevent or reduce the risk of an accident.Thus, one can think of increases
in travel time as reducing the ex ante cost of an accident. Another way to reduce one’s
expected private cost of an accident is to buy a larger, sturdier car.
The VTTS reflects not only the benefits of travel time savings (or reduced risk of
accident) but also the reliability of those time savings (the variance of travel time
savings).30 This is one reason why the VTTS is higher during congested periods,
where there is more uncertainty, than under free-flow conditions.
The large empirical literature on VTTS has been reviewed by several authors,mostly
on a country-specific or regional basis. Typically, these estimation exercises have been
commissioned by the governments of individual countries and have led to the adoption
of a standard VTTS for use in analysis in that country.31 In most cases, as we will discuss,
VTTS is expressed as a proportion of the before-tax or after-tax wage rate. This allows
analysts to readily estimate travel time costs using local wage rates, although they should
be adjusted for income and other factors, as we discuss near the end of this chapter.
Table 5 contains estimates of the VTTS for road transportation, based on literature
reviews by William Waters, and by Markus von Wartburg and William Waters.32 The
latter study also presents estimates of the value of time saved in other activities, such as
walking and waiting, expressed as multiples of the VTTS.
The Waters Estimates of VTTS
William G. Waters reviewed estimates of the VTTS from 56 empirical studies con-
ducted between 1974 and 1990.These studies use revealed preference or CV methods.
Revealed preference studies include a wide range of situations: route choice decisions
in which there are different costs (e.g., toll roads versus nontoll roads), mode choice
TABLE 5
The Value of Time
Plug-In Category
Shadow Price Value
Comments
VTTS for Road Transportation
1. Commuting or leisure 
travel time
1. 50% of the average 
after-tax wage rate 
per hour saved
Based on Waters (1996) 
and von Wartburg and 
Waters (2004).
2. Travel time paid for by 
employers
2. 100% of the before-tax
wage rate plus benefits 
per hour saved
Time in Other Activities
1. Walking
1. 2  VTTS
Common convention in
many jurisdictions (von
Wartburg and Waters, 2004).
2. Waiting
2. 2.5  VTTS
3. Congestion
3. 2  VTTS
404

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
decisions (bus or car travel versus faster, but more costly, airline travel), speed
choice decisions (in which faster speeds involve higher operating costs), and location
choice decisions (hedonic methods that isolate the impact of commuting time on land
values). Survey methods are also used to estimate VTTS because they allow re-
searchers to gather data of direct relevance to determining WTP.
As is the standard in the VTTS literature, Waters presents the VTTS as a percent-
age of the after-tax hourly wage rate, rather than as a dollar figure. He found as much
as a tenfold variation in estimates from the literature. As with other estimates de-
scribed in this chapter, the studies cover a wide range of circumstances. Waters parti-
tions previous studies in a number of ways. He aggregates the 32 studies that focus on
commuting trips (after eliminating some outliers) and calculates the mean value at
48 percent of the after-tax wage rate with a median of 40 percent.When using only the
15 of the 22 studies that are North American automobile commuting studies, Waters
calculates a mean of 59 percent (54 percent with the elimination of outliers) and a me-
dian of 42 percent. The 17 non–North American auto commuting studies generate a
mean of 38 percent.Waters concludes that a shadow price of between 40 to 50 percent
of the after-tax wage rate is the appropriate VTTS for auto commuting.
The von Wartburg and Waters Estimates of the VTTS 
and Time in Other Activities
Markus von Wartburg and William Waters review more recent advances in the study
of the VTTS. They note that the establishment of toll roads is particularly useful for
examining the components of VTTS (time saved and reduced variance in time saved).
They also note that there is still considerable heterogeneity of results depending on
the parameters of the study designs.
Von Wartburg and Waters recommend that the VTTS should be set at 50 percent of
the average after-tax wage rate for commuting or leisure nonwork trips.They also suggest
that there should be no distinction based on the reason for these trips (i.e., vacation time
saved and commuting time saved should be valued at the same percentage even though
some people enjoy traveling in cars on their vacations).33 The VTTS for business trips in
which the time required is paid for by the employer should be valued at 100 percent of the
gross (before-tax) wage plus labor-related overheads (e.g., employer-paid benefits); no
other adjustments should be made for the socioeconomic characteristics of travelers.
They also suggest that commuting and leisure travel time savings in congested traf-
fic should be weighed at twice the uncongested (free-flow) rate.34 Finally they recom-
mend a weighing factor of two times the VTTS for time spent walking and two and
one-half times for waiting time.35 The authors maintain that these multipliers are in
line with convention.
THE VALUE OF RECREATION
The value of recreation is important for assessing damage to rural areas, whether
this damage is caused by fire or by development.The National Park Service, the Fish
and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the Forest Service require this
405

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
information to assess damage. This information is also helpful in assessing the bene-
fits of new recreational opportunities and for determining whether to develop
wilderness areas.
Studies that estimate the value of various kinds of recreation generally rely on
the travel cost method or the CV method. Recreational facilities almost always pro-
vide both use benefits and nonuse benefits. Within the category of use benefits, we
include rivalrous consumption (such as hunting), direct nonrivalrous consumption
(such as hiking), and indirect nonrivalrous consumption (such as watching a movie
about hiking in the wilderness).Within the category of nonuse benefits, we include pure
existence value (valuing the “natural order”) and altruistic existence value (such as valu-
ing other people’s use or nonuse value of wilderness).
Reviews of the value of recreational activities have built upon one another over
the past 20 years.An early review of 93 studies was conducted by Cindy Sorg and John
Loomis in 1984.36 Richard Walsh, Donn Johnson, and John McKean updated and ex-
tended this earlier study, incorporating studies that had been conducted through
1988.37 In 2001, Randall Rosenberger and John Loomis merged the results of two more
recent reviews.38 This study focused on recreational activities that are of importance to
the Forest Service. Most recently, Pam Kaval and John Loomis extended the survey; it
now encompasses a study period from 1967 to 2003, covering 1,239 observations from
593 individual studies.39
Kaval and Loomis report the mean net WTP for 30 separate outdoor recreation
activities, which are shown in Table 6. They report their findings by “activity day,”
TABLE 6
The Value of Recreational Activities (in 2008 U.S. dollars)
Backpacking
$57.84
Pleasure driving
(including sightseeing)
$65.75
Bird-watching
$32.87
Camping
$41.28
Rock climbing
$62.45
Cross-country skiing
$34.84
Scuba diving
$35.93
Downhill skiing
$37.18
Sightseeing
$40.90
Fishing
$52.36
Snorkeling
$33.65
Boating
$112.02
Snowmobiling
$40.28
(nonmotorized)
Swimming
$47.39
General recreation
$38.96
Visiting an environmental
$6.67
Going to the beach
$43.78
education center
Hiking
$34.24
Visiting an arboretum
$15.02
Horseback riding
$20.11
Visiting an aquarium
$31.43
Hunting
$52.08
Waterskiing
$54.42
Motor boating
$51.36
Wildlife viewing
$47.03
Mountain biking
$81.90
Windsurfing
$439.01
Off-road vehicle
$25.44
Average value of a
$52.88
driving
recreational day
Other recreation
$54.06
Picnicking
$46.02
All figures are per activity day.
Source: Adapted from Pam Kaval and John Loomis,“Updated Outdoor Recreation Use Values with
Emphasis on National Park Recreation,” Final Report to National Park Service, Fort Collins, CO (Colorado
State University, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics: Fort Collins, CO, 2003).
406

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
which is the typical amount of time pursuing an activity within a 24-hour period.
This unit is easily converted to other visitation/participation units (e.g., recreation
visitor days, trips, or seasons).Across all recreational activities, the average value of a
recreational day is about $53.
THE VALUE OF NATURE (SPECIFIC SPECIES OR HABITATS)
Interest in the environment has increased considerably in recent years. At the same
time, scientists have developed a better understanding of the relationship between the
environment, human intervention, and human well-being.40 However, valuing most
environmental impacts is difficult. One reason is that each environmental area is gen-
erally used for multiple purposes—commercial (e.g., timber and fish), recreation, and
other purposes. Moreover, environmental areas can affect the value of neighboring
areas. For example, using a hedonic pricing model, Elena Irwin found that the mar-
ginal benefit per household of preserving open space in the rapidly suburbanizing re-
gion of Central Maryland ranges from $1,213 to $4,035 for each acre of neighboring
farmland that is preserved.41 Consequently, there are potential problems of aggrega-
tion and double counting.
This section focuses on valuing aspects of nature and biodiversity. It concerns
the value of specific species of flora and fauna and, more broadly, of habitats
and ecosystems. Given the increasing interest in the environment, it is perhaps sur-
prising that relatively few studies have attempted to value such goods, at least rela-
tive to the number of studies that value recreation. This has begun to change in the
last decade, however.
Studies that value elements of nature often use the contingent valuation method.
Such studies usually incorporate both option price (e.g., for bird-watching, and possi-
bly for hunting) and existence value. The option price typically varies according to
proximity. For example, Bateman and colleagues found that people living near the
Norfolk Broads (a wetland site in eastern England that covers three National Nature
Reserves and offers opportunities for bird-watching, sailing, and coarse fishing) were
willing to pay about three times as much as people living elsewhere in the United
Kingdom to preserve these recreational opportunities afforded by the Broads.42
Some authors have conducted longitudinal studies, which are particularly useful for
examining the effects of changes in urban areas on ecosystem services and the value
of those services.43
In 1993, Johan Loomis and Douglas White surveyed the value of specific species.44
They summarized estimates from different CV studies of 18 threatened or endan-
gered species and conducted a meta-analysis using these estimates. Respondents to
the CV questions were usually either the residents of an area in which the species
was found or visitors to the area or both. Occasionally, however, a national sample
was used. The estimates of the public’s WTP to preserve an endangered animal
species, which appear in Table 7, are presented on a per person basis and the
amounts pertain either to WTP each year or to willingness to make a single one-
time payment. When more than one estimate is available for a single species, the
amounts are averaged.
407

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
TABLE 7
The Value of Environmental Impacts (in 2008 U.S. dollars)
Plug-In Category
Shadow Price Value
Comments
Specific Species
Annual WTP
Northern spotted owls
$104 per person
Based on Loomis and White
(1996)
Grizzly bears
$69 per person
Whooping cranes
$52 per person
Red-cockaded woodpeckers
$19 per person
Sea otters
$43 per person
Gray whales
$39 per person
Bald eagles
$36 per person
Bighorn sheep
$31 per person
Sea turtles
$19 per person
Squawfish
$12 per person
Striped shiner
$9 per person
Pacific salmon/steelhead
$94 per person
Atlantic salmon
$12 per person
One-time lump sum
Bald eagle
$322 per person
Humpback whale
$258 per person
Monk seal
$179 per person
Gray wolf
$100 per person
Arctic graying/Cutthroat trout
$22 per person
Existence Value of Habitats
Terrestrial
$32–$122 per household 
per year
Based on Nunes and van den
Bergh (2001)
Coastal
$11–$62 per household 
per year
Wetland
$10–$116 per household 
per year
Wetland Habitats
Overall
$3,948 ($212) per hectare 
per year
Based on Brander, Floran,
and Vermaat (2006). Mean 
values with median values 
in parentheses
Woodland
$4,512 ($282) per hectare 
per year
Freshwater marsh
$4,935 ($169) per hectare 
per year
Salt/brackish marsh
$3,666 ($240) per hectare 
per year
Unvegetated sediment
$12,690 ($494) per hectare 
per year
Mangrove
$564 ($113) per hectare per year
Water Quality Improvements
1. From unusable to boatable
1. $10.20 to $70.80 per year 
per household
Based on Luken, Johnson, and 
Kibler (1992)
2. From boatable to rough fishing
2. $15.24 to $61.20 per year 
per household
3. From rough fishing to 
game fishing
3. $20.28 to $50.40 per year 
per household
4. From game fishing to superior
game fishing
4. $24 to $42 per year per 
household
5. From unusable to superior 
game fishing
5. $50.40 to $182.40 per 
year per household
(Continued)
408

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Paulo Nunes and Jeroen van den Bergh survey various measures of biodiversity.45
As shown in Table 7, they find that the existence value of different habitats ranges
from $9.6 to $122.4 per household per year in 2008 U.S. dollars.
Luke Brander, Raymond Floran, and Jan Vermaat conducted a meta-analysis
using 190 studies of the value of wetlands that provided 215 value observations.46 The
studies were from 25 countries, but a little over a half of these studies valued wetlands
in North America. A wide variety of methods were used to value wetlands, including
the travel cost method, hedonic pricing, and the replacement cost method; but the
most important were market prices, which accounted for nearly 40 percent of the
value observations, and contingent valuation, which accounted for 16 percent. The
market price approach simply computed the total revenue obtained from the wetland
being valued. Thus it ignores the costs of producing the goods and services derived
from the wetland and, unlike the CV studies, misses any nonuse value associated
with wetlands.
Averaging over all 215 available observations, the annual wetland value was
found to be a little under $4,000 U.S. dollars per hectare per year. However, the me-
dian value was only $212 per hectare per year, indicating that some extremely large
estimates drove up the mean. The mean and median for the North American studies
are about 50 percent and 40 percent larger, respectively, than the overall mean and
median. The mean and median values produced by the market price method are
about $550 and $140, respectively, while those resulting from CV studies are around
$11,000 and $60, respectively. Thus, extreme values produced by some of the CV
studies helped pull up the overall mean. Table 7 displays mean and median values for
different types of wetlands. As can be seen, the median values vary much less than
the mean values.
THE VALUE OF WATER AND WATER QUALITY
Fresh water is a necessity and is becoming scarcer. As there generally is no well-
functioning market for fresh water in most locations,analysts have to estimate its shadow
price. CV surveys, the market analogy method, the intermediate good method, defen-
sive expenditures, and the travel cost method have all been used to estimate the value
TABLE 7
(Continued )
Plug-In Category
Shadow Price Value
Comments
Water Values by Use
Waste disposal
$4.15 ($1.38)
Based on Frederick, van den 
Berg, and Hanson (1996). Mean
values with median values
in parentheses.Values are per 
acre-foot
Recreation/fish and wildlife
$66.50 ($6.92)
Navigation
$202.26 ($13.85)
Hydropower
$34.63 ($29.09)
Irrigation
$103.91 ($55.42)
Industrial processing
$390.67 ($182.87)
Thermoelectric power
$47.10 ($40.18)
Domestic
$287.96 ($134.38)
409

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Ralph Luken wished to estimate the costs and
benefits of (technology-based) water pollution
standards introduced by the Clean Water Act
of 1972. However, there were no existing esti-
mates of WTP for improvements in the water
quality of the rivers in question. Therefore, he
utilized WTP estimates from existing studies as
a basis for his estimates of the value of im-
provements in water quality.
He initially considered eight existing studies
that might provide plug-in values.Five of the ex-
isting studies used the contingent valuation
method, two studies used the travel cost
method, and the eighth study was a user partici-
pation study. Luken eliminated five of the stud-
ies because their focus was not similar to the
EXHIBIT 1
Water Quality Change
River
Boat-Fish
Fish-Swim
Boat-Swim
Monongahela 
(contingent valuation)
$25–40
$14–23
$40–64 
Monongahela (travel cost)
$8
$10
$18
Charles (contingent valuation)
—
—
$74
sites he was considering.These five studies dealt
with water systems, such as those on a large
western lake and a western river basin. His sites,
in contrast, were generally eastern rivers with
local recreation usage. Therefore he focused on
three studies: one on the Charles River in
Boston and two on the Monongahela River in
Pennsylvania. The Monongahela studies esti-
mated benefits for three levels of improvement
in water quality (from boating to fishing, from
fishing to swimming, and from boating to swim-
ming), whereas the Charles River study only ex-
amined improvements in water quality from
boating to swimming (i.e., the biggest “jump” in
quality).The summarized values as annual WTP
per household (1984 dollars) are as follows:
Unfortunately, these benefit categories 
did not directly map into the benefit cate-
gories Luken was using, which covered five
quality improvement levels: U  Unusable, B 
Boatable, R  Rough fishing, G  Game fish-
ing, and G*  Superior game fishing. Luken
assumed that the travel cost method provided
lower-bound estimates (because they include
only use valuations) and the contingent valua-
tion estimates provided upper-bound esti-
mates (as they include nonuse as well as use
valuations). As shown next, he also included
of water of different quality levels or the benefits of improvements in water quality for
various purposes.47
The fourth section in Table 7 summarizes annual household WTP amounts for
water quality improvements for recreational purposes by Ralph Luken, Reed Johnson,
and Virginia Kibler.48 These authors drew on previous studies of the Monongahela
River, near Pittsburgh. Luken, Johnson, and Kibler argue for distances of 30 miles as an
upper bound in defining the relevant markets for such recreational sites.They also rec-
ommend using visitation rates for households within this distance that range from 50
percent for sites with few substitutes to 10 percent for sites with numerous substitutes.
(Continued)
410

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Initial Water 
Quality
Final Water 
Quality
Lower 
Bound
Upper 
Bound
U
U
$1–3
$9–18
U
B
$5
$35
U
R
$15
$50
U
G
$20
$80
U
G*
$25
$90
B
B
$2–4
$8–15
B
R
$8
$30
B
G
$15
$50
B
G*
$20
$60
R
R
$3–5
$6–13
R
G
$10
$25
R
G*
$15
$35
G
G
$3–6
$5–10
G
G*
$12
$20
intrause estimates to reflect smaller benefit
improvements. His plug-in values for water
quality benefits (WTP per household per year
in 1984 dollars) follow:
Although the purpose of this exhibit is to il-
lustrate the use of secondary sources, it is inter-
esting to note that in using these values, Luken
generally found that costs exceed benefits.
Sources: Adapted from Frederick W. Gramlick, “The Demand for Clear Water: The Case of the Charles River,”
National Tax Journal, 30(2) 1977, 183–195; Ralph A. Luken, Efficiency in Environmental Regulation (Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1990), 45–50, 88–90; V. Kerry Smith and William H. Desvousges, Measuring Water Quality
Benefits (Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing, 1986); V. Kerry Smith, William H. Desvousges, and Ann Fisher, “A
Comparison of Direct and Indirect Methods for Estimating Environmental Benefits,” Working Paper No. 83–W32,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 1984.
Kenneth Frederick,Tim van den Berg, and Jean Hanson summarize plug-in values
for different uses of water based on a survey of 41 earlier studies.49 The authors pro-
vide estimates of the cost of water in eight uses: waste disposal, recreation/fish and
wildlife habitat, navigation, hydropower, irrigation, industrial processing, thermoelec-
tric power generation, and domestic uses. Values are expressed in terms of dollars per
acre-foot (one acre-foot equals 325,851 gallons, the volume of water required to cover
one acre at a depth of one foot).
Water used for industrial processing and domestic use have the highest mean and
median values. However, recreation/fish and wildlife habitat and irrigation account for
nearly 80 percent of all the estimates and the highest values of any individual studies.
We report both the median and mean values in Table 7 due to the lack of weighting in
the final estimates.The authors point out that median values may be most applicable to
national level assessment and likely reflect normal hydrologic conditions.
The authors note several caveats. Water quality is important in most uses, but this
factor is not reflected in the estimates.The timing of rainfall and levels of the water table
play a large role in the cost of water, and values vary among regions (as water value is
411

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
inversely related to availability). They also note that supply and demand conditions
change over time (due to seasonal variation, technological changes, and weather condi-
tions), thereby affecting the value of water.
THE COST OF NOISE
The cost of noise is mostly relevant in the evaluation of transportation projects. The
dominant method for estimating the cost of noise is the hedonic pricing method.
Property values (usually those of private residences) are regressed on noise, structural
characteristics of the houses (numbers of rooms, square footage), neighborhood char-
acteristics (number of lots or broken windows per block), accessibility characteristics
(to downtown or local waterfront), and other environmental characteristics (air pollu-
tion). It is important to control for air quality because it is correlated with noise pollu-
tion from automobiles.
The U.S. Federal Aviation Agency has developed a measure of the level of noise
called the Noise Exposure Forecast (NEF).50 One NEF is equal to a mean exposure
over time to one decibel of noise.Ambient noise is in the 15–25 NEF range,“some” to
“much” annoyance occurs in the 25–40 NEF range, and “considerable” annoyance oc-
curs above 40 NEFs.
The sensitivity of house prices to changes in the noise level is measured by the
noise depreciation sensitivity index (NDSI), which is also called the noise sensitivity
depreciation index (NSDI). Either way, it represents the percentage reduction in the
value of a house that results from a unit increase in the noise level, measured in
NEFs.51 One way to obtain the NDSI is to specify a semilog hedonic price function in
which the price of a house (in logarithms) is a linear function of noise and various
control variables. The NDSI equals the slope of this function with respect to noise
multiplied by 100.52
Ian Bateman, Brett Day, Ian Lake, and Andrew Lovett conducted a review of
“noise” studies published after 1970.53 Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, consensus esti-
mates of the NDSI have remained fairly stable over several decades. As shown in
Table 8, noise pollution has two primary sources—air traffic and road traffic. The 
TABLE 8
The Cost of Noise Pollution
Plug-In Category
Shadow Price Value
Comments
Cost of Noise
Airline noise pollution
Roadway noise pollution
0.65 percent reduction in 
property value per NEF
0.64 percent reduction in 
property value per NEF
Based on Schipper (1996) 
and Bateman, Day, Lake,
and Lovett (2001).
Cost of Noise
1. Residential properties
1. 0.65 percent reduction 
in value per NEF
Based on Uyeno, Hamilton, and 
Biggs (1993).
2. Condominiums
2. 0.90 percent reduction 
in value per NEF
3. Vacant land
3. 1.66 percent reduction 
in value per NEF
412

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
best estimate of the NDSI for air traffic noise in the U.S. is 0.65 percent.54 Recall that the
NDSI measures the percentage change in house prices for a change in ambient noise
level of one NEF. In other words, if the noise level increases by one NEF, then the
price of an affected house will decreases in value by 0.65 percent on average. Thus,
houses adjacent to an airport with NEFs of 40 are priced 9.75 percent lower than
houses farther from the airport with NEFs of 25. For roadway noise pollution,
Bateman and his colleagues suggest that the NDSI is 0.64 percent.
The estimated NDSIs discussed thus far pertain to residential properties. Dean
Uyeno, Stan Hamilton, and Andrew Biggs recognize that the NDSI may differ ac-
cording to land use.55 They estimate a semilog hedonic price function where the price
of a house (in logarithms) is a linear function of noise (in NEFs) and other house
quality characteristics. Using Canadian data, they estimate that the NDSI is 0.65 per-
cent for detached houses with NEFs of 25 or higher (exactly the same as mentioned
previously); they estimate it is 0.90 percent for condominiums and 1.66 percent for
vacant land.
THE COST OF AIR POLLUTION
Air pollution results in both health and nonhealth costs. Health costs include the costs
of premature death and the costs of morbidity (illness).56 Nonhealth costs include en-
vironmental costs, such as those associated with rising sea levels, coastal erosion, river
floods, deforestation, retarded plant growth, and reduced agricultural output. Other
nonhealth costs include corrosion to buildings, cars, and materials (such as rubber), as
well as loss of views.
Air pollutants are emitted from many sources, especially motor vehicles, industrial
plants, and power plants.57 Important pollutants are volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), carbon oxides (COx), and partic-
ulate matter of less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10). VOCs combine with NOx to
produce ozone, which is a primary contributor to morbidity. Through chemical reac-
tions SOx, VOCs, and NOx produce PM10s, which cause both premature death and
morbidity, especially respiratory diseases. The solution of SOx and NOx in cloud and
rain droplets causes acid rain, which is known to damage pine and spruce forests and is
thought to damage tobacco, wheat, and soya crops. Acid rain also damages buildings,
increases the acidification of lakes, and affects fish populations.58 The accumulation of
greenhouse gas emissions, especially, carbon dioxide (CO2), causes global warming.59
Analysts estimate the cost of pollution using two main approaches. One is the hedo-
nic property value method.60 The more widely used approach is called the dose response
function or damage function approach. A dose response function (or damage function)
relates unit increases in a pollutant to various health effects, such as the probability of
premature death and increases in different types of important effects such as on visibility,
materials deterioration, damage to the natural environment, and health. For example, in
the case of health, an increase in a ton of particulate matter might be related to the in-
creased probability of premature death and increases in different types of respiratory
problems. These effects would then be weighted by dollar valuations of these effects,
which themselves would usually be based on CV estimates of WTP.
413

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
H. Scott Matthews and Lester Lave have derived estimates of the cost of key air
pollutants based on a number of damage function studies that were conducted in the
early and mid 1990s.61 These estimates, with the cost figures updated to 2008 dollars,
are summarized in Table 9.They indicate the costs resulting from a one-ton increase in
each pollutant. As indicated by the wide ranges between the minimum and maximum
values, there is a great deal of uncertainty related to the actual costs associated with
various types of air pollution. As pointed out by Matthews and Lave, much of this un-
certainty relates to the damage functions used to obtain the values. For example, it is
difficult to isolate the extent to which premature death results from a one-ton increase
in particulate matter from increases in premature death due to other pollutants. The
wide range of values also occurs because air pollution varies considerably across areas
and time. In addition, some studies only consider health effects, while other studies also
incorporate other effects, such as on visibility and the natural environment. According
to Matthews and Lave, monetization plays a comparatively minor role.
Probably the most important aggregate air pollution cost is the cost of carbon, the
major source of global warming. Given its importance, it is not surprising that there has
been considerable effort in recent years to estimate the social cost of carbon emissions.
Richard Tol has recently conducted a meta-analysis of 211 estimates of the social cost of
carbon from 47 different studies and found that, for peer-reviewed estimates that were
based on a 3 percent discount rate, the mean social cost per ton of carbon is $35 in 2008
U.S. dollars, with a median of $28 per ton.62 After carefully reviewing previous studies
and adding considerable analysis of his own, David Pearce concluded that the marginal
social cost of carbon is between $10 and $65 per ton of carbon.63 Finally, in a less-formal
examination of the literature, Ian Parry, Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington settle
on a value of $22 per ton of carbon.64 They also point out that the social cost of carbon
emissions is likely to rise in the future because of growth in the value of world output and
because marginal damage will increase as temperature levels rise.Thus, they suggest the
social cost will be $92 per ton of carbon by 2050 and $297 per ton of carbon by 2100.
All of the estimates of the current social cost of carbon emissions that appear above,
including the mean estimate provided by Mathews and Lave, are roughly of the same
TABLE 9
The Social Cost of One Ton of Air Pollutants (in 2008 U.S. dollars)
Shadow Price Value 
(Dollars per ton of air emissions)
Plug-In Category
Number of
Studies
Minimum
|Median
Mean
Maximum
Carbon monoxide (CO)
2
$2
$796
$796
$1,607
Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
9
$337
$1,622
$4,284
$14,535
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)
10
$1,178
$2,754
$3,060
$7,191
Particulate matter (PM10)
12
$1,454
$4,284
$6,579
$24,786
Volatile organic 
compound (VOC)
5
$245
$2,142
$2,448
$6,732
Global warming potential 
(in CO2 equiv)
4
$3
$21
$20
$35
Source: Adapted from Table 1 of Matthews and Lave (2000).
414

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
magnitude. However, the well-known Stern Review contains a much larger estimate of
over $300 per ton.65 William Nordhaus suggests that the major reason for this high esti-
mate is that carbon dioxide emissions have an expected atmospheric life of 100 years or so
and, hence, estimates of the cost of emissions are very sensitive to the assumed discount
rate.66The estimate in the Stern Review is based on a low social discount rate of 1 percent,
while the authors of this book suggest a rate of 3.5 percent (and Nordhaus prefers an even
higher rate). In addition, the Stern Review assumes that the damage of a current emission
of carbon will continue into perpetuity.The fairly wide range for the cost of carbon emis-
sions suggested by Pearce is also largely (although not entirely) attributable to discount
rate assumptions, with the lower end of the range based on a constant discount rate and
the upper end resulting from the use of a time-declining discount rate.
THE SOCIAL COSTS OF AUTOMOBILES
Ian Parry, Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington review numerous studies that esti-
mate negative externalities resulting from the operation of automobiles. Based on this
review, they present their “very tentative” assessment of social costs resulting from
each mile traveled by lightweight vehicles in the United States.67 These estimates are
shown in Table 10.68 Perhaps surprisingly, the largest item in the table, at 6 cents per
mile, is costs that result from congestion, much of which is attributable to wasted time.
The second largest item at 3 cents per mile is costs resulting from accidents.These costs
include injuries and property damage, but exclude injuries to the driver and other pas-
sengers as these are assumed to be internalized. Interestingly, Parry, Walls, and
Harrington estimate that the costs associated with global warming that result from dri-
ving a mile is only about one-quarter of a penny. This is because a gallon of gasoline
contains 0.0024 tons of carbon and they assume that an automobile can drive 21 miles
with each gallon, which was the national average at the time of their study.Thus, given
their conclusion that the social cost of one ton of carbon is $22, the cost per mile works
out to 0.25 cents ((.0024  $22)>21). Of course, there are many automobiles in the
United States and many of them travel a substantial number of miles each year. Parry,
Walls, and Harrington point out that, in aggregate, light-duty vehicles account for
about 20 percent of carbon dioxide emissions in the U.S.
TABLE 10
The Social Cost of Automobiles 
(in 2008 U.S. dollars)
Plug-In Category
Shadow Price Value 
(Cents per mile)
Greenhouse warming
0.3¢
Local pollution
2.0¢
Oil dependency
0.7¢
Congestion
6.0¢
Accidents
3.0¢
SUM
10.9¢
Source: Adapted from Table 2 of Parry,Walls, and Harrington (2007)
415

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
THE COST OF TAXATION: MARGINAL EXCESS TAX BURDEN
Government projects often involve expenditures that have to be financed through
taxes. Taxes typically result in a deadweight loss: the marginal excess tax burden
(METB). This loss, or “leakage,” occurs whenever there is a behavioral response to a
tax—for example, an excise tax on a good causes purchases to fall or a tax on earnings
causes workers to reduce their work hours. The marginal social value of the lost con-
sumption or lost work is the deadweight loss of the tax. Important manifestations of
the deadweight loss include the inefficient substitution of leisure for work, of barter for
legal trade, and the search for tax loopholes. METBs vary according to the type of tax.
In general, METBs are greater when the taxed activity is more demand elastic. The
METBs from income taxes are higher than the METBs from property taxes and sales
taxes.
There are numerous empirical estimates or the value of the marginal excess tax
burden and the estimates vary for a number of reasons. For example, each type of tax
(e.g., income taxes, sales taxes, and property taxes) has a different marginal excess tax
burden.With respect to federal projects, however, it is probably reasonable to view in-
come taxes as the marginal tax source.Thus, we focus on METB estimates that pertain
to income taxes.
The major distortions caused by the individual income tax occur in labor markets.
Therefore, estimates of the marginal excess tax burden of the income tax utilize esti-
mates of labor supply elasticities.Although most estimates of the METB of the income
tax are based on compensated labor supply elasticities, a few are based instead on un-
compensated elasticities. It can be reasonably argued that unless a policy or program
sufficiently benefits those who fund it through their taxes so that it essentially compen-
sates them, which is unlikely in the case of most projects and programs, a METB that is
based on uncompensated labor supply elasticities should be used in CBA.69
Daniel Fujiwara has assembled estimates of the METB that are based on both com-
pensated and uncompensated labor supply elasticities.The estimates he collected of the
marginal excess tax burden that are based on uncompensated labor supply elasticities
appear in Table 11.70 The average of the five mid-point estimates is 23 cents per dollar.
The average of the low estimates is 18 cents per dollar and the average of the high esti-
mates is 28 cents per dollar. The mean for the twenty studies based on compensated
TABLE 11
Plug-Ins for the Marginal Excess Tax Burden per Dollar of Revenue
from Income Taxes
Mid-Point of 
METB as a 
METB Estimate
Study
Country
percentage
(country dollars)
Dahlby (1994)
Canada.
0.09–0.38
0.235  
Stuart (1984)
USA
0.43
0.430  
Fullerton and Henderson (1989)
USA
0.06 – 0.17
0.115  
Ballard et al. (1985) 
USA
0.12 – 0.23
0.185  
Campbell and Bond (1997)
Australia
0.19
0.190 
Source: Correspondence with Daniel Fujawara.
416

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
labor supply elasticities that Fujiwara collected is 26 cents per dollar, with a range be-
tween 21 cents and 32 cents per dollar once the more extreme values are eliminated.
METBs that are based on compensated labor supply elasticities tend to be larger than
those based on uncompensated labor supply elasticities because the reduction in hours
worked resulting from a given increase in taxes is greater with a compensated elasticity.
Although an estimate of 23 cents per dollar appears to provide a reasonable value
for the METB for federal projects that are funded by income taxes, this estimate may
not be appropriate for local government projects that are more likely to be funded
through property taxes. For these projects, a METB of 17 cents per dollar, which
Charles Ballard, John Shoven, and John Whalley estimated for property tax, might be
used instead.71
TRANSFERRING AND ADJUSTING PLUG-IN VALUES
For the most part, the estimates discussed here are based on U.S. research. Differences
in incomes, tastes, and other factors bring into question the appropriateness of using
these estimates to analyze projects in other countries. Wherever possible, plug-in val-
ues should be adjusted to reflect the particular characteristics of a specific application,
whether that is a different country or a nonrepresentative region of the United
States.72 Here, we briefly review four sets of factors that one might consider as a basis
for adjustment: (1) differences in socioeconomic and other personal characteristics of
the population (e.g., income and age), (2) differences in physical and other characteris-
tics of the jurisdiction (e.g., geographic characteristics), (3) differences in the charac-
teristics of the project itself (e.g., project quality), and (4) temporal changes.
Income, Tastes, and Other Socioeconomic Factors
It is often important to make adjustments due to socioeconomic differences or pref-
erence differences among different populations. Perhaps the most important vari-
able is income. Most of the “goods” discussed here, including a statistical life, time,
recreation, and the environment, are likely to be normal goods. People place higher
values on them as their incomes rise. Some of them might be luxuries (sometimes
called superior goods) (i.e., people might be willing to spend a higher proportion of
their incomes on these goods as their income increases).
Preferences may also differ from one region to another or from one occupational
group to another. People who live near airports may object less than others to air-
craft noise; people who live in polluted areas may not value changes in air quality as
much as people who live in areas with better air quality; and people who work in
dangerous jobs may have greater propensity for risk than the average worker. Such
differences in preferences affect how much people are willing to pay for particular
policy effects.
Adjusting the VSL for Income and Other Factors.
The VSL rises with income. Thus,
U.S. estimates should be adjusted before they are applied to other countries.Although
one might suspect that a statistical life is a luxury and thus has an income elasticity
greater than 1, numerous researchers have obtained estimates of the income elasticity
417

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
for the VSL of less than 1.73 For example, Miller finds a range of income elasticity from
0.85 to 0.96, Mrozek and Taylor obtain estimates of 0.46 to 0.49, and Viscusi and Aldy
find that it is between 0.52 and 0.61.74
Using the estimated VSL for the United States of $5 million to obtain the VSL for
some other country, such as Canada, requires two steps. The first step is to convert the
U.S. estimate into Canadian dollars. At mid-2008 exchange rates, for example, one
Canadian dollar was equivalent to US$0.978. Consequently, US$5.0 million was equiva-
lent to approximately C$5.1 million,where C$ represents Canadian dollars.75The second
step is to adjust for income differences.
By definition, the income elasticity of the VSL, EI, is given by:
(4)
where %VSL represents the percentage change in VSL and %I represents the per-
centage change in income. Consequently, to convert a VSL based on U.S. data to an ap-
propriate figure for Canada, we use the following formula:
(5)
Adjusting for purchasing power, Canadian incomes are currently approximately 15 per-
cent lower than U.S. incomes and have maintained this average difference over the past
several decades.76 Setting (ICAN  IUS)>IUS  0.15,the Canadian VSL equals C$4.62 mil-
lion if EI equals 0.50,C$4.44 million if EI equals 0.75,and C$4.25 million if EI equals 1.00.
It seems reasonable to pick the midrange, thus giving a VSL for Canada in 2008 equal to
C$4.44 million or US$4.34. Thus, it is roughly about 90 percent as high as the U.S. VSL.
Further support for this estimate comes from Canadian-specific VSL studies.77
Earlier we mentioned that, in theory, the WTP to reduce fatality risk declines as
the risk level declines. Therefore, the VSL should be adjusted for fatality risk. Air car-
rier fatality rates are lower than motor vehicle fatality rates, which suggests that the
VSL for air travel should be lower than the VSL for road travel, holding everything
else constant. At the same time, road travel is approximately 20 times more risky than
working on a per-hour basis.78 This suggests that the VSL for improvements in road
safety should be valued more than the VSL computed from wage-risk studies.
However, there are at least two problems with adjusting the VSL for the level of fatal-
ity risk. First, the appropriate size of the adjustment is not known. Second, contrary to
theory, some studies have found that the VSL declines as fatality risk increases.79 More
research is needed before adjusting the VSL for fatality risk.
A third potentially important factor is sense of control. M. W. Jones-Lee and col-
leagues found that the average WTP to reduce death on the London underground is
50 percent higher than on roads.80 This difference may be due to many factors, includ-
ing incorrect estimation of the risks, loss of sense of control, or the method of death
(people may think that dying in an underground crash is more traumatic than dying in
a car crash). The loss of sense of control may be associated with the feeling that when
one gives up control to a train driver or pilot, then that person may not fully internalize
the externality associated with one’s own death.
VCAN = VUS + EIVUS(ICAN - IUS)>IUS
EI = %¢VSL
%¢I
418

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Adjusting the VTTS for Income and Other Factors.
W. G.Waters examined how esti-
mates of the VTTS vary with income, time (year of study), country, and trip purpose
(interurban versus commuting or “other”).81 He finds that VTTS increases with in-
come, but less than proportionately:
(6)
where VTTSY is the VTTS of a traveler with income 
is the average income level,
and 
is the average VTTS. He suggests that a convenient rule of thumb for the re-
lationship is a square root rule. For example, if income goes up fourfold from the aver-
age, the VTTS doubles. Using such a rule, the VTTS rises more slowly than does in-
come; it is a normal good but not a luxury. Subsequently, von Wartburg and Waters
suggested using an income elasticity of 0.75; that is, the exponent in equation (6) would
be 0.75, rather than 0.5.82
The relationship between VTTS and other variables appears to be weak. Waters
found that VTTS increases over time (drifting upward at one percentage point per
year) and that interurban travel has a slightly higher value than trips for other pur-
poses.Von Wartburg and Waters suggest using a positive distance elasticity of 0.3.
Physical and Other Regional Characteristics
The second set of factors that may affect the transferability of plug-in values are the
physical and other characteristics of a region. For example, the impact of air pollution
varies widely geographically, depending on population density, climate, and topogra-
phy. More people are affected in more densely populated areas. Other things held con-
stant, greater precipitation in Vancouver than in Los Angeles means that the morbidity
costs of NOx or particulate matter are lower there.
The current level of consumption of a good in a region may also affect the value of
changes in the amount of that good. In general, holding all other factors constant, peo-
ple are willing to pay more (less) for safety-improving projects as the level of safety de-
creases (increases). Consequently, the VSL used in a project in a “high-risk” area
should be higher than the VSL used in a project in a “low-risk” area, holding all other
relevant factors constant.
Project Differences
The third set of factors pertains to the similarity between the policy under evaluation
and the projects in the studies used to derive the plug-in values. For example, the value
of water quality improvement obtained from studies involving small improvements in
quality levels may not apply to a proposed policy that would involve a large change in
the level of water quality.The magnitude of the error in the generalization depends on
the degree of nonlinearity in the relationship between water quality improvements and
WTP. Additionally, there may be important differences in the price and availability of
substitutes which, if not accounted for, can cause biases.83 In sum, policies or projects
under evaluation should ideally be similar to the projects in the studies used to derive
the plug-in values in terms of the availability and quality of alternatives.
VTTS
Y, Y
VTTSY = aY
Y b
0.5
VTTS
419

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
Temporal Changes
The final set of factors includes those relating to the fact that valuations may change
over time. For example, health costs per vehicle mile traveled are declining over time
as heavily polluting vehicles are replaced. Technological change, as well as temporal
changes in population characteristics or jurisdictional characteristics, may affect the
plug-in estimates. For example, increasing incomes and declining supply of accessible
recreational areas might increase the value of such activities, while increasing conges-
tion at the sites might decrease the value of recreational activities. Updating original
estimates using the composite CPI or the GDP deflator implies no change in the rela-
tive value of a recreational activity.
CONCLUSION
By making use of the plug-in values presented in this chapter, analysts can apply CBA
to a wider range of policies than would be feasible if all shadow prices had to be esti-
mated firsthand.
EXERCISES
1.
A 40-mile stretch of rural road with limited access is used primarily by regional commuters
and business travelers to move between two major interstate highways.The legal speed limit
on the road is currently 55 miles per hour (mph), and the estimated average speed is 61 mph.
Traffic engineers predict that if the speed limit were raised to 65 mph and enforcement lev-
els were kept constant, the average speed would rise to 70 mph.
Currently,an average of 5,880 vehicles per day uses the stretch of road.Approximately half
are commuters and half are business travelers. Traffic engineers do not expect that a higher
speed limit will attract more vehicles. Vehicles using the road carry, on average, 1.6 people.
Traffic engineers predict that raising the speed limit on this stretch of road would result in an
additional 52 vehicle crashes involving, on average, 0.1 fatalities annually. They also predict
that operating costs would rise by an average of $0.002 per mile per vehicle. The average
hourly wage in the county in which the majority of users of the road work is $18.30/hour.
Estimate the annual net benefits of raising the speed limit on the road from 55 mph to
65 mph. In doing this, test the sensitivity of your estimate of annual net benefits to several
alternative estimates of the value of time savings and the value of life that you have selected
from this chapter.
2.
Analysts estimate that expanding the capacity of the criminal courts in a city would require
about 7,200 additional hours of juror time.The average wage rate in the county is $20/hour.
A recent survey by the jury commissioner, however, found that the average wage for those
who actually serve on juries under the present system, who are also currently employed, is
only $15/hour.The survey also found that about one-third of those who actually serve on ju-
ries under the existing system do not hold jobs—for example, they are homemakers, re-
tirees, or unemployed.
a.
What shadow price should the analysts use for an hour of jury time?
b.
About one-fourth of the jurors do not receive wages from their employers while on
jury duty. How does this affect your choice of the shadow price?
3.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) Assuming that the elasticity of the value
of a statistical life with respect to income is between 0.4 and 0.9 and that the value of a
420

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
statistical life in the United States is between $2 million and $7 million, ranges of values of a
statistical life for Australia, Portugal, and Brazil are found in the spreadsheet. Data on per
capita income were obtained from the Quick Reference Tables section of the World Bank
site: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GNIPC.pdf, using
the Atlas method figures. Using the same source of data on per capita income, calculate
ranges of  the value of a statistical life for Norway, New Zealand and Croatia.
NOTES
1. This chapter draws upon Anthony E. Boardman,
David H. Greenberg,Aidan R.Vining, and David
L.Weimer,“Plug-In Shadow Price Estimates for
Policy Analysis,” Annals of Regional Science
31(3) 1997, 299–324; and Anming Zhang,
Anthony E. Boardman, David Gillen and
William G.Waters II, Towards Estimating the
Social and Environmental Costs of
Transportation in Canada:A Report for Transport
Canada (Vancouver, Canada: Centre for
Transportation Studies, University of British
Columbia,August 2004) also available on
Transport Canada’s Web site.We would like to
thank Diane Forbes for research assistance in
preparing this chapter.
2. For example,Tae Hoon Oum,W. G.Waters II, and
Jong-Say Yong surveyed over 60 studies of own-
price elasticities of transport demand,“Concepts
of Price Elasticities of Transport Demand and
Recent Empirical Estimates:An Interpretative
Essay,” Journal of Transport Economics and
Policy 26(2) 1992, 139–154.A companion survey
reviews empirical estimates of public transit and
auto usage; see Philip Goodwin,“A Review of
New Demand Elasticities with Special Reference
to Short and Long Run Effects of Price
Changes,” Journal of Transport Economics and
Policy 26(2) 1992, 155–169.
3. For example, one study suggests that transporta-
tion and communications are substitutes; see 
E. A. Selvanathan and Saroja Selvanathan,“The
Demand for Transport and Communication in
the United Kingdom and Australia,”
Transportation Research–B 28(1) 1994, 1–9.
4. For our purpose, value and cost can be used in-
terchangeably, but we stick with common
nomenclature—that is, we refer to “the value of
life saved (or lost)” and “the cost of injury.”
5. For example, on gasoline demand, see Molly
Espey,“Explaining the Variation in Elasticity
Estimates of Gasoline Demand in the United
States:A Meta-Analysis,” Energy Journal
17(3)1996, 49–60.
6. Ted R. Miller, Narrowing the Plausible Range
Around the Value of Life (Washington, D.C.:The
Urban Institute, 1989);Ann Fisher, Lauraine G.
Chestnut, and Daniel M.Violette,“The Value of
Reducing Risks to Death:A Note on New
Evidence,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 8(1) 1989, 88–100; and W. Kip
Viscusi,“The Value of Risks to Life and Health,”
Journal of Economic Literature 31(4) 1993,
1912–1946. See also Arianne de Blaeij, Raymond
J. G. M. Florax, Piet Rietveld, and Erik Verhoef,
“The Value of Statistical Life in Road Safety:A
Meta-Analysis,” Accident Analysis and
Prevention 35, 2003, 973–986.
7. Ted R. Miller,“Variations Between Countries in
Values of Statistical Life,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 34(2) 2000, 169–188;
Janusz R. Mrozek and Laura O.Taylor,“What
Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-Analysis,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2)
2002, 253–270;W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy,
“The Value of Statistical Life:A Critical Review
of Market Estimates Throughout the World,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(1) 2003, 5–76;
and Ikuho Kochi, Bryan Hubbell, and Randall
Kramer,“An Empirical Bayes Approach to
Combining and Comparing Estimates of the
Value of a Statistical Life for Environmental
Policy Analysis,” Environmental & Resource
Economics 34 2006, 385–406.
8. Based on a meta-analysis of 22 U.S. wage-risk
studies, Francois Bellavance and his colleagues
obtained a slightly smaller median value of $7.63
million. Francois Bellavance, Georges Dionne,
and Martin Lebeau,“The Value of a Statistical
Life:A Meta-Analysis with a Mixed Effects
Regression Model,”Working Paper 06-12,
Montreal: Canada Research Chair in Risk
Management, 2006.
421

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
9. In addition, a recent empirical study in which
Viscusi was involved with others found virtually
identical values to these for the lower and upper
bounds of the VSL.Thomas J. Kniesner,W. Kip
Viscusi, Christopher Woock, and James P. Zillak,
“Pinning Down the Value of Statistical Life,”
Discussion Paper No. 3107, Bonn:The Institute
for the Study of Labor, 2007.
10. Eduard Zaloshnja,Ted Miller, Eduardo Romano,
and Rebecca Spicer,“Crash Costs by Body Part
Injured, Fracture Involvement, and Threat to
Life Severity, United States, 2000,” Accident
Analysis and Prevention 36(3) 2004, 415–427.
11. Peter Abelson,“The Value of Life and Health for
Public Policy,” The Economic Record 79 (Special
Issue) 2003, 2–13.This estimate is based on a
VSL of $3 million, life expectancy of 40 years,
and a discount rate of 3 percent.
12. EPA Science Advisory Board, SAB Advisory on
EPA’s Issues in Valuing Mortality Risk Reduction,
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 2007); Joseph E.Aldy and W. Kip
Viscusi,“Age Differences in the Value of a
Statistical Life Revealed Preference Estimates,”
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
1(2) 2007, 241–260; and Alan Krupnick,
“Mortality Risk Valuation and Age: Stated
Preference Evidence,” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 1(2) 2007, 261–282.
13. The weights can be determined in a variety of
ways including, for example, the standard gamble
method, time trade-off value measurements, or
estimated by physicians. Scores on indirect utility
assessment instruments, such as the Health
Utilities Index Mark 2 and 3, the EuroQol, and
the Short-Form 6-D, can also be used as weights.
14. Dorothy P. Rice, Ellen J. MacKenzie, and
Associates, Costs of Injury in the United States:A
Report to Congress (San Francisco, CA: Institute
for Health and Aging, University of California
and Injury Prevention Center,The Johns
Hopkins University, 1989)
15. Ted R. Miller and Maury Galbraith,“Estimating
the Costs of Occupational Injury in the United
States,” Accident Analysis and Prevention 27(6)
1995, 741–747.
16. Alan E. Dillingham,Ted Miller, and David T.
Levy,“A More General and Unified Measure for
Valuing Labour Market Risk,” Applied
Economics 28 1996, 537–542.
17. Zaloshnja, Miller, Romano, and Spicer,“Crash
Costs by Body Part Injured, Fracture Involvement,
and Threat to Life Severity, United States, 2000.”
18. Lawrence J. Blincoe,Angela G. Seay, Eduard
Zaloshnja,Ted R. Miller, Eduardo O. Romano,
Stephen Luchter, and Rebecca S. Spicer, The
Economic Impact of Motor Vehicle Crashes 2000,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
U.S. Department of Transportation.Available at
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov.
19. Note the high cost of motor vehicle crashes that
cause workplace injuries.Although they account
for only 3 percent of workplace injuries, they
represent 6 percent of total costs, nearly six times
the average cost of $21,040.This is partly ex-
plained by the high rate of fatalities from these
crashes and by litigation with nonemployees
over crashes involving multiple vehicles.
20. Ted R. Miller,“Costs and Functional
Consequences of U.S. Roadway Crashes,”
Accident Analysis and Prevention 25(5) 1993,
593–607.
21. There is an AIS 0 category, but we ignore this
level because it is very similar to property dam-
age only (PDO).
22. Ted Miller,“Costs and Functional Consequences
of U.S. Roadway Crashes.”
23. The Federal Aviation Authority, the Office 
of the Secretary of Transportation for the
Department of Transportation, American 
Road & Transportation Builders Association,
and the Texas Transportation Institute com-
monly use these fraction of VSL figures to 
determine the WTP for avoiding an injury
caused by an accident.
24. Ascribed by Miller, Narrowing the Plausible
Range Around the Value of Life, 1989, p. 605, to
Ezra Hauer (no cite).
25. For an excellent example see David A. Long,
Charles D. Mallar, and Craig V.Thornton,
“Evaluating the Benefits and Costs of the Jobs
Corps,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 1(1) 1981, 55–76.
26. Ted R. Miller, Mark Cohen, and Brian Wiersema,
Victim Costs and Consequences:A New Look,
NCJ 155282, National Institute of Justice,
Washington, D.C., 1996; Mark A. Cohen,“The
Monetary Value of Saving a High Risk Youth,
Journal of Quantitative Criminology 14(1) 1998,
5-33; and Mark A. Cohen, Roland T. Rust, Sara
Steen, and Simon T. Tidd, “Willingness-to-Pay
422

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
for Crime Control Programs,” Criminology
42(1), 2004, 89–108.
27. For a CV study of the economic value of reduc-
ing violent crime in the United Kingdom, see
Giles Atkinson,Andrew Healey, and Susana
Mourato,“Valuing the Costs of Violent Crime:A
Stated Preference Approach,” Oxford Economic
Papers 57(4) 2005, 559–585.
28. Herbert Mohring, John Schroeter, and Paitoon
Wiboonchutikula,“The Values of Waiting Time,
Travel Time, and a Seat on a Bus,” Rand Journal
of Economics 18(1) 1987, 40–56.
29. The relationship between speed and flow and be-
tween speed and density has been well docu-
mented. For example, see Anthony E. Boardman
and Lester B. Lave,“Highway Congestion and
Congestion Tolls,” Journal of Urban Economics
4(3) 1977, 340–359.
30. The value of reliability (VOR) has been esti-
mated between 50 to 140 percent of the wage
rate, a variation larger than for recent estimates
of VTTS. See Terence C. Lam and Kenneth A.
Small,“The Value of Time and Reliability:
Measured from a Value Pricing Experiment,”
Transportation Research Part E 37(2–3) 2001,
231–251.
31. United Kingdom: C. Sharp,“Developments in
Transport Policy:The Value of Time Savings and
of Accident Prevention,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 22(2) 1988, 235–238; Mark
Wardman,“The Value of Travel Time:A Review
of British Evidence,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 32(3) 1998, 285–316;
Canada: J. J. Lawson, The Value of Passenger
Travel Time for Use in Economic Evaluation of
Transport Investments (Ottawa, Ontario:
Transport Canada, 1989); New Zealand:Ted
Miller,“The Value of Time and the Benefit of
Time Saving,” presented to the National Roads
Board, New Zealand, and the Federal Highway
Administration, U.S. Dept. of Transportation
(Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 1989);The
Netherlands: H. F. Gunn and C. Rohr,“The
1985–1996 Dutch Value of Time Studies,” paper
presented at PTRC International Conference on
the Value of Time,Wokingham, UK, 1996;
Norway: Farideh Ramjerdi, Lars Rand, and
Kjartan Saelensminde, The Norwegian Value of
Time Study: Some Preliminary Results (Oslo:
Institute of Transport Economics); United States:
Texas Transportation Institute,“Value of Time
and Discomfort Costs, Progress Report on
Literature Review and Assessment of
Procedures and Data,”Technical Memorandum
for NCHRP, pp. 7–12;Ted R. Miller,“The Value
of Time and the Benefit of Time Saving,” Report
prepared for the U.S. Department of
Transportation; Developing countries: John
Bates and Stephen Glaister,“The Valuation of
Time Savings for Urban Transport Appraisal for
Developing Countries:A Review,” Report pre-
pared for the World Bank, 1990.
32. William G.Waters II,“Values of Travel Time
Savings in Road Transportation Project
Evaluation,” in David A. Hensher, Jenny King,
and Tae Hoon Oum, eds., World Transport
Research: Proceedings of the 7th World
Conference on Transport Research, vol. 3 (New
York: Elsevier, 1996) and Markus von Wartburg
and William G.Waters II,“Congestion
Externalities and the Value of Travel Time
Savings,” in Anming Zhang,Anthony E.
Boardman, David Gillen, and William G.Waters
II, Towards Estimating the Social and
Environmental Costs of Transport in Canada:A
Report for Transport Canada.
33. Richard G.Walsh, Larry D. Sanders, and John R.
McKean,“The Consumptive Value of Travel
Time on Recreation Trips,” Journal of Travel
Research 29(1) 1990, 17–24.These authors found
that travelers express a positive WTP for up to
three hours of scenic driving in the Rockies on
weekends.
34. See also David A. Hensher,“The Valuation of
Commuter Travel Time Savings for Car Drivers:
Evaluation Alternative Model Specifications,”
Transportation 28(2) 2001, 101–118.
35. See also Mark Wardman,“A Review of British
Evidence on Time and Service Quality
Valuations,” Transportation Research Part E 37(2)
2001, 107–128.Wardman concluded that the mul-
tiplier for waiting time is 1.47 in Great Britain.
36. Cindy F. Sorg and John B. Loomis, Empirical
Estimates of Amenity Forest Values:A
Comparative Review, General Technical Report
RM-107 (Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest
Service, USDA, 1984).
37. Richard G.Walsh, Donn M. Johnson, and John
R. McKean,“Benefit Transfer of Outdoor
Recreation Demand Studies, 1968–1988,” Water
Resources Research 29(3) 1992, 707–713.
423

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
38. Randall Rosenberger and John B. Loomis,
Benefit Transfer of Outdoor Recreation Use
Values:A Technical Report Supporting the Forest
Service’s Strategic Plan (2000 Revision). General
Technical Report RMRS-GTR-72 (Fort Collins,
CO: Rocky Mountain Research Station, 2001).
This report was based on Doug MacNair, 1993
RPA Recreation Values Database, RPA Program
Contract 43-4568-3-1191 (Washington, D.C.;
USDA Forest Service, 1993) and John Loomis,
Randall S. Rosenberger, and Ram Shrestha,
Updated Estimate of Recreation Values for the
RPA Program by Assessment Region and Use of
Meta-Analysis for Recreation Benefit Transfer,
Final Report RJVA 28-JV7-962 (Fort Collins,
CO: Colorado State University, Department of
Agricultural and Resource Economics, 1999).
39. Pam Kaval and John Loomis, Updated Outdoor
Recreation Use Values with Emphasis on
National Park Recreation, Final Report to
National Park Service, Fort Collins, CO
(Colorado State University, Department of
Agricultural and Resource Economics: Fort
Collins, CO, 2003).
40. See, for example, the reports produced by the
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (www.
millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx).
41. Elena G. Irwin,“The Effects of Open Space on
Residential Property Values,” Land Economics
78(4) 2002, 465–480.
42. I. J. Bateman, K. G.Willis, G. D. Garrod, P.
Doktor, I. Langford, and R. K.Turner,
“Recreation and Environmental Preservation
Value of the Norfolk Broads:A Contingent
Valuation Study,” Report to the National Rivers
Authority, Environmental Appraisal Group,
University of East Anglia, 1992.
43. See, for example, Urs P. Kreuter, Heather G.
Harris, Marty D. Matlock, and Ronald E. Lacey,
“Change in Ecosystem Service Values in the San
Antonio Area,Texas,” Ecological Economics
39(3) 2001, 333–346.
44. John B. Loomis and Douglas S.White,
“Economic Benefits of Rare and Endangered
Species: Summary and Meta-Analysis,”
Ecological Economics 18 1996, 197–206.
45. Paulo A. L. D. Nunes and Jeroen C. J. M. van den
Bergh,“Economic Valuation of Biodiversity:
Sense or Nonsense?” Ecological Economics
39(2) 2001, 203–222.
46. Luke M. Brander, Raymond J. G. M. Floran,
and Jan E.Vermaat,“The Empirics of Wetland
Valuation:A Comprehensive Summary and a
Meta-Analysis of the Literature,” Environmental
& Resource Economics 33(2) 2006, 223–250.
47. For a CV survey example, see Jeffrey L. Jordan
and Abdelmoneim H. Elnagheeb,“Willingness to
Pay for Improvements in Water Drinking
Quality,” Water Resources Research 29(2) 1993,
237–245. Charles W.Abdalla, Brian A. Roach,
and Donald J. Epp,“Valuing Environmental
Quality Changes Using Averting Expenditures:
An Application to Groundwater Contamination,”
Land Economics 68(2) 1992, 163–169, use both
the market analogy method (observations of bot-
tled water expenditures) and defensive expendi-
tures (expenditures incurred in boiling or haul-
ing water or installation of household treatment
systems). For a study that estimates the benefits
of water quality improvements on river segments
using the travel cost method, see V. Kerry Smith
and William H. Desvousges, Measuring Water
Quality Benefits (Boston, MA: Kluwer-Nijhoff
Publishing, 1986).
48. Ralph Luken, F. Johnson, and V. Kibler,“Benefits
and Costs of Pulp and Paper Effluent Controls
Under the Clean Water Act,” Water Resources
Research 28(3) 1992, 665–674.
49. Kenneth D. Frederick,Tim van den Berg,
and Jean Hanson,“Economic Values of
Freshwater in the United States,” Discussion
Paper 97-43 (Resources for the Future:
Washington, D.C., 1996).
50. Other measures, which were proposed in the U.K.,
are the Noise and Number Index (NNI), which
measures aircraft noise, and the Traffic Noise
Index (TNI), which measures motor vehicle noise.
51. Specifically, NSDI  (D>property value)  100,
where D  reduction in property value from a
unit increase in noise exposure that is, D  100
(H>NEF)/H), where H represents house prices.
52.
In contrast, the hedonic 
price of noise or marginal implicit price of 
noise is the slope of the function relating 
house prices, H, to noise level, that is,
53. Ian Bateman, Brett Day, Iain Lake, and 
Andrew Lovett,“The Effect of Road Traffic on
Residential Property Values: A Literature
Review and Hedonic Pricing Study,” Report 
0H
0NEF.
NDSI = -100 0lnH
0NEF.
424

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
to the Scottish Executive Development
Department (Scottish Executive:
Edinburgh, 2001).
54. See Y. J. J. Schipper,“On the Valuation of
Aircraft Noise:A Meta-Analysis,” unpublished
paper,Titenberg Institute, Free University of
Amsterdam, 1996.
55. Dean Uyeno, Stanley Hamilton, and Andrew J. G.
Biggs,“Density of Residential Land Use and the
Impact of Airport Noise,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 27(1) 1993, 3–18.
56. Dallas Burtraw,Alan Krupnick, Erin Mausur,
David Austin, and Deirdre Farrell,“Costs and
Benefits of Reducing Air Pollutants Related to
Acid Rain,” Contemporary Economic Policy
16(4) 1998, 379–400.
57. For more on the sources of emissions in the
United States, Germany, and the United
Kingdom, see David W. Pearce and R. Kerry
Turner, Economics of Natural Resources and
the Environment (Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1990), 192. Also see
Alan J. Krupnick and Paul R. Portney,
“Controlling Urban Air Pollution: A Benefit-
Cost Assessment,” Science 252(26) 1991,
522–528.
58. Pearce and Turner, Economics of Natural
Resources and the Environment.
59. Thomas C. Schelling, “Some Economics of
Global Warming,” American Economic Review
82(1) 1992, 1–14 and Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2001).
60. For example see Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael
Greenstone,“Does Air Quality Matter?
Evidence from the Housing Market,” Journal of
Political Economy 113(2) 2005, 376–424.
61. H. Scott Matthews and Lester B. Lave,
“Applications of Environmental Valuation for
Determining Externality Costs,” Environmental
Science & Technology 34(8) 2000, 1390–1395.
62. Richard S. J.Tol,“The Social Cost of Carbon:
Trends, Outliers and Catastrophes,” Economics:
The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal 2
2008, 1–22.
63. David Pearce,“The Social Cost of Carbon and
Its Policy Implications,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 18(3) 2003, 362–382.
64. Ian W. H. Parry, Margaret Walls, and Winston
Harrington,“Automobile Externalities and
Policies,” Journal of Economic Literature 45(2)
2007, 373–399.
65. Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate
Change:The Stern Review (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2007).
66. William D. Nordhaus,“A Review of the Stern
Review on the Economics of Climate Change,”
Journal of Economic Literature 45(3) 2007:
682–702.
67. Ian W. H. Parry, Margaret Walls, and Winston
Harrington,“Automobile Externalities and
Policies.”
68. Parry,Walls, and Winston also discuss costs that
cannot be estimated, such as U.S. vulnerability to
oil price volatility and military costs associated
with protecting access to foreign oil.
69. We are indebted to Daniel Fujiwara for suggest-
ing the argument in favor of using estimates based
on uncompensated labor supply elasticities to us.
70. The original sources of these estimates are as fol-
lows. B. Dahlby (1994),“The Distortionary Effect
of Rising Taxes”, in W. Robson and W. Scarth
(eds), Deficit Reduction:What Pain,What Gain,
Toronto: C. D. Howe Institute 1994; Charles E.
Stuart,“Welfare Costs per Dollar of Additional
Tax Revenue in the United States,” American
Economic Review 74(3) 1984, 452–462; D.
Fullerton and Y.K. Henderson (1989),“The
Marginal Excess Burden of Different Capital Tax
Instruments, Review of Economics and Statistics
71 1989, 435–42; Charles L. Ballard, John B.
Shoven, and John Whalley,“General Equilibrium
Computations of the Marginal Welfare Costs of
Taxes in the United States,” American Economic
Review 75(1) 1985, 128–138; Charles L. Ballard,
John B. Shoven, and John Whalley,“The Total
Welfare Cost of the United States Tax System:A
General Equilibrium Approach,” National Tax
Journal 38(2) 1985, 125–140; Harry F. Campbell
and K. Bond,“The Costs of Public Funds in
Australia,” Economic Record 73 1997, 28–40.
71. Charles L.Ballard, John B. Shoven, and John
Whalley,“General Equilibrium Computations of
the Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the
United States.”
72. For further discussion of these issues, see Kevin J.
Boyle and John C. Bergstrom,“Benefit Transfer
Studies: Myths, Pragmatism and Idealism,” Water
Resources Research 28(3) 1992, 657–663;William
425

Shadow Prices from Secondary Sources
H. Desvousges, Michael C. Naughton, and George
R Parsons,“Benefit Transfer: Conceptual Problems
in Estimating Water Quality Benefits Using
Existing Studies,” Water Resources Research 28(3)
1992, 675–683; Kenneth E. McConnell,“Model
Building and Judgment: Implications for Benefit
Transfers with Travel Cost Models,” Water
Resources Research 28(3) 1992, 695–700; John B.
Loomis “The Evolution of a More Rigorous
Approach to Benefit Transfer: Benefit Function
Estimation,” Water Resources Research 28(3) 1992,
701–705; Mark Downing and Teofilo Ozuna Jr.
“Testing the Reliability of the Benefit Function
Transfer Approach,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 30(3) 1996, 316–322;
and Martin van Bueren and Jeff Bennett,
“Towards the Development of a Transferable Set
of Value Estimates for Environmental Attributes,”
The Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics 48(1) 2004, 1–32.The van
Bueren and Bennet article investigates the validity
of transforming WTP values that were estimated
for a national sample in Australia to regions within
the country.
73. In Brad J. Bowland and John C. Beghin,“Robust
Estimates of Value of a Statistical Life for
Developing Economies: An Application to
Pollution and Mortality in Santiago,” Journal of
Policy Modeling 23(4) 2001, 385–396.The authors
find a median income elasticity of 1.95 and a
range of income elasticity from 1.7 to 2.3.
74. Ted R. Miller,“Variations Between Countries in
Values of Statistical Life,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 34(2) 2000, 169–188;W.
Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy,“The Value of
Statistical Life:A Critical Review of Market
Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 27(1) 2003, 5–76; and
Janusz R. Mrozek and Laura O. Taylor, “What
Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-Analysis,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2)
2002, 253–270.
75. See PACIFIC Exchange Rate Service, University
of British Columbia at http://fx.sauder.ubc.ca/.
76. Over the past 25 years Canadian incomes (mea-
sured by GDP/capita) have varied between 80
and 90 percent of U.S. incomes according to the
Centre for the Study of Living Standards, Table
3 at http:// www.csls.ca/data/iptjune2009.pdf
(accessed 20 Feb 2010), and are currently at
about 85 percent.
77. For more discussion see Anthony E. Boardman
and Steve Yong,“The Value of Statistical Life,” in
Anming Zhang,Anthony E. Boardman, David
Gillen, and William G.Waters II, Towards
Estimating the Social and Environmental Costs of
Transport in Canada:A Report for Transport
Canada.
78. See Anthony E. Boardman and Steve Yong,“The
Value of Statistical Life,” p. 185.
79. See, for example,W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aidy,
“The Value of Statistical Life:A Critical Review
of Market Estimates Throughout the World”
However, de Blaeij, Florax, Rietveld, and Verhoef,
“The Value of Statistical Life in Road Safety: Meta-
Analysis,” and others, find WTP declines as the
risk level declines.
80. M.W. Jones-Lee, G. Loomes, S. Jones, P. Rowlatt,
M.. Spackman, and S. Jones,“Valuation of Deaths
from Air Pollution,” NERA and CASPAR, report
prepared for the Department of the Environment,
Transport and the Regions and the Department
of Trade and Industry, London, 1998.
81. W. G.Waters II,“The Value of Travel Time Savings
and the Link with Income: Implications for Public
Project Evaluation,” International Journal of
Transport Economics 12(3) 1994, 243–253.
82. von Wartburg and Waters,“Congestion
Externalities.”
83. Stephanie Kirchhoff, Bonnie G. Colbey, and
Jeffrey T. LaFrance,“Evaluating the Performance
of Benefit Transfer:An Empirical Inquiry,” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management
33(1) 1997, 75–93.
426

Shadow Prices: Applications 
to Developing Countries1
W
hy does this book contain a separate chapter on cost-benefit analysis in de-
veloping countries? CBA in developing countries has much in common with
CBA in industrialized countries. The major distinguishing characteristic of
CBA in developing countries is the need to place greater emphasis on shadow pricing,
that is, adjusting the market prices of project outputs and inputs so that they more ac-
curately reflect their value to society. This topic is obviously important for those who
actually will apply CBA in developing countries. However, it also provides insight into
shadow pricing in developed countries.
The reason for the emphasis on shadow pricing is that markets in some developing
countries are much more distorted than in most developed countries. Analysts suggest,
for example, that labor markets are segmented and labor mobility is limited by systems
of land tenure; that official exchange rates do not accurately reflect the value of the na-
tional currency;that the prices of goods exchanged in international markets are distorted
by trade taxes, import controls, and high tariffs; and that credit markets are divided 
between formal and informal sectors. Consequently, experts advocate that shadow
prices, which are often and rather confusingly called accounting prices, be used instead of
market prices in conducting CBAs in developing countries. Similar to shadow price ad-
justments used in industrialized countries for CBA, accounting prices may incorporate
adjustments for market failures such as monopoly and externalities. Particular emphasis
in developing countries, however, is placed on adjustments for taxes (especially tariffs),
subsidies, and quotas that affect the market prices of imports and exports.
Surprisingly, perhaps, there is not only agreement among the experts on using
shadow prices, but also on the basic methods to use in determining the values of these
shadow prices. Nonetheless, considerable variation remains in the details of how these
methods are applied in practice.These methods, which received much of their impetus
from international organizations involved in the funding of projects in developing
countries, were developed in the early 1970s by the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization2 and by Ian Little and James Mirrlees.3 The ideas con-
tained in these two publications were then synthesized by Lyn Squire and Herman G.
van der Tak,4 two employees of the World Bank, who emphasized the concepts devel-
oped by Little and Mirrlees. As a consequence, the resulting approach, which with
some modification continues to enjoy wide acceptance, is sometimes called the LMST
accounting price method. This chapter describes this method and discusses some of the
key issues it raises.5
Form Chapter 17 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
427

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
THE LMST METHODOLOGY
The LMST methodology makes a basic distinction between tradeable goods and non-
tradeable goods. Tradeable goods include consumption goods and productive factors
that are exported or imported, as well as products for which there might potentially be
an international market—for example, close substitutes of the goods that are traded in-
ternationally. Thus, traded goods affect, or potentially can affect, a nation’s balance of
payments. Nontradeable goods include all other consumption goods and productive fac-
tors such as local transportation, electricity, services, and (most importantly) local labor.
The key to LMST project evaluation is in using world prices, the prices at which goods
are actually bought and sold internationally, to shadow price all project inputs and out-
puts that are classified as tradeable.6 Nontradeable goods are often produced with in-
puts that are tradeable so that world prices can also be used to value them. Even the
labor for a project may be drawn from other sectors of the economy where it was previ-
ously producing tradeable goods so that world prices can once more be used.7
The rationale for using world prices is not that free trade prevails or that world
prices are undistorted—although they are less distorted than the domestic market
prices in many developing countries and are probably less distorted today than they
were when the LMST methodology was initially developed—but that they more accu-
rately reflect the opportunities that are available to a country, and these opportunities
should be recognized in evaluating projects. For example, if a project input has to be
imported, it is reasonable to value it at its import price. Similarly, if project output is to
be exported, it is reasonable to value it on the basis of its export price because this in-
dicates what it would contribute to the nation’s foreign exchange. Thus, the methodol-
ogy is based on the principle of trade opportunity costs.
To see the rationale for using world prices to value project outputs and inputs
more clearly, consider a developing country that is conducting a CBA of a proposal to
build a steel plant with government funds. Although the country currently has a high
tariff on imported steel, it nonetheless is dependent on steel produced in other coun-
tries. Because the tariff is incorporated into the domestic market price of steel, it can be
viewed as a transfer between domestic steel buyers and the government. However,
world prices do not incorporate tariffs.Thus, the world price for an export is often con-
siderably lower than its market price in a developing country. Consequently, a CBA
that is based on domestic market prices could indicate that the steel plant project
should proceed, when, in fact, the real resource cost of importing steel (that is, the cost
net of the tariff) is smaller than the resource cost of producing it domestically.
Similarly, if a project uses a locally produced (but potentially importable) input that
has an artificially inflated price because of high tariffs or import quotas, the potential
to purchase the input more cheaply on the world market should be recognized in de-
termining the project’s cost. As a third example, consider a project to increase the pro-
duction and foreign sales of an agricultural crop. In some developing countries, na-
tional policies keep the domestic market prices of some agricultural crops artificially
low. When this occurs, a crop production project might not pass the cost-benefit test if
domestic market prices are used, but could pass it if the analysis is based instead on
world prices.Thus, the LMST method argues that the values of imports and exports on
the world market should be the basis for decisions about domestic projects.
428

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE LMST METHOD IN PRACTICE
To describe how this kind of shadow pricing is done in practice, we discuss three exam-
ples for an import, for an export, and for a nontradeable good (electricity).8 All three
examples are assumed to pertain to a project being considered in a small, developing
country with a distorted economy. For simplicity, it is also assumed that the amounts of
imports and exports involved would not be large enough to affect world prices.This last
assumption, which is sometimes called the “small country assumption,” is the one usu-
ally made in conducting CBAs of projects in developing countries and is realistic except
when a project will substantially affect a country’s export of a good and the country has
a large share of the world market for that good.9
Shadow pricing in all three cases involves multiplying each market price by an
accounting price ratio (APR).An APR can be defined as follows:
(1)
Because the accounting price of a good or a productive factor is essentially synony-
mous with its shadow price, multiplying the market price of a good by its APR converts
it to its shadow price.That is,
The ways in which APRs are obtained in practice are described as we work through the
examples.
An Import
Determination of the accounting price for an import that is being used as an input to
our hypothetical project (or, alternatively, an output from the project that substitutes
for a good that otherwise would have to be imported) is shown in Table 1. The CIF
shadow price for good i = APR for good i * market price for good i
 = shadow price of good i
market price of good i
 APR for good i = accounting price of good i
market price of good i
TABLE 1
Accounting Price for Imported Good
Item
Dollars 
(U.S. $)
Market Value 
(Pesos)
APR
Accounting 
Value (Pesos)
CIF price
40
80
1.00
80
Tariff
—
10
0.00
—
Transport
—
8
0.50
4
Distribution
—
5
0.80
4
All components
—
103
0.85
88
Exchange rate: 2 pesos  US$1
Source: Adapted from Terry A. Powers,“An Overview of the Little-Mirrlees/Squire-van der Tak Accounting
Price System,” in Terry A. Powers, ed., Estimating Accounting Prices for Project Appraisal (Washington, D.C.:
Inter-American Development Bank, 1981),Table 1-1.
429

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
price of a unit of the good on the world market, that is, the cost of the item (C) plus in-
surance (I) and freight expenses to the port of destination (F), is US$40.This $40 price
is sometimes called a border price because it corresponds to the amount of foreign cur-
rency needed to pay for the good at the border. To translate the $40 amount into the
local currency, pesos, it would be multiplied by the country’s exchange rate. In the ex-
ample, a dollar is assumed to equal 2 pesos. Thus, the $40 CIF price is equivalent to 80
pesos. Because the 80 peso price is already a world price, its shadow price is also 80
pesos. Hence, the accounting price ratio equals 1.
As just indicated, an exchange rate is needed to translate foreign currency, such as
U.S. dollars, into the local currency. Usually, the official exchange rate is used for this pur-
pose. However, as the existence of black markets in currency exchange in many devel-
oping countries attests, a nation’s official exchange rate may not accurately reflect the
actual value of its currency.This would occur, for example, if the official exchange rate
is that a dollar is convertible into 2 pesos, but a dollar can, on average, actually be used
to purchase domestic output worth 3 pesos. This latter value is called the shadow ex-
change rate. In practice, the official, rather than the shadow, exchange rate, is normally
used in determining accounting prices because it is more easily obtained.This choice is
not very important for CBA, however. In conducting a CBA using the LMST method,
all project benefits and costs must be expressed in accounting prices. As just seen,
some, such as imports, already are. As discussed later, others, such as nontradeables,
must be converted into accounting prices. As a result, all benefits and costs are made
commensurable. Moreover, each is the multiplicative product of its value in dollars (or
some other foreign currency) and a constant that equals whatever exchange rate is
being used. Consequently, the choice between the official and the shadow exchange
rates affects the absolute size of benefits and costs—the shadow rate is usually larger
than the official rate—but not their relative size. Thus, the choice neither determines
whether net benefits are positive or negative nor the relative ranking of projects.10
As indicated in Table 1, in addition to its CIF price of 80 pesos, the domestic market
price of the import also reflects a tariff of 10 pesos, local transportation costs of 8 pesos,
and distribution costs of 5 pesos. Thus, a unit of the import would cost 103 pesos in the
local market. However, only part of these additions to the market price reflect real re-
source costs to the economy. For example, the revenue from a tariff is simply a transfer
between buyers and the government.Thus, its accounting price ratio is set equal to zero.
Transportation and distribution do involve the use of real resources, but in this example,
their accounting price ratios are less than 1. Consequently, their shadow or accounting
prices are less than their market prices. (The reasons for this divergence will be discussed
later.) Hence, the shadow price of the import equals 88 pesos (80  4  4), considerably
less than its market price of 103 pesos.The import’s overall APR is, therefore, less than
1 (0.85  88>103), which is typically the case for imports.
An Export
Table 2 describes the determination of the shadow price of an export that is produced
by the project (or, alternatively, a project input that otherwise would have been ex-
ported). The price of the export at the port of origin, before insurance and freight
charges to its ultimate destination are added (its so-called free on board [FOB] price), is
430

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
TABLE 2
Accounting Price for Export
Item
U.S. Dollars 
(U.S. $)
Market Value
(pesos)
APR
Accounting 
Value (pesos)
FOB price
100
200
—
—
Export tax
25
50
1.0
50
Transport for export
1
2
0.5
1
Factory gate price
74
148
1.0
148
Transport for domestic sale
—
4
0.5
2
Distribution in domestic market
—
10
0.8
8
Exchange rate: 2 pesos  U.S. $1
Source: Adapted from Terry A. Powers,“An Overview of the Little-Mirrlees/Squire-van der Tak Accounting
Price System,” in Terry A. Powers, ed., Estimating Accounting Prices for Project Appraisal (Washington, D.C.:
Inter-American Development Bank, 1981),Table 1-2.
assumed to equal $100 or 200 pesos. Because the $100 is the amount of foreign currency
received at the border, it is the border price for an export. The FOB price includes the
cost of producing a unit of the good (148 pesos), as well as an export tax (50 pesos) and
transportation costs to the port of origin (2 pesos). Only half the transportation costs
are assumed to reflect real resource costs to the economy (i.e., the APR equals 0.5).The
export tax is a transfer between foreign purchasers and the domestic government, but be-
cause foreigners typically would not be given standing in evaluating the project, the tax
amount would be included in the shadow price.Therefore, if the good were produced by
the project and exported,its shadow price would equal 199 pesos (148  50  1).Thus,the
overall accounting price ratio for the export is slightly less than 1 (0.99  199>200).
It is useful to point out that by shadow pricing the export, it is valued on the basis
of each unit’s contribution to the nation’s foreign exchange. Thus, for example, al-
though a tax on an export increases its shadow price, possibly decreasing sales, a sub-
sidy on an export, perhaps, to encourage sales, decreases its shadow price.
Now, suppose that rather than being a product for export, the good in question is a
project input that would be exported if the project were not undertaken. Under these
circumstances, the shadow price must include the additional costs incurred by diverting
the good to domestic use, as well as revenue forgone and costs saved by not exporting
the product. Thus, the net effects of not exporting the good must be determined. The
revenue forgone is the 200 peso FOB price, while the cost saved is the 1 peso of trans-
portation cost to the port of origin.The additional costs incurred by diverting the good
to the project include local transportation costs of 4 pesos and distribution costs of 10
pesos. As previously discussed, because only part of these additional costs reflect real
resource costs to the economy, they must be adjusted to their shadow price equivalents
by multiplying them by their accounting price ratios. Thus, the shadow price of the ex-
port when it is diverted to domestic use is 209 pesos (200  1  2  8).
A practical problem arises when project inputs are potential exports, such as the
case just described, and also when project outputs are substituted for potential imports.
The problem involves selecting the appropriate world price to use in shadow pricing
because often there will be several alternative world prices that are candidates because
similar products may vary along different dimensions such as quality and ease of access.
431

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
Obviously, a CBA that selects an export price from the low end or an import price from
the high end of such a range is more likely to show that net benefits are positive than
one that selects from the opposite end of the range. One reasonable approach is simply
to use a value from the middle of the range if the good cannot be priced in terms of its
specific characteristics.
A Nontradeable Good (Electricity)
Table 3 lists the costs of the various inputs needed to produce the additional electric-
ity required by the project. These inputs would presumably be diverted by the pro-
ject from other uses and, thus, represent opportunity costs associated with the pro-
ject. The electricity itself is assumed to be produced domestically and, hence, is an
example of a nontraded good. However, for CBA purposes, it must be made com-
mensurable with traded goods, which, as already discussed, are valued in terms of
their world prices.
To make tradeable and nontradeable goods commensurable, the LMST ap-
proach involves determining the equivalent value of nontradeables in world prices.
To do this, it exploits the fact that the production of nontradeables involves inputs
that are tradeable. As the table indicates, many of the inputs required to produce the
TABLE 3
Accounting Price for Electricity Value at Marginal Cost of Supply 
(in thousands of pesos)
Item
Cost in
Domestic Prices
APR
Cost in 
Accounting Prices
Capital costs
3,000
0.89c
2,678
Thermal generating unit (CIF)
1,800
1.00
1,800
Building and site construction
1,200
0.73
878
Imported materials (CIF)
500
1.00
500
Labor
250
0.60a
150
Industry taxes and tariffs
200
0.00
0
Other expenses
250
0.91
228
Imported materials (CIF)
180
1.00
180
Labor
40
0.60a
24
Other expenses
30
0.80b
24
Annual operating costs
1,000
0.83c
831
Fuel oil (CIF)
800
1.00
800
Maintenance
40
0.78
31
Parts (CIF)
15
1.00
15
Labor
20
0.60a
12
Other
5
0.80b
4
Taxes and tariffs
160
0.00
0
aThe accounting price ratio of labor is discussed later; here it is assumed to equal 0.6 for purposes of the
example.
bThe standard conversion factor (SCF), which is assumed to have a value of 0.8 for purposes of the exam-
ple, is used to convert the domestic value to its accounting price.
cRounded to two significant digits.
Source: Adapted from Terry A. Powers,“An Overview of the Little-Mirrlees/Squire-van der Tak Accounting
Price System,” in Terry A. Powers, ed., Estimating Accounting Prices for Project Appraisal (Washington, D.C.:
Inter-American Development Bank, 1981),Table 1-3.
432

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
needed electricity—for example, the material required to construct the generating
plant—are tradeable. Thus, using the LMST method to shadow price a nontraded
good involves breaking down the cost of the good into its traded, nontraded, and
labor components. The nontraded components can then be further broken down
into their traded, nontraded, and labor components, and so forth. These components
and subcomponents are listed in the table. By multiplying each of these components
and subcomponents by their accounting price ratio, the opportunity cost of supply-
ing an additional amount of a nontraded good to the project can be evaluated in
terms of the tradeable goods required to produce the additional amount. Although
this example pertains to electricity, the same procedure would be used in the case of
other nontraded goods such as the transport and distribution costs items listed in
Tables 1 and 2.
The different APRs listed in Table 3 are derived by several different methods. As
previously indicated, the APR of a tradeable component that is expressed in CIF
prices (for example, imported materials) is 100, although the ratio for a domestic
transfer (for example, tariffs on tradeables and taxes on nontradeables) is zero. The
APR for domestic labor is complex to derive and will be discussed in some detail
later. Those for nontradeable components are simply weighted averages of the APRs
of their components, where the weights are the cost of each component expressed in
shadow prices as a fraction of total cost. Sometimes these weighted averages are de-
rived from calculations made by the project evaluators. For example, the APR for an-
nual operating costs of 0.83, shown in Table 3, is computed as follows: 1.0 (800>1000)
 0.78(40>1000)  0(160>1000). However, the weighted APRs that are used to obtain
shadow pricing for fairly small subcomponents (for example, other maintenance ex-
penses) are often conversion factors (CFs), which are obtained from previous studies
and pertain to entire industries or national economic sectors, such as the electricity
and gas industry, rather than to one specific input, such as the fuel oil used to produce
the electricity needed by the project.
Except for pertaining to a broader segment of the economy, conversion factors
are similar to APRs that are developed for a specific project evaluation. Like project-
specific APRs, they are weighted averages of their components. Because conver-
sion factors can be plugged into more than one CBA, they are obviously an 
example of shadow prices from secondary sources. Because the use of conversion fac-
tors saves time for evaluators, the extent to which they are used in a particular CBA
depends on the resources available for the study and the accuracy required. In practice,
the role of conversion factors is often of considerable importance.
A technique called semi-input-output (SIO) analysis is often used to derive
conversion factors. SIO analysis utilizes national input-output tables, national cen-
suses, household expenditure surveys, and other national data, such as information
on tariffs, quotas, and subsidies. SIO analysis is particularly difficult to conduct if
input-output tables are not already available, because then the analyst must piece
together the equivalent information. Using the available data, an SIO table is con-
structed that divides the economy into as many productive sectors as the data allow
(for example, corn and corn products, fishing, mining, hotels, electricity and gas, real
estate, etc.). Often fifty or more productive sectors are listed. Part of the output
433

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
produced in each sector will be directly consumed, and part will be used as inputs in
the other sectors. The table indicates the percentage contribution of the output pro-
duced in each sector to the total market value of the output produced in all the other
sectors. In addition, primary factor inputs such as labor, capital, foreign exchange,
and taxes and subsidies are also listed, and their percentage contributions to the total
market value of the output produced in each of the productive sectors is also indi-
cated. Deriving conversion factors from the table constructed for SIO analysis essen-
tially involves solving a set of simultaneous equations using matrix algebra.11 In
doing this, SIO analysis treats interdependence between different sectors of the
economy consistently; for example, coal may be used to produce electricity and elec-
tricity may be used in mining coal.
In addition to being used to obtain CFs for individual industries, SIO can be used
to obtain CFs for skilled and unskilled labor and aggregate CFs. One such aggregate
CF is the consumption conversion factor (CCF), which is a weighted average of the
APRs for a nationally representative market basket of goods. The CCF plays several
roles in shadow pricing that are mentioned later.Another aggregate CF is the standard
conversion factor (SCF), which is the ratio of the value of all production at accounting
prices to the value of all production at market prices. In other words, the SCF is the
weighted average of the CFs for the productive sectors of the economy, where the
weights are the contribution that each sector makes to total national output. The SCF
is used in computing the shadow prices of minor components of nontraded goods when
more specific CFs are not available.
Although nowadays the SCF is usually derived by actually computing a weighted
average of the CFs for the productive sectors of an economy, it is instructive to exam-
ine briefly the following formula, which has been used in the past to obtain a crude ap-
proximation of the SCF:
(2)
where, M is the total value of imports in market prices, X is the total value of exports in
market prices, Tm is the total effective tariff rate on imports, Tx is the total effective tax
rate on exports, Sm is the total effective subsidy rate on imports, and Sx is the total effec-
tive subsidy rate on exports.The numerator of this expression values imports and exports
at their domestic market prices, while the denominator values them at their world prices.
This expression is only a crude approximation because it ignores nontraded goods in the
economy and because it assumes that distortions in domestic market prices are entirely
due to tariffs and import taxes and subsidies (thereby ignoring other distortions such as
taxes on nontraded goods and import quotas, monopoly power, and externalities).What
is interesting about this expression is that it implies that tariffs and export subsidies cause
market prices to be larger than world prices, while taxes on exports and import subsidies
have the opposite effect.As the former are usually more important in developing coun-
tries than the latter, the SCF, most CFs for specific sectors of the economy, and most
APRs for specific goods have values that are less than 1.12 For example, Steve Curry and
John Weiss examined separate studies of 13 different countries and found that estimates
of the SCF range between 0.59 and 0.96, with an average value of about 0.8.13
SCF =
M + X
M(1 + Tm - Sm) + X(1 - Tx + Sx)
434

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
SHADOW PRICING WHEN GOODS ARE IN FIXED SUPPLY
As previously indicated, the LMST approach normally relies on the shadow prices of
inputs required to produce a good to convert its market price to a shadow price.An im-
portant exception to this procedure occurs when the supply of a good is fixed, however.
This could happen, for example, if there is a quota on imports or the government exer-
cises a monopoly over providing a particular good or service and has run out of funds
needed to supply more.
A situation in which supply is fixed is illustrated in Figure 1, which pertains to
the electricity that would be required for our project. The production of electricity is
often characterized as having constant marginal costs up to a capacity constraint.
Consistent with this, the supply curve in the figure is perfectly elastic prior to Q1 and
then becomes completely inelastic when the nation’s generating capacity is exhausted.
Let Da represents the demand curve for electricity without the project and Da rep-
resents the demand curve with the project. Under these circumstances, the electricity
capacity constraint is not binding.As a result, the project would not affect the current
consumers of electricity. However, it would require that additional inputs be used to
produce the additional electricity needed by the project. Consequently, the method
Price
per kW
P2
P1
P0
Da
Da
Db
Db
S
Q2
Q1
Quantity in kWs
FIGURE 1
Shadow Pricing when Electricity Supply Is Either Completely
Elastic or Completely Inelastic
435

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
outlined earlier for deriving the shadow cost of the electricity used on the project
would be appropriate.
Now assume that without the project the demand curve for electricity is Db and
with the project it is Db. Thus, the project would increase the market price of electric-
ity from P1 to P2 and reduce the consumption of electricity by current consumers from
Q1 to Q2. Because of the price increase, current consumers lose surplus, while the pro-
ducers of electricity gain surplus. These changes in surplus can be appropriately taken
into account in determining the cost of electricity to the project by simply using the av-
erage of the old and new prices, (P1  P2)>2, as the market price. Thus, measured in
market prices, the cost of electricity for the project would equal [(P1  P2)>2]
(Q1  Q2).
To use the LMST method, however, this cost must be converted to its shadow
price equivalent. In doing this, account must be taken of the fact that when the sup-
ply of electricity is fixed the opportunity cost of diverting some electricity from cur-
rent consumers to the project is not additional inputs but the consumption forgone
by current consumers. One way of doing this is to ask what consumers would pur-
chase with [(P1  P2)>2](Q1  Q2) of additional income and then determine the
shadow prices of each of these goods using the techniques discussed earlier. Of
course, it is highly unlikely that the specific items that consumers would purchase
would actually be known. Thus, in practice, [(P1  P2)>2](Q1  Q2) would probably
be converted to its shadow price equivalent by multiplying it by the CCF, which as
previously mentioned is a weighted average of APRs for a nationally representative
market basket of goods.
THE SHADOW PRICE OF LABOR
A project in any country will use labor. In developing countries, increasing the employ-
ment of unskilled workers may, in fact, be an important part of the motivation for initi-
ating many projects. Even when it is not, labor is still likely to be a major nontradeable
input used in the project. Hence, shadow pricing the cost of employing workers is of
critical importance in conducting CBA in developing counties. Shadow pricing labor
raises some difficult special issues, however.
Like any input used in a project, labor has an APR:
(3)
This expression implies that different types of labor (for example, skilled and unskilled
workers) may have different APRs. It also indicates that to determine the shadow price
of labor it is first necessary to determine labor’s market wage. Doing this is fairly
straightforward when skilled workers who are employed at a nation’s business estab-
lishments are hired to work on a project, but it is not so apparent when the project
hires unskilled workers.We discuss the easier case first.
If a nation’s labor market for skilled workers is functioning reasonably well—for
example,unemployment among such workers is not high—then the wage at which they
are hired by a project provides a reasonable approximation of their market wage.
APR of type j labor =
shadow wage of type j labor
the market wage of type j labor
436

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
Consequently, the project wage provides a reasonable approximation of their produc-
tivity elsewhere and, hence, represents the social opportunity cost (expressed in do-
mestic prices) of hiring them for the project.14 If a conversion factor is available for
skilled workers, then the shadow wage can be obtained by multiplying it by the pro-
ject wage. Alternatively, but less satisfactorily, the project wage can be multiplied by
sector-specific conversion factors to convert it to its foreign exchange equivalent. For
example, if carpenters are hired, then the project wage for carpenters can be multi-
plied by the conversion factor for the construction industry. Still less satisfactory if
neither a conversion factor for skilled workers nor an appropriate sector-specific con-
version factor is available, then an estimate of the standard CCF can be used.
A special case occurs when a developing country does not have sufficient skilled
workers for the project and the required workers must be hired from abroad. These
foreign workers would typically not be given standing. Nonetheless, they would
spend some of their earnings within the country, while sending or taking the remain-
der out of the country.Thus, to determine the shadow cost of hiring foreign labor, the
fraction of earnings sent abroad would have to be estimated. As these earnings
would be a direct loss of foreign exchange, they would have an APR of 1. In princi-
ple, the value of each item purchased within the country should be multiplied by its
APR. Because the information to do this would probably not be available, however,
all earnings that remain in the country would probably be multiplied by the economy-
wide CCF.15 Hence, the shadow wage for foreign workers, SWf, would be computed
as follows:
(4)
where, PW is the project wage, h is the fraction of the project wage sent or taken home,
and (1  h) is the fraction spent domestically.
A substantial fraction of the unskilled workers for a project in a developing coun-
try are ultimately likely to be drawn from the countryside.This will be true not only of
projects in rural areas, but also of projects in cities, even if the workers who are directly
hired by the project currently reside in urban areas. The reason is that as employment
increases in urban areas in developing countries, workers in rural areas are induced to
migrate to the areas where employment has increased.
Why this migration occurs is suggested by a well-known model developed by
John Harris and Michael Todaro.16 Their model is based on two observations about
developing countries: unemployment is often very high in urban areas, and earn-
ings are typically considerably higher in urban than in rural areas. Although Harris
and Todaro do not explain the reasons for the higher urban wages, they could 
be due to minimum wage laws that are enforced in urban areas but not rural areas,
the role of unions, decisions by foreign corporations that are under pressure in
their home countries to pay wages that exceed subsistence levels, or a belief on the
part of employers that higher wages result in higher productivity because higher 
paid workers are healthier, less likely to leave the firm, and more motivated.17
The key point for purposes of the Harris-Todaro model is that urban wages are
above their equilibrium level and, consequently, result in urban unemployment.18
SWf = [h + (1 - h)(CCF)](PW)
437

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
Rural wages, in contrast, are at their equilibrium level and, consequently, lower
than urban wages.
Harris and Todaro suggest that because of the higher urban wages, workers will
migrate from the countryside to the cities, even though some of them will not be able
to find jobs. More specifically, they postulate that the probability that a rural worker
will obtain employment upon migrating to a city equals (L  U)>L, where L is the size
of the workforce in the city, U is the number of unemployed persons, and E  (L  U)
is the number of employed workers. Therefore, the model implies that workers will
have an incentive to migrate from the countryside to the city as long as:
(5)
where RW is the rural wage, UW is the urban wage, and UW(E>L) is the wage that mi-
grating workers will receive on average (in other words, UW(E>L) is their expected
wage).Thus, according to the model, rural-urban migration will cease when:
(6)
Two important implications of this model are that even when there is no incentive for
further migration urban unemployment may continue to be high, and urban wages may
continue to exceed rural wages.
We now use the Harris-Todaro model to examine the effects of locating a new
project in a city. Assume that prior to initiating the project the equilibrium condi-
tion specified in equation (6) is being met. Now assume that 
unskilled workers
are hired to work on the project. If 
is fairly small relative to the size of the work-
force, then wage rates are unlikely to be affected. Moreover, urban wage rates may
also be unaffected because they are already above their equilibrium level. However,
because of the increase in the number of available urban jobs, the expected urban
wage facing rural workers will increase to UW[(E 
)>L], inducing some rural
workers to migrate. Consequently, the equilibrium can only be reestablished if:
(7)
where L is the number of workers added to the urban labor force.
There are two things to notice here. First, if there are no changes in urban wage
rates, then current residents of the city who are presently outside the labor force (that
is, not already employed or seeking employment) will not be induced to join it, except
perhaps by the increase in the number of available jobs. Therefore, many, if not most,
of the workers added to the urban labor force will be migrants from rural areas.
Second, according to the model, the number of migrants is likely to exceed the num-
ber jobs created by the project. This can be seen by first rearranging the terms in
equation (7) to obtain:
(8)
L + ¢L = L(E + ¢E)>E
¢
E>L = (E + ¢E)>(L + ¢L)
¢E
¢E
¢E
RW = UW(E>L)
RW 6 UW(E>L)
438

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
and then by subtracting L  L(E)>E from equation (8) and rearranging the terms to
obtain:
or
(9)
Because the urban labor force consists of both workers and the unemployed (that is,
L  E  U), the ratio L>E must exceed 1 and, thus, as equation (9) implies, so will the
ratio L> E.
The implications of this simple model can be illustrated with an example. If the urban
wage is 50 percent higher than the rural wage (that is, if RW(L>E)  1.5RW  UW), then
equation (6) implies that E>L equals 0.67. Hence, one-third of the urban workforce will
be unemployed. Moreover, equation (9) implies that for each job created by a pro-
ject, 1.5 persons will enter the urban labor force (that is,

E(L>E)  1(3>2) 
1.5). For reasons already stressed, many, if not most, of these persons are likely to be
rural migrants.
Because most of the unskilled workers added to the workforce as a result of a gov-
ernment project would probably be drawn from the countryside, the output that is for-
gone is production in rural areas. If the project is located in a rural area, then rural-urban
migration is not a consideration, and the shadow wage would be obtained by simply
multiplying the rural wage by the most appropriate conversion factor that is available.
(Some of the possible conversion factors that might be used were listed earlier when the
shadow wage of skilled workers was discussed.) However, if the project is located in an
urban area, then account must be taken of the number of workers who would leave the
countryside for each job created.According to the Harris-Todaro model, if all the work-
ers added to the workforce as a result of the project are rural migrants, then this can be
accomplished by multiplying the product of the rural wage and the conversion factor by
the ratio, L>E. Notice, however, that equation (6) indicates that RW(L>E)  UW. In
other words, the Harris-Todaro model implies that an upper-bound estimate of the
shadow wage rate for evaluating projects in urban areas can be obtained by multiplying
the urban wage rate by the appropriate CF.19
The product of the urban wage rate and the CCF should be viewed as an upper bound
because fewer than L>E rural workers may migrate in response to each job created by an
urban project. First, as previously mentioned, some urban residents may be induced into
the labor force as jobs are created by the project. Second, the actual number of migrants
could be less if workers are risk averse or there are monetary or psychic costs associated
with migrating.Third, if the project is sufficiently large, then the migration of rural work-
ers could cause rural wages to rise, thereby reducing the ultimate number of migrants. If
fewer than L>E workers migrate,then the appropriate market wage to use in determining
the shadow wage rate would be less than the urban wage. Thus, Caroline Dinwiddy and
Francis Teal demonstrate that, under a wide variety of assumptions, the appropriate mar-
ket wage to use is likely to fall somewhere between the rural and the urban market
wage.20 Consequently, if large numbers of unskilled workers will be employed on an urban
project in a developing country, and there are wide differences between rural and urban
¢
¢L
¢
¢
¢L>¢E = L>E
L + ¢L - L = L(E + ¢E)>E - L(E)>E
439

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
wages, a sensitivity test should be conducted in determining the shadow wage rate by first
using the rural market wage and then using the urban wage.
While urban wage rates for unskilled workers can be obtained from survey
data—for example, the average manufacturing wage can be used21—many rural
workers produce crops for their own consumption. Hence, the effective wage rate
of these workers is more difficult to ascertain. One way to construct an estimate of
the rural market wage is to first determine how a typical rural worker who is likely
to be affected by the project being evaluated allocates his or her productive time
and then estimate the value of the worker’s output. For instance, suppose that the
typical worker is employed on a cacao plantation for half the year and receives a
daily wage of 40 pesos and food and transportation valued at 10 pesos a day, for a
total of 50 pesos. Because the worker is only needed at the plantation for six
months, he or she works at home during the remainder of the year, growing corn
for three months and bananas for the remaining three months. Although the corn
and bananas are mostly grown for home consumption, if they were brought to the
local market they could be sold for 910 pesos and 1,365 pesos, respectively.
Dividing market value of corn and bananas by the 91 days during which the work
to grow each was performed suggests that the worker earned a daily market wage
of 10 pesos from growing corn and a daily market wage of 15 pesos from growing
bananas. Given this information, the worker’s daily wage can be computed as a
weighted average of his or her daily return from each endeavor, where the weights
are the fraction of time he or she devoted to each activity. That is:22
(10)
In principle, at least two additional factors should be taken into account in deter-
mining the shadow wage rate of rural, unskilled workers, although in practice they
rarely are because of the lack of adequate information.
First, it is possible that moving to the city requires the worker to work longer
hours, places the worker under greater stress, and results in a less-satisfactory lifestyle.
If so, then the shadow wage rate should, in principle, be adjusted upward to account for
the resulting loss of utility.
Second, many rural workers live in large extended families. If a project induces a
rural worker to migrate to the city, then the effects on the remaining family members
should, in principle, be taken into account. The remaining family members lose the
migrating worker’s output, of course, but they gain because the worker no longer
consumes the income available to the family. These two amounts are not necessarily
entirely offsetting; it is possible that the gain exceeds the loss. This would occur, for
example, if the family shares its income (the total value of the output produced by all
family members) equally among its members. Under these circumstances, each fam-
ily member’s consumption level would be equal to the average value of the output
produced by the family.The family member’s contribution to family output, however,
would correspond to his or her marginal product. Because rural families typically
produce much of their output at home on a fixed amount of land, it is likely that the
family would be producing on the declining segment of its marginal product curve. If
so, the value of a family member’s marginal product will be smaller than the value of
RW = .5(50) + .25(10) + .25(15) = 31.25 pesos
440

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
the output that he or she consumes. Thus, if a family member is induced by a project
to migrate in such circumstances, the consumption levels of the remaining family
members will increase.
ADDITIONAL TOPICS
As previously mentioned, with the exception of using world prices to shadow price
benefits and costs, conducting CBAs in developing countries is similar to CBA in in-
dustrialized countries. However, the literature concerning CBA in developing coun-
tries has evolved somewhat separately from the main body of CBA literature.As a re-
sult, there are a few additional topics that are treated somewhat differently in the
former than in the latter. In this section, we briefly review these topics. The discussion
is brief because these differences are mainly conceptual in nature; they appear to have
had little effect on the actual conduct of CBA.
Budget-Constrained CBA and Discounting
The points concerning discounting are generally applicable to CBA in developing coun-
tries as well as industrialized countries. When discussing industrialized countries, one
sometimes presumes that funding for government projects would come from taxes, which
would reduce consumption or private-sector investment,or by borrowing from foreigners.
In 1974, the World Bank led an international
effort to eradicate onchocerciasis (river blind-
ness) in West Africa. The project, which ex-
tended over more than two decades and cov-
ered 11 countries, used insecticides to kill the
blackfly, the carrier of the parasite that causes
onchocerciasis. The benefits of the program
stem from the reduction in the number of
cases of river blindness. A CBA of a similar
program in a developed country would likely
have measured benefits by monetizing the
morbidity and mortality effects with shadow
prices. However, estimating the necessary
shadow prices in these very poor countries
was impractical. Instead, the CBA of the pro-
ject conducted by the World Bank in 1995
measured benefits in terms of the value of
increased agricultural output resulting from
increased labor and land. As the average
EXHIBIT 1
person who develops blindness lives with it
for 8 years and dies 12 years prematurely,
each avoided case adds about 20 years of pro-
ductive life. Assuming that these years are
employed in agriculture, the percentage in-
crease in the rural labor supply resulting from
the project was projected and multiplied by
an estimated output elasticity of labor of 0.66
to obtain the predicted percentage increase in
agricultural output. The increase in agricul-
tural output was in turn valued using an ac-
counting price, the agricultural value-added,
which is estimated by the World Bank. A sim-
ilar procedure was used to value the addi-
tional agricultural land made available through
eradication. Overall, the project offered net
positive benefits, even when assuming labor
force participation rates and land utilization
rates of only 70 percent.
Source: Adapted from Aehyung Kim and Bruce Benton,“Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Onchocerciasis Control Program,”
World Bank Technical Paper Number 282, May 1995.
441

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
In contrast, a government in a developing country may be reluctant or unable to borrow
additional funds or to increase tax revenues. In other words, government expenditures
cannot, or will not, be increased even if such an increase would greatly benefit the public.
By the same token, they cannot or will not be decreased even if the funds could be better
used in the private sector. Given a fixed public-sector budget, therefore, a new project can
be undertaken only if the funds are diverted from a current government project or pro-
gram.23 In these circumstances,the opportunity cost of undertaking that project is not for-
gone consumption or private-sector investment, but forgone public-sector investment.
We are skeptical, however, that a government’s budget would ever really be fixed,
at least over the long run. Nonetheless, if this were the case, then the appropriate social
discount rate should be obtained by conducting CBAs of current government projects
and determining their internal rates of return. Analysis should focus on projects that
would be terminated if the proposed project went ahead. These projects should have
relatively low internal rates of return as government should terminate the worst pro-
jects. The very worst project might have a negative internal rate of return, which indi-
cates, of course, that it should be terminated. One should never use a negative rate of
return to evaluate a new project.
If government budgets are reasonably flexible, then the social discount rate may
be based on observed market interest rates. The practical problems in doing this, how-
ever, are considerably more formidable in developing than in developed countries be-
cause of the high degree of fragmentation in lending markets in developing countries.
For example, Karla Hoff and Joseph Stiglitz cite evidence that lending rates in the in-
formal economy in some developing countries vary considerably and are up to six
times higher than rates in the formal sector.24
It is also important to remember that where governments have expenditure con-
straints, new projects should be selected on the basis of their benefit-cost ratio.
Multiple Goals and Social Project Appraisal
The literature on CBA in developing countries suggests that public expenditures have
three somewhat conflicting goals: (1) increasing economic efficiency (that is, maximiz-
ing net economic worth), (2) encouraging economic growth, and (3) redistributing in-
come from the rich to the poor. A sharp distinction is made between CBAs that focus
solely on the first goal, economic efficiency, and analyses that attempt to assess the con-
tribution of projects to all three goals.This chapter has so far discussed only CBA.The
second type of analysis is sometimes called social project appraisal.
In the LMST approach, social project appraisal is based on the following general
framework:
(11)
where SW is the social welfare gain from a project, NSB is the present value of net so-
cial benefits as they are usually estimated in CBA using appropriate accounting
prices, C is the present value of the net change in private-sector consumption resulting
from the project and is measured in domestic market prices, W is a distributional
SW = NSB + C(W>u - CCF)
442

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
weight parameter with a value that is greater than 1 if the change in consumption dis-
proportionately accrues to persons with below-average incomes and a value smaller
than 1 if the consumption change disproportionately accrues to persons with a with
above-average incomes. The value of W would be 1 if the per capita consumption of
all income groups changed by the same amount.  is the shadow price of capital, and
CCF is, again, the economy-wide consumption conversion factor.
The first term on the right-hand side of equation (11), NSB, reflects only the first of
the goals listed above: economic efficiency. Most actual CBAs in developing, as well as in
industrialized, countries simply stop at this point, thereby implicitly setting the second
term equal to zero. The second term is meant to incorporate the other two goals: eco-
nomic growth and income redistribution. It implies that while a reduction in investment
is a social cost, an increase in consumption is a social benefit. For example, it is often sug-
gested that savings rates are especially low in developing countries and result in insuffi-
cient investment to sustain economic growth.Thus, C  CCF is subtracted to reflect the
notion that an increase in consumption has less social value than an equal increase in in-
vestment. In other words, the intent is to bias choices among projects toward those that
increase investment the most. Because the benefits and costs that comprise the NSB es-
timate are all measured in shadow prices, but C is measured in domestic market prices,
the CCF is used to make the two terms commensurable.The ratio, W>, indicates that so-
cial welfare increases as a greater part of the increase in consumption accrues to persons
with incomes below the national average (that is, as W becomes larger) but decreases as
the amount of forgone investment becomes greater (that is, as  becomes larger).25
To get some flavor for how use of the framework summarized by equation (11)
might affect a CBA in practice, consider a project that increases the per capita consump-
tion of higher income groups more than lower income groups,so that W  0.5.Chapter 10
suggests that a reasonable value for  is 1.1. Finally, Steve Curry and John Weiss have
assembled 14 different estimates of the value of CCF from 12 studies of different devel-
oping countries.26 These estimates range between 0.74 and 1.12, but all but four are be-
tween 0.79 and 0.94. For illustrative purposes, we assume that CCF  0.85. Given these
values, (W>  CCF)  (0.45  0.85)  0.40. This implies that a one-peso increase in
consumption as a result of a government project is around 40 percent as valuable as a
one-peso increase in investment. Notice, however, that if the consumption from the pro-
ject is spread more evenly across income groups, it is conceivable that (W>  CCF) will
have a positive value, implying that an increase in consumption has greater social value
than a similar increase in investment.This would occur, for example, if W  1.
Although the LMST framework for social project appraisal addresses important
issues, it is somewhat ad hoc. In our view, the method for incorporating the shadow
price of capital into social discounting, which results in a direct adjustment of the
NPV estimate, provides a more appropriate way of taking account of the opportunity
cost of consuming project output, rather than investing it. The use of the parameter,
W, in equation (11) represents one particular approach to taking account of the pos-
sibility that an increase in the consumption of low-income persons is of greater social
value than an equal increase in the consumption of higher-income persons.There are
alternative, and perhaps preferable, approaches that can be used to do this which
also directly adjust the net present value estimate.
443

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
Using Plug-In Values
Many of the plug-in values with which the reader is familiar can be used in CBAs in
developing countries. However, when we engage in benefits transfer (i.e., use a
shadow price estimate obtained in one country at one time to estimate the shadow
price in another country at another time), we should adjust for differences in in-
comes, tastes, and other factors. The same procedure to compute an appropriate
value of a statistical life (VSL) for Canada based on a VSL for the United States can
be used to compute a VSL for use in a developing country, adjusted for income.
The estimated VSL does control for income differences between the two coun-
tries. However, this is only a partial adjustment because the VSL may vary with
other factors. For example, it generally increases with the level of fatality risk: peo-
ple are willing to pay more to avoid fatality risk as the fatality risk level increases. If
the level of fatality risk is higher in a developing country than in the United States,
then the estimated VSL should be adjusted upward, holding everything else con-
stant. Furthermore, one should also adjust for other factors that affect the VSL, such
as age, attitudes, or culture. In practice, however, adjustments are rarely made for
these other factors.
IS THE LMST METHOD ACTUALLY USED FOR PROJECT EVALUATION?
Not surprisingly, international organizations such as the World Bank make regular use
of the shadow pricing procedures discussed in this chapter in conducting CBA.
However, the governments of many developing countries do not. Some time ago, the
World Bank surveyed 27 developing countries about the project evaluations that they
conduct.27 All but three of these countries had one or more offices with specific respon-
sibility for project evaluation. None of these offices conducted social project appraisals;
that is, their formal analyses were concerned solely with whether the evaluated projects
increased economic efficiency. However, some of the offices were not using appropriate
methods to determine this. Although information was not available for several of the
surveyed countries, only eight of the countries surveyed were found to use shadow pric-
ing regularly in conducting project evaluations. In fact, seven of the remaining countries
not only failed to shadow price, but they also did not discount benefits and costs.
CONCLUSION
A large fraction of economic activity in developing countries typically occurs outside
efficient markets. Consequently, the application of CBA in developing countries re-
quires extensive use of shadow prices. The LMST accounting price method is the most
commonly used framework for determining a consistent set of shadow prices.
Implementing it often requires considerable skill in working with available information.
444

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
Finding appropriate shadow prices for unskilled labor poses a particularly difficult
problem.Thus, although the principles of CBA are readily transferable to developing
countries, their application requires familiarity with a variety of complex shadow
pricing issues.
EXERCISES
1.
A developing country is considering building a steel plant in its largest city. The estimated
construction costs of this plant in domestic prices are listed in the following table.
a.
Compute the weighted APR for the imported materials that would be used in con-
structing the plant.
b.
Compute the total construction cost of the plant in accounting prices.
Accounting Price for Steel Plant Construction (in Thousands of Dubyas)
Item
Cost in Domestic Prices
APR
Cost in Accounting Prices
Imported materials
CIF price
500
Taxes and tariffs
100
Transportation
50
0.60
Distribution
20
0.80
Local materials
600
0.90
Labor
Skilled
300
0.95
Unskilled
800
0.55
Capital costs
Equipment
250
0.75
Other
100
0.90
2.
A certain developing country currently imports all its wheat but is considering funding an
irrigation project that would allow domestic farmers to grow and sell wheat. The domesti-
cally grown wheat would be sold in competitive markets at an estimated price of 15 dubyas
per bushel.The wheat the nation currently imports has a CIF price of US$3 per bushel.The
official exchange rate is 4 dubyas per dollar. The nation’s tariff on imported wheat is 
2 dubyas per bushel.Transportation and distribution charges from the port to a typical mar-
ket are 2 dubyas and 1 dubya per bushel, respectively.The APR has been estimated to be 0.6
for transportation and 0.8 for distribution.
a.
Calculate the market price of imported wheat.
b.
Calculated the shadow price of imported wheat.
c.
Should the irrigation project proceed?
3.
Assume that a typical unskilled rural worker in a developing country would be paid 
2 dubyas a week if he migrates to the city and finds a job. However, the unemployment rate
for unskilled workers is 40 percent in the city.
a.
What does the Harris-Todaro model predict the worker’s rural wage is?
b.
Assume now that the government is considering funding a project in the city that would
use substantial numbers of unskilled workers. Using your answer to part a, suggest a rea-
sonable upper-bound and lower-bound estimate of the market wage rate for unskilled
workers that the government might use in conducting a CBA of the proposed project.
445

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
NOTES
1. We are indebted to Tim Gindling for suggestions
on this chapter.
2. United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, Guidelines for Project Evaluation
(New York: United Nations, 1972).
3. I. M. D. Little and J.A. Mirrlees, Project Appraisal
and Planning for Developing Countries (London:
Heinemann Educational, 1974).
4. Lyn Squire and Herman van der Tak, Economic
Analysis of Projects (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1975).
5. An excellent concise summary of the approach
can be found in Terry A. Powers,“An Overview
of the Little-Mirrlees/Squire-van der Tak
Accounting Price System,” in Terry A. Powers,
ed., Estimating Accounting Prices for Project
Appraisal (Washington, D.C.: Inter-American
Development Bank, 1981), 1–59. Recent book-
length treatments include Caroline Dinwiddy
and Francis Teal, Principles of Cost-Benefit
Analysis for Developing Countries (Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996); Robert
J. Brent, Cost-Benefit Analysis for Developing
Countries (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publishing, 1998); and Steve Curry and John
Weiss, Project Analysis in Developing Countries
(London: Macmillan, 1993).The book by Curry
and Weiss provides a particularly clear exposi-
tion of how to use the approach in practice.The
Dinwiddy and Teal book focuses on the eco-
nomic principles that underlie the approach.
6. There is an alternative to this approach, which
is known as the UNIDO approach and is based
on the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization’s 1972 guidelines. Instead of using
world prices to shadow price project inputs and
outputs, it uses domestic prices to do this. In
practice, the major focus of the LMST method
is in adjusting nontradeables to world prices,
whereas the major focus of the UNIDO ap-
proach is in adjusting tradeables to domestic
prices. CBA can be conducted using either ap-
proach and, as demonstrated by Curry and
Weiss, Project Analysis in Developing Countries,
the two approaches will produce similar results
if equivalent assumptions are made in conduct-
ing analyses under them. Because the LMST
method is more widely used than the UNIDO
approach, we focus on it in this chapter.
7. What is the world price? The purchasing power
parity (PPP) theory predicts that “the nominal
exchange rate between two currencies should be
equal to the ratio of aggregate price levels be-
tween the two countries, so that a unit of currency
of one country will have the same purchasing
power in a foreign country” (Alan M.Taylor and
Mark P.Taylor,“The Purchasing Power Parity
Debate,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(4)
2004, 135–158 at 135).The PPP theory suggests
that the world price can be measured in any
free-floating currency. However, the PPP appears
not to hold fully in the short run, so the choice of
a currency for the world price may make a differ-
ence.The best strategy is probably to choose a
widely traded currency such as the U.S. dollar.
8. These examples are all adapted from Terry A.
Powers, “An Overview of the Little-Mirrlees/
Squire-van der Tak Accounting Price System,”
20–28.
9. If a project increases a country’s exports of a
good, and the increase reduces the world price
for the good, then a CBA must not only take ac-
count of the benefits to the country from the in-
creased sales of the product but also the cost that
results because previous exports of the product
must now be sold at a lower price.
10. For a detailed discussion, see Dinwiddy and Teal,
Principles of Cost-Benefit Analysis for Developing
Countries, 128–131; or Curry and Weiss, Project
Analysis in Developing Countries, 130–137.
11. For an introduction to using the semi-input-out-
put approach to derive conversion factors, see
Curry and Weiss, Project Analysis in Developing
Countries. For a detailed description of methods
for computing CCFs either directly with input-
output tables or using the semi-input-output ap-
proach, as well as four studies in which these
methods are used to compute conversion factors
for developing countries, see Terry A. Powers,
ed., Estimating Prices for Project Appraisal.
12. The major exceptions usually occur among APRs
for goods that are exported.
13. Curry and Weiss, Project Analysis in Developing
Countries, 264–266.
446

Shadow Prices: Applications to Developing Countries
14. This will not be the case, of course, if labor mar-
kets are highly distorted by union contracts, gov-
ernment wage controls, or for other reasons.
Under these circumstances, recall the method for
determining the opportunity cost of hiring the
unemployed to work on a project may have to be
used.
15. Because the spending patterns of domestic and
foreign workers are likely to differ, a CCF that is
specific to foreign workers should ideally be
used. Such a CCF is unlikely to be available,
however.Thus, the CCF for the overall popula-
tion would probably be used in practice.
16. John. R. Harris and Michael. P.Todaro,“Migration,
Unemployment, and Development,” American
Economic Review 60(1) 1970, 126–142.This model
is quite simple, making no attempt to capture all
important labor market phenomena in developing
countries, yet it provides some very useful insights.
17. See Dinwiddy and Teal, Principles of Cost-Benefit
Analysis for Developing Countries, 145–147 and
151. Higher living costs could also contribute to
higher urban wages but, unlike the factors listed
in the text, would not induce workers to migrate
from rural to urban areas.
18. The urban wage is still equal to the marginal
product of labor because urban employers hire
workers until the point where the marginal prod-
uct of labor equals the marginal cost of hiring an
additional worker.
19. The conclusion that the urban wage should be
used was also reached by Christopher J. Heady
(“Shadow Wages and Induced Migration,”
Oxford Economic Papers 33[1] 1981, 108–121) on
the basis of a model that incorporated more gen-
eral and complex assumptions than the Harris-
Todaro model. However, Heady also discussed
certain circumstances under which a lower wage,
but one that is probably higher than the rural
wage, should be used.
20. Dinwiddy and Teal, Principles of Cost-Benefit
Analysis for Developing Countries.
21. This particular measure is suggested by Heady,
“Shadow Wages and Induced Migration.”
22. If the rural market wage rate is being used to
determine the shadow wage rate and a conver-
sion factor exists for each crop, then the shadow
wage can be directly computed by multiplying
each of the terms in equation (10) by its conver-
sion factor.
23. Little and Mirrlees, Project Appraisal and
Planning for Developing Countries, in particu-
lar, emphasize this possibility. The alternative
possibility that is often also mentioned in the
CBA literature on developing countries is that
government investment will be funded through
foreign borrowing.
24. Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz,“Imperfect
Information and Rural Credit Markets: Puzzles
and Policy Perspectives,” World Bank Economic
Review 4(3) 1990, 329–351.
25. In the framework represented in equation (11),
the NPV would not be estimated by using the
shadow price of capital method. Instead, the
shadow price is incorporated into the third term
of the equation.
26. Curry and Weiss, Project Analysis in Developing
Countries, Table 11-5.
27. The findings are reported in Lyn Squire,“Project
Evaluation in Theory and Practice,” in Hollis
Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of
Development Economics, Volume II, (Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1989), 1126–1127.
447

448

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Form Chapter 18 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
449

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
C
ost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) is a widely used alternative to CBA, especially
in areas such as health and defense policy.Analysts seeking efficient policies but
facing constraints that prevent them from doing CBA may find it useful. In par-
ticular, CEA circumvents three common constraints. First, analysts may be unwilling or
unable to monetize the most important policy impact. Relatedly, clients may not want
monetization. This constraint arises frequently in the evaluation of alternative health
policies; for example, many people are willing to predict the numbers of lives saved by
alternative public health programs but are unwilling to place a dollar value on a life
saved. Second, analysts may recognize that a particular effectiveness measure does not
capture all of the social benefits of each alternative, and some of these other social ben-
efits are difficult to monetize. In using CBA, analysts face the burden of monetizing all
impacts. If the effectiveness measure captures most of the benefits, then it may be rea-
sonable to use CEA to avoid the burden of conducting a CBA. Third, analysts may be
dealing with intermediate goods whose linkage to preferences is not clear. For exam-
ple, the exact contribution of different types of weapon systems to overall national de-
fense is often unclear. In such situations, CBA is not possible, but CEA may give useful
information concerning the relative efficiency of alternatives.
CEA compares (mutually exclusive) alternatives in terms of the ratio of their costs
and a single quantified, but not monetized, effectiveness measure. For example, alterna-
tive highway safety programs may each involve different costs and numbers of lives saved.
The cost-effectiveness ratios of the programs would be expressed as dollars per life saved,
and the program that costs the least per life saved would be assessed as the most efficient.
In many circumstances such an assessment is valid; in other circumstances, however, the
assessment would not be valid because cost-effectiveness ratios ignore scale effects, rank-
ing policies that produce small impacts at a relatively low cost per unit above policies that
produce much larger impacts at a somewhat higher cost per unit.Consequently,care must
be taken in interpreting cost-effectiveness ratios as measures of efficiency.
In some applications, especially in health policy, it may be possible to construct an
outcome measure that serves as a direct proxy for changes in individuals’ utilities. In
such applications, CEA is referred to as cost-utility analysis (CUA). For example, the
benefit measure may be quality-adjusted life-years, which combines both the number
of additional years of life and the quality of life during those years. If a CUA employs
a perfect proxy for changes in utility, then use of the marginal utility of money would
enable the analyst to move directly to CBA; this would not be the case for a CEA that
excludes some dimension of utility, such as quality of life.
The presentation that follows addresses the following questions: How should cost-
effectiveness ratios be computed and used to compare policy alternatives? How should
450

costs and excluded benefits be handled? How should sensitivity analysis be con-
ducted? How can health outcome measures be made proxies for utilities? How reliable
are league tables for comparing large numbers of policies?
COST-EFFECTIVENESS RATIOS AND POLICY CHOICE
CEA involves computing cost-effectiveness ratios and using these ratios to choose
policies that promote efficiency.These apparently simple tasks typically involve several
complications. The analyst must choose an appropriate basis from which to compute
the effects and costs of alternatives. Once cost-effectiveness ratios for alternative poli-
cies have been specified, the analyst must also take account of relevant resource con-
straints in choosing among them.
Cost-Effectiveness Ratios: Incremental Costs and Benefits
As CEA does not monetize benefits, it inevitably involves two different metrics: Costs
are measured in dollars, whereas effectiveness may be measured in units such as lives
saved, tons of carbon dioxide reduced, or children vaccinated. Because noncommensu-
rate metrics cannot be added, it is impossible to obtain a single measure of net social
benefits from the two metrics. However, it is possible to compute the ratio of the two
measures, which can be used as a basis for ranking alternative policies. Obviously, the
ratio can be expressed in two ways: either as a cost-effectiveness ratio (CE ratio), com-
puted by dividing the costs of an alternative by the measure of its effectiveness, or as an
effectiveness-cost ratio (EC ratio), computed by dividing the effectiveness measure of
an alternative by its costs.The discussion that follows focuses on the cost-effectiveness
ratio, which is by far the more commonly used ratio.
Costs and effectiveness are always measured incrementally. Consider two policies,
labeled i and j. The cost-effectiveness ratio of policy i relative to policy j, CEij, is given
by the following formula:
(1)
where Ci is the cost of alternative i, Cj is the cost of alternative j, Ei is the number of ef-
fectiveness units produced by alternative i, and Ej is the number of effectiveness units
produced by alternative j.The simplest application of the formula occurs when a single
policy,i,is being assessed as an addition to the status quo,j,and both the cost and effective-
ness of i can be expressed as increments to the status quo, Ci  C  Cj and Ei  E  Ej.
The cost-effectiveness ratio then becomes C>E. For example, imagine that in addition
to the highway safety program already in place, it is possible to add an additional pro-
gram that would cost $2 million more than the current program and avoid an addi-
tional 4 fatalities.The cost-effectiveness ratio would then be ($2 million)>(4 avoided fa-
talities), or $500,000 per avoided fatality. By itself, this ratio does not indicate whether
the program is efficient. Rather, it indicates that the program should be adopted before
other safety programs that avoid the same number of fatalities and cost more than
$500,000 per avoided fatality.
CEij =
Ci - Cj
Ei - Ej
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
451

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
The application of the cost-effectiveness ratio becomes more complicated when
choosing among multiple policy alternatives. As an illustration, consider alternatives for
improving student achievement scores.Imagine that a school currently assigns 30 students
per classroom at a total marginal cost per classroom of $60,000 and achieves an average
achievement score of 60. Label this alternative S30.Alternatively, the school could reduce
class size to 25 students (S25), 20 students (S20), or 15 students (S15). Obviously, these are
mutually exclusive alternatives because there can only be one class size. Imagine that an
alternative to reducing class size below 30 students is to enhance 30-student classrooms
with computer support (Sc). The costs and effects of each of these alternatives are dis-
played in the columns of Table 1, which are labeled C and E, respectively. The third col-
umn, labeled C>E, presents the ratio of costs to effects. It can be thought of as the incre-
mental cost-effectiveness ratio where the comparison alternative, Sj, is no schooling, with
zero costs and zero effectiveness.This ratio is referred to as the average cost-effectiveness
ratio. Not surprisingly, relative to no schooling, a 30-student classroom offers the smallest
cost-effectiveness ratio of $33 (per student) per point increase in average test.
No schooling, however, is not a realistic alternative. Rather, the current classroom
size of 30 students should be thought of as the status quo policy and, therefore, the start-
ing point for comparisons.The column labeled Sj makes clear the alternative used as the
basis for calculating the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio, C>E, shown in the last
column. It is appropriate to compare the reduced class size of 25 (S25) as well as the
computerized classroom (Sc) to the status quo. Further reductions in class size, however,
are more appropriately assessed relative to the previous reduction, so that S20 is as-
sessed relative to S25 and S15 is assessed relative to S20. Note that the smallest incremen-
tal cost-effectiveness ratio arises in moving from S30 to S25.The next smallest incremen-
tal cost-effectiveness ratio results from moving from S30 to Sc, suggesting that Sc should
be selected over S20 if the decision maker wants to achieve a higher average test score
than that provided by S25.Yet a comparison of S20 and Sc in terms of costs and effects in
the first two columns of Table 1 makes clear that this would be an incorrect choice be-
cause S20 and Sc have the same total cost, but S20 offers a larger gain in average test
score. S20 strictly dominates Sc; thus it would never make sense to choose Sc over S20.
The dominance of S20 over Sc is shown graphically in Figure 1,which plots the cost of
each alternative on the vertical axis and its effect on the horizontal axis. Holding cost
constant, one should always prefer an alternative that has a larger effect. In other words,
one would always like to make possible moves due east—S20 is due east of Sc and 
TABLE 1
Working with Cost-Effectiveness Ratios
C (dollars
per student)
E (average
test score)
C>E
(relative
to no
schooling)
Sj (basis
for
comparison)
C
(relative
to Sj)
E
(relative
to Sj)
C>E
(incremental
cost-effectiveness
ratio)
S30
2000
60
33.3
—
—
—
—
S25
2400
68
35.3
S30
400
8
50
S20
3000
74
40.5
S25
600
6
100
S15
4000
76
52.6
S20
1000
2
500
Sc
3000
72
41.7
S30
1000
12
83.3
452

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
therefore should always be preferred. In addition, holding effect constant, one should
also prefer an alternative with a smaller cost. In other words, one should always want to
make possible moves due south because they give the same effect at lower cost.
The lines shown connecting S30 to S25 to S20 to S15, which have slopes equal to their
incremental cost-effectiveness ratios, map out a frontier of the best possible outcomes—
those that push as far to the southeast as possible. Points to the northwest of this frontier
are subject to what is called extended dominance.1 For example, if Sc costs a few dollars
less, then it no longer is strictly dominated by S20.Yet, as long as it still falls to the north-
west of the frontier, it will be subject to extended dominance. The first step in comparing
alternatives using cost-effectiveness ratios should always be to remove from further con-
sideration all alternatives that are dominated, either strictly or by extension. Plotting costs
and effects as in Figure 1 facilitates the identification of dominated alternatives.
Frontiers like the one shown in Figure 1 narrow the set of alternatives to consider,
but in the absence of information about the decision maker’s preferences there is no way
to select a particular alternative on the frontier. In contrast, CBA leads to a specific
choice.2 In the example presented in Table 1, assigning a shadow price to average test
60
0
68
74
76
72
4000
3000
2400
2000
Sc
S30
S25
S20
S15
Average Test Scores (E )
Dollars per Student (C)
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 1
Graphical Representation of Costs and Effectiveness
453

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
scores enables the analyst to estimate the net benefits of each alternative. One can easily
verify that, if an average test score point is valued at $50 or less, then S30 should be cho-
sen. If the shadow price of a point is between $50 and $100, then S25 should be selected.
If the shadow price is between $100 and $500, then S20 should be selected. Only if the
shadow price is over $500 should S15 be selected. No shadow price exists at which Sc
should be selected because S20 has larger net benefits for any positive shadow price.
CEA Where Scale Problems Are Irrelevant: Identical 
Program Budgets or Identical Program Effectiveness
In general, absent additional information about preferences or the context of the deci-
sion problem, cost-effectiveness ratios do not provide a clear basis for choosing among
alternatives. The reason is that ratios do not take into account the different scales of
projects.The major exception arises when one alternative clearly dominates all others.
Dominance is immediately apparent, and scale is not a problem, if all of the alterna-
tives have the same cost. Table 2 compares three alternative projects for saving lives.
The only costs are budgetary costs (in millions of dollars), and the effectiveness crite-
rion is the number of lives saved. The cost-effectiveness ratio reveals the average cost
per life saved. Of course, in this simple example one does not even have to compute
cost-effectiveness ratios: By “eyeballing” the table, one can easily observe that alterna-
tive C saves the most lives. Computing the cost-effectiveness ratio simply confirms this.
It does not matter whether the ratio is calculated as cost per life saved or as lives saved
per (million) dollars.Because all alternatives involve the same level of expenditure,they
can be thought of as different ways of spending a fixed budget. In this case, CEA corre-
sponds to a simple effectiveness maximization problem (maximize lives saved).
Similarly, scale is not a problem if the level of effectiveness is constant across all al-
ternatives. Obviously, the alternative that offers the lowest cost dominates the others
because it provides the same level of outcome at a lower cost. Situations in which the
level of effectiveness is constant across alternatives can be thought of as different ways
of achieving a fixed effectiveness. In this case, CEA corresponds to a simple cost-mini-
mization problem (minimize dollars).
In the fixed budget and fixed effectiveness cases, dominance is readily apparent. It is
possible, however, that one alternative can dominate another even if they have neither
TABLE 2
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis with Fixed (Identical) Costs
Alternatives
Cost and Effectiveness
A
B
C
Cost measure (budget cost)
$10M
$10M
$10M
Effectiveness measure (number 
of lives saved)
5
10
15
CE ratio (cost per life saved)
$2.0M
$1.0M
$0.67Ma
EC ratio (lives saved per million dollars)
0.5 life
1.0 life
1.5 livesa
aCE ratio or EC ratio of the most cost-effective alternative.
454

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
the same cost nor the same effectiveness, as long as it is superior on both dimensions.
Clearly, dominated alternatives should not be selected. If an alternative dominates all
others, then it should be selected.
Imposing Constraints to Deal with Scale Differences
Scale differences among alternatives may distort choice as illustrated in Table 3. If we
used a cost-effectiveness ratio, then we would choose alternative A.Yet, if we look more
closely at alternative B, we see that it would save a large number of lives at the relatively
low “price” per life saved of $0.5 million. It is, therefore, likely that a CBA would show
that alternative B has larger net social benefits. As CEA was probably proposed in the
first place because an analyst, client, or decision maker was unwilling to monetize lives
saved, how can CEA be used sensibly as a decision rule without monetizing lives saved?
Before answering this question, it is helpful to remind ourselves that if we could
replicate project A in 49 other locations (50 in total), the total cost would be $50 mil-
lion and 200 lives would be saved. This alternative, which we will call project C, would
dominate project B. However, project C is not feasible. If it were feasible, then it should
have been included in Table 3 as one of the alternatives in an exhaustive (i.e., complete)
set of mutually exclusive alternatives.
In order to use CEA for decision making, a common practice is to impose a con-
straint, either a minimum acceptable level of effectiveness, denoted 
, or a maximum
acceptable cost, denoted 
.
If we impose a minimum level of effectiveness, we may either minimize costs, Ci, or
the cost-effectiveness ratio, CEi. Thus, we could select the project that meets a mini-
mum level of effectiveness at the lowest cost:
(2)
In this specification, the decision maker is acting as if he or she does not value addi-
tional units of effectiveness.This might apply, for example, to alternative ways of ensur-
ing that children receive minimum amounts of fluoride to protect their teeth. It might
also apply to some national defense activities, such as sea lift capability. Even in these
Subject to Ei Ú E
Minimize Ci
C
E
TABLE 3
The Problem with the CE Ratio When Scale Differs
Alternatives
Cost and Effectiveness
A
B
Cost measure (budget cost)
$1M
$100M
Effectiveness measure (number 
of lives saved)
4
200
CE ratio (cost per life saved)
$250,000a
$500,000
EC ratio (lives saved per million dollars)
4.0 livesa
2.0 lives
aCE ratio or EC ratio of the most cost-effective alternative.
455

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
examples, however, additional units of effectiveness above 
are probably worth
something to decision makers.Alternatively, we could select the most cost-effective al-
ternative that satisfies the effectiveness constraint:
(3)
This rule generally leads to higher levels of effectiveness and higher costs than the
first rule.
If we specified a maximum budgetary cost,
, then we might select the project that
yields the largest number of units of effectiveness, subject to the budget constraint:
(4)
The problem with this rule is that it ignores incremental cost savings. In other words,
cost savings beyond 
are not valued. Alternatively, we could select the project that
most cost-effectively meets the imposed budget constraint:
(5)
This rule places some weight on incremental cost savings and is more likely to result in
the selection of a project with less than the maximum cost.
An Illustration of the Different CE Rules
Imagine that each of the ten mutually exclusive and exhaustive projects shown in
Table 4 are intended to save lives.The expected number of lives saved for each project
is given in column 2, and the expected budgetary cost in millions of dollars for each
project is in column 3. Dominated projects can be eliminated from the choice set at
the outset to simplify the analysis: Project D can be eliminated because it is domi-
nated by project C, and projects C and F can be eliminated because they are domi-
nated by project A.
The cost-effectiveness ratio (cost per life saved) appears in column 4.The projects
can be ranked from most cost-effective to least cost-effective using this ratio. Project E
is the most cost-effective alternative with an average cost per life saved of $2.0 million.
The next most cost-effective alternative is project B, followed by J, then I and A, which
have equal cost-effectiveness, then G, and then H.
Note, however, that Project E saves the fewest lives. Project B saves twice as many
lives as project E and costs only $24 million more. Which project is better? This ques-
tion illustrates the problem of different scales. Preferably, we would like the option of
performing project E 2.2 (or more) times, but this option is not feasible because the list
of projects was constructed to be exhaustive.
Suppose the decision maker is willing to specify that she wants to adopt only projects
that save at least 50 lives. Which alternative that satisfies this constraint is preferable?
Subject to Ci … C
Minimize CEi
C
Subject to Ci … C
Maximize Ei
C
Subject to Ei Ú E
Minimize CEi
E
456

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
The least costly of the acceptable alternatives is project H, whereas the most cost-
effective acceptable alternative is project A. Note that project A costs $50 million more
than project H, but it saves 50 more lives. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of
project A relative to project H is $1 million per life saved, on average, which is very low.
Indeed, spending the additional $50 million would be even more cost-effective than pro-
ject E. However, the choice depends on the decision maker’s willingness to trade addi-
tional lives saved for additional budgetary cost. Even though CEA is often proposed as a
way of avoiding monetization of an important benefit category,analysts or decision mak-
ers must often make trade-offs between costs and a nonmonetized benefit to rank alter-
natives. In doing so, they implicitly consider the value of an additional saved life.
The same type of problem arises if a budget constraint is imposed. Suppose, for
example, the decision maker indicates that she cannot spend more than $250 million.
Subject to this constraint, project A saves the most lives, but project E is the most cost-
effective. Again, to choose between projects A and E, the decision maker must con-
sider trade-offs between additional lives saved and additional budgetary costs.
Sensitivity Analysis: The Problem of Ratios
We rarely predict either costs or effects of policy alternatives with great certainty.
Conveying the level of uncertainty in projected cost-effectiveness ratios provides im-
portant information to decision makers. The methods of sensitivity analysis for
CBA—partial sensitivity analysis, worst- and best-case analysis, and Monte Carlo
simulations—can also be applied to CEA. The problem posed by ratios, however,
makes Monte Carlo simulations particularly attractive in cost-effectiveness analysis.
If we were to add or subtract normally distributed random variables, then the re-
sulting random variable would also be normally distributed. In contrast, dividing one
TABLE 4
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis with Constraints
E  50
C  250
Projects
(1)
Lives 
Saved
(2)
Budget 
Cost ($M)
(3)
CE Ratio
(cost per
life saved)
($M/life
saved)
(4)
Budget Cost
of Projects
That Save
at Least
50 Lives
(5)
CE Ratio
of Projects
That Save
at Least
50 Lives
(6)
Lives Saved
of Projects
That Cost
No More
than $250M
(7)
CE Ratio
of Projects
That Cost 
No More
than $250M
(8)
A
100
250
2.5
250
2.5a
100a
2.5
B
20
44
2.2
—
—
20
2.2
C
100
300
3.0
300
3.0
—
—
D
50
300
6.0
300
6.0
—
—
E
10
20
2.0a
—
—
10
2.0a
F
100
900
9.0
900
9.0
—
—
G
60
210
3.5
210
3.5
60
3.5
H
50
200
4.0
200a
4.0
50
4.0
I
40
100
2.5
—
—
40
2.5
J
45
110
2.4
—
—
45
2.4
aCE ratio, budget cost, or effectiveness of the most preferred alternative.
457

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
normally distributed random variable by another does not produce a normally distrib-
uted ratio. More generally, the ratio of any two random variables generally does not
have the same distribution as either of the random variables that make it up.
Figure 2 illustrates this property of cost-effectiveness ratios. The cost of the pro-
ject is estimated to be $20 million with a standard deviation of $2 million.The number
of lives saved is estimated to be 20 with a standard deviation of 2.The estimates might
be based on data from similar projects that have been implemented elsewhere, in
which case the standard deviations might be a by-product of the estimations, or the es-
timates might be constructed from shadow prices and elasticities, in which case the
Cost (million $)
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
Number of Lives Saved
0
5
10
15
20
0
Fraction
0.1263
0
Fraction
0.1237
FIGURE 2
Monte Carlo Analysis of a Cost-
Effectiveness Ratio
(Continued)
458

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
standard deviations would be based on their ranges.The Monte Carlo simulation pre-
sented in the figure assumes that cost and lives saved are each normally distributed.
The simulation involves generating 10,000 pairs of values of cost and lives saved based
on draws from their respective normal distributions.The top two histograms show the
resulting distributions of draws for costs and lives saved separately, with theoretical
normal distributions superimposed to show that they are approximately normal. The
simulation next computes a cost-effectiveness ratio for each pair of costs and lives
saved. The distribution of the resulting 10,000 cost-effectiveness ratios is displayed in
the third histogram in the figure. Note that the distribution of cost-effectiveness ratios
does not correspond nearly as closely to the normal distribution, again superimposed
on the histogram, as did the variables used to construct it. It is considerably skewed
with a longer tail to the right of the mean of $2.1 million per life saved. In other words,
the most likely outcome is a cost-effectiveness ratio slightly below the mean but with
some probability of substantially larger ratios. The distribution of the ratios can also
be used to provide other information, such as the probability of the ratio being above,
say, $3 million (5.6 percent).3
Note that the skew shown in the figure would be even more dramatic if the distri-
bution of effectiveness were spread more evenly over some range rather than having
a central mode like the normal distribution.Also note that one could compare the dis-
tributions of cost-effectiveness ratios for two alternatives by superimposing their
Monte Carlo distributions. A thicker left-hand tail, showing a higher probability of
lower CE ratios, would tend to favor that alternative.To make a more systematic com-
parison, one would construct a cumulative distribution for each alternative and, if one
cumulative distribution lay consistently to the left of the other, select it as
stochastically dominant. That is, it would consistently offer higher probabilities of
achieving more desirable outcomes.
CE Ratio (millions $ per life)
0
0
Fraction
0.3054
10
8
6
4
2
FIGURE 2
(Continued )
459

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
OMITTED COSTS AND BENEFITS
As should be clear, CBA seeks to include all social costs and benefits. For CEA to be
an appropriate guide for the more efficient allocation of resources, given its inherent
limitations, it too should seek to be as comprehensive as possible in measuring valued
impacts. Most fundamentally, it should be based on social costs and take account of so-
cial benefits not captured in the effectiveness measure.
Measurement of Costs
The measurement of costs in actual CEA studies varies enormously. In the health care
area, costs might include only the costs of treatment, perhaps even just the costs of
medication. More broadly, costs might include other treatment costs, such as doctors’
time or hospitalization expenses. This is important, for example, in assessing drugs for
schizophrenia that, although expensive, may reduce the time patients spend in hospi-
tals, which may be even more expensive. Costs might also include waiting time or time
lost from work, which are borne by patients or employers—effects on members of so-
ciety that would be included in CBA.
If CEA is to be a guide to the more efficient use of resources, then it should in-
clude all social costs. Costs that are constant across all alternatives can be omitted with-
out changing the CE rankings of the alternatives under consideration.Their exclusion,
however, generally changes the magnitude of the computed CE ratios, which may be
relevant in using these context-specific CE ratios as a basis for making general com-
parisons across types of alternatives.4
In practice, when CEA is conducted for a particular government agency, costs are
often measured as that agency’s budgetary costs.5 In the regulatory area, for example,
analysts might measure only the agency’s cost of enforcing compliance. From an effi-
ciency perspective, the costs should also include firms’ costs of complying with the reg-
ulations. Of course, even when looking at agency costs, the guiding principle should be
opportunity cost.
Omitted Benefits: Technical versus Allocative Efficiency
CEA almost invariably omits impacts that would be included in CBA. CEA considers
only one measure of effectiveness. In practice, however, projects often have multiple
benefits. For example, regulations that save lives almost always also reduce injuries or
illnesses. Similarly, new drugs may effectively cure a disease and also have fewer
harmful side effects than current drugs. To measure allocative efficiency, all costs and
benefits should be taken into consideration. One way to get closer to doing this—that
is, to reach a “halfway house” between standard CEA and CBA—is to compute the
following adjusted CE ratio:
(6)
If the numerator can be fully valued and monetized, then this adjusted CE ratio in-
corporates all the impacts that would be included in a CBA.The omission of a particular
CE* = Social Cost - Other Social Benefits
Effectiveness
460

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
category of social cost or benefit from the numerator could very well alter the ranking
of alternatives, however. The danger of obtaining an arbitrary ranking increases as
alternatives become less similar in terms of the inputs they require and the various
impacts they produce. Moreover, the transparency of CEA is also reduced because
costs may no longer have a simple interpretation, such as budgetary dollars. For these
reasons, moving all the way to CBA with extensive sensitivity analysis is often a better
analytical strategy than expanding the scope of measured costs and benefits within a
CEA framework.
It is important to emphasize that in CEA a weak link may exist between the mea-
sure of effectiveness and things that individuals value. It is quite reasonable to presume
that individuals would be willing to pay for incremental units of “lives saved,” an often-
used measure of effectiveness. But now consider the “number of addicts treated.” This
intermediate output may or may not be a good proxy for the final consumption good
that individuals value, such as reductions in street crime. Analysts cannot avoid esti-
mating the value of final consumption goods when doing CBA, even if they must rely
on shadow prices from secondary sources. However, in CEA they may not make an ex-
plicit connection between the effectiveness measure used and benefits that individuals
value. When analysts use an intermediate output as a measure of effectiveness, they
should establish a link between the effectiveness measure and a final consumption
good or at least show that the intermediate output indeed has some value.6
COST-UTILITY ANALYSIS
The most common use of cost-utility analysis occurs in the evaluation of health policies.
In CUA the incremental costs of alternative policies are compared to the health
changes, usually measured in quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) or disability-adjusted
life-years (DALYs), that they produce.7 CUA is most useful when alternative programs
or treatments embody a trade-off between quality of life (morbidity) and length of life
(mortality). It can be thought of as a form of CEA that employs a more complex effec-
tiveness measure that more directly corresponds to changes in utilities. All of the pre-
vious discussion about cost-effectiveness ratios and decision rules thus applies.The ra-
tionale for looking specifically at CUA is that considerable analytical effort has gone
into the measurement of QALYs, which not only serve as a common effectiveness
measure in CEA but also can be directly monetized for CBA through application of a
shadow price for life-years.
The Meaning of Life—Quality-Adjusted Life-Years, That Is!
QALYs involve two distinct dimensions: quality and quantity.The analyst must decide
how to define, measure, and combine these dimensions. Consider, for example, the ef-
fects of three mutually exclusive prenatal programs. Under the status quo, no babies
with a particular condition are born alive. Prenatal alternative A will result in five ba-
bies being born alive per year, but with permanent, serious disabilities. Prenatal alter-
native B will result in only two live births, but with only low levels of disability. Before
we can compare the costs of these alternatives to their effectiveness, we first have to
make quantity and quality commensurate.
461

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
The general form of the problem is shown in Table 5. The columns show additional
years of life ranging from a low of Y1 to a high of Y5.The rows show health status rang-
ing from the worst (health state H1) to the best (health state H5). For simplicity, assume
that alternatives A and B and the status quo involve the same costs and that there is no
uncertainty about the longevities and health statuses they will yield.Suppose that the sta-
tus quo (denoted SQ) gives Y1H1 (the fewest years of life in the worst health status),
while alternative A achieves Y3H3 and alternative B achieves Y4H2. Clearly, the status
quo is dominated, but how should we choose between alternatives A and B? In order to
make the comparison, alternatives A and B must be expressed in a common metric.
Before discussing the various methods for putting health statuses into a common
metric, QALYs, a prior question of relevance must be asked: Whose preferences
should be the basis for assessing health-related quality of life (HRQoL)? Researchers
have used three groups of people as respondents to questions designed to elicit valua-
tions of health statuses: medical experts, patients who have experience with similar sta-
tuses, and the general population.
Medical experts typically bring to the valuation exercise relevant experience and
knowledge, especially with respect to the physical implications of various health sta-
tuses. They also are likely to be sophisticated respondents who can answer more com-
plex questions. Nonetheless, their medically informed assessments may not be consis-
tent with the holistic assessments made by patients or the general public.
The appropriate choice between patients and the general public as respondents is
not clear. Some commonly made arguments in favor of patients as respondents include:
Patients are likely to be more knowledgeable than the general public about what it is
like to experience illnesses and disabilities; researchers need not provide as much de-
scription about health statuses to patients as respondents from the general public in
order to obtain informed valuations; and, in some circumstances, the general public may
be biased against certain conditions, such as those that result from risky behavior or un-
healthy lifestyles. Commonly made arguments in favor of the general public as respon-
dents include: The preferences of the general public are most relevant in making deci-
sions concerning the allocation of scarce resources through public policy; patients may
overstate their HRQoL relative to the general public because of cognitive dissonance
or psychological adaption or actual adaptation to their conditions; and the general pub-
lic is less likely than patients to offer strategic responses to influence public policy.8
Although valuations based on patients and the general public tend to provide sim-
ilar rankings of health statuses, and no systematic differences related to demographic
TABLE 5
The Basic QALY Format
Additional Years of Life (Y)
Health Status (H)
Y1
Y2
Y3
Y4
Y5
H1
Y1H1
SQ
Y2H1
Y3H1
Y4H1
Y5H1
H2
Y1H2
Y2H2
Y3H2
Y4H2
B
Y5H2
H3
Y1H3
Y2H3
Y3H3
A
Y4H3
Y5H3
H4
Y1H4
Y2H4
Y3H4
Y4H4
Y5H4
H5
Y1H5
Y2H5
Y3H5
Y4H5
Y5H5
462

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
characteristics other than health status appear to exist,9 patients tend to place higher
valuations on conditions that they are experiencing.10 The difference implies an asym-
metry in the valuation of losses and gains:The loss in utility from moving from perfect
health to some impaired condition is greater than the gain in utility in moving from the
same impaired condition back to perfect health. It can be explained either as a conse-
quence of loss aversion or costly adjustments to changes in health status.11 If the policy
being analyzed just involves gains in the HRQoL, then patients would be the appropri-
ate group to survey. In contrast, if it involves just losses, then the general public should be
surveyed.The choice between patients and the general public is not clear, however, when
policies involve both gains and losses in HRQoL.
The basic approach for constructing QALYs involves assessing HRQoL for differ-
ent health statuses. The HRQoL is usually measured on a scale in which the value 1 is
assigned to perfect health and the value 0 to death.The HRQoL measures can then be
used to weight life-years to produce QALYs. Researchers have used four approaches,
three direct and one indirect, to assess HRQoL: the health rating method, the time
trade-off method, the standard gamble method, and the health index method.12
Health Rating Method.
Generally, researchers derive a health rating (HR) from
questionnaires or interviews with health experts, potential subjects of treatment, or the
general public. They present scales with well-defined endpoints to respondents, typi-
cally with death assigned a value of 0 and perfect health a value of 1. Intermediate
health states are described in detail to the respondents, who are then asked to locate
each state between the end points, 0 and 1. For example, if three intermediate health
states described to an individual correspond to “seriously disabled,” “moderately dis-
abled,” and “minimally disabled,” then an individual might assign values of 0.15, 0.45,
and 0.90 to these states, respectively.
Respondents often have difficulty assigning numerical values to the various
health states, however. An alternative version of the health rating method uses a
bisection process to obviate the need for respondents to provide numerical values. It
provides respondents with a list of health states from which they are asked to find the
one that falls midway between the end points on a visual display, such as a thermome-
ter scale.13 The respondents are then asked to find the health state that falls midway
between the initially placed health state and the upper and lower endpoints, respec-
tively. The process continues until respondents have placed the various health states
on the scale. It yields an interval scale for HRQoL, but one without a clear basis in
revealed preferences.
The Time Trade-Off Method.
In the time trade-off (TTO) method, respondents
are asked to compare different combinations of length and quality of life.14 The typ-
ical comparison is between a longer life of lower health status and a shorter life with
a higher health status. Figure 3 illustrates such a comparison. The horizontal axis
measures additional years of life (Y ), and the vertical axis measures health status
(H ). Respondents might be asked to compare some status quo point, say R, repre-
senting health status H2 and additional years of life Y1, with an alternative point, say
S, representing health status H1 and additional years of life Y2. If a respondent is
indifferent between the two points, then he or she is willing to give up H2  H1 units
463

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
of health quality in return for Y2  Y1 additional years of life. Assuming that health
status H2 is perfect health and assigning it a utility of 1, the utility assigned to H1 is
then Y1>Y2.
For example, imagine that one wanted to assign a utility to the health status of
twice-weekly severe lower back pain that prevented strenuous physical activity. The
severity and consequences of the back pain would be carefully described to a number
of respondents. Then each would be asked to compare living 10 additional years with
the back pain to living some number of years in perfect health. If a respondent were in-
different between living 10 years with the back pain and 9 years in perfect health, then
the analyst would assign a utility of 9/10 for the health state of back pain.Thus, in com-
paring medical interventions, an additional year of life with back pain would be valued
at 0.9 instead of at 1 for an additional year in perfect health.
A complication arises if a person views the health status being valued as worse
than death. In such cases, respondents are asked to compare immediate death as one
alternative with t1 additional years of life in the extremely undesirable health status
followed by t2 years in full health as the other. Holding the total of t1 and t2 constant,
the values that make the respondent indifferent between the alternatives would assign
a utility to the extremely undesirable health status of t2>t1. The resulting negative
value is consistent with the health status being valued as worse than death, which is as-
signed a utility of 0.
In order for the TTO values to be valid utilities, a strong assumption must be met:
Individuals must be willing to give up constant proportions of their remaining life-years
to attain an improvement in health status, no matter how many additional life-years
remain. For example, if a person expecting to live 10 years with a disability were willing
S
Additional years of life (Y )
Health status (H )
Y2
Y1
H1
H2
R
•
•
FIGURE 3
Time Trade-Off Example
464

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
to give up 5 years to attain perfect health, then when the person has only 8 years of
expected life, he or she should also be willing to give up 4 of the 8 remaining years to
obtain perfect health. The assumption of constant proportional time trade-off implies
that the person has a zero marginal rate of time preference.A particularly serious vio-
lation of the constant proportions assumption occurs when a person’s preferences for
life-years in some health status exhibit maximum endurable time (MET): There is a
limit to the number of years people want to live with the health status.15 The stringency
of the constant proportions assumption suggests caution in interpreting TTO values as
utilities. Nonetheless, the TTO method continues to be used to place relative values on
health statuses for the construction of QALYs.
The Standard Gamble Method.
In the standard gamble (SG) approach, respondents
are presented with a decision tree.16 Respondents are offered a choice between two al-
ternatives. Alternative A has two possible outcomes: either a return to normal health
for n additional years (occurring with probability p) or immediate death (occurring
with probability 1  p).Alternative A might be an operation that has probability 1  p
of failure (death), but which, if successful, will return the patient to normal health for n
years. Alternative B guarantees the patient n additional years with a specified level of
health impairment.This choice is shown in Figure 4.The probability p is varied until a re-
spondent is indifferent between alternatives A and B. When using a health status
index ranging from 0 (death) to 1 (normal health for n years), the p at which a re-
spondent is indifferent can be interpreted as that respondent’s utility from alternative
B.
For example, consider again the assignment of a utility to the health status of
twice-weekly severe lower back pain that prevented strenuous physical activity.There
are two approaches to finding the probability of perfect health that would make the
respondent indifferent between the gamble and the back pain. First, we could simply
Alternative A
p
1 – p
Alternative B
Impaired health for n years
Immediate death
Perfect health for n years
FIGURE 4
The Standard Gamble Method
465

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
ask the respondent to state the probability. Second, we could offer an initial probabil-
ity, and then raise or lower it until the respondent expresses indifference. The former
approach might falter with respondents who are not used to thinking in terms of prob-
abilities. To avoid this problem, it may be desirable to engage the respondent in some
valuations of other health statuses before turning to the one of interest. The latter
approach risks the sort of starting point bias that is connected with contingent valua-
tion. Starting points should be varied across respondents to allow for the possibility of
detecting any starting point bias. Imagine that the method used reveals that the re-
spondent is indifferent between the back pain for certain and a gamble with a proba-
bility of perfect health of 0.95 and a probability of death of 0.05. The SG method
would assign a utility to the health status of lower back pain of 0.95.
The SG method assumes that individuals make choices consistent with the ex-
pected utility hypothesis.To the extent that they do follow the expected utility hypoth-
esis, then the utilities resulting from the SG method are valid utilities. Deviations from
the expected utility hypothesis challenge the validity of the utilities derived from the
SG method. Although direct comparisons of the TTO and SG methods generally con-
clude that they provide similar utilities at least in terms of ordinal rankings,17 a major-
ity of studies find that the SG method yields higher values.18
Health Index Method.
Clinicians have developed a variety of scales to assess varia-
tions in health, whether in relationship to particular diseases, injuries, or mental states,
or to health in general. The health index (HI) method uses one of the direct methods
(HR, TTO, or SG) to assign utilities to points on the health scales, which can then be
used to construct QALYs in a variety of applications. The HI method provides utility
weights that can be applied to standard health scales, thus offering analysts utilities
akin to the shadow prices.
A widely used HI method evolved out of a health classification system intro-
duced by George Torrance and colleagues19 and further developed by the McMaster
University’s Centre for Health Economics and Policy Analysis. Heath Utilities, Inc.,
currently offers several copyrighted versions to researchers.20 Its Health Utility
Index Mark 3, for instance, is comprised of eight attributes: vision, hearing, speech,
ambulation, dexterity, emotion, cognition, and pain. Each attribute has clearly de-
fined levels. For example, the levels for pain are “free of pain and discomfort,” “mild
to moderate pain that prevents no activities,” “moderate pain that prevents a few ac-
tivities,” “moderate to severe pain that prevents some activities,” and “severe pain
that prevents most activities.” With either five or six levels for each attribute, this
classification system defines 972,000 different health statuses.21 Standardized ques-
tionnaires enable researchers to assess health outcomes for individuals or population
samples. Health Utilities, Inc., provides tables derived from general population sur-
veys and multiattribute utility scaling that convert responses into utilities for each of
the attributes.
The most widely used index of general health status is the Short Form Health
Survey (SF-36), which was originally developed by researchers at the RAND
Corporation as part of the Medical Outcomes Study.22 Constructed to conform to
466

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
psychometric standards for making group comparisons, the SF-36 uses 35 items to
construct eight scales: physical functioning, role limitation due to physical problems,
bodily pain, general health, vitality, social function, role limitation due to emotional
problems, and mental health. The first four of these scales combine to form a sum-
mary measure of physical health, and the latter four combine to form a summary
measure of mental health. The SF-36 is licensed through Quality Metric, Inc.,23 and
has been made available in many languages through the International Quality of
Life Assessment Project.24
Efforts are underway to create a mapping from scales derived from the SF-36 to
utilities. For example, John Brazier and his colleagues have created a simplified ver-
sion of the SF-36, the SF-6D, which reduces the number of scales (dimensions) from
eight to six by excluding the general health scale and combining the physical and
emotional role limitations into a single index.25 Each of the six dimensions has five
or six levels of response, enabling them to define 18,000 different health statuses.The
researchers next selected 49 representative health statuses and employed the SG
method in interviews with a general population sample of UK respondents. They
next estimated econometric models with utilities as the dependent variable and the
various levels on the six dimensions as explanatory variables. The coefficients esti-
mated for the various levels can then be used to assign utilities to any one of the pos-
sible health statuses.26 Researchers who can classify outcomes in terms of the SF-6D
scale can thus obtain utilities for these outcomes. Of course, the utilities are based on
the preferences of the UK general public and might not be appropriate in other na-
tional contexts. In the future, however, the estimates are likely to be replicated for
other populations.
Other health status indexes have been created and related to population prefer-
ences. For example, European researchers organized as the EuroQol association have
developed the EQ-5D index to supplement existing indexes.27 Utilities have been as-
signed to EQ-5D health status through general population surveys using the TTO
method.28 Researchers have begun to compare the utilities and the sensitivity of these
utilities to changes in health statuses across the various health indexes. For example, a
recent comparison of EQ-5D and SF-6D utilities for liver transplant patients found
that the SF-6D does not describe health statuses at the lower end of the utility scale
well but is more sensitive than EQ-5D in detecting small changes toward the top of the
scale.29 A comparison of the HUI Mark 3, the SF-6D, and the EQ-5D for patients with
rheumatological conditions suggested broad agreement, but it also showed a number
of specific differences that make the particular choice of index potentially relevant to
constructing QALYs.30
QALYs: Caveats and an Extensions
The construction of QALYs using health status utilities requires a strong assump-
tion: The utility of being in a particular health status is proportional to the time
spent in that status. For example, consider a person who has an expected life of Y
years in health status H. The number of QALYs accruing to this person would be
YU(H), the product of the number of years in the health status and the utility of the
health status, U(H).
467

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
A number of conceptual issues about how to measure utilities remain.31 A particu-
larly important issue is discounting for time. From a CBA perspective, it is problematic
to discount costs but not to discount health years. The reason is that if costs but not
QALYs were discounted, the cost-effectiveness ratio of a policy that involved the ac-
crual of costs and QALYs over substantial periods of time would improve if we de-
layed the health expenditure until the following year.32 The basic idea that individuals
have positive discount rates relating to additional years is widely accepted, but consid-
erable controversy over the theory, measurement, and level of the appropriate dis-
count rate exists.33
The use of QALYs is not limited to CEA, but can also be used in CBA. The basic
procedure would be to monetize QALYs using a value of a life-year. For example,
imagine that a public health intervention would save 10 QALYs this year and 20
QALYs next year. If the analyst values a life-year (VLY) at $200,000, then the benefits
in the first year of the intervention would be $2 million, and the benefits in the second
Researchers recently conducted a study com-
paring various utility elicitation methods for
gastroesophageal reflux disease with heart-
burn. Samples of patients with a history of
heartburn were recruited in Germany and
Sweden. After asking respondents about the
severity of their heartburn in a typical week,
the researchers administered the EQ-5D health
index and then applied the health rating (HR),
time trade-off (TTO), and standard gamble
(SG) methods. For example, the SG alterna-
tives were presented as follows:
Alternative 1 is that you know for certain that you
will live for another 10 years in your current
health state. During these 10 years, your heart-
burn as well as symptoms of any other health
problems that you may have will be exactly as you
have experienced them over the last 12 months.
After these 10 years you will die.
Alternative 2 is that there is a treatment that
either is successful or fails. If the treatment is
successful, you will recover perfect health and
remain perfectly healthy during 10 years, that is,
the same period of time as in alternative 1.
EXHIBIT 1
Perfect health means that you are free from all
health problems, that is, you are free from heart-
burn as well as symptoms of any other health
problems that you may have. After these 10
years you will die. If treatment fails, you will die
immediately. (p. 43)
After giving respondents randomly assigned
starting points of either 0.95 or 0.70 for the prob-
ability of success, probabilities were raised or
lowered until the respondent was indifferent be-
tween the alternatives. Over one-third of respon-
dents were unwilling to accept any risk of death
for the chance of perfect health (or accept any re-
duction of years in the TTO method). The mean
values from the SG method were 0.92, 0.88, and
0.86 for mild,moderate,and severe heartburn,re-
spectively.The TTO values for the three levels of
severity were 0.90, 0.87, and 0.85. In contrast to
these relatively high utilities, the HR method
produced utilities of 0.75,0.67,and 0.49,while the
EQ-5D based utilities were 0.78, 0.67, and 0.49.
Thus, the SG and TTO methods showed much
smaller losses in utility from chronic heart-
burn than the HR or the EQ-5D methods.
Source: Adapted from Bernt Kartman, Gudrun Gatz, and Magnus Johannesson, “Health State Utilities in
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease Patients with Heartburn: A Study in Germany and Sweden,” Medical Decision
Making 24(1) 2004, 40–52.
468

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
year would be $4 million.These yearly benefits would then be discounted to produce a
present value of benefits. However, moving from the value of a statistical life (VSL) to
a VLY is especially controversial as it implies a VSL that is lower for older people with
shorter life expectancies.
THE USE OF LEAGUE TABLES
CEA usually compares mutually exclusive projects. By definition, this means that the
alternative projects address the same problems, for example, alternative methods of
breast cancer screening.Yet, CEA has been used to make rankings across policies that
have the same broad purpose (e.g., saving lives) but are not necessarily mutually exclu-
sive. League tables rank multiple CEAs that share the same cost-effectiveness mea-
sure. Tammy Tengs and her colleagues, for example, have developed a league table of
587 interventions intended to avert premature death (i.e., to save lives).34 They found
that, on average, the United States spent about $433,500 per life saved or $41,600 per
year of life saved (in 1999 dollars). They also asked the question: How many lives
would be saved if the same investment were focused on the most cost-effective inter-
ventions? They conclude that an additional 60,200 lives could be saved, or about twice
as many lives as under the status quo allocation. In a similar study, John Morrall III, up-
dating an earlier review he conducted, assessed the cost-effectiveness of 76 regulations
issued by the U.S. federal government between 1967 and 2001. He found that the cost-
effectiveness ratios differed by six orders of magnitude and that regulations aimed at
reducing safety and cardiovascular risks have been much more cost-effective than reg-
ulations aimed at reducing cancer risks.35
How useful are league tables? Comparisons of mutually exclusive projects inher-
ently control for some of the differences in the measurement of cost and effectiveness.
There can be no such presumption when comparing studies across different authors,
using different data, and somewhat different methodologies. Different studies may
measure costs differently, they may omit different costs, and they may differ consider-
ably in scale.These problems apply even more so to CUA league tables because differ-
ent methodologies are used to calculate QALYs and, as discussed earlier, these
EXHIBIT 2
The Cost-Utility Registry housed in the Center
for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health
at Tufts University provides a comprehensive
listing of cost-effectiveness studies in the health
area. The registry currently includes over 1,700
cost-effectiveness studies of health-related in-
terventions that provide a rich source of QALY
estimates for cost-benefit analysts who do not
have the resources to develop their own esti-
mates. More generally, analysts planning to
conduct their surveys may find it useful to
review studies that used similar methods.
The Cost-Utility Registry can be accessed at
research.tufts-nemc.org/cear/overview/.
Source: Adapted from CEA Registry, Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health,Tufts University,
research.tufts-nemc.org/cear/.
469

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
methodologies do not necessarily produce similar results. Therefore, Karen Gerard’s
caution on the use of league tables is appropriate:
[A]s more and more studies were read in the course of the investigation, it be-
came striking how many not only placed their results in some standard QALY
league table . . . but also purported to present their results as “favourable.” It is
unlikely to be the case that all of these studies can have “favourable” results.36
Other critics have noted the absence of information on uncertainty in most league ta-
bles.37 Thus, caution is warranted in using league tables as guides for policy choice.
CONCLUSION: WHEN IS CEA CLOSE TO CBA?
CEA measures technical efficiency, not allocative efficiency. It can rank alternative
policies is terms of technical efficiency but cannot indicate whether something is worth
doing. CEA is closest to CBA when all social costs are measured, when the effective-
ness measure captures all of the social benefits, and when alternative projects are of
similar scales. Under these circumstances the most cost-effective alternative is the most
allocatively efficient alternative. However, this does not necessarily imply that it
should be adopted because it may not be worth doing. Unless we can monetize units of
effectiveness, we cannot answer the latter question.
When significant nonbudgetary social costs or other categories of benefits exist,
CEA is not close to CBA.Analysts have three options. First, they can try to incorporate
significant nonbudgetary social costs and other categories of benefits into an adjusted
cost-effectiveness measure, such as is done in the construction of QALYs. Second, if
they can also monetize effectiveness, then they should do CBA. Third, they can move
to a more qualitative evaluation method such as multigoal analysis.
EXERCISES
1.
A public health department is considering five alternative programs to encourage parents
to have their preschool children vaccinated against a communicable disease. The following
table shows the cost and number of vaccinations predicted for each program.
Program
Cost ($)
Number of Vaccinations
A
20,000
2,000
B
44,000
4,000
C
72,000
6,000
D
112,000
8,000
E
150,000
10,000
a.
Ignoring issues of scale, which program is most cost-effective?
b.
Assuming that the public health department wishes to vaccinate at least 5,000 children,
which program is most cost-effective?
c.
If the health department believes that each vaccination provides social benefits equal
to $20, then which program should it adopt?
470

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
2.
Analysts wish to evaluate alternative surgical procedures for spinal cord injuries.The proce-
dures have various probabilities of yielding the following results.
Full recovery (FR)—the patient regains full mobility and suffers no chronic pain.
Full functional recovery (FFR)—the patient regains full mobility but suffers
chronic pain that will make it uncomfortable to sit for periods of longer than about
an hour and will interfere with sleeping two nights per week, on average.
Partial functional recovery (PFR)—the patient regains only restricted movement
that will limit mobility to slow-paced walking and will make it difficult to lift ob-
jects weighing more than a few pounds. Chronic pain is similar to that suffered
under full functional recovery.
Paraplegia (P)—the patient completely loses use of legs and would, therefore, require
a wheelchair or other prosthetic for mobility and suffers chronic pain that interferes
with sleeping four nights per week, on average.Aside from loss of the use of his or her
legs, the patient would regain control of other lower body functions.
a.
Describe how you would construct a quality-of-life index for these surgical outcomes
by offering gambles to respondents. Test your procedure on a classmate, friend, or
other willing person.
b.
Assume that the index you construct on the basis of your sample of one respondent is
representative of the population of patients. Use the index to measure the effective-
ness of each of three alternative surgical procedures with the following distributions of
outcomes.
Surgical Procedures
A
B
C
FR
0.10
0.50
0.40
FFR
0.70
0.20
0.45
PFR
0.15
0.20
0.10
P
0.05
0.10
0.05
c.
Imagine that the surgical procedures involved different life expectancies for the vari-
ous outcomes. Discuss how you might revise your measure of effectiveness to take ac-
count of these differences.
3.
(Instructor-provided spreadsheet recommended.) Two alternative mosquito control pro-
grams have been proposed to reduce the health risks of West Nile disease in a state over the
next five years.The costs and effectiveness of each program in each of the next five years are
provided in the following table.
Alternative A
Alternative B
QALYs 
Saved
Incremental 
Cost (millions 
of dollars)
QALYs 
Saved
Incremental 
Cost (millions 
of dollars)
Year 1
1.0
3.8
0.5
1.0
Year 2
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Year 3
0.3
0.0
0.5
1.0
Year 4
0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
471

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
a.
Calculate CE ratios for each program without discounting.
b.
Calculate CE ratios discounting cost but not effectiveness assuming a discount rate of
4 percent.
c.
Calculate CE ratios discounting both costs and effectiveness at 4 percent.
d.
Assume that the uncertainty range for each of the yearly effectiveness estimates is plus
or minus 20 percent and the uncertainty in each of the yearly cost estimates is 10 per-
cent.Assuming uniform distributions of errors, produce Monte Carlo distributions of
CE ratios for each program and compare them.
NOTES
1. See Alan M. Garber,“Advances in Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis,” in Anthony J. Culyer and
Joseph P. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health
Economics 1A (New York: Elsevier, 2000),
181–221 at 193–194.
2. Economists have attempted to determine the cir-
cumstances under which CEA is consistent with
the assumptions of welfare economics that un-
derlie CBA. Overall, strong assumptions are re-
quired for consistency. For overviews, see Werner
B. F. Brouwer and Marc A. Koopmanshap,“On
the Economic Foundations of CEA: Ladies and
Gentlemen,Take Your Positions!” Journal of
Health Economics 19(4) 2000, 439–459; and Paul
Dolan and Richard Edlin,“Is It Really Possible
to Build a Bridge Between Cost-Benefit Analysis
and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis?” Journal of
Health Economics 21(5) 2002, 827–843.
3. Monte Carlo simulations can be used to con-
struct cost-effectiveness acceptability curves that
give the probability of a particular alternative
being optimal for different shadow prices of ef-
fect. See Elisabeth Fenwick, Karl Claxton, and
Mark Sculpher,“Representing Uncertainty:The
Role of Cost-Effectiveness Acceptability
Curves,” Health Economics 10(8) 2001, 779–787.
4. Christopher J. L. Murray, David B. Evans,Arnab
Acharya, and Rob M. P. M. Baltussen,
“Development of WHO Guidelines on
Generalized Cost-Effectiveness Analysis,”
Health Economics 9(3) 2000, 235–251.
5. Karen Gerard found that approximately 90 per-
cent of the health studies she reviewed only
looked at direct budgetary costs; see Karen
Gerard,“Cost-Utility in Practice:A Policy
Maker’s Guide to the State of the Art,” Health
Policy 21(3) 1992, 249–279 at 263.
6. See Michael Drummond, Greg L. Stoddart, and
George W.Torrance, Methods for the Economic
Evaluations of Health Care Programmes
(Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1987),
especially page 76.
7. DALYs were developed primarily to quantify the
mortality and morbidity burdens of various dis-
eases in populations. See Christopher J. L.
Murray and Arnab K.Acharya,“Understanding
DALYs,” Journal of Health Economics 16(6)
1997, 703–730. For a critique, see Sudhir Anand
and Kara Hanson,“Disability-Adjusted Life
Years:A Critical Assessment,” Journal of Health
Economics 16(6) 1997, 685–702.
8. These arguments are taken from Peter A. Ubel,
Jeff Richardson, and Paul Menzel, “Societal
Value, the Person Trade-Off, and the Dilemma
of Whose Values to Measure for Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis,” Health Economics 9(2)
2000, 127–136 at 128.
9. David L. Sackett and George W.Torrance,“The
Utility of Different Health States as Perceived
by the General Public,” Journal of Chronic
Diseases 31(11) 1978, 697–704; and Debra
Froberg and Robert L. Kane,“Methodology for
Measuring Health-State Preferences—IV:
Progress and a Research Agenda,” Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology 42(7) 1989, 775–685.
10. Paul Dolan,“The Measurement of Health-
Related Quality of Life for Use in Resource
Allocation in Health Care,” in Anthony J. Culyer
and Joseph P. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of
Health Economics 1B (New York: Elsevier,
2000), 1723–1760 at 1738–1739 and 1748.
11. Rajiv Sharma, Miron Stano, and Mitchell Haas,
“Adjusting to Changes in Health: Implications
for Cost-Effectiveness Analysis,” Journal of
Health Economics 23(2) 2004, 335–351.
12. In addition to these methods, which attempt to
elicit individual valuations of health states, the
person trade-off (PTO) method seeks to assess
472

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
societal values for different distributions of
health outcomes. For example, if respondents
were indifferent between a policy that would
move five people from extremely poor health to
moderate health and an alternative that would
move fifteen people from moderate health to
perfect health, then the social value of the unit
effect of the first policy is three times that of the
unit effect of the second. See Erik Nord, Jose
Luis Pinto, Jeff Richardson, Paul Menzel, and
Peter Ubel,“Incorporating Societal Concerns 
for Fairness in Numerical Valuations of Health
Programs,” Health Economics 8(1) 1999, 25–39.
13. For an overview of this and the other methods
for assessing HRQoL, see Dolan,“The
Measurement of Health-Related Quality of Life
for Use in Resource Allocation in Health Care.”
14. The TTO method was first proposed by G.W.
Torrance,W. H.Thomas, and D. L. Sackett,“A
Utility Measurement Method for Evaluation of
Health Care Programs,” Health Services Research
7(2) 1972, 118–133.
15. Paul Dolan and Peep Stalmeier,“The Validity of
Time Trade-Off Values in Calculating QALYs:
Constant Proportional Time Trade-Off versus the
Proportional Heuristic,” Journal of Health
Economics 22(3) 2003, 445–458.
16. The general SG method was introduced by John
von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern, Theory
of Games and Economic Behavior (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944).
17. See, for example, J. L. Read, R. J. Quinn, D. M.
Berrick, H.V. Fineberg, and M. L.Weinstein,
“Preferences for Health Outcomes: Comparisons
of Assessment Methods,” Medical Decision
Making 4(3) 1984, 315–329; and George W.
Torrance,“Social Preferences for Health States:
An Empirical Evaluation of Three Measurement
Techniques,” Socio-Economic Planning 10(2)
1976, 129–136.
18. See, for example, Han Bleichrodt and Magnus
Johannesson,“Standard Gamble,Time Trade-Off
and Rating Scale: Experimental Results on
Ranking Properties of QALYs,” Journal of
Health Economics 16(2) 1997, 155–175.
19. George W.Torrance, Michael H. Boyle, and
Sargent P. Horwood,“Application of Multi-
Attribute Utility Theory to Measure Social
Preferences for Health Status,” Operations
Research 30(6) 1982, 1043–1069.
20. Additional information, including a bibliography
of studies that have used the health utilities in-
dices, can be found at, www.healthutilities.com.
21. John Horsman,William Furlong, David Feeny,
and George Torrance,“The Health Utilities
Index (HUI®): Concepts, Measurement
Properties, and Applications,” Health Quality and
Life Outcomes 1(1) 2003, 54–67.
22. John E.Ware Jr. and Cathy D. Sherbourne,“The
MOS 36-Item Short Form Health Survey: I.
Conceptual Framework and Item Selection,”
Medical Care 30(6) 1992, 473–483.
23. See www.qualitymetric.com/products/descriptions/
sflicenses.shtml for additional information.
24. John E.Ware Jr. and Barbara Gandek,
“Overview of the SF-36 Health Survey
Instrument and the International Quality of Life
Assessment (IQOLA) Project,” Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology 51(11) 1998, 903–912.
25. John Brazier, Jennifer Roberts, and Mark Deverill,
“The Estimation of a Preference-Based Measure
of Health from the SF-36,” Journal of Health
Economics 21(2) 2002, 271–292; and John Brazier,
Tim Usherwood, Rosemary Harper, and Kate
Thomas,“Deriving a Preference-Based Single
Index from the UK SF-36 Health Survey,” Journal
of Clinical Epidemiology 51(11) 1998, 1115–1128.
26. John Brazier, Jennifer Roberts, and Mark Deverill,
“The Estimation of a Preference-Based Measure
of Health from the SF-36,”Tables 5 and 6.
27. Richard Books and EuroQol Group, “EuroQol:
The Current State of Play,” Health Policy 37(1)
1996, 53–72. For current information about
EuroQol and the EQ-5D index, see www.
euroqol.org/
28. See, for example, Paul Dolan,“Modelling
Valuations for Health States:The Effect of
Duration,” Health Policy 38(3), 189–203.
29 Louise Longworth and Stirling Bryan,“An
Empirical Comparison of EQ-5D and SF-6D in
Liver Transplant Patients,” Health Economics
12(12) 2003, 1061–1067.
30. Barbara Conner-Spady and Maria E. Suarez-
Almazor,“Variation in the Estimation of Quality
Adjusted Life-Years by Different Preference-
Based Instruments,” Medical Care 41(7) 2003,
791–801.
31. For more on the debate over how well different
methods get at utility, see A. J. Culyer and Adam
Wagstaff,“QALYs versus HYEs,” Journal of
473

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Health Economics 11(3) 1993, 311–323; and
Amiram Gafni, Stephen Birch, and Abraham
Mehrez,“Economics, Health and Health
Economics: HYEs versus QALYs,” same issue,
325–329.
32. Emmett B. Keeler and Shan Cretin,“Discounting
of Life-Saving and Other Nonmonetary Effects,”
Management Science 29(3) 1983, 300–306.
However, this is not a paradox per se because, as
we have shown, a CE ratio never tells us whether a
project has positive social value and hence, should
be implemented—whether this year or next year.
33. Amiram Gafni,“Time in Health: Can We
Measure Individuals’ ‘Pure Time Preference’?”
Medical Decision Making 15(1) 1995, 31–37;
Donald A. Redelmeier, Daniel N. Heller, and
Milton C.Weinstein,“Time Preference in
Medical Economics: Science or Religion?”
Medical Decision Making 13(3) 1993, 301–303;
and Magnus Johannesson, Joseph Pliskin, and
Milton C.Weinstein,“A Note on QALYs,Time
Trade-off and Discounting,” Medical Decision
Making 14(2) 1994, 188–193.
34. Tammy O. Tengs, Miriam E. Adams, Joseph S.
Pliskin, Dana Gelb-Safran, Joanna E. Seigel,
Michael C. Weinstein, and John D. Graham,
“Five-Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and
Their Cost-Effectiveness,” Risk Analysis 15(3)
1995, 369–390. For more on their methodology
and policy implications, see Tammy O. Tengs
and John D. Graham, “The Opportunity
Costs of Haphazard Social Investment in 
Life-Saving,” in Robert W. Hahn, ed., Risks,
Costs, and Lives Saved: Getting Better Results
from Regulation (New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press; Washington, D.C.:
The AEI Press, 1996).
35. John F. Morrall III,“Saving Lives:A Review of
the Record,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
27(3) 2003, 221–237.
36. Gerard,“Cost-Utility in Practice,” 274.
37. Josephine Mauskopf, Frans Rutten, and
Warren Schonfeld, “Cost-Effectiveness 
League Tables: Valuable Guidance for
Decision Makers?” Pharmacoeconomics
21(14) 2003, 991–1000.
474

Distributionally Weighted 
Cost-Benefit Analysis
G
overnment policies, programs, and projects typically affect individuals differ-
ently. Thus, in conducting CBAs, analysts often report benefits and costs for
separate categories of people. The relevant classification of individuals into
groups for this purpose depends on the specific policy under evaluation. Some exam-
ples include consumers versus producers versus taxpayers, program participants ver-
sus nonparticipants, citizens (of a nation or a state or a city) versus noncitizens, and
high-income groups versus low-income groups. This chapter focuses on the most
common form of distributionally weighted CBA, which that involves high-income
versus low-income groups.
Once individuals are divided into categories, the first issue that must be decided
is whether each group will be given standing in the CBA. For example, in conducting
a CBA of U.S. regulatory policy on acid rain, a decision must be made as to whether
to give standing to Canadians affected by acid rain resulting from manufacturing in
the United States. Similarly, when evaluating a policy that impacts foreign-based and
owned companies, one must decide whether to give standing to foreign shareholders.
Given a decision on standing, costs and benefits may be reported separately for
each group with standing. The usefulness of showing the impacts on each group sepa-
rately is illustrated by the following hypothetical example. Here, it is assumed that the
government is considering proposals from three different (national) companies for
constructing and operating a pipeline that would transport oil from inside the country
to customers in another country. Consider, for example, a pipeline from Northern
Canada into the United States. The benefits and costs associated with each proposal
may be presented in two ways.
Table 1 exemplifies “traditional” CBA, which ignores distributional considera-
tions. Impacts are categorized as benefits or costs from the perspective of society as a
whole. Society would be better off if it adopted Company A or B’s proposals than no
pipeline (the NPV of the net social benefits are positive) and would be best off by
adopting Company B’s proposal. In contrast, Table 2 indicates how three different
groups would be affected by each proposal. It shows that all firms would enjoy net
benefits as their profits (producer surplus) would be positive. Some (firms A and B),
however, would enjoy more profits than others (firm C). Government would also ben-
efit as government surplus (tax revenues) would be positive. However, a third party
Form Chapter 19 of Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice, 4/e.Anthony E. Boardman. David H. Greenberg.
Aidan R.Vining. David L.Weimer. Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education. Published by Prentice Hall.All rights
reserved.
475

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 2
Social Cost-Benefit Analysis of Alternative Pipeline Proposals 
(Net Benefits to Each Affected Group)
Company A
Company B
Company C
COMPANY
Benefits
Revenues
4.00
4.00
4.00
Costs
Construction cost
1.88
1.98
2.36
Operating costs
1.20
1.25
1.50
Taxes
0.24
0.20
0.05
Expected firm environmental costs
0.18
0.08
0.05
Costs
3.50
3.51
3.96
Expected profit
0.50
0.49
0.04
RESIDENTS’ COSTS
Environmental cost of construction
0.20
0.20
0.20
Expected subsequent environmental costs
0.15
0.07
0.04
Less compensation received
-0.04
-0.02
-0.01
Cost to residents
0.31
0.25
0.23
GOVERNMENT REVENUES (TAXES)
0.24
0.20
0.05
Net social benefits
0.43
0.44
-0.14
composed of individuals who live near the pipeline would be worse off under all three
proposals. (There is no consumer surplus in this illustration because it is assumed that
the oil is exported and foreigners do not have standing.) Table 2 also indicates that, al-
though net social benefits would be similar under the proposals from Company A and
B, there is a trade-off between them because the government would receive greater
tax revenues under Company A’s proposal, but residents would be better off under
the proposal from Company B.Thus, Table 2 provides richer information than Table 1.
But how can this information to be utilized in making a decision concerning the three
proposals?
TABLE 1
Social Cost-Benefit Analysis of Alternative Pipeline Proposals
Company A
Company B
Company C
Social benefits
Revenues
4.00
4.00
4.00
Total benefits
4.00
4.00
4.00
Social costs
Construction cost
1.88
1.98
2.36
Operating costs
1.20
1.25
1.50
Environmental cost of construction
0.20
0.20
0.20
Expected subsequent 
environmental costs
0.29
0.13
0.08
Total costs
3.57
3.56
4.14
Net social benefits
0.43
0.44
0.14
476

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
Throughout this book, we have emphasized use of the Kaldor-Hicks potential
compensation test in reaching such decisions. In using this test, benefits and costs are
simply summed across all groups that have standing to determine whether total bene-
fits are larger than total costs and, hence, whether the policy should be adopted.Thus,
this test examines benefits and costs from the perspective of society as a whole.
Indeed, an implicit result of using the Kaldor-Hicks potential compensation test is that,
with standing, it does not matter who receives the benefits from a government program
or who pays the costs (“a dollar is a dollar regardless of who receives or pays it”), as long
as there is a net gain to society as a whole—in other words, as long as the program is
efficient in terms of potential Pareto improvement. Thus, regardless of whether
Table 1 or 2 is used to make a decision, the decision would be in favor of Company B’s
proposal.
In making actual policy decisions, however, the way in which benefits and costs
are distributed among various groups is sometimes important. For instance, this con-
sideration can have an influence over whether a policy is politically acceptable. For
example, effects on local residents may have more influence than the same amount
of funds added to government revenue. Hence, a dollar received or expended by a
member of one group may not be treated as equal to a dollar received or expended
by a member of another group.
In this chapter, we focus on the role of the distribution of benefits and costs among
groups in using CBA for decision making.1 We first examine the economic rationale for
treating dollars received or expended by various income groups differently in CBA.
We then consider approaches for doing this in practice.
DISTRIBUTIONAL JUSTIFICATIONS FOR INCOME TRANSFER PROGRAMS
The rationale suggested by economists for treating dollars received or expended by
various groups differently in CBA is mainly limited to situations in which low-income
persons are helped (or hurt) by a program more than other persons.2 Political decision
makers may treat dollars received or expended by various other groups differently,
even if their income levels are similar. They may, for example, be influenced by
differences among groups in voting behavior or campaign contributions. Economists,
however, typically argue for treating dollars received or expended by various groups
similarly unless they differ in terms of income or wealth.3 Consequently, in the
remainder of this chapter, we focus on CBAs of policies that have differential effects
on groups that differ by income—for example, projects that are located in underdevel-
oped regions or programs that are targeted at disadvantaged persons.
To illustrate such policies, consider a program that taxes high-income persons in
order to provide income transfers to low-income persons. The tax component of this
program is illustrated in Figure 1. For purposes of discussion, assume that the market
represented in this graph is for a luxury good, such as yachts, that is purchased only by
the rich. In the absence of the tax, equilibrium in this market would occur at a price of
P1 and a quantity of Q1. If an excise tax of t is levied on each unit of output, then the
supply curve would shift up by this amount as suppliers attempt to pass along to con-
sumers the additional cost the tax imposes upon them.
477

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
FIGURE 1
An Excise Tax on a Luxury Good
Source: Adapted from Arnold C. Harberger, “On the Use of Distributional Weights in
Social Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 86(2) 1978, S87–S120;
Figure 1, p. S89.
Price
Quantity
D
D
B
A
A
C
C
Q1
S1
S2
P1
P2
P2 – t
Q2
Benefits
Costs
Producers
Consumers
C  D
A  B
Transfer recipients 
Society
A  C
B + D
Using the approach implied by the Kaldor-Hicks rule, a distributional analysis of
the costs and benefits associated with this tax would look like this:
Thus, a deadweight loss equal to areas B  D would result from the tax. In addition
to this deadweight loss, two off-graph social costs also result from our transfer program:
1. Administering both the tax and the transfer parts of the program requires the use
of social resources.
2. Some of those receiving the transfer will probably work less or stop working en-
tirely, thereby reducing the goods and services available to society. In fact, there is
considerable evidence that this is what occurs under existing welfare programs.4
Only part of this loss would be offset by the gains in leisure to transfer recipients.
The remaining residual is a second source of deadweight loss.
It is obvious that this program does not pass the Kaldor-Hicks test.It must instead be
justified on distributional grounds. In other words, one would have to argue that giving a
478

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
low-income person a dollar warrants taking more than a dollar away from a higher-in-
come person. Apparently, this distributional argument has some force because pro-
grams such as Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) and food stamps,
which transfer income from higher-income to lower-income persons, do in fact exist.
Hence, it appears that society is willing to sacrifice some efficiency in order to provide
assistance to low-income persons.
The importance of this for CBA analysis is that it implies that, in practice, a dol-
lar of benefits received or a dollar of costs incurred by a low-income individual is
sometimes given greater weight in assessing government programs than a dollar of
benefits received or a dollar of costs incurred by a higher-income individual. How
can this be justified?
THE CASE FOR TREATING LOW- AND HIGH-INCOME 
GROUPS DIFFERENTLY IN CBA
There are at least three arguments for giving dollars received or paid by low-income
persons greater weight in CBA than dollars received or paid by higher-income persons:
1. Income has diminishing marginal utility.
2. The income distribution should be more equal.
3. The “one person, one vote” principle should apply.
We discuss each of these arguments in turn.
Diminishing Marginal Utility of Income
The first argument is based on the standard assumption in economics that each addi-
tional dollar an individual receives provides less utility than the preceding dollar. A
corollary of this assumption is that a dollar received or a dollar of cost incurred by a
high-income person has less of an impact on his or her utility than it would on a low-
income person’s utility. For that reason, the argument suggests, it should count less in
a CBA.5 This argument can be summarized algebraically as follows:
(1)
where ui >yi is the marginal private utility of income of individual i, l indicates a low-
income person, and h a high-income person.
Income Distribution Should Be More Equal
The second argument for giving dollars received or paid by the poor greater weight in
CBA than dollars received or paid by the rich is premised on the assertion that the cur-
rent income distribution is less equal than it should be and social welfare would be
higher if it were more equal.6 There are several possible bases for such an assertion.
The first is that a highly unequal distribution of income may result in civil disorder,
crime, and riots. More equality in income may reduce these threats to the general social
welfare. Second, it can be argued that some minimum threshold of income exists that is
¢ul>¢yl 7 ¢uh>¢yh
479

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
so low that no one can (or, to preserve human dignity, should have to) live below it.
Third, some relatively well-off persons may receive utility if the circumstances facing
the worse-off members of society at the bottom of the income distribution improve.
Certain types of charitable giving, such as contributions to the Salvation Army, provide
evidence for the existence of this form of altruism. Finally, it is possible that some per-
sons value greater income equality in and of itself.7
If for any of these reasons society prefers greater income equality than cur-
rently exists, then a dollar increase in the income of a low-income person would
result in a larger increase in the welfare of society as a whole than would a dollar
increase in the income of a high-income person. Note that this would still be true even
if the marginal utility of income was not diminishing and, consequently, a dollar
increase in the income of high- and low-income persons resulted in equal increases
in the utilities of these persons. Each of the justifications listed in the previous para-
graph suggests that society as a whole (or at least some relatively well-off members
of society) becomes better off if those at the bottom of the income distribution gain
relative to those in the rest of the distribution. Thus, the first and second arguments
are distinct from one another.
Stated algebraically, the second argument implies that:
(2)
where SW refers to the change in aggregate social welfare and SW>yi is the mar-
ginal effect on social welfare of a change in income that is received by individual i.8
This argument confronts the Kaldor-Hicks test quite directly. It implies that some
projects or programs that fail the Kaldor-Hicks test should nonetheless be adopted if
they redistribute income in a way that makes the income distribution more equal. In
other words, the argument suggests that some programs that are inefficient should be
undertaken if they increase income equality sufficiently. This also implies that some
projects that make the income distribution less equal should not be undertaken, even
though the Kaldor-Hicks test implies that they are efficient.
The “One Person, One Vote” Principle
This argument begins by noting that the benefits and costs of government programs to
consumers are appropriately measured as changes in consumer surplus.Then it goes on
to point out that because high-income persons have more income to spend than low-
income persons, the measured impacts of policies on their consumer surplus will typi-
cally be larger and, hence, will be of greater consequence in a CBA based strictly on
the Kaldor-Hicks rule.
This is illustrated by Figure 2, which compares the demand schedules of a typical
high-income consumer and a typical low-income consumer for a good. If the good is a
normal good, that is, if demand for the good increases as income increases, then the
demand schedule of the high-income consumer will be to the right of that of the low-
income consumer,as the diagram shows.If a government policy increases the price of the
good, say from P1 to P2, both consumers will bear the cost of that increase in the form of
a loss in consumer surplus. However, the loss suffered by the high-income consumer
(areas A  B) will be greater than the loss borne by the low-income consumer (area A
¢SW>¢yl 7 ¢SW>¢yh, even if ¢u1>¢yl = ¢uh>¢yh
480

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
Price
A
B
Quantity
P1
P2
dI
dh
FIGURE 2
Changes in Consumer Surplus for High- and Low-
Income Consumers
alone).As a result, a CBA will give more weight to the impact of the policy on the high-
income consumer than on the low-income consumer.
The final part of the argument suggests that in a democracy low-income persons
should have as much influence over decisions on whether to undertake public projects
as high-income persons. In other words, it is argued that “since the principle of ‘one
person, one vote’ is deeply embedded in the concept of democracy,” measures of
changes in consumer surplus for different persons should be adjusted to what they
would be if everyone had the same income.9 For example, we would count the impact
of the price change on the low-income person represented in the diagram at about
double what we would count the impact on the high-income person, in effect, equaliz-
ing the “votes” of the two individuals.10
DISTRIBUTIONAL WEIGHTS
In principle, various groups can be treated differently in a CBA by using distributional
weights. Distributional weights are just numbers—such as 1, 2, or 1.5—that are in-
tended to reflect the value placed on each dollar paid out or received by each group.
Table 3 compares standard and distributionally weighted CBA for two projects affect-
ing two income groups. In standard CBA, as shown in the upper panel of the table, both
groups receive an equal weight of 1. In distributionally weighted CBA, Group B (the
higher-income group) is given a value of 1, while Group A (the lower-income group) is
given a value of 3, implying that a dollar received by a member of the low-income
group is valued in the CBA at three times that of a dollar received by a member of the
high-income group. Given this weighting, as shown in the lower panel, project selection
switches from Project I to Project II.
481

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 3
Standard versus Distributionally Weighted CBA
1. Standard CBA
Net Benefits
Aggregate Net 
Projects
Group A
Group B
Social Benefits
I
10
50
60
II
20
30
50
Weights
1
1
Selection: Project I
2. Distributionally Weighted CBA
Net Benefits
Aggregate Net
Projects
Group A
Group B
Social Benefits
I
10  3  30
50
80
II
20  3  60
30
90
Weights
3
1
Selection: Project II
Proposed mergers that appear likely to result in
price increases are not allowed in the United
States, but they are permitted in Canada if the
potential gains in efficiency are deemed suffi-
cient.Viewed somewhat differently, mergers are
permitted in Canada if potential gains in pro-
ducer surplus seem to offset potential losses in
consumer surplus resulting from price increases,
but such mergers are not permitted in the
United States. Thomas Ross and Ralph Winter
point out that this is equivalent to giving pro-
ducer and consumer surplus equal distributional
weights in Canada, but giving consumer surplus
EXHIBIT 1
a greater weight than producer surplus in the
United States. Indeed, producer surplus is, in ef-
fect, given a weight of zero in the United States.
One rationale for the U.S. approach might be
that producers (e.g., corporative stockholders)
tend to be wealthier than consumers, but Ross
and Winter argue that this need not always be
the case (e.g., consider the markets for luxury
goods) and, even if it is, distributional weights
should be based on the actual wealth or income
of individuals, not on whether they happen to be
classified as “producers” or “consumers” in the
case of a particular merger.
Source: Adapted from Thomas W. Ross and Ralph A. Winter, “The Efficiency Defense in Merger Law: Economic
Foundations and Recent Canadian Developments,” Antitrust Law Journal 72 2004–5, 471–503.
More formally, distributional weights can be incorporated into a CBA through a
slight modification of the net present value (NPV) formula:
(3)
where Wj is the distributional weight for group j, Bt,j are the benefits received by group
j in period t, Ct,j are the costs incurred by group j in period t, m is the number of groups,
and s is the social discount rate.
NPV = a
m
j=1
cWja
q
t=0
Bt,j - Ct,j
(1 + s)t d
482

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
The idea behind this formula is simple. The persons affected by the government
policy are divided into as many groups as appropriate. Each group is then given a dis-
tributional weight. The NPV for each group is then computed and multiplied by its
weight.These weighted NPVs are then added together to obtain an overall NPV. Note
that in CBAs that rely strictly on the Kaldor-Hicks rule, Wj is implicitly set equal to 1
for all groups. On the other hand, Wj is set to 0 for any group that is not given standing.
DETERMINING DISTRIBUTIONAL WEIGHTS
The obvious difficulty with implementing this approach is determining appropriate
weight for each group.The weights should, of course, be consistent with the rationale for
using them. However, of the three arguments for using weights presented earlier, only
the one based on the “one person, one vote” principle suggests an approach that could
potentially be used in practice for valuing the weights of various groups, and even in this
case, the information requirements are substantial. Among the required information is
the average income level of each relevant group, an estimate of the income elasticity of
demand for each good affected by the government policy being evaluated (i.e., the per-
centage change in the quantity demanded of each good that results from a 1 percent in-
crease in income), and an estimate of the market demand curve for each affected good.
Given this information, the consumer surplus of the average member of each group can
then be computed.These estimates can, in turn, be used to derive distributional weights
for each group that are consistent with the one person, one vote principle.11
To develop weights that are consistent with the remaining two arguments, infor-
mation is needed on u>y (the marginal private utility of income) and SW>y (the
marginal effect on social welfare of a change in income) for a typical member of each
group of interest. For example, a set of distributional weights could be developed that
is consistent with the diminishing marginal utility of income argument if we knew that
a $100 increase in income increased the utility of rich people by two units and the util-
ity of poor people by three units by simply computing weights on the basis of the ratio
of the marginal utility values. Thus, Wj would be set equal to 1 for rich persons and to
1.5 for poor persons. Similarly, a set of distributional weights that is consistent with the
argument that the income distribution should be more equal could be developed if we
knew that a $100 increase in the income of a typical poor person increased social wel-
fare by two units, but the same increase in the income of a typical rich person increased
social welfare by only one unit.
Unfortunately, such information is not available, nor is there any known way to ob-
tain it. First, utility is a subjective concept that defies cardinal measurement.12 Indeed
many economists eschew any explicit interpersonal comparisons of utility for this rea-
son. But in the absence of interpersonal comparisons of utility, it is not possible to
develop a system of distributional weights that is consistent with the diminishing mar-
ginal utility of income argument. Second, no general consensus among members of so-
ciety exists concerning the specific relationship between a given change in the income
levels of individuals and social welfare, except that most persons would, perhaps, agree
that the relation is positive and its magnitude is larger for low-income than for high-
income persons.Without such a consensus, however, it is not possible to develop distri-
butional weights that are consistent with the greater income equality argument.
483

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
EXHIBIT 2
Whether a dollar of benefits or costs is valued
higher in poor developing countries than in a
richer developed countries has important impli-
cations for international environmental agree-
ments. For example, in the absence of weighting,
the per capita benefits of an agreement to re-
duce global climate change by restricting emis-
sions of fossil fuel would be smaller in a poor
country than in a rich country. One reason for
this is that when based on willingness to pay the
value of a statistical life is smaller in the poor
country simply because of differences in ability
to pay. Without weighting, the per capita dollar
costs of restricting emissions in a poor country
(for example, job losses) would also be smaller
than in a rich country. A recent analysis by
Christian Azar, which uses a CBA framework,
found that, compared to a situation in which
weighting is not used, the use of weighting
greatly reduces emissions that rich countries
should be allowed relative to those that poor
countries should be permitted.
Source: Adapted from Christian Azar,“Weight Factors in Cost-Benefit Analysis of Climate Change,” Environmental and
Resource Economics 13(3) 1999, 249–268.
A PRAGMATIC APPROACH TO WEIGHTING
Given the practical difficulties with obtaining a defensible set of distributional
weights,13 we suggest that their use be limited to only those CBAs where distribu-
tional issues are of central concern (for example, CBAs of programs targeted at disad-
vantaged groups or at impoverished areas within countries, states, or cities) or CBAs of
policies that explicitly treat different income groups differently (for example, a CBA of
a plan to store radioactive waste in a low-income area).It may then be possible to use an
approach that highlights the importance of the distributional implications associated
with the policy being analyzed without requiring that any particular set of distributional
weights be selected as the “correct” set.
To illustrate the particular approach that we suggest using to do this, we return to
the CBA of welfare-to-work programs. These programs provide various combinations
of job search, education, training, financial incentives, and subsidized jobs for welfare
recipients. Because these programs are targeted at welfare recipients—an especially
disadvantaged low-income group—both their distributional effects and their effects on
economic efficiency are relevant. Thus, in principle, CBAs of welfare-to-work pro-
grams should take both types of effects into account.
Displaying Unweighted Cost and Benefit Estimates
The first step in taking account of both the efficiency and distributional effects of
welfare-to-work programs is simply to display unweighted program impacts on society
as a whole, as well as on pertinent subgroups. This is accomplished in the first three
columns in Table 4, which simply duplicate the total net present value estimates for the
programs that were originally reported in Table 4. Column 1 reports these estimates
from the perspective of program participants, column 2 from the perspective of non-
participants, and column 3 (which is computed by summing the first two columns) from
the perspective of society as a whole.
484

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 4
Sensitivity of MDRC’s Evaluations of Selected Welfare-to-Work Experiments to the Use
of Distributional Weights (in 2006 dollars)
NPV If 
Estimates
Participant
of Internal
NPV from
NPV from
Unweighted
Weight  2 
Weights for
Participant
Nonparticipant
Social NPV
[2  Col 1
Participants
Perspective
Perspective
[Col 1  Col 2]
 Col 2]
[Col 2/Col 1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Mandatory Work
Experience Programs
Cook County WIN 
Demonstration 
(n  11,912)
686
183
503
1,190
NA
San Diego (n  3,591)
310
1,411
1,721
2,030
NA
West Virginia CWEP 
(n  3,694)
163
1,424
1,261
1,098
8.74
Mandatory Job-Search-
First Programs
Atlanta LFA NEWWS 
(n  4,433)
14
932
946
960
NA
Grand Rapids LFA 
NEWWS (n  4,554)
2,867
3,521
653
2,214
1.23
Los Angeles Jobs-
First GAIN (n  15,683)
509
3,044
3,552
4,061
NA
Riverside LFA NEWWS 
(n  8,322)
1,606
1,870
264
1,342
1.16
SWIM (San Diego) 
(n  3,227)
49
2,599
2,549
2,500
52.59
Mandatory Education-
First Programs
Atlanta HCD NEWWS 
(n  4,433)
398
3,943
3,545
3,147
9.91
Columbus Integrated 
NEWWS (n  7,242)
1,975
295
1,680
3,656
NA
Columbus Traditional 
NEWWS (n  7,242)
1,423
781
2,204
3,628
NA
Detroit NEWWS 
(n  4,459)
196
401
205
9
2.05
Grand Rapids HCD 
NEWWS (n  4,554)
2,443
374
2,817
5,259
NA
Riverside HCD 
NEWWS (n  3,135)
3,686
735
2,951
6,638
NA
Mandatory Mixed-Initial-
Activity Programs
Butte GAIN (n  1,234)
1,829
197
2,026
3,855
NA
Portland NEWWS 
(n  4,028)
1,167
6,337
5,169
4,002
5.43
Riverside GAIN 
(n  5,626)
2,117
4,104
6,221
8,339
NA
San Diego GAIN 
(n  8,224)
1,026
1,277
2,303
3,329
NA
Tulare GAIN (n  2,248)
2,020
3,162
1,142
878
1.57
(Continued )
485

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
TABLE 4
(Continued )
NPV If 
Estimates
Participant
of Internal
NPV from
NPV from
Unweighted
Weight  2 
Weights for
Participant
Nonparticipant
Social NPV
[2  Col 1
Participants
Perspective
Perspective
[Col 1  Col 2]
 Col 2]
[Col 2/Col 1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Project Independence 
(Florida) (n  18,237)
579
100
478
1,057
NA
Alameda GAIN 
(n  1,205)
1,218
4,153
2,935
1,717
3.41
Los Angeles GAIN 
(n  4,434)
2,229
4,811
7,041
9,270
NA
Earnings Supplement 
Programs
MFIP (Minnesota) 
(n  3,208)
10,144
10,958
814
9,329
1.08
SSP Applicants 
(Canada) (n  2,371)
6,589
580
6,009
12,599
NA
SSP Long-Term 
Recipients (Canada) 
(n  4,852)
4,614
2,363
2,251
6,865
NA
WRP (Vermont) 
(n  5,469)
241
228
13
253
NA
NANot Applicable
Source for columns 1–3:Table 12.4
None of the estimates reported in the first three columns of Table 4 are weighted.
Even when distributional weighting is used, unweighted estimates of benefits and costs
for society as a whole should always be provided in CBAs. In addition, whenever distri-
butional considerations are important, benefit and cost estimates for relevant subgroups
should also be provided if it is feasible to do so.
The unweighted NPV estimates reported in the first three columns of Table 4 have
two especially important implications. First, they indicate that just over half of the re-
ported programs pass the Kaldor-Hicks test. Specifically, 14 of the 26 unweighted NPV
estimates for society as a whole, which appear in column 3, are positive, and 12 are neg-
ative. Second, in 5 of the 14 cases that pass the Kaldor-Hicks test, program participants
were apparently made worse off by the tested program, while nonparticipants—a group
who, on average, enjoys substantially higher incomes than participants—were made
better off; but in 5 of the 12 cases that failed the Kaldor-Hicks test, program partici-
pants were made better off, while nonparticipants were made worst off. In these
instances, a trade-off occurs between economic efficiency and distributional consider-
ations. It is only when a policy or program change results in a trade-off between
efficiency and equality in the income or wealth distribution that distributional weighting
is relevant. It is not needed in the case of a “win-win change” (i.e., both efficiency and
progressivity improve) or a “lose-lose change”(both efficiency and progressivity decline).14
Table 4 displays nine win-win changes and seven lose-lose changes, as well as the ten
trade-off changes.
486

Conducting Sensitivity Tests
Column 4 tests the degree to which the estimates reported in column 3 of Table 4 are sen-
sitive to the choice of distributional weights. In contrast to the unweighted figures ap-
pearing in column 3, which are based on the assumption that society values the gains and
losses of welfare recipients and nonrecipients equally, those appearing in column 4 as-
sume that the gains and losses of welfare recipients are valued by society at twice those of
nonrecipients. In other words, participants are given a distributional weight of 2 and non-
participants a weight of 1.Although these weights are obviously arbitrary—as previously
stressed, we do not know the actual relative values that society places on dollars received
and paid out by participants and nonparticipants—in our judgment, it seems likely that
they overstate society’s generosity toward welfare recipients and thus test whether the so-
cial NPV estimates are sensitive to a rather extreme assumption.
A comparison of columns 3 and 4 indicates, as expected, that this assumption
causes changes in magnitude in all of these estimates. More importantly, however, only
four change sign.Two of these sign changes are from positive to negative, thereby turn-
ing a net gain into net loss, while the other two are from negative to positive, turning a
net loss into a net gain. Because the remaining 22 NPVs do not change sign even when
a rather large distributional weight is used, it seems apparent that conclusions as to
whether most of the programs listed in Table 4 are cost-beneficial are not very sensi-
tive to taking account of distributional considerations.
Computing Internal Weights
Column 5 in Table 4 is based on the computation of internal weights, an alternative to
the approach used in column 4 for computing distributional weights. This scheme
works best if there are just two pertinent groups, one of which is relatively disadvan-
taged (e.g., participants in welfare-to-work programs) and the other relatively ad-
vantaged (e.g., nonparticipants in these programs).
Internal distributional weights are derived by first setting the weight for the
advantaged group equal to unity and then computing the weight for the disadvantaged
group by dividing the estimated NPV for the advantaged group by the estimated NPV
for the disadvantaged group. The idea is similar to that behind the computation of in-
ternal rates of return. Instead of somehow selecting weights, one finds the weights at
which the program being analyzed would just break even; in other words, the weights
at which the NPV for society as a whole would equal zero.Viewed a bit differently, the
internal weight for the disadvantaged group indicates the dollars of costs incurred by
the advantaged group per dollar of benefits received by the disadvantaged group if the
former is made worse off by the program and the latter better off, or the dollars of ben-
efits received by the advantaged group per dollar of costs incurred by the disadvan-
taged group if the former is made better off and the latter worse off.
In Table 4, we compute internal weights for Work/Welfare Demonstration partici-
pants by dividing column 2 by column 1.We do this,however,only when the program re-
sults in a trade-off between efficiency and distribution (that is, when column 1 and col-
umn 3 are of the opposite sign). In the case of win-win or lose-lose changes, a trade-off
between efficiency and distribution does not exist and, consequently, distributional
weighting is not germane. As trade-off changes occurred in only ten instances in the
Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
487

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
estimates presented in Table 4, only ten internal weights for program participants ap-
pear in column 5.
Each of these ten values indicates the weight at which a demonstration program
would just break even.Thus, if the “true” weight for participants is larger than their in-
ternal weight, programs with positive unweighted (or standard) social NPVs would fail
to break even once their distributional implications were taken into account, and pro-
grams with negative unweighted social NPVs would more than break even. However,
because the “true” weight for participants is unknown, policy makers would have to
make a judgmental decision as to whether dollars of benefits or costs to participants
should be given a higher or lower value than that implied by the computed internal
weights. Indeed, a major advantage of internal weighting is that it makes the trade-off
between efficiency and distribution explicit for policy makers.
For example, in five of the cases for which internal weights are computed in Table 4,
program participants were worse off under the demonstration programs, but the un-
weighted (standard) social NPV estimate was positive.Thus, these five programs pass the
Kaldor-Hicks test, even though it make the distribution of income less equal. If policy
makers believed that dollars lost to participants in the programs listed in Table 4 should
be valued at, say, 25 percent more than dollars gained by nonparticipants, then this would
imply that one of these five programs failed to break even and, hence, should be discon-
tinued even though they passed the Kaldor-Hicks test. If they instead valued dollars lost
to participants at a little over two times more than dollars gained by nonparticipants, then
this would imply that three of the five programs failed to break even. Thus, they would
conclude that three of the programs that passed the Kaldor-Hicks test actually had a neg-
ative payoff once their adverse effects on the income distribution were taken into ac-
count. But is a weight for participants of over two plausible? We consider this issue next.
Obtaining Upper-Bound Values for Distributional Weights
It was pointed out earlier in this chapter that pure transfer programs inevitably fail the
Kaldor-Hicks test because each dollar of transfer benefits costs nonrecipients more
than a dollar. However, it has been argued that transfer programs can be used as a stan-
dard to which other types of programs that redistribute income can be compared.15
Specifically, the argument suggests that if a nontransfer program makes the disadvan-
taged better off but results in a loss of efficiency, then it should not be accepted if a trans-
fer program that results in a smaller loss in efficiency can potentially be used instead. By
the same token, if a nontransfer program makes the disadvantaged worse off but results
in gains in efficiency, then it should be accepted if there is a transfer program that can
potentially compensate the disadvantaged for their losses without fully offsetting the
gains in efficiency from the nontransfer program.
This approach requires that internal weights that are derived similarly to the ten
values that appear in the last column of Table 4 be obtained for transfer programs.
Along these lines, Edward Gramlich, estimates that it costs taxpayers approximately
$1.50 to $2.00 to transfer a dollar to a recipient under a transfer program.16 As
Gramlich suggests, although these estimates should be considered approximate and
tentative, if one accepts them as being of the right order of magnitude, then it can be
argued that distributional weights for the disadvantaged should never be set above one
and a half to two times the weight for the advantaged.
488

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
Consider, for example, a nontransfer program that has a negative unweighted net
present value, although it makes the poor better off. More specifically, assume the pro-
gram costs the advantaged $2.50 for every dollar of benefits received by the disadvan-
taged. Gramlich’s estimates imply that every dollar received by the disadvantaged
under a transfer program would cost the advantaged only $1.50 to $2.00.Thus, in princi-
ple, the transfer program could be used instead to make the disadvantaged just as well
off as under the nontransfer program but at a lower cost to the advantaged. Thus, not
only does the nontransfer program have a negative unweighted social NPV, but it is also
inferior to a simple transfer program for redistributing income to the disadvantaged.
Now consider a different program that provides the advantaged $2.50 of benefits
for every dollar of costs incurred by the disadvantaged. Under these circumstances,
each dollar lost under the program by the disadvantaged could, in principle, be reim-
bursed through a transfer program at a cost to the advantaged of only $1.50 to $2.00.
Hence, this program not only has a positive unweighted social NPV, but the disadvan-
taged also can be compensated for their losses without completely offsetting the gains
in efficiency from the program.
The argument just presented implies that distributional weights assigned to the dis-
advantaged should not exceed 1.5 or 2 in value if the value for the advantaged is set to 1.
Larger weights would imply acceptance of inefficient programs that are also inferior to
simple transfer programs for redistributing income and rejection of efficient programs
that allow the advantaged to enjoy net gains even when the disadvantaged could be
fully compensated through income transfers for losses they suffer. Thus, the argument
suggests that the three programs in Table 4 that have internal weights well in excess of 2
and positive unweighted (standard) social NPVs should definitely be accepted, even
though they have adverse effects on the income distribution. In contrast, the three pro-
grams that have internal weights that exceed 2, but negative unweighted social NPVs,
should probably be rejected, even though they improve the income distribution.
Note, however, that this argument is very similar in spirit to the one underlying
the Kaldor-Hicks rule. Both are based on the potential use of transfer payments to
compensate losers under a policy, while leaving winners better off than they would be
in the absence of the policy. Nothing, however, requires that these income transfers
actually be made.
CONCLUSION
This chapter focuses on the use of distributional weighting to take account of the fact
that many policies have divergent impacts on different income groups. Given the ab-
sence of generally accepted sets of distributional weights, we suggest that the use of
distributional weights should be limited to policies that meet both of the following con-
ditions: (1) they are targeted at the disadvantaged or treat the advantaged and the dis-
advantaged differently, and (2) they result in reductions in overall social efficiency but
make low-income persons better off, or they increase social efficiency but make low-
income persons worse off.
There may, in fact, be relatively few policies that meet both of these conditions.
Those policies that do might be subjected to sensitivity tests based on a plausible range
of weights. Or alternatively, internal weights might be computed, thereby providing
policy makers with information on which to base their choice of distributional weights.
489

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
In either case, however, a cogent argument can be made for not allowing the distribu-
tional weights for low-income groups to be set much more than 50 to 100 percent
above those for higher-income groups.
EXERCISES
1.
A city is about to build a new sanitation plant.It is considering two sites,one located in a mod-
erately well-to-do neighborhood and the other in a low-income neighborhood. Indeed, most
of the residents in the latter neighborhood live below the poverty line.The city’s sanitation en-
gineer is adamant that “the city needs the new plant and it has to go somewhere.”However,he
is indifferent as to which neighborhood it is located in. The plant would operate at the same
cost and as efficiently in either neighborhood, and about as many people would be affected by
the air pollution emitted by the plant. The city hires an economist to study the two sites. The
economist finds that the plant would cause a considerably larger fall in average property val-
ues in the well-to-do neighborhood than in the low-income neighborhood, given the more ex-
pensive homes that are located in the former. Consistent with this, a contingent valuation
study that the economist conducts finds that willingness to pay to avoid the sanitation plant is
substantially higher in the well-to-do neighborhood than in the low-income neighborhood.
The residents of the poor neighborhood strongly prefer that the plant be built in the
well-to-do neighborhood. In the face of the economist’s findings, what sort of arguments
might they make?
2.
CBAs have been conducted for six proposed projects. None of these projects are mutually ex-
clusive, and the agency has a sufficient budget to fund those that will make society better off.
The following findings from the CBAs are summarized in millions of dollars:
Net Social
Net Group I
Net Group II
Benefits
Benefits
Benefits
Project A
$2
$2
$0
Project B
6
8
2
Project C
4
12
8
Project D
1
3
2
Project E
2
1
1
Project F
2
4
6
Group I consists of households with annual incomes over $25,000, whereas Group II con-
sists of households with annual incomes under $25,000.
a.
According to the net benefit rule, which of these projects should be funded?
b.
For which of the projects might distributional considerations be an issue?
c.
Compute internal distributional weights for the projects you selected in part b. Using
these weights, indicate the circumstances under which each project might actually be
undertaken.
d.
Recompute social net benefits for the six projects using a distributional weight of 1 for
Group I and a distributional weight of 2 for Group II. Using these weight-adjusted net
social benefit estimates, indicate the circumstances under which each project might
actually be undertaken. In doing this, assume that the distributional weight for Group II
is an upper bound—that is, it probably overstates society’s true generosity toward low-
income households.
490

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
NOTES
1. For a more general discussion of the role of dis-
tributional considerations in assessing policy ini-
tiatives, see Alphonse G. Holtmann,“Beyond
Efficiency: Economics and Distributional
Analysis,” in David L.Weimer, ed., Policy
Analysis and Economics (Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishing, 1991), 45–64.
2. It would be better to distinguish among the per-
sons or families affected by government pro-
grams in terms of their wealth (i.e., the value of
their stock of assets), rather than in terms of
their income (the observed flow of payments
they receive in exchange for the labor, capital,
and land that they provide the production
process). For example, two households may have
similar incomes, but if one owns a house and the
other does not, their standard of living may be
quite different. However, income normally is
used instead of wealth in categorizing individuals
or families because it is more readily measured.
3. However, an exception sometimes occurs in the
case of less-developed countries. Because of the
paucity of funds for investment in such countries,
some economists argue that each reduction in
savings that results from a project should count
more heavily in conducting a CBA of the project
than each dollar of increase or reduction in con-
sumption. In principle, however, the relative im-
portance of savings and consumption can be
taken into account by using the shadow price of
capital approach to discounting.
4. See Robert Moffitt,“Incentive Effects of the U.S.
Welfare System:A Review,” Journal of Economic
Literature 30(1) 1992, 1–61, and the references
cited therein.
5. Martin Feldstein’s discussion of technical issues
in computing distributional weights is premised
on this argument. See Martin S. Feldstein,
“Distributional Equity and the Optimal
Structure of Public Prices,” The American
Economic Review 62(1) 1972, 32–36.
6. Arnold Harberger’s classical examination of 
distributional weighting (“On the Use of
Distributional Weights in Social Cost-Benefit
Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 86(2)
1972, S87-S120.) can be viewed as a critical assess-
ment of whether this assertion provides a basis for
conducting distributionally weighted CBA.
7. These points are discussed in greater detail by
Aidan R.Vining and David L.Weimer,“Welfare
Economics as the Foundation for Public 
Policy Analysis: Incomplete and Flawed but
Nevertheless Desirable,” The Journal of Socio-
Economics 21(1) 1992, 25–37. John Rawls, A
Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1971), and others have pro-
vided a more philosophical basis than the rea-
sons listed here for greater income equality.
8. The first two arguments can be derived more for-
mally by specifying a social welfare function.To
illustrate, we specify a very simple social welfare
function in which individual utility depends upon
income, total social welfare depends upon a lin-
ear combination of individual utilities, and the
possibility of interdependent utility (i.e., one per-
son’s utility being affected by the gains or losses
of others) is ignored:
where n is the total number of individuals in 
society.Totally differentiating the social welfare
function yields the following expression:
where dyi represents the change in income result-
ing from a government policy.The first argument
implies that
while the second
argument implies that 
Thus, together the two arguments imply that
9. D.W. Pearce, Cost-Benefit Analysis, 2nd ed. (New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983), 64–66.An exam-
ple, of using this approach is found in Richard
S. J.Tol,Thomas E. Downing, Samuel
Frankhauser, Richard G. Richels, and Joel B.
Smith, Progress in Estimating the Marginal Costs
of Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Working Paper
SCG-4 (Hamburg: Centre for Marine and
Climate Research, Hamburg University, 2001)
www.uni-hamburg.de/wiss.They find that
(0SW>0ul)(0ul>0yl) 7 (0SW>0uh)(0uh>0yh).
0SW>0ul .
0SW>0uh 7
0ul>0yl 7 0uh>0yh,
dSW = a
n
i=1
[(0SW>0ui)(0ui>0yi)dyi]
SW = f [u1(y1) Á , ui(yi) Á , un(yn)]
491

Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis
because the countries that are worst affected by
global warming are located near the equator and
tend to be relatively poor, the costs of global
warming from a global perspective appear much
worst if aggregation across countries is based on
population size rather than on dollars of income.
10. From the perspective of social choice theory, this
is a somewhat naive view of democracy. See
William H. Riker, Liberalism Against Populism
(San Francisco: Freeman, 1982).
11. For an illustration of how this might be done in
practice, see Pearce, Cost-Benefit Analysis, p. 71.
12. For a brief overview, see Amartya Sen, On Ethics
and Economics (New York: Basil Blackwell,
1987). For a more detailed discussion, see Robert
Cooter and Peter Rappoport,“Were the
Ordinalists Wrong About Welfare Economics?”
Journal of Economic Literature 22(2) 1984,
507–530.
13. Although several attempts have been made to
develop distributional weights based on political
decisions concerning taxes or public expendi-
tures, there has been limited acceptance of any of
these weights. Examples of these attempts can be
found in Otto Eckstein,“A Survey of the Theory
of Public Expenditure Criteria,” in James M.
Buchanan, ed., Public Finances: Needs, Sources
and Utilization (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1961), 439–494; . Robert H.
Haveman, Water Resource Investment and the
Public Interest (Nashville,TN:Vanderbilt
University, 1965);V. C. Nwaneri,“Equity in Cost-
Benefit Analysis:A Case Study of the Third
London Airport,” Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy 4(3) 1970, 235–254; and
Burton A.Weisbrod,“Income Redistribution
Effects and Benefit-Cost Analysis,” in S. B.
Chase, ed., Problems in Public Expenditure
Analysis (Washington, D.C.:The Brookings
Institution, (1968), 177–208. In addition, Shlomo
Yitzhaki has developed a method for deriving
distributional weights from inequality indices
commonly used by economists such as the Gini
coefficient. He argues that doing this is appropri-
ate because inequality indices are explicitly or
implicitly based on a set of axioms concerning
distribution and, hence,“by choosing an inequal-
ity measure the economist implicitly assumes dis-
tributional weights” (p. 326).Thus,Yitzhaki relies
on the behavior of economists, rather than that
of politicians. See Shlomo Yitzhaki,“Cost-
Benefit Analysis and the Distributional
Consequences of Government Projects,”
National Tax Journal 56(2) 2003, 319–336.
14. Shlomo Yitzhaki coined the terms “win-win re-
forms,”“trade-off reforms,” and “lose-lose re-
forms” to distinguish among the three types of
reforms described in the text. See Shlomo Yitzhaki,
“Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Distributional
Consequences of Government Projects.”
15. This argument was apparently first made by
Arnold C. Harberger,“On the Use of
Distributional Weights in Social Cost-Benefit
Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 86(2)
1978, S87–S120.
16. Edward M. Gramlich, A Guide to Benefit-Cost
Analysis, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1990), 123–127. Gramlich bases
his conclusion on his own “simple analysis”
and on findings from a general equilibrium
computer simulation conducted by Edgar
Browning and William Johnson (“The Trade-
Off between Equality and Efficiency,” Journal
of Political Economy 92(2) 1984, 175–203).
Both analyses are examples of attempts to
compute the marginal excess burden associ-
ated with taxes.
492

Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
A
Abilities, 308, 366
Absenteeism, 189
Abstract, 11
Abstraction, 2
Abuse, 289, 295-297, 299, 331, 401-402
Accountability, 12, 274
Accounting, 16, 19, 26, 65, 96, 107, 109, 113, 117,
120, 127, 159, 279, 294, 299, 308, 311, 397,
427, 429-434, 441-442, 444-446
accuracy, 4-5, 24, 43, 298, 339, 352, 379, 387, 433
Achievement, 45, 291, 293, 452
Acquisitions, 386
Adaptation, 462
Addictive consumption, 102
Additional vehicle, 9
addresses, 443, 450
adjustments, 120, 159, 169, 232, 238, 288, 304-305,
331, 347, 360, 385, 405, 417, 427, 444, 463
Administrators, 328
Advances, 405, 472
Advantages, 302-303, 305, 308, 330, 350
Adverse selection, 217
Advertising, 182
Affect, 5, 7-8, 36, 38, 40, 42, 47, 54, 75, 85, 114-115,
119-120, 140, 160, 171, 197-198, 216, 233,
239, 243, 261, 267-268, 275-276, 303, 305,
312, 317, 339, 344, 348, 355, 360, 365,
367-369, 372-374, 398, 403, 407, 417,
419-420, 427-429, 435, 443-444, 475
Africa, 39, 441
Age, 183, 263, 279, 295, 322, 329-330, 372, 383, 396,
417, 422, 444
Agencies, 12, 16, 18, 20, 22-23, 26, 137, 249,
273-274, 282, 318-319, 321, 396
Agency Funds, 276
agenda, 299, 472
Agents, 141
Aggregate demand, 36
agreement, 28, 128, 248, 275, 321, 427, 467, 484
Agreements, 484
Agricultural subsidies, 66
AIDS, 289
Air pollution, 95, 117, 132-133, 386, 391, 412-414,
419, 425-426, 490
Aircraft, 159, 417, 424-425
AIS, 395, 398-400, 422
components, 400
Allocations, 29, 49-50, 238
Allowances, 309-310, 324
Alternative evaluation, 302
Amortization, 148
Animals, 39
Annuity, 148, 163-166, 168, 396
deferred, 164
fixed, 163
life, 148, 166, 396
units, 148
Anomalies, 279, 282
anticipate, 102, 135, 171, 219, 232, 287
appearance, 201
Application, 22, 32, 37, 39, 41, 51, 78, 128, 203-205,
232-233, 244, 287, 291, 294, 305, 332, 342,
356, 367, 374, 380-381, 383, 417, 424, 426,
444-445, 451-452, 461, 473
Applications, 137, 192, 204, 232, 274, 357, 374, 425,
427-447, 450, 466, 473
Arbitrage, 278
arguments, 15, 22, 46, 69, 222, 224, 462, 472,
479-480, 483, 490-491
ARM, 399
Art, 233, 235, 472
Assessment method, 2
Assets, 19, 148, 157-159, 194, 217, 219, 221, 233,
236, 239, 262, 265, 283, 336, 367, 491
current, 148, 158, 194, 236, 239, 262
Atlas, 421
attention, 22, 42, 69, 198, 208, 403
Attitudes, 225, 344, 444
Attribute, 369-370, 373, 379, 466
attributes, 233, 235, 367, 369, 373, 379-380, 386, 393,
426, 466
AU, 103, 117
Australia, 117, 396, 416, 421, 425-426
GDP, 426
Authority, 12, 19, 92, 159, 422, 424
availability, 9, 85, 108, 188, 217, 222-223, 244, 294,
346, 412, 419
Available, 18, 24, 33, 35-36, 47, 60, 76, 85, 89, 95,
97-98, 100-101, 103, 117, 120, 124-125,
138-140, 142, 148, 153, 168-170, 171,
174-175, 178, 187, 190, 192, 194, 197-201,
203-204, 210, 217-219, 222, 227, 236,
241-242, 245, 248, 252, 256, 261, 263, 267,
269, 272, 282-283, 286-289, 291-292, 295,
297-298, 304-305, 310, 320, 344-346,
384-385, 390, 400-401, 407, 409, 421-422,
428, 433-434, 437-441, 444, 447, 467, 478,
483
Average costs, 91-92
Average variable cost, 60
avoidance, 387
Awareness, 11, 340
B
Balance of payments, 428
Balanced budgets, 264
Bankruptcy, 217
Banks, 251-252
Bargaining, 109, 364, 368
Bargaining power, 109, 364, 368
Barter, 416
Base year, 149
Basket of goods, 149, 151, 168, 434, 436
Behavior, 22, 31, 39, 58, 217, 224-225, 228, 233, 238,
263, 277, 282, 292, 294, 301-324, 327-333,
335-356, 357-387, 392, 402, 462, 473, 477,
492
Beneficiary, 77, 212, 215
Benefits, 1-26, 27, 29-34, 36-39, 41-43, 45-51, 54-56,
62-70, 77-79, 81-118, 119-136, 137-170,
171-178, 181-203, 205, 208-211, 213-214,
217-224, 226-228, 232-244, 248, 250-251,
259, 265-269, 271-273, 276-277, 280,
282-283, 286-288, 290-291, 293, 295,
298-299, 302, 307-315, 317-318, 321-324,
327-333, 336-337, 340, 350, 354, 357-361,
365-367, 369, 375, 378-385, 387, 390, 398,
401, 404-406, 410-411, 416, 420, 422,
424-426, 430, 432, 441-444, 446, 450-451,
454-455, 460-461, 468-470, 475-480, 482,
484, 486-490
extended, 5, 177-178, 406, 441
payment of, 30, 167, 217, 226, 251
pooled, 323
service, 3, 17-18, 55, 84, 95, 97, 103, 159, 174,
310, 357, 360, 387, 405-406, 424, 426
biases, 15, 168-169, 187, 198, 227, 287, 290, 358,
364, 419
bibliography, 24, 473
Bid, 77, 106, 117
Black markets, 430
Bond prices, 164
interest, 164
Bonds, 150-151, 153, 163, 261-263, 267, 276-277
payment, 153, 267
performance, 153
Boomers, 168
Borrowing, 202, 251, 256, 259-265, 272, 277, 279,
281, 441, 447
Bounded rationality, 14
Brazil, 421
Breakdown, 66
Bridges, 91, 103
Britain, 236, 331, 423
Budget, 12, 16, 19-20, 24-25, 34, 47, 64, 71, 73-74,
76-77, 109, 134-135, 137, 202, 240-242,
245, 249-250, 252-254, 274, 276, 278, 282,
319-320, 441-442, 454-457, 490
defined, 77, 240
Budgeting, 25, 333
Bumper crops, 171
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 159
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 149, 168, 364
Burglary, 401-402
Buyers, 54, 65, 90, 93-94, 105-108, 112-113, 115-117,
129, 428, 430
Product, 93, 116, 430
Rational, 117
C
Campers, 384-385
Canada, 5, 21, 25, 38, 116, 137, 151, 153, 155-156,
168, 204, 274, 277-282, 326, 373, 416, 418,
421, 423, 426, 444, 475, 482, 486
GDP, 426
government intervention, 116
tax rate, 279
wages, 373
Capabilities, 200
Capacity, 8, 14, 22, 24, 108, 128, 175, 218, 420, 435
Capital, 18-19, 27, 45, 59-60, 69, 141, 156, 159, 162,
167-168, 202, 234, 249, 252, 260, 262,
264-267, 271, 274-277, 279-282, 287, 299,
308, 322, 336, 347, 366, 380, 390, 398, 425,
432, 434, 443, 445, 447, 491
definition of, 27
fixed, 59-60, 267
growth, 167-168, 249, 271, 274-275, 277, 281, 299,
443
human, 18, 45, 156, 299, 308, 366, 398
requirements, 159, 264, 308
working, 322, 366, 491
Capital equipment, 287
Capital programs, 366
Carbon dioxide emissions, 137, 415
Carbon footprint, 22
Case Studies, 192
Case study, 492
Cash flow, 25, 151
Cash flows, 148, 164
Cause-and-effect relationships, 9-10
CBO, 47, 274, 283
CEA, 450-451, 454-455, 457, 460-461, 468-470, 472
Central business district, 368-369
Central Limit Theorem, 356
Certainty, 40, 191, 195, 208-210, 213-219, 223, 227,
249-250, 277, 286-287, 293, 305, 457
Ceteris paribus, 257
Change in demand, 73-75
Change in quantity demanded, 57, 77
Change in quantity supplied, 116
Channel, 276
Children, 21, 39-40, 102, 157, 235, 263, 281, 289,
292, 294-295, 299, 324, 329, 332, 383-385,
451, 455, 470
China, 63, 156
CIF, 429-430, 432-433, 445
Claims, 130, 199
Classification, 393, 399, 466, 475
Clean Air Act, 21
Clean Water Act, 410, 424
Clearing, 109, 114, 259, 360
Climate, 8, 160, 234, 250, 269, 277-278, 281-282,
419, 425, 484, 491
Climate change, 8, 160, 234, 250, 269, 277-278,
493

281-282, 425, 484
Closed economy, 268
Coercive power, 279
Cognition, 466
Cognitive dissonance, 16, 462
Collapse, 399
Collateral, 308
Colleges, 310
Collision, 175-177, 191-193, 210
loss, 175
Columbia, 5, 7, 9-10, 17-19, 24, 155-156, 169, 274,
282, 299, 421, 426
Columns, 1, 8, 13, 16, 68, 155, 309, 324, 327,
375-376, 401, 452, 462, 484, 486-487
Commercialization, 192
Commitment, 21
Commodities, 85, 131, 228, 244
Communicable disease, 470
Communication, 421
Companies, 22, 85, 89, 92, 159, 164, 475
Compensation, 30-32, 50, 73, 109, 133, 240, 255,
259, 309, 329, 360-363, 397, 476-477
Competition, 21, 54, 61, 63-64, 78, 116, 319, 321, 386
perfect, 54, 61, 64, 78, 319
Competitive advantage, 323
Competitiveness, 26
Competitors, 86
complaints, 166, 297
Complementarity, 238
Compliance, 22, 49, 287, 298, 460
Component parts, 236
Conditions, 35, 118, 175, 245, 294, 321, 348, 366,
368, 404, 411-412, 462-463, 467, 489
Confidence, 43, 160, 174, 181, 188-189, 275, 286,
344, 349, 352, 393
Configuration, 154
Conflict, 237
Congressional Budget Office, 47, 274
Consideration, 1, 3, 34, 40, 69, 134, 159-160, 172,
186, 199, 217, 219, 222, 227, 236-237,
265-266, 272, 287, 327, 342-344, 346-347,
402, 439, 453, 460, 477
Consistency, 472
Constraints, 7, 14, 33, 37, 39, 44, 50, 71, 73-74, 280,
320, 390, 442, 450-451, 455, 457
changing, 7, 71
implementing, 50
Construction, 5-6, 8, 12, 16-17, 19, 24, 30, 47, 64, 89,
92-93, 104, 106, 158-159, 167, 215, 237,
339, 344, 363, 373, 391, 432, 437, 445, 465,
467, 470, 476
Consumer behavior, 392
Consumer Price Index, 149-151, 168, 297, 324
components of, 324
Consumer surplus, 55-58, 61-65, 70-71, 74-76, 78-79,
82, 85-90, 93, 102-103, 105-107, 113-114,
120-122, 124, 126-127, 129-130, 134-135,
149, 155, 225-226, 228, 234, 236, 240, 245,
336, 341-342, 350, 355, 359-360, 369, 372,
375-381, 387, 390, 476, 480-483
demand curve and, 57, 61-62, 74, 86, 378, 380,
390
Consumers, 17, 23, 36, 42, 47, 50, 55-56, 58, 61,
63-64, 66, 69, 71, 77, 79, 85-88, 90-91,
93-98, 100-102, 115-116, 127, 130-131,
134-135, 137, 149-150, 153, 169, 208, 239,
252, 254, 262-264, 319, 337, 346-347, 364,
382, 390, 392, 435-436, 475, 477-478,
480-482
Consumption, 23, 33, 36-37, 47, 56, 72-73, 75-78, 88,
94-95, 98, 101-103, 120, 125, 128-129,
133-135, 219, 228, 232-238, 242, 249,
251-281, 292-294, 307, 347, 359, 361, 366,
382, 385, 406, 416, 419, 428, 434, 436,
440-443, 461, 491
consumer, 56, 72-73, 75-76, 78, 88, 94, 98,
102-103, 120, 129, 134-135, 228,
233-234, 236, 252-254, 262, 270, 278,
280, 359
Consumption expenditures, 270
Consumption function, 279
Consumption taxes, 261
Contacts, 288
Content, 134
Contract, 92, 202, 213-216, 424
Contracts, 182, 213-214, 216, 218, 447
Control, 17, 20, 97-98, 101, 117, 149, 171, 217, 272,
288-289, 291, 296, 299, 302-306, 328-329,
331, 344, 356, 366-367, 381, 392-393, 402,
412, 418, 423, 441, 444, 469, 471
Controlling, 291, 303, 305, 355, 369, 372, 425
Conversation, 236, 238
conversations, 224
conversion, 432-434, 437, 439, 443, 446-447
Cooperation, 384
Copyright, 1, 27, 53, 81, 119, 137, 171, 207, 231, 247,
285, 301, 335, 357, 389, 427, 449, 475
Corporate bonds, 261, 263
Corporate profits, 259
Corporate social responsibility, 22, 26
CSR, 22
environment, 22, 26
Corporate taxes, 155-156
corporation, 293, 332, 466
Corporations, 20, 22, 274, 282, 437
domestic, 437
foreign, 437
corrections, 237
Cost of living, 150, 168
Cost-benefit analysis, 1-26, 27-51, 53-79, 81-82,
117-118, 119, 132, 135-136, 137, 171, 189,
203, 207, 227, 231, 244, 247, 282, 285, 298,
301, 332, 335, 357, 365, 389-391, 427, 441,
446-447, 449, 472, 475-492
Costs, 1-13, 15-26, 27, 29-34, 37-38, 42-50, 54,
59-60, 62-67, 70, 78, 81-118, 119-136,
137-170, 171, 174, 176-184, 189, 192-195,
199, 201-203, 205, 208-210, 217, 219, 222,
226, 228, 234, 236-237, 239, 244, 248,
250-251, 253-254, 256-257, 262, 266-269,
271-273, 275-277, 281-283, 287, 291,
293-294, 296-299, 302-303, 306-311, 314,
316-318, 320-325, 327-333, 336-337, 340,
354-355, 357, 365-367, 373-378, 380-381,
383-384, 390-391, 394-395, 397-405,
409-411, 413-415, 419-426, 428, 430-433,
435, 439, 441, 443-445, 447, 450-457,
459-462, 468-472, 474, 475-480, 482, 484,
486-489, 491-492
alteration, 11
conversion, 432-433, 439, 443, 447
distribution, 10, 31-32, 34, 37, 88, 115, 182, 189,
193, 199, 203, 222, 237, 282, 291, 309,
365, 395, 430-431, 433, 445, 459, 477,
479-480, 486-489, 492
Countries, 20-21, 38-39, 41, 49, 151, 153, 256,
264-265, 271, 281-282, 358, 362, 366, 373,
394, 404, 409, 417, 421, 423, 426, 427-447,
484, 491-492
Coupons, 88
CPI, 149-153, 168-169, 263, 279, 420
Creativity, 297
Credit, 19, 251, 263, 272, 279, 427, 447
Credit cards, 263
criticism, 110
Croatia, 421
Crowding out, 261-262, 281
CSR, 22
corporate social responsibility, 22
cultural context, 39
Culture, 18, 444
Currency, 293, 427, 430-431, 446
Curves, 36, 54, 57, 59-60, 71-75, 78-79, 82, 84-85,
89-90, 93, 95-98, 100-105, 107, 112,
114-116, 129, 185, 252-253, 255, 259, 315,
317, 320, 335-356, 357, 384, 390, 472
indifference, 71-74, 78, 252-253, 255
nonlinear, 345
slope of, 57, 71, 73, 78, 252-253, 255, 320,
338-341, 345, 351, 355
supply, 59-60, 82, 84-85, 89, 95-98, 101, 103-105,
107, 112, 114-116, 259, 315, 317, 320,
336, 340, 348-350, 357, 390
Customers, 89, 155, 170, 475
Customs, 376
D
Damage, 9, 238, 244, 382-383, 395, 397-400, 402,
405-406, 413-415, 422
property, 395, 397-400, 402, 413, 415, 422
Damages, 21, 413
data, 9, 40, 42-43, 69, 145, 149, 151, 166, 168-170,
174, 181, 200, 221, 236-237, 262, 267, 270,
278-283, 286-288, 290, 292, 296-298,
304-308, 321-323, 328, 330, 333, 338-340,
343, 345-349, 351-355, 358, 364, 367,
373-376, 380, 384-385, 387, 392-393, 402,
405, 413, 418, 421, 423, 426, 433, 440, 458,
469
data processing, 166
data source, 392
Database, 279, 424
systems, 424
databases, 144, 292
electronic, 292
Deadweight loss, 58, 62-63, 65-67, 70, 77, 79, 89-94,
96-98, 101, 108, 126-127, 318, 416, 478
Death, 40-41, 182, 362-364, 372, 384-385, 396, 399,
401, 403, 413-414, 418, 421, 463-466,
468-469
premature, 413-414, 469
Debt, 163-164, 262-264, 274, 279
Decision makers, 5, 7, 23, 162, 186, 203, 456-457,
474, 477
Decision making, 2-3, 13, 23, 27, 31, 44, 159, 162,
186, 204, 290, 298, 455, 468, 473-474, 477
Decision-making, 3, 5, 15, 204
Decision-making process, 15
Deferred annuity, 164
Demand, 3, 11, 20-22, 30, 36, 50, 54-58, 60-62, 64-65,
71-77, 82, 84, 86, 88-94, 96-98, 100-107,
110, 112-117, 119-135, 170, 192, 208,
219-221, 225-226, 228, 234, 238, 240, 244,
259-260, 292-294, 298-299, 307, 316-317,
319-320, 335-356, 357-360, 365, 367,
370-371, 373-374, 376-382, 384-385, 387,
390, 411-412, 416, 421, 423, 435-436, 480,
483
aggregate, 30, 36, 54, 60, 77, 226, 238, 336, 346,
358, 373, 480
change in, 50, 56-58, 64-65, 71, 73-77, 82, 88, 106,
116, 120-121, 124-125, 127, 129, 131,
134-135, 208, 220, 292, 294, 336-339,
341, 343-344, 350-351, 355, 357, 365,
367, 370, 381-382, 480, 483
currency, 293
derived, 60, 75, 98, 100, 221, 226, 307, 319, 339,
356, 379
elastic, 58, 77, 104, 120, 124-125, 293-294, 416,
435
excess, 22, 82, 88, 96, 103, 115, 170, 294, 337,
354, 416
for labor, 110, 112, 133, 319
for leisure, 307
increases in, 50, 115, 117, 127, 129-131, 220, 317,
370, 480
inelastic, 77, 105-106, 134, 435
perfectly elastic, 77, 104, 120, 124-125, 294, 435
perfectly inelastic, 105
price elasticity of, 57-58, 76, 115, 292-293, 298,
307, 337, 339-341, 346-347, 350, 355
prices and, 20, 170, 336, 347
Demand conditions, 412
Demand curve, 11, 36, 54-57, 60-62, 64, 71-72, 74-77,
86, 88-93, 96-97, 100, 102-106, 110,
112-117, 259-260, 316-317, 319-320,
336-343, 345, 348, 350, 354-355, 357-360,
365, 367, 370, 374, 376-382, 385, 390,
435-436, 483
consumer surplus and, 55, 61, 64, 71, 74, 86
individual, 36, 54, 60, 72, 77, 100, 116, 316-317,
345, 374, 376-378, 385
labor, 60, 103-104, 110, 112, 114-115, 316-317,
319-320, 336, 381, 436
market, 11, 36, 54-55, 60-62, 64, 76-77, 86, 88-89,
92-93, 96-97, 100, 102-106, 112-117,
259-260, 316-317, 319-320, 336-337,
340, 348, 350, 355, 357-360, 365, 367,
370, 374, 376-382, 385, 435-436, 483
movement along, 72, 116
negatively sloped, 72
points on, 378-379, 385
price elasticity and, 76, 339
shifts in, 348
Demand schedule, 36, 74-75, 120, 122, 124-125,
127-128, 131-135, 355, 374, 480
Democracy, 25, 40-42, 481, 492
assessment of, 41-42
Department of Labor, 386
Department of Transportation, 6, 400, 422-423
Depreciation, 158-159, 170, 266-267, 280-282, 373,
412
Depression, 318
Deregulation, 21, 26
Derivatives, 245, 278
Derived demand, 319
design, 288-291, 298, 302-306, 324, 328-330, 339,
494

342, 368, 393
Detailed analysis, 136
Developed countries, 264-265, 271, 366, 427, 442,
484, 491
World Bank, 427
Developed country, 441
Developing countries, 20, 366, 423, 427-447, 484
defined, 429
Developing economies, 426
diagrams, 227, 302, 316
Differentiation, 386
product, 386
Diffusion, 386
Diminishing marginal returns, 60
Diminishing returns, 319
Direct loss, 437
Directive, 108
disabilities, 369, 461-462
Disability, 398, 400, 461, 464, 472
total, 398, 400, 464
Discount rate, 12, 15, 18, 20, 25, 137, 140, 144,
147-148, 151, 154, 156-157, 160-162,
166-167, 183, 191, 201-203, 205, 248-283,
322-324, 329-330, 394, 396, 414-415, 422,
442, 468, 472, 482
Discount stores, 150
Discounts, 257-258, 273
Disease, 41, 201-202, 204, 297, 361, 460, 468,
470-471
disinterested, 3
Disposable income, 68, 74, 168, 280
Disposal, 40, 154, 202, 337-339, 341-344, 349,
354-355, 409, 411
Distance, 10, 71, 73-74, 95-96, 112, 244, 368-370,
376, 379, 385, 410, 419
Distribution, 10, 31-32, 34, 36-37, 41, 51, 88, 115, 182,
188-191, 193, 199-200, 203, 222, 229, 235,
237, 282, 290-291, 309, 353, 356, 365, 395,
429-431, 433, 445, 458-459, 477, 479-480,
483, 486-489, 492
case study, 492
Diversification, 222-224
Diverting, 176, 431, 436
Dividends, 166
Documentation, 26
documents, 282
distribution of, 282
Dollar, 2, 6, 9-10, 15, 31, 41, 43-44, 50-51, 66-67, 114,
148-149, 152, 162, 182, 226, 240, 244, 248,
252, 262, 264, 266-267, 277, 293, 309-310,
318, 324, 327, 338, 402, 405, 413, 416-418,
425, 430, 445-446, 450, 477, 479-481, 484,
487-489, 491
exchange rates, 418, 430
SDR, 248, 262, 264
Dollars, 1, 10, 22, 24, 33, 40, 42, 44, 60, 66, 76, 97,
137, 148-149, 151-152, 154-156, 166-167,
169, 176, 184, 189, 193, 201, 211, 251,
276-277, 297, 309, 327, 330, 338, 341, 343,
359, 365, 373, 375, 378, 383, 391-394,
396-398, 400-402, 406, 408-411, 414-416,
418, 429-431, 450-456, 461, 469, 471, 477,
479, 485, 487-488, 490, 492
Dominance, 452-454
Downsizing, 279
Downstream, 33, 365, 367
Drugs, 150, 328, 460
Duties, 37, 39
legal, 39
Duty, 109, 169, 415, 420
E
Earnings, 41, 45, 67-68, 169, 291, 296, 302, 304-307,
309-313, 315-318, 321-324, 327-330, 333,
362, 366, 385, 397, 402, 416, 437, 486
test, 41, 291, 296, 486
Econometric models, 467
Economic analysis, 26, 159, 237, 282, 446
Economic development, 292, 299
Economic efficiency, 281, 318, 442-444, 484, 486
Economic growth, 41, 257, 299, 442-443
in developing countries, 442-443
rates, 257, 442-443
Economic models, 36, 101
Economic policy, 41, 279, 299, 425
Economic principles, 446
Economic well-being, 51, 299
Economics, 25, 27, 40-41, 49-51, 54, 62, 69, 79,
117-118, 135, 205, 221, 225-229, 243-244,
250-251, 277-282, 292, 298-299, 331-332,
340, 355-356, 373, 383, 386-387, 406,
421-426, 447, 466, 472-474, 479, 484,
491-492
language and, 40
Economies of scale, 91, 130
benefits of, 130
Economy, 20, 25, 51, 96, 104, 117, 128, 130, 135,
149, 168, 228, 251, 254-256, 258-259, 262,
265, 268, 273, 280-281, 356, 386-387, 425,
428-431, 433-434, 442-443, 478, 491-492
team, 130
Education, 1, 8, 11, 18, 27, 39, 45, 53, 81, 119, 128,
137, 171, 207, 231, 247, 263, 279, 285, 292,
299, 301-302, 305, 308, 311, 324, 327,
329-330, 332, 335, 347, 357-358, 366, 372,
389, 391, 393, 406, 427, 449, 475, 484
Effective interest rate, 277
Effective tariff, 434
Efficiency, 3, 20-21, 27-29, 31-34, 36-37, 41-47, 49,
62-64, 67-70, 78, 82-83, 94, 128, 228, 262,
281, 283, 286, 318, 356, 411, 442-444,
450-451, 460, 470, 479, 482, 484, 486-489,
491-492
Efficiency gains, 21, 78
Elasticities, 287, 292, 298-299, 307, 340, 346-347,
355-356, 370, 390, 416-417, 421, 425, 458
Elasticity of demand, 57-58, 76, 134, 292-293, 307,
337, 339-341, 346-347, 350, 355, 483
estimates of, 292, 307, 340, 346-347, 350
for gasoline, 292, 347
income, 76, 292, 307, 346-347, 483
price, 57-58, 76, 134, 292-293, 307, 337, 339-341,
346-347, 350, 355
electronic databases, 292
Eminent domain, 105
emphasis, 406, 424, 427
Employees, 48, 63, 69, 103, 166, 361, 427
Employment, 20, 23, 69, 110-111, 288, 302, 307-308,
310, 314-315, 318, 321, 324, 331-333, 344,
356, 362, 365, 384, 392, 436-438
full, 315, 321, 362
endpoints, 463
England, 156, 407
Entities, 404
Entrepreneurship, 60
Environment, 21-22, 26, 156, 217, 310, 367, 386, 391,
393, 407, 413-414, 417, 425-426
natural, 22, 386, 413-414, 425
Environmental law, 299
Environmental Protection Agency, 21-22, 26, 167, 274,
276, 281, 283, 396, 422
Equilibrium, 58, 61-64, 73, 76, 78, 86-89, 97, 106, 110,
115, 124-125, 128, 132, 134, 136, 228, 312,
332, 370-373, 381-382, 425, 437-438, 477,
492
labor market, 332, 372
Equilibrium price, 86-88, 97, 106, 110, 381
Equity, 51, 68-69, 78, 128, 261, 278-279, 281, 491-492
defined, 78
ETC, 256, 309, 433
ethical dilemmas, 271-272
Ethics, 492
EU, 151, 211-212, 215, 227, 282
Euro, 293
European Union, 151, 281
EU, 151
Evaluation, 4, 7, 16, 20-21, 25-26, 27, 38, 44-46,
49-50, 54, 117, 159, 169, 175, 203, 229, 237,
244, 278-283, 287-289, 291-292, 302-306,
308, 322, 328-331, 333, 339, 387, 391, 399,
412, 419, 423, 426, 428, 433, 444, 446-447,
450, 461, 469-470, 473, 475
evidence, 7, 9-10, 21-23, 25, 69, 83, 158, 168, 188,
260, 263-265, 269, 271, 273, 279, 282, 286,
290, 292-293, 295, 297-299, 307, 323,
332-333, 343, 364, 386, 392, 401, 421-423,
425, 442, 478, 480
supporting, 286, 297
Excess supply, 170
Exchange, 71, 169, 256, 262, 265, 308, 311, 318, 336,
384, 418, 426, 427-431, 434, 437, 445-446,
491
Exchange rate, 265, 426, 429-431, 445-446
determination of, 429-430
flexible, 265
Exchange rates, 418, 427, 430
determination of, 430
Excise taxes, 349
Exclusion, 37, 39, 287, 460
Expansion, 125, 128, 175, 244
expect, 31, 35, 88, 137, 154, 158, 167, 171, 191, 243,
279, 337, 347, 370, 374, 379-380, 396, 403,
420
Expectations, 153-154, 189, 228, 261, 362
expected loss, 125
Expected return, 367
Expenditures, 2, 17-21, 34, 43, 48, 55, 64, 67, 77, 88,
103-104, 106-108, 113-114, 122, 129-130,
148, 168, 170, 178, 235, 264, 270, 276,
309-311, 315, 317, 324, 327, 350, 358, 360,
381-383, 387, 409, 416, 424, 442, 492
defined, 77, 129, 148
limitations, 108, 311, 350
Expenses, 64, 85, 109, 296, 317, 322, 329, 355, 402,
430, 432-433, 460
hospitals, 460
Experience, 26, 94, 132, 202, 235, 287, 293, 327, 343,
361, 364, 403, 462, 485
Experimental research, 290
Explanations, 82
Explosion, 11
Exporting, 175, 431
Exports, 89, 265, 427-429, 431, 434, 446
financing, 265
External costs, 47
Externalities, 54, 78, 82, 89, 95-96, 98, 101-102, 108,
114, 116-117, 120, 125, 128-129, 132-133,
158, 254, 256, 261, 269, 332, 361, 367, 372,
387, 415, 423, 425-426, 427, 434
negative, 78, 95-96, 102, 114, 116-117, 125, 129,
132-133, 261, 269, 361, 367, 415
network, 128
F
Factors of production, 59-61, 63, 69
Failure, 26, 83, 98, 103, 117, 237, 303, 321, 357, 465
Fair price, 217, 227
fairness, 21, 35, 49, 473
Family, 45, 295, 372-373, 440-441
FAST, 175, 257
Favors, 134, 250
Feature, 69, 191
Federal Aviation Administration, 128, 399
Federal government, 18, 20-21, 47, 89, 153, 155, 274,
307, 469
Federal Reserve, 153, 169, 280, 307
inflation and, 153
Federal Reserve Bank, 153, 169, 307
Federal Reserve Board, 280
feedback, 293
Fields, 292, 330
Filtering, 43
Finance, 12, 26, 58, 68, 128, 141-142, 150, 163, 166,
168, 205, 265, 275, 279, 333, 386
summary of, 333
Financial analysis, 148
Financial crisis, 264-265
Fines, 132-133
Fire, 296, 347, 363, 386, 395, 397, 402, 405
risk of, 363, 402
Firms, 21-22, 60-61, 63, 69, 82, 88, 90-92, 108,
116-117, 129, 257, 269, 276, 319, 336, 361,
367, 386, 460, 475
Fisher Effect, 169
Fixed costs, 63, 78, 91
Flexibility, 148
Floating currency, 446
Flood, 9, 20, 98, 101, 201
FOB, 430-431
Food, 169, 251, 440, 479
production, 251
Forecast rate, 274
Forecasting, 4, 158, 282, 287, 290, 299, 323, 333, 390
Forecasts, 24, 153, 169, 187, 262, 287
Foreign exchange, 169, 336, 428, 431, 434, 437
Foundations, 27-51, 53-79, 472, 482
fractions, 398
Fragmentation, 442
France, 275
Free on board, 430
Free trade, 428
Freedom, 66, 353
Frequency, 146, 190, 204, 282, 289, 299
Fringe benefits, 309-311, 324, 398
Full employment, 321, 362
Fund, 141, 416, 490
495

G
Gambling, 102-103, 117, 188
Game theory, 203
GAO, 26, 274
GDP, 149, 250, 267, 420, 426
GDP deflator, 149, 420
Gender, 345
General Accounting Office, 26
Germany, 39, 425, 468
Gifts, 251
Gini coefficient, 492
Global financial crisis, 265
Global warming, 250, 272, 278-279, 281, 413-415,
425, 492
Goals, 27, 42, 44-46, 401, 442-443
definition of, 27
Gold, 283
Golden Rule, 281
Goods, 27-28, 31, 36-37, 40, 54, 71, 73, 75-76, 82, 85,
88-89, 94, 98, 100-101, 103-104, 108-109,
116-117, 119-120, 124, 127-131, 134-135,
149-151, 168-169, 208, 219-221, 225,
228-229, 232-235, 238-241, 244, 251, 257,
270, 292-294, 310, 320, 336, 340, 347,
357-358, 360, 365-366, 372, 380-381,
386-387, 390, 403, 407, 409, 417, 427-428,
432-436, 446, 450, 461, 478, 482
basket of, 149, 151, 168, 434, 436
complementary, 233
free, 88, 98, 100, 116-117, 238, 358, 428, 446
inferior, 220-221, 225, 228
intermediate, 358, 365-366, 409, 450, 461
normal, 75, 220-221, 225, 228, 234, 417
private, 54, 88, 98, 101, 116-117, 151, 238, 251,
310, 358, 360, 366
public, 27, 40, 82, 88-89, 98, 100-101, 103, 108,
116, 119, 128-129, 135, 149, 151, 229,
233-234, 238-239, 244, 251, 257, 270,
292, 294, 310, 320, 358, 360, 372, 381,
386-387, 407, 450
substitute, 120, 124, 127, 320, 381, 387
Government, 2-3, 6-8, 12, 16-22, 24, 26, 31-32, 38,
42, 47-48, 58-59, 61-70, 73, 75, 77, 82-97,
101, 104-105, 107-117, 119-120, 126-129,
131, 137-138, 140, 142-143, 147, 149-151,
153, 155, 158-159, 163-164, 166-169, 175,
201, 204, 209, 213, 215-216, 248-250, 256,
259-265, 268-269, 272-274, 276, 279-283,
294, 307, 309-310, 316-319, 327-329,
331-333, 336, 340, 349, 358-361, 365-367,
375, 378, 385-386, 403, 416-417, 428,
430-431, 435, 439, 441-443, 445, 447, 460,
469, 475-477, 479-480, 483, 491-492
global financial crisis, 265
intervention, 2-3, 82-83, 94, 101, 114, 116-117,
127, 129, 131, 331, 385
leasing, 167
tariffs, 428, 445
Government agencies, 12, 20, 249, 273-274, 282
Government intervention, 2, 82-83, 94, 101, 116-117,
131, 385
change and, 131
United States and, 116
Government policies, 61, 63, 66, 75, 82-83, 119-120,
209, 248
Government purchases, 108, 114
Government regulation, 386
Government regulations, 340
Government securities, 274
Government subsidies, 66, 93
Grants, 38
intergovernmental, 38
Graphs, 98, 185, 187
Great Britain, 236, 423
Great Depression, 318
Greenhouse gas, 272-273, 281, 413, 491
Gross domestic product, 149, 250
nominal, 149
real, 149
Group, 34, 37, 41, 46, 50, 66, 96, 100-102, 119, 129,
162, 254, 275, 288-289, 291, 293, 296, 299,
303-306, 324, 328-330, 346, 368, 384, 417,
424, 463, 467, 473, 475-477, 481-484,
486-487, 490
groups, 9, 18-20, 22-23, 32, 37, 41, 46, 65, 78, 95-96,
117, 122, 135, 189, 217, 222, 228, 288-289,
291, 302-306, 309, 311, 328-330, 346, 443,
462, 475, 477, 479, 481-484, 487, 489-490
development of, 78
Growth rate, 165-167, 257, 269-275, 281
Guidelines, 274, 281-283, 446, 472
H
Haiti, 39, 50
Health care, 7, 292, 296, 298, 307, 361, 402, 460,
472-473
Health care costs, 296, 298
Health insurance, 292, 298, 307
Medicaid, 298
Heuristics, 198
Highway accidents, 177
Hospitals, 226, 460
Housing market, 425
HTML, 117
HTTP, 149, 168-169, 278, 280, 282, 421-422, 426
Human capital, 18, 45, 156, 308, 366, 398
Human resources, 51, 299, 330, 332
investing in, 299, 330
hypothesis, 290, 349, 353, 356, 466
I
Idealism, 425
III, 220, 225-226, 228, 469, 474
illustration, 9, 37-38, 67, 71, 126-127, 181, 185, 194,
197-198, 211, 214, 216-217, 242, 280, 295,
340, 356, 375-376, 452, 456, 476, 492
Immigration, 376
Impairment, 395, 398, 465
Imperfect information, 228, 308, 447
Implementation, 30, 34, 36, 221, 287, 290-291, 295,
298
Import quotas, 428, 434
Importing, 428
Imports, 115, 133-134, 427-431, 434-435, 445
Inc., 68, 118, 200, 330, 466-467
Incentives, 32, 116-117, 187, 308, 324, 327, 484
Income, 21, 32, 36-37, 41, 45-51, 67-68, 71, 73-76,
78-79, 88, 135, 148-149, 151, 165, 167-170,
208, 210-217, 220-222, 225-226, 228, 244,
252-253, 256, 259, 261, 270, 277-280, 292,
295, 299, 307-310, 312-315, 317-318, 325,
327-329, 332, 344, 346-348, 354, 360,
365-367, 372, 374-376, 390, 392-394, 404,
416-421, 426, 436, 440, 442-444, 475, 477,
479-484, 486, 488-492
differences in, 41, 366, 374, 417, 419, 444, 484
disposable, 68, 74, 148-149, 168, 280
increase in, 49-50, 73-74, 88, 208, 214, 256,
312-313, 315, 317-318, 365, 390, 417,
443, 480, 483
market, 36, 48, 76, 78, 88, 135, 149, 151, 222, 225,
228, 244, 252-253, 256, 259, 261,
278-279, 292, 308, 312-313, 315,
317-318, 332, 348, 360, 365-367, 372,
374-376, 392-393, 421, 426, 436, 440,
442-443, 477, 483
national, 49, 78, 168-170, 244, 270, 278, 280, 299,
347, 426, 443, 475, 492
per capita, 148, 270, 278, 347, 421, 443, 484
permanent, 167, 280
personal, 148, 256, 259, 279, 417
Income distribution, 41, 51, 479-480, 483, 488-489
Income effect, 73-76, 79
Income elasticity, 79, 221, 346-347, 417-419, 426, 483
Income elasticity of demand, 346, 483
Income tax, 51, 68, 256, 259, 270, 280, 416
Indexes, 169, 467
Index.html, 117
Indifference curves, 71-74, 78, 252-253, 255
Individual demand curve, 378
Industry, 21, 91, 95, 103, 128, 169, 361, 364, 386,
393, 426, 432-433, 437
Inefficiencies, 66
Inelastic supply, 105-106
Inequality, 258, 492
Infection rate, 183-184, 205
infer, 122, 132, 153, 224, 244, 269, 350, 368
Inflation, 12, 148-149, 151-155, 167-169, 202, 251,
262-263, 274, 279-280, 392
anticipated, 155, 202
costs of, 155, 167, 202
Inflation expectations, 153
Inflation rate, 152-153, 155, 167, 279
Informal economy, 442
Information, 3-5, 8-9, 24, 27, 37, 44, 54, 73-74, 82, 89,
93-94, 101, 108, 116, 122, 144-146,
157-158, 161-163, 169, 171, 174, 182,
185-188, 191-197, 199, 201-202, 204-205,
211, 217-218, 221, 224, 227-228, 235-236,
243, 254, 256, 263, 269, 280, 287, 290, 298,
304-306, 308, 324, 329-332, 336, 339, 348,
350, 358-360, 364, 367, 369, 378-379, 383,
385-386, 391-392, 406, 433, 437, 440, 444,
447, 450, 453-454, 457, 459, 470, 473, 476,
483, 489
imperfect, 201, 228, 287, 308, 385, 447
Information system, 144-146, 158, 161-163
Infrastructure, 19, 116, 119, 128-129, 262, 279-280,
287, 340, 391
Initiative, 20
Injury, 41, 363, 372, 394-395, 397-400, 402-403,
421-422
personal, 397, 400, 402-403
Institute for International Economics, 278, 281
Insurance, 177, 210, 217-219, 222-224, 227-228, 292,
298, 307-308, 386-387, 398, 400, 402, 430
applications, 430
availability, 217, 222-223
contracts, 218
definition of, 219
option, 177, 210, 217-219, 222-224, 227-228
risk and, 210, 223, 228, 386-387
Insurers, 217
Integration, 203, 355
intelligence, 368
Inter-American Development Bank, 429, 431-432, 446
Interdependence, 434
Interest, 2, 19-20, 23, 49, 58, 69, 138-143, 145-146,
151-155, 158, 161, 163-169, 236, 249,
251-254, 256, 259-262, 264-265, 267-269,
272-279, 282, 290, 295, 305-306, 331,
344-345, 349, 351, 357, 368, 407, 442, 466,
483, 492
credit, 19, 251, 272, 279
Interest rate, 138-143, 151-152, 154-155, 158, 161,
163-169, 249, 251-254, 256, 259, 261,
264-265, 268, 272, 276-277
current, 139, 151-152, 154, 158, 167-169, 249,
251-254, 256, 264, 272, 277
risk, 249, 251, 256, 261, 277
Interest rates, 139, 151-153, 161, 164-165, 249, 251,
254, 260, 265, 269, 275, 278, 282, 442
inflation and, 153
investment and, 260, 269, 275
nominal, 151-153
real, 151-153, 161, 251, 275, 282
Intergovernmental grants, 38
Internal rate of return, 13, 161-162, 170, 442
IRR, 161-162, 170
International markets, 427
pricing, 427
Interviews, 463, 467
Investment, 2-3, 31, 45, 128, 139, 141, 153-154, 156,
159, 161, 167, 191, 193, 202, 205, 229,
248-249, 251, 254-262, 264-271, 274-281,
308, 366, 380, 399, 441-443, 447, 469, 474,
491-492
government, 2-3, 31, 128, 153, 159, 167, 248-249,
256, 259-262, 264-265, 268-269, 274,
276, 279-281, 366, 441-443, 447, 469,
491-492
gross, 266-267, 280
net, 2, 31, 45, 128, 139, 154, 156, 159, 167, 191,
193, 202, 205, 248, 265-266, 268,
276-277, 280-281, 441-443
private, 2, 159, 205, 249, 251, 254, 259-262,
264-269, 271, 274-278, 281, 308, 366,
441-442
saving and, 474
Investment decisions, 167, 205, 229, 279, 281
Investments, 18, 145, 164, 205, 224, 250, 255, 257,
259, 261-262, 265, 268, 273, 276-277, 281,
308, 366, 390, 423
revenues from, 18
Investors, 259
IRR, 161-162, 170
ISO, 374
J
Japan, 279, 366
Job creation, 19, 237
job market, 305
job search, 110, 308, 310-311, 324, 327, 484
Jobs, 19-20, 109, 115, 133, 237, 305, 308, 318, 321,
327, 364-365, 368, 386, 392, 394, 417, 420,
496

422, 438-439, 484
levels, 20, 321, 394, 420
measuring, 133, 318
Jordan, 424
journals, 289, 291, 390-391
Jury awards, 402
K
Knowledge, 8, 94, 97, 198, 215, 228, 233, 289, 293,
305, 328, 336, 350, 357, 378, 390, 462
L
Labor, 17-18, 20, 27, 30, 45, 48, 60, 67, 78, 103-104,
108-112, 114-115, 118, 131, 133, 149, 156,
168, 184, 200, 292, 307, 312-321, 323, 328,
331-332, 336, 356, 361-364, 368-369, 372,
381, 386, 391, 393, 397, 405, 416-417, 422,
425, 427-428, 432-434, 436-439, 441, 445,
447, 491
government intervention, 131
investment in, 45, 491
labor relations, 331
labor force, 110, 438-439, 441
Labor market, 109, 114, 292, 316-317, 319, 321, 323,
331-332, 361-363, 368-369, 372, 393, 436,
447
equilibrium, 332, 372
imperfect information and, 447
Labor relations, 331
Labor supply, 67, 312-315, 317, 332, 361, 416-417,
425, 441
Labor supply curve, 313-315, 317, 332, 361
Language, 40
Law of large numbers, 190
Lawsuits, 21
Learning, 3-5, 21, 94, 171, 194-198, 298, 305
Leasing, 167, 384
Ledger, 65, 96, 107, 113, 117, 127
Legislation, 45-46, 114, 298
Less-developed countries, 491
letters, 281, 387
international, 281
Leverage, 238
Liabilities, 148
Lifestyle, 440
Liquidation, 144-145, 147, 154-155, 157-158
Living standards, 426
Loading, 376
Loans, 254, 261, 280
Local government, 358, 375, 417
London, 1, 25, 41, 118, 283, 418, 426, 446, 492
Loss, 9, 11, 17, 37, 45, 56, 58, 62-63, 65-67, 70-71,
76-77, 79, 87, 89-94, 96-98, 101, 103, 105,
107-108, 113, 124-127, 133-135, 175, 182,
184, 240, 258, 296, 309, 312-313, 315,
317-318, 325, 329, 332, 337-338, 341-342,
385, 398-399, 413, 416, 418, 437, 440, 463,
471, 478, 480, 487-488
collision, 175
control, 17, 97-98, 101, 296, 329, 418, 471
direct, 66, 87, 97, 103, 133, 184, 317, 337-338,
341-342, 437, 463
distributions, 37, 182, 471
expected, 94, 125, 175, 182, 184, 487
fortuitous, 342
income, 37, 45, 67, 71, 76, 79, 135, 309, 312-313,
315, 317-318, 325, 329, 332, 416, 418,
440, 480, 488
indirect, 385, 463
known, 37, 79, 182, 318, 413, 418, 437
of use, 17
paying, 17, 71, 98, 105, 108
ratio, 58
reduction, 63, 76, 87, 96, 124-125, 133-135, 258,
342, 385
reserve, 175
severity, 398-399
Low-skilled workers, 307
M
Macroeconomic policy, 151
Macroeconomics, 279
Management, 6, 12, 16-18, 24-25, 50-51, 117, 137,
203, 205, 225, 227-228, 244, 249, 274,
276-277, 280-283, 298-299, 387, 421-422,
426, 474
Managers, 3, 189
Manufacturing, 95, 267, 344, 440, 475
Margin, 241, 261, 266
Marginal benefit, 55, 60, 65, 77-78, 90-92, 98,
100-101, 294, 407
Marginal cost, 59-60, 62-63, 65, 68, 77-78, 90-92, 98,
101, 104, 106, 112-113, 115, 133, 261, 294,
375, 380-381, 391, 432, 447, 452
Marginal rate of substitution, 78, 253
Marginal revenue, 89-90, 92, 112
Marginal utility, 36-37, 50, 54, 73, 135, 225-226, 242,
257, 270, 364, 450, 479-480, 483
Market demand, 11, 36, 54, 61, 82, 88-89, 94, 97,
100-102, 114, 122, 125, 260, 337, 340, 350,
355, 357-358, 365, 374, 378-379, 381, 483
Market demand curve, 11, 36, 54, 61, 88-89, 97, 100,
260, 337, 340, 350, 355, 357-358, 365, 374,
378-379, 381, 483
Market effects, 119-120, 122-123, 128-129, 136, 316
Market efficiency, 20
Market equilibrium, 76, 97, 128
Market failure, 83, 98, 103, 117, 357
Market power, 116, 269, 361
Market supply curve, 60-61, 98
Market value, 154, 158, 367, 369, 429, 431, 434, 440
Marketing, 387
Markets, 2, 11, 20, 31, 36, 40, 51, 54, 64, 70, 78,
81-118, 119-136, 217, 227-228, 233-234,
238, 249, 251-252, 254, 263, 269, 281, 286,
293-294, 316-317, 321, 336, 340, 349,
357-358, 364, 372, 384-386, 390, 392, 398,
410, 416, 427, 430, 442, 444-445, 447, 482
development of, 51, 78, 238, 386
perfectly competitive, 64, 70, 91, 252
meaning, 233, 280, 461
Measurement, 4, 6, 8-9, 24, 54, 68, 75, 85, 127, 151,
168-170, 220, 232, 236, 238-240, 280-281,
302, 336, 460-461, 468-469, 472-473, 483
measurements, 422
mechanics, 144, 162
median, 109, 153, 346, 354, 393, 405, 408-409, 411,
414, 421, 426
Medicaid, 288-289, 298
Medical care, 166-167, 292, 298, 307, 403, 473
medium, 158, 262
Memory, 201
Mergers, 63, 482
Metrics, 451
Mexico, 390
Microeconomics, 69
Minimum wage, 109, 114, 313-314, 332, 383, 437
Ministry of Finance, 12, 275
Money, 18, 22, 24, 28, 37, 48, 50, 66-67, 71, 73-75,
92, 135, 138-140, 154-155, 174, 234-235,
242, 244, 251-252, 278-279, 293, 296, 318,
327, 360-361, 371, 403, 450
commodity, 403
demand for, 22, 73-74, 244
Monopolies, 90, 92, 108
natural, 92, 108
social cost of, 108
Monopolistic competition, 116
Monopoly, 82, 84, 89-92, 112-114, 116, 131-133, 361,
427, 434-435
Monte Carlo simulation, 286, 293, 459
Moral hazard, 217, 228
insurance and, 228
Mortgage, 169, 263, 272, 279
Motivation, 234-235, 273, 306, 331, 366, 436
Motor vehicles, 159, 413
Multipliers, 25, 405
tax, 405
using, 405
Museums, 129
Music, 101
Myths, 425
N
National income, 170, 270, 280
National markets, 89
National security, 44
Nations, 38, 209, 386, 427, 446
Natural environment, 22, 413-414
sustainability, 22
Natural monopoly, 91-92, 116
Natural resources, 219, 243, 281, 366, 425
access to, 425
navigation, 156, 409, 411
Negative externalities, 96, 114, 125, 129, 261, 269,
367, 415
Negligence, 362
Negotiation, 101
Process, 101
Net exports, 265
Net income, 148, 211, 215, 222, 312, 314-315, 317
Net present value, 6, 13, 137, 139, 143, 145, 154, 203,
248, 281, 325, 443, 482, 484, 489
NPV, 13, 139, 143, 145, 154, 248, 443, 482, 489
Net present value analysis, 139
Netherlands, 423
Netting, 74
New Zealand, 421, 423
Nominal interest rate, 151-152, 155, 169
Nominal interest rates, 152
Normal good, 32, 74-75, 220-221, 419, 480
Norms, 40
North America, 409
Norway, 421, 423
NPV, 13-15, 20, 139-140, 143-148, 154-155, 157-158,
160-162, 165, 168-170, 248-250, 266-269,
272-273, 277, 282-283, 443, 447, 475,
482-483, 485-489
O
Objectives, 192, 314
Obligation, 164
Occurrence, 171-173, 175, 188, 218, 306, 364
OECD, 153
Offer, 32, 73, 88, 115, 219, 223, 228, 252, 305, 314,
459, 462, 466
Office of Management and Budget, 12, 16, 137, 249,
274, 276, 282
OMB, 274, 282
Offset, 9, 58, 63, 72, 86, 117, 127, 130, 309-310, 312,
315, 321, 336, 365, 478, 482
Offsets, 107, 317
Oil, 88, 115, 128, 133-134, 137, 171-172, 175, 181,
393, 415, 425, 432-433, 475-476
Oligopoly, 116
Online databases, 144
Open economy, 268
Operating expenses, 64
Operations, 192, 473
Opportunities, 38, 130, 171, 219, 262, 280, 308, 314,
321, 392, 406-407, 428
Opportunity cost, 12, 17, 29-31, 47-48, 60, 103-106,
108-109, 111, 114-115, 117, 130-131, 162,
167, 183-184, 188, 194, 209, 212, 215, 248,
251, 259, 264-265, 269, 274, 280, 287,
293-294, 360, 374, 376, 380, 383, 385, 433,
436-437, 442-443, 447, 460
Opportunity costs, 31, 34, 59-60, 78, 82, 103-110,
113-114, 130, 182, 380, 384, 428, 432, 474
Optimism, 290
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, 153
Organization, 38, 393, 446
definition of, 38
Organizations, 238, 427, 444
Orientation, 16
Outlays, 19, 103, 106, 114, 309-310
Output, 11, 13-14, 25, 58-60, 62, 69, 74, 87, 89-92, 96,
100-101, 133, 309-310, 317-321, 325, 327,
361, 381, 385, 391, 413-414, 428-430,
433-434, 439-441, 443, 446, 461, 477
equilibrium, 58, 62, 87, 89, 381, 477
potential, 414, 428, 477
taxes and, 434
Overconsumption, 78
overhead, 183-184
Ownership, 283, 292, 386
P
Pacific exchange, 426
Parameter, 160, 183, 187-188, 197-199, 205, 225,
241, 257, 261, 266, 270, 351-353, 370, 443
parentheses, 375, 399, 408-409
Partitioning, 235, 238, 240-243
Partnership, 295
Patents, 150
Paternalistic, 234-235
payroll, 261
Perceived risk, 393
Perceived value, 40, 235
percentages, 139, 162, 234
Perfect competition, 54, 61, 64, 78, 319
Perfect market, 357
Perfectly elastic supply, 104, 294
Perfectly inelastic supply, 105
497

Performance, 21, 48, 153, 279, 287, 291, 426
Permits, 92, 117, 119, 272, 303, 373
Personal income, 148, 256, 259
Personal injury, 397, 400, 402-403
Personal property, 400
Petroleum reserves, 175
Physician services, 397
Place, 13, 15, 19, 31, 40-41, 50-51, 84-85, 101, 104,
110-111, 114, 122, 124, 127, 129, 133, 137,
182, 191-192, 194, 213, 226, 232, 235-238,
272, 287-288, 303, 305, 312, 319-320, 332,
374, 417, 427, 450-451, 455, 463, 465
Plans, 174, 228, 272, 278
Policies, 2, 27, 30-34, 36-47, 49-51, 54, 61, 63-64, 66,
70, 75, 82-83, 85, 92, 102-103, 116,
119-120, 130, 171, 175, 177, 188, 194, 198,
208-210, 222-224, 234, 236, 239-240, 243,
248, 250, 286-295, 297-299, 330-332, 367,
390, 403, 419-420, 425, 428, 450-451, 461,
463, 469-470, 475, 477, 480, 484, 489
assignment of, 288-289
limited, 175, 194, 420, 477, 484, 489
participating, 289
valued, 27, 31, 54, 61, 82, 234, 236, 243, 292-293,
484
Political constraints, 14
Political systems, 32
Politics, 25-26
Pollution control, 117
Pooling, 177, 217, 223-224
Poor countries, 441, 484
Population, 8, 19, 41, 46, 167, 169, 178-180, 182-183,
185, 187-189, 200-202, 204-205, 222,
233-234, 238, 288, 295-296, 299, 307, 309,
328-329, 339, 341-342, 354, 360, 375,
378-379, 381, 383, 385, 391-394, 417,
419-420, 447, 462, 466-467, 471, 492
Portfolio, 222-223, 255, 261
Model, 223, 255
Portugal, 421
Poverty, 45, 490
Power, 33, 35, 84, 89, 109, 114, 116, 132, 147,
149-150, 156-157, 223, 269, 279, 297, 356,
361, 364, 368, 409, 411, 413, 418, 434, 446
PPP, 446
Pragmatism, 425
Premium, 177, 222, 228, 249, 261, 279, 364-365, 368,
392
Premiums, 224, 365
gross, 365
Present value, 6, 12-13, 137, 139, 142-146, 148, 154,
157-158, 161, 163-168, 170, 175-177,
180-181, 194-196, 201-203, 248, 250, 252,
266, 268, 276-277, 281, 323, 325, 329, 362,
442-443, 469, 482, 484, 489
prevention costs, 401, 403
Price, 36, 40, 50, 54-66, 69, 71-79, 84-93, 95-100,
102-108, 110-117, 119-121, 123-127, 129,
131, 133-136, 137, 149-151, 153, 155-156,
167-169, 172, 175, 177, 183, 202-203,
207-229, 232, 238, 240-242, 244, 249, 260,
265-267, 271, 274-277, 280, 287, 292-295,
297-299, 307, 316-317, 322, 324, 332,
336-342, 344-350, 352-356, 357-361,
367-376, 378-382, 385-386, 390-392,
394-395, 401-402, 404-405, 407-409,
412-415, 419-421, 424-425, 427-433,
435-436, 441, 443-447, 453-455, 461,
477-478, 480-482, 491
defined, 57, 65, 77-78, 129, 227, 238, 240, 429
price changes, 61, 74-75, 120, 125, 127, 131,
135-136, 137, 155, 225, 228, 244,
346-347, 356, 390, 421
price elasticity, 57-58, 76, 115, 292-293, 298, 307,
337, 339-341, 346-347, 350, 355
Price changes, 61, 74-75, 120, 125, 127, 131,
135-136, 137, 155, 225, 228, 244, 346-347,
356, 390, 421
Price effects, 36, 86, 104-107, 123, 127
Price elasticity, 57-58, 76, 115, 292-293, 298, 307,
337, 339-341, 346-347, 350, 355
Price elasticity of demand, 57-58, 76, 292-293, 307,
337, 339-341, 346-347, 350, 355
demand curve and, 57
Price elasticity of supply, 76
Price floor, 110
Price ratio, 429-433
Prices, 20, 23, 31, 36, 42, 54, 58, 60-61, 66, 69, 71,
74-76, 79, 82, 84-85, 96, 100, 103, 107-108,
112, 114-116, 119-120, 124-125, 128-131,
134, 149-151, 153, 155, 164, 167, 170, 171,
208-210, 217, 219, 221-222, 224-226, 228,
240-242, 261, 277, 286-287, 292, 294-295,
297, 299, 336, 344, 347, 349, 357-359, 364,
367, 369-370, 373-374, 376-377, 379, 381,
384-386, 389-426, 427-447, 458, 461, 466,
472, 491
demand and, 82, 84, 107, 114, 225-226, 228, 336,
357, 390, 421
demand schedule and, 374
equilibrium, 58, 61, 76, 115, 124-125, 128, 134,
228, 370, 373, 381, 425, 437-438
flexible, 442
inflation and, 153
input, 31, 85, 107-108, 112, 294, 381, 428-431,
433, 436, 446
maximum, 71, 75, 85, 209-210, 219, 240, 398, 400,
414
minimum, 60-61, 114, 240, 414, 437
of substitutes, 344, 374, 376, 419
predatory, 66
reservation, 114-115
retail, 151, 347, 386
trade and, 426
wages and, 69, 447
Pricing, 40, 63-66, 84-85, 92, 108-109, 113, 115, 132,
228, 268, 294, 360, 369-373, 380, 386, 407,
409, 412, 423-424, 427, 429, 431, 433-436,
444-445
elements of, 407
horizontal, 92, 115
payment, 407
predatory, 66
trial, 108
value, 40, 84-85, 109, 115, 132, 228, 268, 294,
360, 369-370, 372-373, 380, 386, 407,
409, 412, 423-424, 427, 429, 431, 434,
444
vertical, 386
Principal, 138, 140-141, 153, 267-268, 352
Principles, 22-23, 47, 69, 204, 293, 355, 445-447
Private goods, 98, 238
Private ownership, 283
Private sector, 18, 88, 98, 105, 117, 151, 205, 259,
265-266, 271, 274, 283, 310, 324, 358, 442
Privatization, 69
Probability, 20, 45-46, 174, 177-180, 182-192, 194,
198, 203-204, 208, 211, 214-218, 220, 223,
225, 227, 290, 296-297, 346, 353, 356, 362,
364, 384, 402, 413, 438, 459, 465-466, 468,
472
objective, 346
subjective, 45, 174, 204
Producer surplus, 60-65, 70, 76, 78, 82, 85-91, 93, 96,
106-107, 111-112, 114-115, 120, 124, 130,
135, 149, 155-156, 336, 367, 475, 482
Product differentiation, 386
Product or service, 349
Product quality, 151
Production, 23, 59-61, 63, 69, 84, 95-96, 101, 117,
128-130, 228, 251, 254, 365, 367, 381, 428,
432, 434-435, 439, 491
national, 23, 69, 84, 101, 128, 130, 428, 434
Production costs, 96, 129-130
Production function, 381
Productivity, 103, 117, 310, 319, 398-400, 402, 437
labor, 103, 319, 437
Products, 5, 66, 94, 116, 125, 128, 130, 150-151, 176,
205, 234, 379, 428, 431, 433, 473
levels of, 130, 234
Professionals, 49
Profit, 23, 60, 90, 217, 278, 476
Profits, 23, 63, 69, 78, 89, 91-92, 116, 132-133, 155,
259, 336, 361, 386, 475
Property, 35, 43, 132-133, 234, 296-297, 373, 386,
395, 397-400, 402, 412-413, 415-417, 422,
424, 458, 490
damage, 395, 397-400, 402, 413, 415, 422
Property taxes, 416-417
proposals, 245, 282, 475-476
types of, 245
Proposed values, 270
Prosperity, 281
Protection, 21-22, 26, 167, 224, 228, 272, 274, 276,
281, 283, 396, 422
Public choice, 25
Public goods, 82, 89, 98, 100-101, 108, 116, 234,
238-239, 244, 251, 270, 320, 372, 387
Public health, 203, 289, 450, 468, 470
Public opinion, 237
Public policies, 34, 41-42, 44, 49, 103, 222, 294
Public policy, 2-3, 26, 27, 38, 41-42, 50-51, 69, 118,
128, 135, 151, 171, 175, 205, 277-278,
291-292, 295, 298-299, 307, 422, 462, 491
Purchasing, 88, 94, 108, 115, 144, 149-150, 217, 272,
294, 370, 418, 446
Purchasing power, 149-150, 418, 446
Purchasing power parity, 446
PPP, 446
Pure competition, 386
purpose, 2-3, 18, 24, 83, 94, 132, 181, 198, 310, 378,
380, 391-392, 396, 398, 411, 419, 421, 430,
469, 475
defining, 380
general, 2, 419
specific, 3, 83, 392, 398, 475
Q
Quality, 45, 79, 94, 151, 154, 208, 221, 225, 232,
241-242, 244, 289, 291-292, 296-297, 332,
356, 369, 373, 375, 383, 386-387, 391,
395-396, 398, 400, 402, 408-413, 417, 419,
423-426, 431, 450, 461-464, 467, 471-473
quality control, 356
Quantity demanded, 57, 75-77, 124, 127, 135, 220,
337, 339-340, 344-346, 348, 352, 355, 375,
483
Quantity supplied, 76, 116, 348
Questionnaires, 463, 466
Quota, 435
Quotas, 62, 427-428, 433-434
import, 427-428, 434
R
Race, 263, 372
Rail systems, 19
Rate of return, 13, 77, 161-162, 169-170, 251,
254-259, 261, 266, 275-276, 296, 366, 442
internal, 13, 161-162, 170, 442
Rates, 9, 12, 67, 75, 78, 109-110, 130, 133, 139,
151-153, 159-161, 164-166, 187, 249-252,
254, 256-257, 259-265, 267, 269-275,
277-279, 281-283, 288-289, 296, 298, 311,
322-323, 347, 373-374, 386, 403-404, 410,
418, 427, 430, 438, 440-443, 468, 487
gross, 67, 250, 267
reasonable, 75, 159-160, 187, 249, 257, 261,
264-265, 270-271, 279, 418, 443
Rating, 463, 468, 473
Rational decision making, 23
Ratios, 33-34, 162, 192, 205, 295, 430-431, 450-454,
457-461, 469, 472
Reach, 28, 39, 130, 180, 204, 214, 256, 295, 373, 460
Readiness, 292
Real estate, 386, 433
Real GDP, 267
Real interest rate, 151-152, 154, 169, 264, 272
Real interest rates, 152-153
recommendations, 15, 160, 250, 275, 283
Records, 201, 288, 337, 346
Recruitment, 398
Reference group, 41
Reform, 21, 26, 66
Refunds, 280
Regression analysis, 188, 290, 336, 351, 356, 393
Regulation, 21, 23, 26, 43-44, 51, 66, 117, 269, 282,
365, 386-387, 411, 474
federal, 21, 51, 66, 282
methods, 21, 269, 365, 386-387, 411
state, 21
surplus, 66, 117, 387
Regulations, 2, 21-22, 26, 44, 108, 132, 166, 282-283,
340, 365, 367, 460, 469
global, 282
Rehabilitation services, 397
Reinsurance, 217
pool, 217
Reinvestment, 266
Relationships, 9-10, 289, 307, 386
cause-and-effect relationships, 9-10
Relative efficiency, 27, 36, 450
Religion, 474
Repetition, 290, 295-296, 349
Replacement cost, 409
Replication, 288, 290, 297
reports, 94, 192, 288, 324, 333, 341, 399, 424, 484
498

components of, 324
types of, 94, 288, 484
Representations, 36
Representative democracy, 42
Representativeness, 173, 203
Resale, 202
research, 9-10, 12, 24, 43, 128, 135, 169, 175, 192,
243-244, 272-273, 279, 286-287, 290-292,
296-299, 303, 324, 330-331, 336, 338-339,
341, 387, 393, 417-418, 421, 423-426, 469,
472-473, 491
conducting, 43, 330-331, 491
planning, 175, 298, 469, 473
primary, 128, 135, 279, 286, 336
secondary, 128, 135, 393, 417-418, 421, 423-426
Research and development, 192
cost of, 192
Research design, 291
Reserves, 175, 407
case, 175
loss, 175
policy, 175
Resources, 2-4, 7-8, 12-13, 15, 17, 20, 22-23, 25, 27,
29-30, 42-43, 47, 51, 60, 69, 78, 82, 84-85,
103-104, 117, 128, 130-131, 162, 193, 199,
219, 232, 238, 243-244, 248-249, 254-256,
259, 261-262, 264-265, 269, 279, 281,
286-288, 291, 294-295, 299, 308, 318, 330,
332, 346, 361, 366, 391, 421, 423-426, 430,
433, 460, 462, 469, 478
Responsibility, 22, 26, 39, 444
Restricted, 49, 62, 92, 129-130, 192, 357, 471
Restrictions, 36
Retail prices, 151, 347
Retention, 331
Retirement, 263
Return on investment, 251, 256-259, 261, 269, 274
Revenue, 16-19, 24-25, 47, 58, 60-61, 64, 67-68, 77,
85-90, 92, 96, 112, 114-115, 126-127, 132,
202, 277, 294, 358-359, 409, 416, 425,
430-431, 477
marginal, 25, 60, 67-68, 77, 88-90, 92, 96, 112,
114-115, 126, 277, 294, 416, 425
Revenues, 2, 6, 8, 16-18, 23, 61, 67, 77, 82, 86-89,
92, 96, 112, 115, 117, 127-131, 148, 202,
277, 280, 350, 360, 366, 442, 475-476
revision, 244, 424
Risk, 38, 40-41, 43, 102, 172, 175, 177-178, 181-184,
186-189, 196, 198-200, 203-205, 209-217,
220-229, 249, 251, 256, 261-262, 277, 279,
286-287, 289, 294, 308, 321, 328, 346, 358,
360-365, 368-369, 372, 383, 386-387,
392-394, 397-398, 402-404, 417-419,
421-422, 426, 439, 444, 468-469, 474
asset, 279, 294, 358, 368-369
business, 360, 365, 368-369
classification, 393
commercial, 43
definition of, 38
enterprise, 175
financial, 217, 228, 279, 308, 386
fire, 363, 386, 397, 402
in society, 40, 223, 262
insurance and, 228, 398
interest rate, 249, 251, 256, 261, 277
market, 102, 175, 222, 224-225, 228, 249, 251,
256, 261, 279, 286, 294, 308, 321, 358,
360-365, 368-369, 372, 383, 386-387,
392-393, 421-422, 426, 439
objective, 321, 346
personal, 184, 256, 262, 279, 397, 402-403, 417
political, 40, 228, 386-387
property, 43, 386, 397-398, 402, 417, 422
pure, 386, 403, 474
strategic, 175, 203
subjective, 204, 308
Risk management, 203, 421
benefits of, 203
Risks, 41, 49, 93, 102, 166, 171, 177, 182, 189, 208,
217, 219, 222-224, 227-228, 256, 289, 305,
364, 368, 372, 392-393, 418, 421, 466, 469,
471, 474
Rivalry, 41, 100
Robbery, 401-402
Role, 40, 175, 188, 250, 269, 299, 411, 414, 433, 437,
467, 472, 477, 491
Royalties, 155-156
S
Salaries, 69, 108, 358, 366, 368-369
Salary, 363, 368
Sales, 108, 129, 141, 237, 416, 428, 431, 446
Sales tax, 237
Sales taxes, 416
Samples, 238, 346, 352, 394, 466, 468
Sampling, 302
Sanctions, 39
Saving, 44, 262, 271-272, 276, 278-279, 360, 362,
401, 403, 422-423, 454, 469, 474
scope, 21, 461
SD, 211
SDR, 248-251, 256-257, 259-262, 264-265, 269-275,
281-282
SEA, 244, 276, 408, 413, 455
Securities, 274
Security, 44, 47, 153, 367
Selection, 175, 217, 228, 248, 303, 306, 331, 358,
368-369, 372, 456, 473, 481-482
Self-esteem, 315, 328
Self-insurance, 223, 228
Self-interest, 2, 49
Sellers, 54, 64-65, 93-94, 96, 106-108, 116-117
Sensitivity, 6, 12-13, 15, 47, 137, 160-161, 167, 171,
174, 181-182, 184-187, 198-201, 203,
262-263, 267, 270-271, 274-275, 286, 293,
322, 342, 349, 373, 394, 412, 420, 440, 451,
457, 461, 467, 485, 487, 489
Services, 18, 27, 78, 88, 94-95, 97-98, 103, 129-131,
134, 149, 151, 228, 251, 297, 303-304,
307-311, 318-320, 328-330, 332, 358, 362,
382, 384, 386, 397-399, 402-403, 407, 409,
428, 473, 478
attributes of, 386
defined, 78, 129
differentiation, 386
levels of, 130, 397-398
Shareholder, 256
Shareholders, 69, 276, 367, 475
shipping, 85, 134
Ships, 85, 134
Shrinkage, 298
SIMPLE, 13, 27-30, 32, 45, 59, 79, 138, 140-141, 153,
157-159, 163, 172, 178, 185, 197-201, 249,
251, 254, 275, 282, 296, 303, 305, 321, 336,
342, 362-364, 368-369, 372, 375, 439, 447,
451, 454, 461, 483, 489, 491-492
Single market, 279
SIR, 174
Size, 7, 30, 67, 74-76, 79, 114, 127, 131, 162,
175-176, 185, 193, 221, 225, 241, 243-244,
260, 290-291, 295, 298-299, 304, 320, 323,
352-353, 356, 368-370, 372-373, 386, 418,
430, 438, 452, 492
Skills, 8, 112, 295, 308, 311, 315, 321, 324, 364, 366,
384, 398
Slope, 25, 54, 57, 71, 73, 78, 89, 214, 218, 227,
252-255, 278, 319-320, 336-341, 345,
350-351, 353, 355, 370, 380, 385, 390, 412,
424
Small business, 21, 169
Smoke, 360, 363, 386
Social bottom line, 22
Social responsibility, 22, 26
Societies, 32, 41
Society, 2, 18, 22-23, 29, 31-32, 34-40, 45-47, 49-51,
55, 58, 60, 63-65, 67, 78, 83, 90, 92, 94, 96,
101, 104, 114-115, 129, 131, 162, 175, 186,
222-223, 229, 238, 248-249, 251, 254-259,
262, 265-266, 270-273, 277-278, 309-310,
327-328, 330, 360-362, 366, 368, 385, 396,
402, 427, 460, 475, 477-480, 483-484,
486-487, 490-491
summary, 47, 271
software, 188, 200, 352-354, 385
South Africa, 39
Specialized skills, 398
spreadsheets, 141, 163-164, 188, 200
Standard deviation, 115, 188, 191, 201, 262, 291, 296,
299, 353, 394, 458
Standard of living, 491
State government, 155, 163
statistics, 149, 168-169, 191, 200, 204, 298, 353, 364,
375, 386-387, 425
Status, 2-3, 7, 13-15, 19, 28-30, 37, 45, 49, 51, 138,
162, 182, 194, 279, 287-288, 302, 304, 307,
338, 341-342, 365, 368, 451-452, 461-467,
469, 473
Status quo, 2-3, 7, 13-15, 19, 28-30, 37, 45, 49, 51,
138, 162, 194, 287-288, 338, 341-342,
451-452, 461-463, 469
Steam, 159
Stock, 166, 222, 236, 267, 366-367, 491
Stockholders, 482
Strategies, 201
Strategy, 189, 201-202, 205, 295, 446, 461
combination, 189
focus, 446
Stress, 122, 440
Students, 16, 166, 169, 291, 452
Subgroups, 345, 484, 486
Subjective probability, 204
Subsidies, 18, 65-66, 78, 93, 98, 108, 218, 237, 332,
368, 427, 433-434
Substitution, 73-75, 78-79, 135, 150, 253, 318, 332,
416
Success, 192, 292, 373, 468
Sunk costs, 4, 19
Supply, 50, 59-62, 65, 67, 76-77, 82, 84-89, 95-98,
101, 103-108, 110-112, 114-117, 120,
123-125, 128, 131-133, 155, 170, 175, 208,
221, 225, 259, 265, 268, 294, 307, 312-317,
319-320, 332, 336, 340, 348-350, 357-358,
361, 373, 390, 412, 416-417, 420, 425, 432,
435-436, 441, 477
aggregate, 60, 67, 77, 155, 336, 358, 373
excess, 67, 82, 88, 96, 103, 115, 170, 294, 416,
425
inelastic, 77, 105-106, 435
of capital, 265
of labor, 104, 307, 416, 432, 436, 441
of money, 50
perfectly elastic, 77, 104, 120, 124-125, 294, 435
perfectly inelastic, 105
price elasticity of, 76, 115, 307, 340, 350
Supply and demand, 132, 294, 336, 340, 348, 412
Supply curve, 59-62, 76, 85-88, 95-96, 98, 104-106,
110-112, 115-116, 259, 313-317, 319-320,
332, 336, 348-349, 357-358, 361, 435, 477
aggregate, 60, 336, 358
individual, 59-60, 111, 116, 316-317
labor, 60, 104, 110-112, 115, 313-317, 319-320,
332, 336, 361
market, 60-62, 76, 85-88, 95-96, 98, 104-106,
111-112, 115-116, 259, 313, 315-317,
319-320, 332, 336, 348, 357-358, 361,
435, 477
movement along, 116
producer surplus and, 60
slope of, 320
Support, 15, 18-20, 25, 46, 66, 263, 286, 291-292,
297, 309-310, 418, 452
Support programs, 66, 309
Surplus, 41, 55-66, 69-71, 74-76, 78-79, 82, 85-94, 96,
98, 101-103, 105-117, 120-135, 149,
155-156, 175, 208-228, 234, 236, 240, 245,
294, 311-318, 332, 336-339, 341-342, 350,
355, 357, 359-360, 367, 369, 372, 375-381,
387, 390, 436, 475-476, 480-483
consumer, 55-58, 61-65, 70-71, 74-76, 78-79, 82,
85-90, 93-94, 98, 102-103, 105-107,
113-114, 120-122, 124, 126-127,
129-131, 134-135, 149, 155, 210,
225-226, 228, 234, 236, 240, 245, 336,
341-342, 350, 355, 359-360, 369, 372,
375-381, 387, 390, 476, 480-483
producer, 60-65, 70, 76, 78, 82, 85-91, 93, 96,
106-107, 111-112, 114-115, 120, 124,
130-131, 135, 149, 155-156, 312-313,
336, 367, 475, 482
total, 55, 59-62, 64-65, 75, 78, 87-88, 98, 101,
105-108, 111, 113, 116, 221, 223, 226,
236, 240, 367, 372, 375-380, 476
Survey methods, 30, 405
Survey questions, 392
surveys, 41, 43, 50, 79, 153, 169, 224, 232, 234, 239,
243, 272, 277, 294, 383, 409, 433, 466-467,
469
Sustainability, 22
Sweden, 468
Switzerland, 366
system, 19, 25, 31, 39, 82, 115, 128, 144-146, 151,
158, 161-163, 172-174, 176-177, 288,
294-297, 299, 308, 329, 399, 401-403, 420,
425, 429, 431-432, 446, 466, 483, 491
Systematic risk, 223
T
499

Tables, 145, 156, 163, 353, 391, 421, 433, 446, 451,
466, 469-470, 473-474
Tacit knowledge, 293
Tariff, 23, 428-430, 434, 445
Tariffs, 427-428, 432-434, 445
overview of, 432
Tax burden, 66-67, 82, 170, 277, 294, 318, 354, 391,
416
Tax cuts, 280
Tax rates, 78, 257, 262, 347
Tax refunds, 280
Tax revenues, 77, 96, 115, 127-128, 366, 442,
475-476
economy and, 128
Tax system, 115, 151, 425
Taxation, 58, 67, 115, 279-280, 339, 416
Taxes, 21, 23, 58, 64, 66-68, 70, 78, 93, 96, 108, 115,
125, 155-156, 218, 237, 249, 251, 254,
256-257, 259-264, 268, 277, 280, 292, 299,
311, 318, 322, 329, 349, 355, 360, 368,
416-417, 425, 427, 432-434, 441, 445,
476-477, 492
burden of, 115, 277, 416, 425
cigarette, 299
consumption, 23, 78, 125, 237, 249, 251, 254,
256-257, 259-264, 268, 277, 280, 292,
416, 434, 441
corporate, 155-156, 256, 259, 261, 263, 280, 292,
299
employment, 23, 318
estate, 433
excise, 58, 66-67, 349, 416, 477
income, 21, 67-68, 78, 256, 259, 261, 277, 280,
292, 299, 318, 329, 360, 416-417, 477,
492
pollution, 96, 425
property, 416-417
sales, 108, 237, 416
value-added, 441
taxonomy, 235
teams, 237
conflict in, 237
Technology, 25, 48, 95, 148, 192, 203, 410, 425
Telecommunications, 21
Telecommuting, 390
Teleconferencing, 390
telephone, 354, 383
Tenure, 372, 386, 427
Terminal value, 144, 156-158
Termination, 3
Terminology, 25, 233
The Economist, 153, 490, 492
Theft, 401-402
burglary, 401-402
robbery, 401-402
Threats, 479
Timing, 7, 137-138, 144, 146, 164, 411
Total cost, 64, 170, 374-379, 401, 403, 433, 452, 455
computing, 170
Total costs, 5-6, 33, 62, 78, 383, 391, 422, 476-477
Total disability, 398
Total market value, 434
Total revenue, 60-61, 409
Total surplus, 61
Tourism, 156
Trade, 2, 19, 41, 43, 45, 47, 169, 217, 227, 239, 249,
251, 254, 258, 265, 269, 272, 358, 360, 416,
422, 426, 427-428, 457, 461, 463-465, 468,
472-474, 476, 486-488, 492
deficit, 265
domestic, 265, 428
surplus, 41, 217, 227, 360, 476
Trade-offs, 2, 41, 45, 227, 251, 358, 360, 457
Traffic congestion, 47
Traffic flow, 404
Training, 3, 23, 26, 104, 137, 156, 158, 302-308,
310-311, 315, 318, 323-324, 327-333, 366,
391, 398, 401, 484
Training programs, 3, 26, 156, 158, 302, 307, 311,
331-333, 366, 401
effectiveness of, 333
Transactions, 234, 257, 318-319
consistent, 234
Transfers, 29, 31-32, 45, 65-66, 96, 112, 307, 336,
426, 477, 489
Transparency, 297, 461
Transportation, 6, 18, 24, 82, 89, 119, 128, 133,
135-136, 292, 299, 309-310, 316, 324, 384,
390-391, 397, 400, 403-404, 412, 421-423,
428, 430-431, 440, 445
costs, 6, 18, 24, 82, 89, 119, 128, 133, 135-136,
299, 309-310, 316, 324, 384, 390-391,
397, 400, 403-404, 421-423, 428,
430-431, 445
Transportation costs, 430-431
Treasury bills, 138
Treasury bonds, 262-263
Treasury Department, 23, 167
Trends, 21, 425
Triple bottom line, 22
TRIPS, 9, 132, 376, 380, 405, 407, 419, 423
Trucks, 6, 9, 63, 153-155
Trust, 169
U
Unemployed, 11, 20, 104, 108-112, 114-115, 130-131,
155, 222, 281, 303-307, 312, 318, 321, 336,
420, 438-439, 447
Unemployment, 20, 48, 109-110, 112, 118, 130, 133,
304, 306, 308-309, 321, 329, 436-438, 445,
447
alternative measures of, 110
costs of, 48, 109, 133, 321, 445
Unemployment insurance, 308
Unemployment rate, 109, 445
Unions, 361, 364, 368, 437
United Kingdom, 8, 137, 151, 153, 168, 407, 421, 423,
425
United Nations, 38, 209, 427, 446
United States, 26, 38-39, 47, 49, 64, 66, 94, 116-117,
137, 148, 150-151, 153, 155, 168, 204, 262,
264, 267, 270, 279-281, 292, 296, 318, 324,
331, 337, 392, 394, 397, 402, 415, 417-418,
421-425, 444, 469, 475, 482
Universities, 286
Unskilled labor, 434, 445
U.S, 5, 12, 16, 20-22, 26, 38, 47, 49, 65-66, 84, 128,
149-151, 167-170, 175, 181, 204, 262-264,
267, 273-274, 276, 278-283, 307, 324, 332,
338, 340, 356, 362, 364, 386, 391-394, 396,
398, 400-402, 406, 408-409, 412-415,
417-418, 421-423, 425-426, 429-431, 446,
469, 475, 482, 491
U.S., 5, 12, 16, 20-22, 26, 38, 47, 49, 65, 84, 128,
149-151, 167-170, 175, 181, 204, 262-264,
267, 273-274, 276, 278-283, 307, 324, 332,
338, 340, 356, 362, 364, 386, 391-394, 396,
398, 400-402, 406, 408-409, 412-415,
417-418, 421-423, 425-426, 429-431, 446,
469, 475, 482, 491
U.S. Department of Labor, 386
U.S. dollar, 446
U.S. economy, 168, 281, 356
U.S. Treasury bonds, 263
Utilities, 2, 37, 91, 211-212, 225, 243, 422, 450-451,
461, 464-468, 473, 480, 491
Utility, 2, 8, 36-37, 41, 49-50, 54, 71-79, 134-135,
147-148, 208, 210-213, 215, 220, 225-228,
233-234, 238, 240-242, 244-245, 251-252,
255, 257, 270, 273, 277-278, 282, 328, 346,
364, 370, 384, 387, 422, 440, 450, 461,
463-469, 472-474, 479-480, 483, 491
V
Validity, 37, 299, 302-306, 339, 343, 364, 426, 466,
473
Value, 2-6, 8-13, 15, 17, 19, 23-24, 30-31, 37, 40-44,
49-51, 57, 68, 71, 73, 76-78, 82, 84-85, 88,
97, 101, 103-104, 109-112, 114-115, 122,
125, 127, 130-133, 135, 137-146, 148-152,
154-161, 163-168, 170, 171-172, 174-178,
180-203, 205, 207-229, 231-245, 248-253,
256, 258-259, 261-263, 265-268, 270-272,
274-279, 281-282, 287, 289-290, 292-294,
299, 308, 310, 313-315, 318-325, 328-329,
332, 347, 349, 351-353, 357-358, 360-362,
364-370, 372-376, 379-380, 383-386,
390-397, 401, 403-417, 419-424, 426,
427-432, 434, 437, 440-444, 450, 455, 457,
461, 463-464, 468-469, 472-474, 480-482,
484, 488-489, 491
building, 8, 10-11, 24, 166-168, 210, 212, 215, 237,
426, 432
defined, 49, 57, 77-78, 148, 152, 165, 227, 238,
240, 429, 463
market value, 154, 158, 367, 369, 429, 431, 434,
440
Value added, 365
value of information, 171, 191, 193-194, 199, 205
Value pricing, 423
Value-added, 441
Variability, 213-214
Variable costs, 62, 78, 91, 104
Variables, 10, 189, 191, 199-201, 205, 228, 299, 339,
344-349, 351-352, 355-356, 358, 365,
368-370, 372-374, 381, 386-387, 392-393,
412, 419, 457-459, 467
Variance, 182, 188, 191, 193, 200, 211, 215, 223, 227,
291, 347, 352-353, 356, 404-405
Violence, 296
virus, 182, 189, 203, 205
Vision, 283, 466
Volume, 174, 331, 337, 411, 447
W
Wages, 19, 43, 63, 67, 69, 115, 154, 189, 319, 321,
358, 360-361, 364-365, 368, 372-373, 384,
387, 398, 420, 437-440, 447
college degree and, 368
differences in, 368
efficiency, 43, 63, 67, 69
equilibrium, 63, 115, 372-373, 437-438
minimum, 63, 361, 437
nominal, 154, 358
real, 67, 154
War, 175
Warranties, 94
Warrants, 479
Water, 11, 39, 50, 79, 95, 159, 172, 174, 178, 210-211,
234, 243-244, 278, 280-281, 292, 299, 365,
367, 375, 383, 390-391, 408-412, 419,
423-426, 492
Water resources, 243-244, 423-426
Weaknesses, 332
Wealth, 32, 34, 36-37, 41, 46, 50-51, 227, 234-235,
243, 258, 386, 477, 482, 486, 491
Wealth of Nations, 386
Weather conditions, 368, 412
Web, 168, 292, 298, 421
Web site, 168, 421
Welfare programs, 302, 313, 331, 478
Welfare reform, 21
West Virginia, 485
Women, 295, 307, 323, 345, 362
Won, 48
Work, 2, 11, 20, 22, 26, 31, 36, 45, 49-50, 67, 74, 84,
94, 100, 109-111, 114-115, 151-152, 166,
171, 180, 182-183, 189, 292, 295, 303-304,
307-320, 324, 327-328, 331-333, 360-361,
366, 384, 386, 395, 397-398, 401, 416-417,
420, 429, 436, 438, 440, 447, 460, 478,
484-485, 487
Workers, 19-20, 63, 93, 104, 109-112, 114-115, 130,
155, 189, 204, 304, 307, 317-321, 323,
363-365, 372, 375, 384, 386-387, 393, 398,
416, 436-440, 445, 447
skilled, 307, 436-437, 439, 445
unskilled, 321, 436-440, 445
workforce, 45, 109, 320-322, 438-439
workplace, 365, 393, 398, 400, 422
World, 10, 20, 41, 48-50, 66, 71, 115, 157, 171-172,
175-176, 217, 223, 227, 234, 278, 280-281,
292, 366, 414, 421, 423, 426, 427-432, 434,
441, 444, 446-447
World Bank, 421, 423, 427, 441, 444, 447
World economy, 280-281
World Wide Web, 292
WWW, 47, 117, 149, 168-169, 280, 282-283, 298, 400,
422, 424, 426, 473, 491
Y
Yen, 298
500

