
COUNTERTERRORISM
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Consumer Culture, Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Dating and Sexuality in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Forest Conservation Policy, V. Alaric Sample and Anthony S. Cheng
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick and Robert H.
Blank
U.S. Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Work and Family in America, Leslie F. Stebbins
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


COUNTERTERRORISM
A Reference Handbook
Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England

Copyright 2004 by Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Steven, Graeme C.S.
Counterterrorism : a reference handbook / Graeme C. S. Steven and
Rohan Gunaratna.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issue)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-666-3 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN 1-85109-671-X (e-Book)
1. Terrorism — Prevention. 2. Terrorism — Prevention — Government
policy. I Gunaratna, Rohan, 1961– II. Title. III. Series.
HV6-31.S744 2004
363.32—dc22
2004009632
08
07
06
05
04
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit abc-
clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

To those faceless men and women
fighting terrorist groups


COUNTERTERRORISM
A Reference Handbook


Contents
Preface, xiii
Acknowledgements, xxiii
1
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global
Context, 1
The Terrorist Threat Today,  2
Definition of Terrorism, 4
The Types and Causes of Terrorism, 8
Motivations for Joining or Supporting a Terrorist
Group, 13
Theories of Psychology, 14
Recruitment Techniques, 19
Common Motives for Wanting to Leave a Terrorist
Group, 24
Factors Inhibiting or Deterring Disengagement, 26
Applying These Findings to Counterterrorism, 28
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism, 32
Terrorist Organization and Infrastructure, 41
Terrorist Training and Weaponry, 42
Terrorist Tactics and Targets, 63
Terrorist Financing, 84
Notes, 97
References, 97
2
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and
Solutions, 99
Moral and Legal Issues, 99
Models for a Counterterrorism Response, 100
Counterterrorism Measures, 102
Political Measures, 102
Punitive Measures, 104
xi

Judicial Measures, 105
The Military, 107
Intelligence Agencies, 111
Movement Restriction, 113
The Police, 114
Counterpropaganda, 115
The Media, 116
Problems of Transnational Response, 120
Response, 122
Countering Terrorist Activities, 123
Problems of Response, 127
Conclusion, 129
References, 133
3
Chronology, 135
4
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and
Organizations, 147
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders, 149
Countering the Leadership, 183 
Profiles of Counterterrorism Leaders, 186
Group Profiles, 188
References, 207
5
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy, 209
6
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and
Organizations, 217
Government Agencies, 217
International Government Agencies, 239
Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs), 245
Intergovernmental Organizations, 247
7
Print and Nonprint Resources, 253
Print, 253
Nonprint, 257
Appendix: List of Abbreviations, 261
Index, 263
About the Authors, 293
xii
Contents

Preface
A
fter Al Qaeda attacked America’s most iconic landmarks on
9/11, a state of perpetual conflict between the Islamists and
the West has arisen, where Al Qaeda and its associates peri-
odically strike targets of the United States, its allies, and its
friends. Although the pre-9/11 Al Qaeda group conducted an av-
erage of one attack every two years, the post-9/11 Al Qaeda move-
ment—Al Qaeda and its associated groups—mount an average of
one attack every three months.
To compensate for the loss of its state-of-the-art training and
operational infrastructure in Afghanistan, Al Qaeda is seeking to
establish new bases in Yemen, Mindanao in the Philippines,
Kashmir, the Pankishi Valley in Georgia, Chechnya, and Iraq.
Like bees that disperse when its hive is attacked, Al Qaeda orga-
nizers, operatives, financiers, and other experts have dispersed
from Afghanistan and Pakistan to lawless zones of Asia, the Horn
of Africa (the easternmost projection of Africa, including
Somalia), the Middle East, and the Caucusus, increasing the
threshold of worldwide terrorism. Dependent on the ability of the
United States to manage the deteriorating situation in Iraq and
the willingness of Muslim governments to cooperate with the
West, the dispersed threat could either escalate or de-escalate.
The security environment became more complicated with
the unilateral U.S. intervention in Iraq, a watershed event that has
not in any way reduced the threat of terrorism. In contrast to the
highly successful U.S.-led global coalition response that gravely
weakened Al Qaeda after 9/11, U.S. intervention in Iraq has facil-
itated the growth of existing and emergence of new Islamist polit-
ical parties and terrorist groups in the Muslim world. The
resurgence of the Taliban, Hezb-e-Islami, and Al Qaeda in
xiii

Afghanistan and the post-invasion alliance between secular
Saddam loyalist Tawhid Wal Jihad and Al Ansar Al Islami, an Al
Qaeda associate group in Iraq, spells continued violence in 2004.
The momentum of attacks in Iraq has created an operational
tempo for terrorist activities worldwide.
With the steadfast growth of Muslim public anger and rage
against the United States, its allies, and friends, Islamist groups in
Iraq and beyond are now able to exercise greater influence among
the Muslim communities. An American Muslim remarked: “Bin
Laden brought down two towers, but George Bush destroyed two
countries.” Like sharks in search of new opportunities, Al Qaeda
and its associate groups are aggressively harnessing the resent-
ment among the Muslims living in the West and in their home
countries.
As the memory of 9/11 recedes, the West is likely to witness
another mass casualty attack on Western soil. Such targets are
numerous, and hence all of them cannot be protected and so will
remain the most vulnerable to attack. The November 2003 double
suicide attacks in Turkey, the bridge from the Middle East to
Europe, is a grim reminder that terrorists can strike amidst secu-
rity measures. Especially after Turkey, Al Qaeda’s hallmark of tar-
geting picture-postcard or emblematic targets in the West is
becoming more likely. As terrorists determined to survive and
succeed adapt to the post-9/11 security environment, they are
likely to identify the loopholes and gaps in Western security
architecture and breach its security and countermeasures. The fre-
quency of attacks in the Middle East, Asia, Horn of Africa, and the
Caucusus will continue, but for greater impact they are likely to
kill, maim, and injure more people. For effect, the terrorists will
continue to attack economic, religious, and population targets
using the tactic of coordinated simultaneous suicide operations.
The sustained global action against Al Qaeda will further force
the mother group to the background, thereby empowering its
associates to the fore and making it more difficult for intelligence
and enforcement agencies to monitor and respond to a numeri-
cally larger number of Islamist groups.
U.S. intervention in Iraq has increased the threshold of ter-
rorism worldwide and weakened the resolve of Muslim leaders,
their governments, and publics to fight terrorism. Despite the
pledges, the failure of the international community to provide
more grants and aid to Afghanistan and Pakistan ensures the sup-
port for extremist ideologies and the survival of Al Qaeda leader-
xiv
Preface

ship. Furthermore, Iran is likely to develop into a safe zone for Al
Qaeda unless the West strengthens the hand of the moderates
over the hardliners in Tehran.
Following are some likely future developments: 
•
Unprecedented security, intelligence, and law
enforcement cooperation; heightened public vigilance;
and aggressive hunting of Al Qaeda and associated
cells has made it difficult for terrorists to mount
another 9/11 scale attack on U.S. soil. Although
terrorist capabilities to attack North America, Western
Europe, and Australasia have suffered, the terrorist
intention to mount an attack on Western soil has not
diminished. The attack in Madrid on March 11, 2004,
demonstrated that Al Qaeda and its associated cells are
likely to continue mass casuality attacks on Western soil
in the coming years.
•
The bulk of the terrorist attacks will be conducted by
Islamist terrorist groups from Asia, the Middle East, the
Horn of Africa, and the Caucusus. Most of the attacks
will be conducted in Muslim countries but against
high-profile, symbolic, and strategic targets of the
United States, its allies, and its friends. Furthermore,
due to the hardening of American targets (similar to
Israeli targets after Munich 1972), the threat shifted to
allies and friends of the United States. Germans and
French were the targets in Tunisia, Westerners—
especially Australians—in Bali, eleven French naval
technicians in Karachi, the Italians in Iraq, and the
British in Turkey.
•
The threat has shifted to “soft” targets—unprotected or
poorly defended targets. Due to government hardening
of military and diplomatic targets, the terrorist attacks
will shift to economic (tourism, hotels, banks) and
religious (Christian, Jewish, Hindu) targets and
population centers. Almost all the attacks will be
suicide vehicle bombings, an Al Qaeda hallmark. The
vast majority of the attacks will result in mass
casualties, including deaths of Muslims. Nonetheless,
the Islamist groups will find sufficient support to
continue the fight against the United States, its allies,
and its friends.
Preface
xv

•
Al Qaeda has been gravely weakened. The vast number
of attacks will be conducted not by Al Qaeda but by
associated Islamist groups. As demonstrated in Turkey,
Morocco, Chechnya, Pakistan, Tunisia, Algeria, the
Philippines, Jordan, Iraq, and Indonesia, groups
trained, armed, financed, and ideologized by Al Qaeda
are able to mount attacks as lethal as Al Qaeda. Six
groups—Al Ansar Al Islami in Iraq, Salafi Group for
Call and Combat in Algeria, Tawhid Wal Jihad, Hezb-e-
Islami, Islamic Movement of the Taliban, and Jemmah
Islamiyah in Southeast Asia—will likely conduct Al
Qaeda–style attacks. Due to the sustained U.S.-led
coalition action against Al Qaeda, the group will be
able to conduct fewer attacks but will remain in the
background inspiring, instigating, and coordinating
attacks by its associated groups.
In addition to these significant functional and regional terror-
ist trends and patterns, terrorist groups are increasingly express-
ing an interest to acquire, use, and develop dual technologies. In
the hands of a terrorist, certain civilian technologies with military
applications can enhance terrorist performance. Just as 9/11 sui-
cide hijackers adapted commercial infrastructure as missiles, Al
Qaeda members are sighting agricultural farms in search of fertil-
izer to develop bombs, pharmacies and chemist stores to acquire
material to build bombs in garages and kitchens, and hospital and
industrial complexes to smuggle out radiological devices.
The recovery of the manufacturing apparatus with ricin
traces but not the ricin itself in the United Kingdom in 2003 sug-
gests that Al Qaeda and its associated groups have begun to
move down the road of chemical, biological, and radiological
(CBR) weapons. In 2002, an Al Qaeda Tunisian member attacked
a Jewish synagogue in Djerba, the oldest in North Africa, using a
liquid petroleum gas (LPG) vehicle. He killed fourteen Germans,
three Frenchman, and five Tunisians. The recovery of three dozen
terrorist manuals from Afghanistan and other theaters with for-
mulae to manufacture chemical and biological agents and radio-
logical dispersal devices is indicative of several hundred
members with such specialist capabilities. As the Al Qaeda move-
ment continues to recruit from a cross-section of society (rich,
poor, educated, and less educated), it will gain access to special-
ist technologies. Although conventional terrorist attacks (using
xvi
Preface

guns and bombs) will remain the most common, the likelihood of
terrorists using dual technologies, particularly CBR agents, is
increasing.
The threat of hijacking of aviation and maritime transporta-
tion to strike human and infrastructure remains significant. As a
proven technique, Al Qaeda and its associated groups have tested
and attempted several times—even after 9/11—to hijack aircraft
with the intention of attacking ground and maritime targets. A
weakness in the transportation chain in a target or a neighboring
country is likely to pave the way for success. Despite terrorist fail-
ures to destroy commercial airliners in Iraq in 2003 and Kenya in
2002 and a U.S. fighter plane in Saudi Arabia in 2001, the threat
continues. With the failure of operational agencies to disrupt the
Al Qaeda–linked fleet of merchant ships, where lethal cargo can
be transported relatively easily, the future threat posed by sur-
face-to-air missiles (SAMs) remains significant. With the diffi-
culty of hijacking aviation, even a nonsuicide conventional
hijacking, terrorists are likely to invest in attacking aviation tar-
gets when airborne or while grounded with other stand-off
weapons—rocket-propelled grenade launchers (RPGs) and light
anti-tank weapons (LAWs). As aerial and ground targets harden,
the vulnerability of the maritime domain to infiltration and strike
has increased. A vessel could be used not only to transport lethal
cargo but also as a bomb to attack a port city. Investing in vigilant
vessel profiling is the key to identifying and searching high-risk
ships before they reach a port.
Regions of Concern
With sustained U.S.-led coalition action in Afghanistan since
October 2001, the threat posed by Al Qaeda has globalized. Al
Qaeda organizers of attacks, financiers, operatives, and other
experts now operate with associated groups from lawless as well
as hospitable zones in the Middle East, Asia, and the Horn of
Africa. Even so, Al Qaeda and its associated members are con-
centrated in four regions of the world: Iraq and its border regions,
Yemen and the Horn of Africa, the Pakistan-Afghanistan border,
and the Indonesian and Philippine archipelagos.
•
The Islamist ideologues have declared Iraq as a new
land of jihad (holy war). In time the scale and intensity
Preface
xvii

of the fighting in Iraq will increase due to the
unimpeded flow of mujahedin (Islamic guerrilla
fighters) through Iran, Syria, and Saudi Arabia;
collaboration between foreign mujahedin and Saddam
loyalists; increased support from angry Muslims
worldwide; and tacit and active sanctuary and covert
support from Iraq’s neighbors to the Iraqi fighters.
Unless Western and Muslim governments invest more
resources and men, the situation in Iraq will deteriorate
even further. Like Afghanistan during the Soviet
occupation, Iraq is emerging as the new land of jihad
for the politicized and radicalized Muslims worldwide.
Although the bulk of the foreign mujahedin at present
are from the Levant (including Syria), with time,
Muslim youth from North Africa, the Horn of Africa,
the Persian Gulf, and the Caucusus, cradle and convert
European Muslims, and Asian Muslims are likely to
enter Iraq. As much as Afghanistan produced the
current generation of mujahedin, the next generation of
mujahedin is likely to be produced in Iraq.
•
Al Qaeda has developed significant infrastructure in
the Horn of Africa, including Somalia, and is using that
region as a base to launch operations both in the
Persian Gulf and in Africa. Several hundred Al Qaeda
members in Yemen (only 35 percent of the country is
under government control) are moving back and forth
to East Africa to develop the horn as a theater for
sanctuary. In the coming years, East African Islamist
groups influenced by Al Qaeda will increasingly
participate in international terrorism. Subsaharan
Africa, with incompetent and corrupt governments,
remains the Achilles heel of the Western security and
intelligence agencies.
•
Afghanistan was a terrorist Disneyland after Soviet
withdrawal from February 1989 until U.S. intervention
in October 2001. As a result of international neglect, Al
Qaeda, Taliban, and other Islamist groups trained
several tens of thousands of mujahedin in Afghanistan.
Although nearly six hundred Al Qaeda members who
fled Afghanistan and its associate members in Pakistan
have been arrested, the reservoir of trained mujahedin
is huge and is largely located along the Afghanistan-
xviii
Preface

Pakistan border. As President Musharraf of Pakistan
continues to target Al Qaeda and Taliban members,
Pakistani support for Islamism and opposition to
Musharraf are growing. To prevent a future Islamic
government coming to power, sustained western
assistance to Musharraf, improved Pakistan-
Afghanistan relations, and an international resolution
of the Indo-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir are essential
at this stage. As Al Hezb-e-Islami, the Taliban, and Al
Qaeda seek to develop Pakistan’s northwest frontier
province as a staging pad to conduct operations into
Afghanistan (a repetition of the anti-Soviet Afghan
mujahedin model), Pakistan remains the most pivotal
state in the fight against terrorism.
•
With the United States becoming Iran’s immediate
neighbor overnight, the hardliners in Tehran advocate
support for anti-U.S. insurgency in Iraq. Due to
sustained U.S.-led coalition action in Afghanistan, the
bulk of the Al Qaeda leaders and members moved to
two countries—Iran and Pakistan—in late 2001 and
early 2002. An estimated five hundred Al Qaeda
members, led by Saif Al Adil and Saad bin Laden, are
located in Iran. Although the Iranian moderates call for
tougher action against Al Qaeda, the hardliners with
previous training ties to Al Qaeda wish to repeat the
success of the Lebanese Hezbollah’s coordinated
suicide attack of October 1983, which killed 241
American and 58 French soldiers and forced the Multi-
National Force (MNF) to withdraw from the Middle
East. As the West has failed to engage Iran, the duality
of Iran’s response to Al Qaeda is likely to continue. The
United States identifying Iran as “evil” will help neither
the West nor the Muslim moderates in Iran.
Al Qaeda: From a Group to a Movement
To survive and to be relevant, Al Qaeda has transformed through
three phases, and it is still changing.
After the Soviets decided to withdraw from Afghanistan, Al
Qaeda Al Sulbah (The Solid Base) began as a group to support
Preface
xix

local jihad movements fighting for suppressed and oppressed
Muslims. By providing finance, weapons, and trainers, the group
played or attempted to play critical roles in the lands of jihad—
Algeria, Tajikistan, Bosnia, Chechnya, Mindanao, Kashmir, and
Egypt, among others. In the first phase, they assisted associated
groups or directly targeted opposing governments mostly in
Muslim countries.
In the second phase, largely due to the close cooperation
with the Egyptian groups—the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and the
Islamic Group of Egypt—Al Qaeda developed its own capability
to mount operations—against U.S. troops in Yemen in December
1992 and Somalia in 1993, at the World Trade Center in New York
in February 1993, on eleven U.S. airliners over the Pacific, on U.S.
President Bill Clinton and other Oplan Bojinka targets in
1994–1995, on Western targets in Saudi Arabia beginning in the
mid-1990s, at U.S. embassies in East Africa in August 1998, on the
USS Cole in October 2000, and most infamously, through the
attacks of September 11, 2001.
Due to post-9/11 security measures in Western countries, Al
Qaeda and its associated groups have not been able to strike
again on Western soil; in response they have targeted Western
(including Israeli and Jewish) sites and people in Muslim coun-
tries or Muslim regions. This third phase has borne witness to
attacks—mostly car bombings—in a Balinese tourist area and at
the Jakarta Marriot in Indonesia, of an Israeli hotel and aircraft in
Mombasa in Kenya, of the oldest Jewish synagogue in Djerba in
Tunisia, at Jewish and other targets in Casablanca in Morocco,
and at a variety of Western targets in Saudi Arabia, Turkey,
Pakistan, Chechnya, and Iraq.
In the third phase, the bulk of the post-9/11 attacks were not
staged by Al Qaeda but by its associated groups. As they lacked
the expertise of Al Qaeda, the bulk of their attacks produced more
Muslim casualties than non-Muslims. As a result of the loss of
training and rehearsing bases in Afghanistan and the intense net-
working with its associate groups, Al Qaeda has morphed from a
group into a movement. Having successfully performed its van-
guard operational role by attacking America’s icons, a hunted Al
Qaeda is investing in an ideological role, mostly through the
Internet. Although the Western governments are largely investing
their resources to fight Al Qaeda, the center of gravity has shifted
beyond Al Qaeda into its associated groups, posing varying
scales of threat in different regions.
xx
Preface

Preface
xxi
Conclusion
The fight against Al Qaeda and its associated groups, spear-
headed by the United States, has met with partial successes and
failures. Although declaring war on Iraq was an errant overreac-
tion to 9/11, to withdraw now would be fatal. Indeed, the present
deadlines for troop withdrawal from Iraq and Afghanistan are
unrealistic. Like the Soviets in Afghanistan in a war-fighting role
or NATO in Bosnia in a peacekeeping role, the Western powers
and their Muslim partners must remain engaged in these two the-
aters.
The effectiveness of the fight against Al Qaeda and its asso-
ciated groups is strictly dependent on the long-term cooperation
and coordination to share intelligence and conduct operations
against terrorist groups and suppress their support bases. To suc-
ceed, it is paramount that the United States maintain a robust
antiterrorism coalition, particularly the support of the Middle
Eastern and Asian Muslim governments. By resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute and by investing in public diplomacy (as
opposed to government-to-government relations), the United
States can seek to change its image from an aggressor to a friend
in the Muslim world.


Acknowledgments
F
irst thanks must go to Mrs. Mim Vasan for her editorial help
with the book. Thanks also must go to Tore Bjorgo,  Magnus
Ranstorp, and Oscar Becerra for their opinions and assistance.
I would particularly like to thank Neill Martin, John Allison, Paul
Wilkinson, and especially John Horgan for being such inspira-
tions and for all their help and encouragement over the years.
Final thanks must go to my family: Maggie, Pam, Bob, Brian, and
Callum, without whose support this book would have never been
possible.
—Graeme C. S. Steven
I wish to thank Barry Desker, Institute of Defence and
Strategic Studies, Singapore; Bruce Hoffman of RAND,
Washington Office; Scott Campbell, Maritime Intelligence Group,
Washington D.C.; Andrew Coburn, RMS, London; Andy Clarke,
CBS, London; Boaz Ganor, International Policy Institute for
Counter Terrorism Policy, Israel; Russ Howard, Combating
Terrorism Centre, West Point; Nikkos Passas, Northeastern
University, Boston; Jesse Finklestein, IDDS intern from Watson
Institute for International Studies, Brown University; and Ian
Rosenberger, IDSS intern from Cornell University, for their stead-
fast support. I wish to express my appreciation to production edi-
tors Gina Zondorak and Laura Stine, acquisitions editor Mim
Vasan, and copyeditor Michelle Asakawa. For their steadfast
affection, I want to thank my wife Anne, our sons Kevin and
Ryan, my parents, my brother Keith, my sister Malkanthi, and her
husband Shanthikumar. 
Arabinda Acharya, International Centre for Political Violence
xxiii

and Terrorism Studies, Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies,
Singapore, worked as my principal research assistant. 
—Rohan Gunaratna
Both authors wish to thank the many people who cannot be
named for security reasons for their cooperation and assistance.
xxiv
Acknowledgments

1
Terrorism and
Counterterrorism in the
Global Context
”We owe it to all those whose bravery protects us
to enjoy the freedom they secure for us.”
Sir John Stevens, head of the London
Metropolitan Police Force, U.K.
I
n order to “counter” something, one must first understand the
nature, essence, and dynamics of what it is that is trying to be
countered. Therefore, before discussing or examining counter-
terrorism, one must first be familiar with the phenomenon of ter-
rorism. Furthermore, before defining what terrorism is and
examining it more closely, it is useful to note what it is not, and to
dispel some common myths or misconceptions about terrorism,
as noted by Stohl (Kegley 2003): 
•
Political terrorism is exclusively a nongovernmental
activity
•
All terrorists are insane, psychopaths, or suffering from
mental illness
•
All terrorists are criminals
•
One man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter
•
All insurgent violence is political terrorism
•
A terrorist’s purpose is to cause chaos
1

•
Governments always oppose nongovernmental
terrorism
•
Political terrorism is exclusively a problem relating to
internal conditions
•
Contemporary terrorism is caused by the evil actions of
one or two major actors
•
Terrorism is a futile strategy 
The Terrorist Threat Today
The face of terrorism is changing rapidly. It has emerged as the
single biggest security threat to both governments and societies
today. Governments should be using every tool of statecraft—in-
telligence, law enforcement, military, political, diplomatic, eco-
nomic, and financial means—to combat and reduce the threat of
terrorism. Terrorism has replaced the threat of nuclear confronta-
tion, the predominant threat during the Cold War.
Al Qaeda’s coordinated multiple suicide airborne attacks
aimed at destroying three outstanding U.S. landmark targets—
the World Trade Center in New York City, the Pentagon, and
Congress—on September 11, 2001, demonstrated the escalating
terrorist threat posed to civilian and military infrastructure.
Conducted by nineteen suicide hijackers, the attacks killed
about 3,100 citizens from seventy-eight countries. According to
Bruce Hoffman of RAND, only fourteen terrorist attacks killed
more than one hundred people in the twentieth century; until
9/11, the terrorist attack that killed the largest number of civil-
ians was in Abadan, Iran, when 440 people were killed in 1978;
total U.S. fatalities during three decades of international and do-
mestic terrorism were under three thousand. With 9/11, the
worst terrorist attack ever, the threshold for terrorism world-
wide increased. Terrorism has moved from a tactical to a strate-
gic threat, prompting governments to invest unprecedented re-
sources both in preempting terrorist attacks and in managing
mass casualty attacks.
Since the Cold War, most major terrorist groups have devel-
oped a presence outside their immediate theaters of conflict, often
cooperating and coordinating their actions. With the exchange of
2
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

ideas, technologies, and personnel, the terrorist intentions, capa-
bility, and opportunities for attack have increased dramatically.
Moreover, conflict conditions create the milieu for the spawning
and growth of terrorist groups. Now two-thirds of the countries
of the world are affected by political violence. As of 2002, there
were twenty-three high-intensity conflicts (where more than one
thousand people die per conflict per year), seventy-nine low-in-
tensity conflicts (where between one hundred and one thousand
people die per conflict per year), and thirty-eight violent political
conflicts (where fewer than one hundred people die per conflict
per year). At the turn of the millenium, according to Dr. Albert J.
Jongman of the Interdisciplinary Research Programme on Causes
of Human Rights Violations in the Netherlands, there were 612
politically motivated groups, mostly with guerrilla and terrorist
capabilities, active in 140 conflicts. Nonetheless, only about forty
organizations have developed an external reach and pose a threat
to international security.
The geographic region most affected by terrorist violence is
the Asia-Pacific region. In scale of violence, South Asia is fol-
lowed by Southeast Asia, Oceania, and Northeast Asia. Within
this region, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, Indonesia,
and the Philippines are experiencing high-intensity conflicts;
Myanmar, Bangladesh, and Nepal are witnessing low-intensity
conflicts. The Asia-Pacific region is closely followed by sub-Saha-
ran Africa, with the Horn of Africa and Southern Africa following
Central Africa. In particular, Angola, Burundi, Chad, Congo,
Guinea, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, and Sudan are experi-
encing high-intensity conflicts. Cameroon, Central African Re-
public, Brazzaville Congo, DR Congo, Ethiopia, the Ivory Coast,
Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania,
and Uganda are experiencing low-intensity conflicts. In Latin
America, Colombia has been witnessing the most violent conflict,
with Peru, Mexico, and Guatemala witnessing low-intensity con-
flicts. In the Middle East, Algeria and the Israeli-Palestinian con-
flicts produce the highest fatalities and casualties. Iraq, Iran, and
Lebanon are witnessing low-intensity conflicts. In the former So-
viet Union, the Caucasus is home to high-intensity conflict, no-
tably the conflict in Chechnya; this is followed by low-intensity
conflicts in Central Asia. Until 9/11, North America and Europe
had the lowest fatalities and casualties.
The Terrorist Threat Today
3

Definition of Terrorism
Terrorism is a unique form of political violence, a political cam-
paign backed by threats and acts of violence. It must be system-
atic and deliberate; it seeks to influence a wide audience by gen-
erating fear. Primarily it targets civilians to gain political control
of the public. Other forms of political violence include attacks
against infrastructure (sabotage), against political leaders (assas-
sination), against military (guerrilla warfare), and genocide (eth-
nic cleansing). Although attacks against civilians (so-called soft
targets) are the most common in the initial wave of terrorist op-
erations, subsequently terrorist groups develop the capability to
attack security forces (hard targets). Today, about 45 percent of all
attacks staged by terrorist groups are against security forces per-
sonnel. The tactical repertoire of contemporary terrorist groups
includes forms of political violence other than terrorism. For in-
stance, the National Liberation Army (ELN) sabotaged gas and
oil pipelines in Colombia; Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA)
assassinated moderate politicians in Spain; the Free Aceh Move-
ment (GAM) conducts guerrilla warfare against Indonesian secu-
rity forces; and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Tigers (LTTE) have
ethnically cleansed Sri Lanka’s northern province of Muslims.
Terrorism differs from common crime. Terrorism is driven
predominantly by a political motive (ideological, ethnic, reli-
gious); crime is predominantly driven by an economic motive.
With the decline of state sponsorship, terrorist groups resort to
crime to build their capacities and capabilities; but the line blurs
between terrorism and organized crime as groups learn increas-
ingly from each other and adopt each other’s tactics. The Revolu-
tionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) extorts money from
foreign companies in Colombia; the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) kid-
naps foreigners in the Philippines; the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan traffics narcotics; the Revolutionary United Force of
Sierra Leone (RUF) smuggles diamonds; the Armed Islamic
Group of Algeria (GIA) steals cars; and Al Qaeda engages in credit
card fraud. Contemporary terrorist groups traverse along the po-
litical violence-criminality nexus. In summary, terrorist groups are
armed political parties. Strategically, their goal is always political;
operationally, they build support and infrastructure; tactically,
they build military power, accumulate economic wealth, and gain
political strength. Terrorist groups have also learned the benefits
of spreading their support, training, procurement, and financing
4
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

operations internationally so as to make it difficult, if not impossi-
ble, for their governments to disrupt them.
There are two forms of terrorism: Domestic terrorism—also
called national terrorism—refers to acts of terrorism committed
within the territorial borders of a country and involving citizens
and interests only of that country. International terrorism refers to
acts of terrorism involving citizens or the territory of more than
one country.
Almost all major terrorist groups have developed an external
presence during the post–Cold War period. By building robust
external support networks, even domestic terrorist groups have
developed an international dimension. Therefore, the distinction
made during the Cold War between domestic and international
terrorism is of lesser relevance today, especially toward under-
standing and responding to the threat of terrorism.
Four databases collect information worldwide about domes-
tic and international terrorist incidents: RAND, the International
Centre for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at the Insti-
tute of Defence and Strategic Studies in Singapore, the UN Ter-
rorism Prevention Branch, and the Centre for the Study of Terror-
ism and Political Violence (CSTPV) at the University of St.
Andrews in Scotland. The vast majority of terrorist incidents are
domestic, but they are largely unreported in the international
press, especially if they occur in the Southern Hemisphere. Inci-
dents of international terrorism constitute about 8–12 percent of
all incidents of terrorism. Most government agencies and private
research institutions collect data about only a few domestic or re-
gional terrorist campaigns. Traditionally, RAND, the U.S. State
Department, and a few other government agencies collected data
on international terrorism. The overall terrorist threat is skewed
because most analysts map terrorist trends and patterns by ex-
amining only incidents of international terrorism. The decade
preceding 9/11 witnessed a steady decline in the incidents of in-
ternational terrorism, largely due to international cooperation.
However, the overall incidents of terrorism increased due to an
increase in domestic terrorism. The overall increase in terrorist in-
cidents is attributed to the numerical increase and the intensity of
intrastate conflicts.
The U.S. State Department defines terrorism as “premedi-
tated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncom-
batant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents, usu-
ally intended to influence an audience.” Here, “noncombatant”
Definition of Terrorism
5

includes, in addition to civilians, military personnel who at the
time of the incident are unarmed or not on duty.
The U.S. State Department also considers acts of terrorism to
be “attacks on military installations or on armed military person-
nel when a state of military hostilities does not exist at the site,
such as bombings against U.S. military bases both at home and
overseas.”
The U.S. Justice Department defines terrorism as “the un-
lawful use of force and violence against persons or property to in-
timidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any
segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives.”
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), an agency of the
Justice Department, describes terrorism either as domestic or in-
ternational, depending on the origin, base, and the objectives of
the terrorists: Domestic terrorism is the unlawful use, or threatened
use, of force or violence by a group or individual based and op-
erating entirely within the United States or its territories, without
foreign direction, committed against persons or property to in-
timidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any
segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives. In-
ternational terrorism involves violent acts or acts dangerous to
human life that are a violation of the criminal laws of the United
States or any state, or that would be a criminal violation if com-
mitted with the jurisdiction of the United States or any state.
These acts appear to be intended to intimidate or coerce a civilian
population, influence the policy of a government by intimidation
or coercion, or affect the conduct of a government by assassina-
tion or kidnapping. International terrorist acts occur outside the
United States or transcend national boundaries in terms of the
means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appear
intended to coerce or intimidate, or the locale in which the per-
petrators operate or seek asylum.
The U.S. Defense Department defines terrorism as the un-
lawful use of—or threatened use of—force or violence against in-
dividuals or property to coerce or intimidate governments or so-
cieties. It is often used to achieve political, religious, or ideological
objectives.
In the U.K. Terrorism Act 2000, terrorism means the use or
threat of action that is designed to influence the government or to
intimidate the public or a section of the public within or outside
of the United Kingdom. Terrorism is also the use or threat of ac-
6
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

tion for the purpose of advancing a political, religious, or ideo-
logical cause. Terrorism involves serious violence against a per-
son or serious damage to property; endangers a person’s life,
other than that of the person committing the action; creates a se-
rious risk to the health or safety of the public or a section of the
public; or is designed seriously to interfere with or seriously to
disrupt an electronic system.
Instead of defining terrorism, twelve UN conventions crimi-
nalize a set of specific threats and actions as terrorist. They are in
the areas of internationally protected persons, safety of aviation,
safety of maritime navigation, safety of fixed platforms at sea,
hostage-taking, protection of nuclear material, manufacturing ex-
plosives, bombings, and financing. The post-9/11 policy-working
group on terrorism delineated the broad characteristics of the phe-
nomenon of terrorism as an act meant to inflict dramatic and
deadly injury on civilians and to create an atmosphere of fear, gen-
erally for a political or ideological (secular or religious) purpose.
The world body is under significant pressure to adopt a universal
definition of terrorism.
There are over one hundred definitions of terrorism. As no
one definition has gained universal acceptance, we propose a
working definition of terrorism: Terrorism is the threat or the act of
politically motivated violence directed primarily against civilians.
Some supporters of the Palestinian, Kashmiri, and Kurdish
struggles have argued that they are legitimate campaigns and that
Palestinian, Kashmiri, and Kurdish actions against civilians are
not terrorist. They have also argued that when a campaign is le-
gitimate, the fighters are “freedom fighters,” not terrorists. In our
view, whether a campaign is legitimate or not, deliberate attacks
against civilians to achieve a political goal are terrorist. Killing un-
armed combatants, including women and children, is not an act
worthy of a freedom fighter. Irrespective of legitimacy, perpetra-
tor, location, and time of the attack, terrorism is a method.
What has hampered international counterterrorism efforts
for so long is that both agencies and countries have defined ter-
rorism to suit their budgets or interests. A basic starting point for
world leaders should be a working definition based on the unac-
ceptability of directly or indirectly targeting or affecting civilians
in order to further one’s aims or cause. This should be the start-
ing point, as it is hard to imagine heads of state who would pub-
licly advocate such targeting of civilians.
Definition of Terrorism
7

The Types and Causes of Terrorism
Terrorist groups develop ideologies or belief systems to advance
their aims and objectives. Secular and religious ideologies are de-
signed to politicize, radicalize, and mobilize the actual and po-
tential followers of terrorist groups. Terrorist groups seek to ad-
vance their objectives by conducting a terrorist campaign within
an ideological framework. Although aims differ according to the
ideological orientations of each group, their objectives are to gain
recognition at local, national, and international levels; intimidate
and coerce both the target population and the government; and
provoke the government to overreact so as to generate greater
public support. Three principal strands have generated the ideo-
logical fuel required to spawn and sustain terrorist campaigns
around the world.
Ideological Terrorism
Marxism, Leninism, and Maoism provide the ideological fuel for
left-wing terrorist groups to advance their aims and objectives.
They seek to overthrow existing regimes and establish commu-
nist and socialist states. Most of the groups driven by left-wing
ideologies—the Communist Combatant Cells (CCC) of Belgium,
the Red Army Faction (RAF) of Germany, the Red Brigades (RB)
of Italy, Action Direct (AD) of France—disintegrated at the end of
the Cold War and ended with the death of the Soviet empire. A
few left-wing groups survived in the poorer regions of the world.
They include FARC in Colombia, the Tupac Amaru Revolution-
ary Movement (MRTA) in Latin America, the Sendero Luminoso
(Shining Path) in Latin America, the New Peoples Army (NPA) in
the Philippines, and the Peoples War Group (PWG) in Andhara
Pradesh, India. Of these groups, FARC, the Nepal Maoists, and
the NPA pose a severe national security threat to Colombia,
Nepal, and the Philippines. The left-wing groups still active in
Europe are the Revolutionary Organization 17 November and
Revolutionary Nuclei, both of Greece, and the Revolutionary
People’s Liberation Party (DHKP-C) in Turkey.
Groups driven by right-wing ideologies include the Ku Klux
Klan, Aryan Nations (Church of Christian Aryan Nations, Church
of Jesus Christ Christian), the Aryan Liberation Front, the Aryan
Brotherhood, the Arizona Patriots, the American Nazi Party (Na-
tional Socialist Party, United Racist Front), and the United Self-
8
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC). A right-wing group bombed
the Alfred P. Murray Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April
19, 1995. Overall, groups driven by right-wing ideologies pose a
low threat compared to other categories of terrorism. In contrast
to the left-wing groups, the bulk of the right-wing groups are lo-
cated in North America and in Western Europe. Most right-wing
groups are neo-Nazi, neofascist, anti-Semitic, and racist groups
dominated by skinheads, attacking immigrants and refugees,
mostly of Asian and Middle Eastern origin.
Ethnonationalist Terrorism
The first wave of ethnonationalist campaigns was by national lib-
eration movements directed against colonial rulers. They in-
cluded the Irgun and Lehi opposing the British rule in Palestine
in the 1940s and French rule in Algeria in the 1950s. Contempo-
rary groups driven by ethnonationalism can be divided into three
subcategories—groups fighting for autonomy, for unification, or
for reunification (irredentism). The Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, the
Jammu and Kashmiri Liberation Front (JKLF), and the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam are fighting for independence from Israel,
India, and Sri Lanka, respectively, and are motivated by Palestin-
ian, Kashmiri, and Tamil nationalism. Two other groups, Conti-
nuity and the Real IRA, are fighting for unification or reunifica-
tion with the Republic of Ireland. The PKK is fighting for
linguistic and cultural autonomy for the Kurds in southeastern
Turkey. In comparison to other categories, ethnonationalist con-
flicts produce the largest number of fatalities and casualties, in-
ternally displaced persons and refugee flows, and the biggest
human rights violations. Groups that have adopted virulent eth-
nonationalist ideologies pose a significant threat to their oppos-
ing ethnic communities and governments.
Politico-Religious Terrorism
Groups driven by religiosity include those from the Christian,
Jewish, Sikh, Hindu, Buddhist, and Islamic faiths. They include
the Army of God in the United States; Kach and Kahne Chai of Is-
rael; Babbar Khalsa International of Punjab, India; Aum Shin-
rikyo (recently renamed Aleph) of Japan; the Islamic Resistance
Movement (Hamas); the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ); and the
Armed Islamic Group of Algeria. Aum, an apocalyptic group,
The Types and Causes of Terrorism
9

aimed to take over Japan and then the world until its leader Soko
Asahara was arrested after a deadly sarin attack in the Tokyo
subway in 1995. In contrast to other Islamist groups campaigning
within their territories, Al Qaeda and Lebanese Hezbollah (to a
lesser extent) have a global or a universalistic Islamic agenda. To
justify violence, politically motivated religious leaders propagate
corrupt versions of religious texts, often misinterpreting and mis-
representing the great religions.
Of the religious category of groups, Islamists, or groups mo-
tivated by radical Islamic ideology, are predominantly the most
violent. This is mainly because most religious terrorists often be-
lieve they are supported by God, or they draw support from reli-
gion. Groups often use religious clerics to interpret religion to the
aims of the group, justifying the leadership and causing anyone
who questions the leadership or group to appear as “apostates”
or “unbelievers,” those who would question God and not carry
out his bidding. Two pivotal events in 1979—the Islamic Revolu-
tion in Iran and the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan—led to the
increase in the number of groups driven by Islamism. By holding
on to U.S. hostages for 444 days, the Islamic Republic of Iran in
1979 defied the United States. The anti-Soviet multinational
Afghan mujahedin defeated the Soviet Army in 1979, after which
the Islamists turned their energies toward building a capability to
defeat the remaining superpower—the United States—along
with its allies and its friends in the Muslim world. With martyr-
dom becoming widespread and popular among Islamist groups
throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the scale of violence unleashed
by Islamist groups has surpassed that of secular ethnonationalist
and left-wing and right-wing groups. For instance, the Palestin-
ian Liberation Organization (PLO), Popular Front for the Libera-
tion of Palestine, and Abu Nidal Organization killed far fewer
people than their Islamist counterparts—Hamas and PIJ.
Other Categories
Terrorist campaigns are also driven by ideologies that lack mass
appeal and therefore are not very common. These can include
state-sponsored, anarchist, and single-issue terrorism. Because
terrorism is a “low cost–high impact” form of violence, states
wishing to advance their foreign policy goals have supported ter-
rorist groups to attack their inimical states. Due to sanctions im-
posed by the international community against states that sponsor
10
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

terrorist groups, this clandestine surrogate form of warfare has
declined throughout the 1990s and into the twenty-first century.
Although the U.S. government has accused a range of countries
of supporting terrorism, there is no evidence that North Korea,
Iraq, Sudan, Libya, or Cuba sponsor terrorism today, though in
the 1990s, Sudan and Libya were active sponsors of terrorism.
Iran, Syria, and Lebanon continue to support terrorism, albeit in
reduced scale. The U.S. list of countries can be seen as “politically
colored,” as it does not include a dozen other countries that clan-
destinely support foreign terrorist groups.
Single-issue terrorist groups include violent animal rights
and anti-abortion groups that seek to change a specific policy or
practice rather than the political system. Anarchist terrorists seek
to overthrow established governments by a wave of bombings
and assassinations. State response to anti-globalization move-
ments will determine whether we are likely to witness the emer-
gence of terrorist groups espousing the cause of anti-globaliza-
tion, although there are already fears in intelligence communities
that anti-globalization groups have been networking with terror-
ist groups with similar beliefs.
Some of the groups have overlapping ideologies. The ethno-
nationalist PKK has a strong Marxist-Leninist orientation; the
original ideological disposition of the LTTE was Marxist-Leninist;
Hamas and PIJ are religious but have a strong nationalist dimen-
sion; and Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is ethnonationalist but has a
strong religious dimension. In order to survive, the ideologies of
groups tend to shift with the changes in the political environ-
ment. Groups driven by left-wing ideologies operating in North
America and in Western Europe declined in strength and size at
the end of the Cold War. The post–Cold War period witnessed a
resurgence of ethnicity and religiosity. As a result, groups driven
by ethnicity and religion now account for about 70–80 percent of
all terrorist groups. Furthermore, the ethnonationalist and reli-
gious groups have the greatest staying power. Unlike left-wing or
right-wing conflicts, ethnonationalist and religious conflicts are
protracted.
Although the different types of terrorism allude, to some de-
gree, to the motivation or causes of such activities, one must be
careful not to solely consider the ideological factors driving the
group. A group might be primarily motivated by religious rea-
sons, but that is not to say that it is not affected by external factors
or that its members did not join for other reasons, as we shall see
The Types and Causes of Terrorism
11

in the section on why people join and support terrorist groups.
Although the FARC in Colombia is ostensibly an ideological
group, it has realized the wealth and improved standard of living
that can be accrued from illegal activities such as drug trafficking.
Thus, if one tried to counter such a group solely on the basis of its
ideological issues, then one would be highly unlikely to resolve
the situation. One must also take into account external factors
that may affect the drive to undertake in such violent activities. It
is also important to treat each case individually. These points be-
come particularly important in a counterterrorism context and
are apparent when one realizes, for example, that measures used
to counter or resolve one type of terrorism in one country would
not necessarily work on the same type of terrorism in another
country. Thus, for instance, you would not expect to respond to
ideological violence in Italy in the same way as ideological vio-
lence in Africa, because not only would the ideologies probably
differ, but the context would be different. Certain factors that con-
tribute to the drive to undertake or partake in such action would
be present in one example but not in the other. To further illus-
trate this one might consider that in developing world countries,
environmental factors such as the availability of food, water, and
resources may affect the motivation of certain groups, and that
membership in a group might mean that through pillaging,
members can acquire such resources that they would not be able
to obtain as individuals.
The causes of political violence and terrorism should not be
viewed in isolation but in relation to five major sectors: military
security, political security, economic security, societal security,
and environmental security.
Generally speaking, military security concerns the two-
level interplay of the armed offensive and defensive
capabilities of states, and states’ perceptions of each
other’s intentions. Political security concerns the orga-
nizational stability of states, systems of government
and the ideologies that give them legitimacy. Economic
security concerns access to the resources, finance and
markets necessary to sustain acceptable levels of wel-
fare and state power. Societal security concerns the sus-
tainability, within acceptable conditions for evolution,
of traditional patterns of language, culture and reli-
gious and national identity and custom. Environmental
security concerns the maintenance of the local and the
12
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

planetary biosphere as the essential support system on
which all other human enterprises depend. These five
sectors do not operate in isolation from each other.
Each defines a focal point within the security prob-
lematic, and a way of ordering priorities, but all are
woven together in a strong web of linkages. (Buzan
1991, 19–20)
It is important to respond to the problem of terrorism based on
the type of terrorism, to recognize external factors, and to treat
each case individually rather than to use broad generalizations.
One must realize that many groups use ideology as a front, or
façade, in attempts to either cover or legitimize their activities to
their supporters. Thus because a group is a certain type of group
(e.g., ideological), it does not mean to say that the group is actu-
ally driven by that ideology, or that it was ideology alone that
caused all of its members to join. If we understand more about the
causal factors that drive the group to act—and about the individ-
uals who join the group that undertakes such actions, as well as
the environment/context in which they operate—we can better
understand how to respond, resolve, and counter such terrorism.
Motivations for Joining or Supporting a
Terrorist Group
Since 9/11, much speculation has taken place over the role of re-
ligion in terrorism. This is another example of focusing on the
type of group, and not taking into account any other factors. Reli-
gion can and often does play a significant part, but it is impera-
tive to recognize the roles and degrees of influence of other fac-
tors involved and not focus solely on one aspect, such as religion,
to the exclusion of the others, as doing so will ultimately lead to
misunderstanding. When looking at factors that motivate entry,
and that encourage or deter exit, one must remember that just be-
cause a group or individual is religious, for example, it does not
mean that other factors cannot cause members to join or leave.
For instance, there were rumors of a case a few years ago of one
of the regional chiefs of Al Qaeda who left the group citing eco-
nomic factors, as he found out that his opposite number in an-
other region was getting paid more than he was! Also, when look-
ing at suicide missions and “martyrdom,” there is the example of
Motivations for Joining or Supporting a Terrorist Group
13

the LTTE, which effects suicide missions based not on religion
and the belief of automatic access to heaven, but on indoctrina-
tion. Members are indoctrinated with the belief of becoming a
martyr/legend/hero, doing something to be remembered by, and
making others proud. Promises of their family being paid and
supported (so they won’t need to worry about food, money, etc.)
if the individual undertakes the suicide mission further increases
the motivation to do so.
Although the factors that affect the aspects involved with
entry to and exit from terrorist groups can vary depending on re-
gion, culture, and type of group (whether ethnic, ideological, re-
ligious/cult), the following brief and general summary of the
most common themes provides a basic working knowledge of the
factors involved.
Theories of Psychology
Are Terrorists Mad or Irrational?
Let’s look briefly at what psychologists suggest: psychopathology
theory claims the notion that terrorists are mad or psychopaths
(suffering from a psychopathological disorder), and thus are irra-
tional actors. Proponents of this line of thought do not take issue
with the suggestion that terrorists reason logically. However, they
argue that political terrorists are driven to commit acts of violence
as a consequence of psychological forces. Jerrold Post (Origins of
Terrorism, 1996) suggests that they have a special psycho-logic
that is constructed to rationalize acts they are psychologically
compelled to commit, and that “individuals are drawn to the path
of terrorism in order to commit acts of violence, and their special
psycho-logic, which is grounded in their psychology and re-
flected in their rhetoric, becomes the justification for their violent
acts.”
The question is whether this theory can be applied to all ter-
rorists. This theory is possibly more relevant when looking at
low-level thugs, such as some of the paramilitaries, who have
perhaps been bullied and have insecurities that might drive
them to get involved in such activities. There are interesting par-
allels with studies conducted by the FBI’s behavioral science
unit (Douglas et. al 1997) in Quantico on serious criminals such
as rapists and in other studies of people who become involved
in paramilitary activities, serious crime (rape, murder, etc.), and
14
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

the more “thuggish” elements of organized crime, in their moti-
vations and backgrounds. Many, bullied while young, devel-
oped “them and us” syndromes, feeling that the world is against
them; they felt insecure and so developed macho or “bad” rep-
utations in order to ward off potential aggressors. Such senti-
ments often motivate such people to train obsessively, some-
times take steroids, turn into bullies, and feel secure in a group
with a “dangerous” reputation. Although this theory may help
explain some of the thuggish elements in an organization, it can-
not be applied to the whole organization. One must bear in
mind the sophistication of many terrorist groups. Many such
groups have research and development wings, for example. The
LTTE actually developed stealth boats and was in the process of
building mini-submarines for its maritime division, the Sea
Tigers. Many groups also have legal wings investigating inter-
national and domestic legal loopholes, as well as operating very
astute political fronts. Therefore, if all terrorists were mad or
suffered from psychopathological disorders, such organizations
would not be so successful at evading capture, continuing to op-
erate, or achieving some of their aims. Although there may be
elements of these factors or symptoms involved in the motiva-
tion to become a terrorist, they often vary in their extent. For
these reasons it is often better to take a “case-by-case” approach
rather than generalize.
Are Terrorists Rational? 
The basis of Rational Choice Theory is the notion that the decision
to both become a terrorist and commit terrorist acts is influenced
by factors in the environment, and that the actor is a rational one
who responds and reacts to these environmental factors. This the-
ory opposes the common misconception that “all terrorists are
mad” and looks at external as well as internal factors in trying to
understand and explain such behavior. Many psychologists, such
as Taylor, Horgan, and Silke, for example, have conducted inter-
views with terrorists and found them to appear rational and “nor-
mal,” with no signs or histories of psychopathological disorders.
One must be aware of the dangers of generalizing on such
topics. There is no “one size fits all” theory, and the motivating
factors can depend on thespecific case study; indeed, the best ex-
planation is often a kind of “pick-n-mix” combination of a num-
ber of different factors.
Theories of Psychology
15

As it would be wrong to fully discount the theory that all ter-
rorists are mad, it would be equally wrong to state that all terror-
ists are rational; there will always be counterexamples to every
example put forward. There will always be some mad terrorists,
and there will always be some rational terrorists; it is not a ques-
tion of either/or, but a question of discerning where the bound-
aries lie.
Due to the parallels of terrorism with racist and right-wing
youth groups in Europe over entry and exit, as found by Bjorgo
(1997), we shall apply his framework and findings to the case of
the terrorist in the following sections.
Reasons for Joining Terrorist Groups
Many people join terrorist groups in their youth, and indeed it is
in the interests of groups to “get them when they’re young,” as
that is when they are most impressionable and most vulnerable to
group manipulation and indoctrination. Some are also likely to
join in an act of adolescent rebellion, making it easier for the
group to take them physically, as opposed to resorting to coer-
cion. In terms of manipulation and indoctrination, an interesting
example is that of the Tamil Tigers (LTTE), which as part of its
youth recruit training regularly shows Rambo videos in between
weapons training. Such a technique reinforces the idea of invinci-
bility and machismo by exploiting adolescent feelings. Although
most recruits are youths, it would be wrong to say that adults are
not recruited. As is true with adolescents, adults often can be ma-
nipulated through propaganda and by exploiting any vulnerabil-
ities they may have.
One common factor that motivates people to join or support
a group is belief in the cause of the group—sympathy with the
aims, ideology, religion, or politics of the group. Factors that can
affect the degree of members’ “sympathy” with the cause can be
formed by the whole socialization process—their upbringing, ed-
ucation, friends, family, community, what they see on TV, and so
on. The belief that the political process has failed and that the
only way to achieve the end goal is to support or use terrorism,
and the belief that by employing terrorism (as opposed to demo-
cratic means) it is feasible to achieve the end goal, can also drive
someone to support or join terrorist groups.
Terrorist propaganda often purports that the community has
been wronged or deprived and that community members are the
16
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

victims of unprovoked and unjustified attacks or efforts from an
oppressive “bullying” opponent. Provocation and anger can mo-
tivate people to support or join terrorist groups. A feeling of
hopelessness (and the sense that terrorist groups are “bullied un-
derdogs” of “David and Goliath” proportions) can drive people
to join. Revenge is another powerful motivation; it is often trig-
gered when security forces or another group harms individuals,
their loved ones, or property. Often the most committed members
of terrorist groups are those who have been directly affected by
political violence, often by a state or a state-sponsored group.
Those who have suffered the loss of family members and friends,
their schools or their homes, become the most committed because
they have direct and tangible personal justifications as opposed
to an ideological cause. They are likely to have a personal vendetta
or battle with what they perceive as “the enemy.” Joining or sup-
porting a terrorist group is often perceived as the only avenue for
extracting revenge.
Although conscription is not widespread (and is often high-
lighted and exaggerated by governments for propaganda pur-
poses), terrorist groups also coerce some recruits to join or sup-
port them. In Colombia and some African countries there are
accounts of terrorist and paramilitary groups raiding villages and
kidnapping children, recruiting them, and inducing terror to en-
sure villager support. In an atmosphere of fear and uncertainty, a
potential recruit can be threatened by a terrorist group to join or
support a group, and indeed have no real choice. Such recruits
harbor the belief that joining or supporting a terrorist group
would facilitate protection of his or her family from the terrorist
threat. Likewise, if a family member has been taken away to join
the group, the group will often blackmail the remaining family,
threatening to kill the taken family member if demands are not
met. In places such as Northern Ireland many individuals join ter-
rorist or paramilitary groups for protection from opposing
groups. If individuals have been bullied or feel threatened by
gangs or criminals, even though there may not be any real threat,
they may also be driven to join groups for protection.
Terrorist groups often use propaganda to legitimize their
cause, and to display their members as freedom fighters and
charismatic folk heroes standing up for what they believe, unde-
terred by the vast odds against them, and taking on the full might
of the “enemy” with no regard for their personal safety. This
propaganda is also designed to attract potential recruits who
Theories of Psychology
17

might have a boring or mundane life with no sense of purpose,
those who feel like a “nobody.” Such people often perceive the
opportunity of joining such a group as an opportunity for be-
coming a mythical hero, martyr, or living legend, with a life of ex-
citement and action. A common theme among adolescents is that
they often strive to be taken seriously as adults. Groups such as
the FARC exploit this by approaching such youths and treating
them seriously—showing them respect that perhaps others do
not. FARC recruiters will befriend the youth and then get
him/her to go with them, ostensibly to see if they would like to
join the group, although few, if any, get the choice of not joining.
They are then taken into the jungle and continually moved
around so that it is physically impossible for them to return
home. Once these new members have acquired the necessary jun-
gle survival and navigational skills that would aid them in re-
turning home, other techniques are employed to ensure they do
not leave the group (threats to families, involvement in killings,
guilt, criminal implications).
Some individuals join or support a terrorist group for social
recognition or social acceptance. Clark (Terrorism, 1983) found
when investigating ETA that in the Basque region of Spain,
mixed-parentage children (those not “pure Basque”) are reviled,
and that only 8 percent are of mixed Basque-Spanish origin.
When Clark investigated the background membership of ETA he
found that over 40 percent of the terrorist group were from such
mixed-parentage families, thus suggesting that they were trying
to show that they were so Basque that they would go to the ex-
tremes of fighting for Basque independence; in other words, they
were attempting to “out-Basque the Basques” (Reich 1996, 29).
Many members of terrorist groups join because they are attracted
by romantic fantasies of a secretive “James Bond” lifestyle or are
excited by prospects of receiving illegal weapons training; others
are attracted by the tribalism of being part of a group with its own
distinctive uniforms, fear-inducing symbols, and so on. Psychol-
ogists (e.g., Douglas and Olshaker 1997) have documented nu-
merous terrorist group members who were drawn to positions of
authority, dominance, and control.
Some individuals join terrorist groups for economic reasons,
much as one might choose a career due to its perceived benefits.
Because contemporary terrorist groups engage in organized
crime—from trading in diamonds to trafficking in narcotics to
human smuggling and credit-card fraud—to fund their existence
18
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

and operations, joining a terrorist group can be lucrative. In con-
flict zones, areas affected by drought, and areas with little or no
prospects for its residents, the opportunities for livelihood are
often limited, and there may be no alternatives or better prospects
than to join and stick with a terrorist group. The phenomenon of
“war economies,” where groups receive more money than they
ever would if there were no war, compound this problem, for if a
“war economy” exists, not only are people more likely to join, but
they are equally unlikely to leave. For example, groups such as
the Tamil Tigers or FARC may be receiving so much funding that
if their political demands (e.g., of independence) were achieved
there may be no jobs or income to revert to; thus it is a more pros-
perous and stable option to continue the war economy.
Some scholars believe that people join terrorist groups be-
cause they have failed to achieve their political goal by political
means; that in their minds the use of violence is justified because
there is no other path available. This is simply not true. By turn-
ing straight to terrorism, it can be argued, one saves a lot of time
and effort because it is easier to present a cause by terrorist, rather
than democratic, means; to organize and achieve a political party
and aim, one needs significant resources (finances, personnel,
etc.) as well as sophisticated organizational skills to run the party
and mobilize public support through various events, and delicate
handling and courting of the media.
Unlike most democratic political parties that tolerate dissent,
many terrorist groups are totalitarian movements led by dicta-
tors. The internal and external political environments of members
are often controlled with no or limited access to the outside
world. Events are interpreted through the group’s viewpoint
until its members share certain values and beliefs. Singularly and
collectively, members believe that they can accomplish the aims,
objectives, and goals of the terrorist group. We now turn our at-
tention to understanding what happens when a person joins a
terrorist group.
Recruitment Techniques 
Theorists have long argued that poverty, lack of education, and
unemployment produce terrorist recruits and supporters. How-
ever, Osama bin Laden comes from the richest nonroyal Saudi
family, and his principal strategist, Dr. Ayman Al Zawahiri, is
Recruitment Techniques
19

from one of the most educated families in Egypt. Although those
who live in poverty, are unemployed, or underemployed are most
vulnerable to ideological indoctrination, it also generates recruits
and supporters for terrorism in developed countries, as well as
among wealthy and educated classes. However, because the so-
cioeconomic and political conditions in Asia, Africa, the Middle
East, Latin America, and the former USSR are conducive to the in-
culcation of terrorist ideologies, the bulk of the terrorist groups
are located in the poorer regions of the world. Both territorial and
migrant communities harboring actual and perceived grievances
and aspirations provide significant political, economic, and mili-
tary support for terrorist groups. However, causal factors of ter-
rorism can be very diverse, as they often depend on various,
sometimes interrelated, factors—individual circumstances, exter-
nal environments, psychology, upbringing, and so on. It is neces-
sary to consider how groups recruit members and the often very
sophisticated manipulative process that groups utilize.
In a situation where unemployment was over 50 percent,
medical supplies and food staples were scarce, and much of the
population had no education, the Armed Islamic Group of Algeria
(GIA) operated through mosques by giving food, medical hand-
outs, and offering accommodations. This gave the GIA a very
credible humanitarian dimension to attract potential recruits and
legitimize its cause. Keeping in mind that both the Sharia and
Qur’an prescribe the notion of Muslim brotherhood—that it is
wrong not to equally share resources among Muslims—and that
there was, or at least was perceived to be, in Algeria a corrupt gov-
ernment seen by the populace as benefiting from the oil industry
while the the greater population suffered (it has been estimated
that the entire wealth of Algeria’s 28 million residents is in the
hands of only about 5,000 people), one begins to understand how
religion was manipulated to play an important part in driving
people to join terrorist groups as well as justifying their actions.
Protracted socioeconomic and political conflicts create the
conditions for the spawning and sustenance of virulent ideolo-
gies. Through propaganda (word of mouth, sermons and lectures,
leaflets and booklets, print media, radio, TV, and the Internet),
terrorist ideologues indoctrinate members, supporters, sympa-
thizers, and potential recruits. Those indoctrinated join, collabo-
rate, support, or sympathize with terrorist goals, aims, and objec-
tives. Sustained terrorist indoctrination can construct new
grievances (insecurity) or exacerbate existing grievances (educa-
20
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

tion, employment opportunities, cultural rights, land settlement
and colonization, regional autonomy). Similarly, through height-
ened propaganda, the aspirations of an affected community can
be elevated.
Indoctrination is particularly important in long-term opera-
tions, suicide operations, or where a terrorist becomes a “sleeper
agent”—residing in the target country for a number of years, liv-
ing a normal life, and waiting to be activated as and when the
group wishes. This is particularly relevant in the case of 9/11,
when many observers wondered how the terrorists could sustain
their beliefs for so long in the target country. The answer is
clearly this: If a terrorist from an impoverished background
comes to, for example, the United States as a sleeper agent and
sees the luxury Americans live in compared to his or her family
and friends at home, his or her commitment to the cause and sui-
cide mission will often be reinforced. Prior long-term indoctrina-
tion in terrorist training camps also keeps these types of agents
focused on their missions. An interesting parallel is the Cold
War, whereby the Soviet intelligence agencies let only their most
committed ideological spies and agents come to the West for
long-term assignments to ensure they wouldn’t be swayed by
life in the target country. The same principle exists with terrorist
groups, whereby only the most committed (and indoctrinated)
are allowed to undertake such assignments.
The processes and uses of indoctrination not only help ex-
plain motivations to join but also explain the transition to ex-
tremism or suicide bombing—where extreme indoctrination,
propaganda, and interpretation of external events through the
group viewpoint occurs, often because the individuals are re-
moved from reality. Instead of the idea that it is a madman or fa-
natic who gets recruited and then executes a suicide mission, we
now see that the more likely scenario is that of a rational person
who goes through the recruitment process (including manipula-
tion and indoctrination) of the group and ends up with a mind-
set that allows him (or her) to conduct such acts. A famous ex-
ample is that of Zacarias Moussaoui, who was recruited by Al
Qaeda at a time when he was very vulnerable: living in a foreign
country, with nowhere to stay, no job, no friends, and little money.
The extent of indoctrination was such that he later wasn’t recog-
nized by his brother, who remembered him as a “kind, caring,
moderate person,” not someone with extreme religious beliefs
who had the urge to “fight for and with his Muslim brothers.”
Recruitment Techniques
21

Moussaoui is now in U.S. federal custody pending trial on alle-
gations that he was to have been the twentieth active Al Qaeda
terrorist in the 9/11 attacks.
A particular danger for youths in the early recruitment stages
is that they may focus so much on becoming a part of the group
that they miss what it is they are actually getting into, what life
will be like, what the consequences may be. The escalation of vi-
olence is often gradual; it takes time before members reach the ex-
tremes of murder. Some may exit because they have realized that
things have “gone too far,” but more junior members may not do
so because they are gradually sucked in. The real danger, though,
is that by this stage it is perhaps too late, and there are no credi-
ble exit opportunities available as they may already be stigma-
tized or involved in crime. It is this notion of “no return” that is
so important: 
Becoming socialised into a new community, with a
world-view and value system completely at odds with
mainstream society, and building bonds of loyalty to
the new “family,” represents one fundamental process
individuals go through when they join such a group,
and occurs in tandem with the severing of ties to nor-
mal society, and often, society, family, [and] friends
burn the bridges behind them. (Jamieson 1989)
Research shows that once inside a group, many find they are
not instantly accepted into the “secret circle,”1 core, or clandes-
tine activities, and are involved in overt activities to weed out
those who are committed from those who are not (Bjorgo 1997).
Although many get bored and leave, others who are curious
about the inner circles, crave acceptance, or desire to prove them-
selves push for this inner circle. This is the beginning of a process
designed to invoke absolute loyalty and “burn all other
bridges”—when regular or full-time members openly mistrust
irregular or part-time members. Because part-timers have al-
ready risked social isolation, this treatment by group members
often makes them want to prove themselves and pushes them
further into the group. Many go through processes of inclusion
and socialization into a new reclusive and stigmatized commu-
nity, having ties severed to the normal community outside
(Bjorgo 1997). As the dual processes of inclusion and socializa-
tion occur, it becomes harder to leave the group the further and
longer they continue. Usually it takes time—and a long and
22
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

gradual process of “bridge-burning”—for recruits to become full
members, or “regulars.” Terrorist groups use different methods.
Based in northern Ireland, the Provisional Irish Republican
Army (PIRA) does not pay members unless they have been cho-
sen to become full-time. The small allowance that is sometimes
given to other members is so little that many are forced to divide
their time between PIRA activities and earning more money to
live, leaving little spare time for external relations that might
conflict with the group’s interest. “Full-time” members may be
expected to regularly move around the country to various
“posts,” thus minimizing the development of external social re-
lations.
To summarize, when one becomes a member of a terrorist
group, one experiences a new identity, isolation, stigmatization,
criminality, and a sense of purpose. The process and shared expe-
riences of the group can build up a collective psychology—a pas-
sive or indirect form of indoctrination or brainwashing. One
PIRA member noted: “We confirmed each other’s opinions all the
time as we lived in our own closed world, marginalized and iso-
lated from others” (Jamieson 1989).
If there is no community of supporters or the group has to re-
cruit externally, usually the group will first pick out vulnerable
targets (youths or those who are “down on their luck” or de-
pressed), as they are vulnerable to approaches and thus easy to
manipulate. In the case of religious groups, people who are more
ideologically committed are also targets, as they are easy to ma-
nipulate through clerics interpreting religion to the aims of the
group. The techniques used to manipulate can include blackmail,
propaganda, promises of both tangible rewards for self and/or
family (cash, food, medicine), and intangible rewards (becoming
a martyr and going to heaven).
Once the targets have been approached, their commitment is
tested. The techniques employed are that of intensive testing
through a rigorous selection process (requiring that they show up
for 5 A.M. prayers, or complete a training camp, etc.). Another
technique used is, for want of a better term, a boring process (such
as handing out flyers for hours) to test a recruit’s commitment.
There is no immediate weapons training or access to secrets be-
cause the recruitment process is designed to weed out undesir-
ables—fantasists or “loose cannons” who are easier for the au-
thorities to notice/catch, as well as those who are unpredictable
and undisciplined.
Recruitment Techniques
23

Those who complete each stage of the recruitment process
and remain are socialized into a new community in an isolated
and often stigmatized group that binds them together. Through-
out the process, individuals are indoctrinated and adopt the
group’s values, perspective, views, style, and behavior. They also
adopt the group’s enemies (opposing/rival groups or state secu-
rity forces). A further test of commitment is participation in ille-
gal activities or in violent confrontations wherein recruits be-
come criminals; the group’s knowledge of this is a threat against
individuals if they decide to leave or betray the group (Bjorgo
1997).
Bjorgo noticed these processes and identified the important
aspect he described as “bridge burning”—cutting ties to “nor-
mal” society. He noted that the process of burning bridges is often
inherent in the recruitment process: recruits are expected to go
where they are told, when they are told, and are instructed that
their ultimate loyalty must be to the group and to the cause. As
this occurs, they become dependent on the group (they have no
other friends outside, and thus no conflicting loyalties).
It is not only the “cause” or religion that is solely important.
One must take into account environmental, as well as social and
psychological, factors, along with the methods that groups use to
attract and recruit potential members. It is often pointless trying
to explain the mindset of terrorists without knowing about their
backgrounds, previous situations, and how the group recruits or
operates.
Often, the reality of life as a terrorist is very different from the
image or motivating factor that caused the individual to join in
the first place. The factors that drive individuals to join a group
can also become the factors that make them want to leave, if
membership of the group ceases to satisfy or fulfill that need that
caused them to join in the first place.
Common Motives for Wanting to Leave a
Terrorist Group
Bjorgo (1997) suggests that factors encouraging exit can be di-
vided into push factors (internal factors that drive the individual
to want to leave) and pull factors (external factors that drive the
individual to leave).
24
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Push Factors 
Negative reactions from social surroundings: Suspected as terrorists,
individuals are often avoided, even by sympathizers, due to the
danger and hassle. Some may find that instead of becoming a folk
hero they have become even more isolated. This may cause some
individuals to wish to leave if their motivations to join were to
win friends and gain status.
Losing faith in the group’s ideology and politics: If individuals
joined for ideological reasons, they may become disillusioned on
realizing that they are not engaged in a political war but are
killing innocent civilians rather than strictly military or opposi-
tion targets. Or they may realize that they cannot achieve their
initial aims or that their initial aims and beliefs were wrong.
The feeling that “things are going too far”: If innocent people are
getting killed, or there are too many casualties, the perceived
risks and “cons” may outweigh the “pros,” causing the individ-
ual to realize that “this wasn’t what I joined for.”
Disillusionment about group and comradeship can cause in-
dividuals to want to leave, especially if they joined for social rea-
sons. Although there is often a close camaraderie in the group
due to massive external pressures acting as a cohesive, there is
also a great deal of paranoia and “backstabbing” due to the con-
stant fear of being infiltrated. Such fear, paranoia, backstabbing,
and accusations are magnified in a small close-knit group and
thus felt more strongly and personally because there is no other
social support network. Thus, social factors can also affect the op-
erational or “professional” aspects of the terrorist group. Further-
more, a loss of status, confidence/trust, and position in the group
can cause people to want to leave if they are sidelined or ex-
cluded.
Exhaustion from the constant pressure of threat of injury, im-
prisonment, or death can also cause some individuals to want to
leave the group. As members of the Red Brigades stated, “When
you join, your whole life changes; you are a political terrorist ‘24:
7’ with no respite, no fun, no babies, no cinema, and so you begin
to miss your previous conventional life” (Jamieson 1989). If you
are always looking over your shoulder—even to go round the
corner for a paper—you often increasingly want a break or a nor-
mal life. These pressures cause many to “burn out” and some to
commit suicide, as they see no alternative.
Common Motives for Wanting to Leave a Terrorist Group
25

Pull Factors
External factors that cause members to leave include the longing
for the freedoms of a normal life. Often as members grow older
they find they don’t have the same need for excitement anymore,
or they may get the feeling that they are “too old for this.” Other
pull factors can include the fear of (further) jeopardizing personal
future and career, finding a girlfriend or boyfriend outside the
group, acquiring new responsibilities for a spouse and children,
and any other conflicting loyalties (although in many cases this is
not often the case, as the organization is extremely strict and dis-
ciplined). Pull factors become increasingly attractive because a
terrorist lifestyle is a full-time one with little or no respite. A key
point is that even if members want to leave, it is seldom possible
for them to do so.
Factors Inhibiting or Deterring
Disengagement
Again, Bjorgo’s studies on youth and extremist gangs are rele-
vant, as they have parallels with the factors involved in terrorist
groups, and so his framework and findings have been applied to
the phenomena of terrorism.
One factor deterring exit is that there is nothing to substitute
for the positive characteristics of the group—comradeship, loyalty,
understanding, and excitement. This sentiment is reflected in
many ex-terrorist accounts. According to his well-publicized
quote, Sean O’Callaghan, the former head of the IRA southern
command, for example, stated, “In essence, the reason why so
few republicans quit is that they cannot imagine that there is life,
fun, decency, and honour outside the ghetto or group.” Although
one might question the notion of terrorists referring to or being
affected by decency and honor, one must not discount the fact
that it is a sentiment that they feel; thus it cannot be ignored when
dealing with terrorists.
This problem is compounded by time; the longer a member
remains, the more the group becomes his or her social universe—
providing community, a substitute “family,” identity, a sense of
purpose, security and protection against external threats and ene-
mies, and excitement and adventure. Leaving the group thus
26
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

means forfeiting these things. A shared collective experience re-
sults in an intimate understanding and bonding and becomes part
of the character of the individual. The importance of having some-
one you can talk to, who is either going through the same thing or
can relate to it, should never be underestimated. This parallels
documented experiences of former and serving Special Forces sol-
diers, where the pressures of not being able to tell anyone (even
your spouse) about your job and life cause a great rift in other so-
cial situations, and can lead to not being able to form proper rela-
tionships with others; this reaffirms the value of group member-
ship and understanding. This problem is amplified when the
individual knows he cannot reenter the terrorist group and can act
as an effective deterrent against those considering leaving the
group.
The fear of negative sanctions from the group or the commu-
nity, if the community supports the terrorist group, also acts as a
deterrent to leaving. It is usually in the group’s interest to kill in-
dividuals who want to leave the group to deter others from de-
fecting and to safeguard any secrets individuals may have. Indi-
viduals may be open to blackmail at a later date, or run the risk
of people in their “new life” finding out about their past activities
and crimes. Even if individuals manage to evade the group, their
families may not.
Fearing the loss of protection from former enemies can also
deter people from leaving the group. As members they may only
worry about the group’s enemies; even then they have or may
feel that the group affords them some degree of protection. If they
leave the group, they have no protection, and depending on how
they leave, they may also need to worry about reprisals from their
former group.
An additional consideration is that of the belief that they are
doing something honorable or fighting a noble cause and the
sense of importance or purpose that this gives while they are mem-
bers of a group. This is an especially significant factor in the case
of when the individual wants to leave, as this sentiment is first felt
and then taken away. How does one make the transition from feel-
ing that he or she is a “freedom fighter,” as they often see them-
selves, to a supermarket shelf stacker, or office worker, for exam-
ple? This is a question that needs to be addressed by those
involved in witness protection or relocation programs.
Another factor deterring exit is the fear that one’s future
and career are already ruined. Terrorists often have no personal
Factors Inhibiting or Deterring Disengagement
27

bank accounts, social security number, national insurance num-
ber, and so on, as these are all means by which they can be
traced—once an individual is made a full-time member of a ter-
rorist group, his or her identity often disappears for operational
requirements. Employability is thus diminished, as there are no
employer’s references. In addition, passports and other docu-
ments required to travel and settle abroad are unavailable.
Many members of terrorist groups feel that their future
prospects are so limited by their membership that they might as
well stay in the group.
And as mentioned earlier, in developing or undeveloped
countries where there is a “war economy,” not being a member of
the group might mean not having food, water, money, or other
life essentials.
Applying These Findings to
Counterterrorism
In order to motivate people to disengage from terrorist groups,
one has to reinforce the “push factors,” which make continued
belonging to the group less attractive; reinforce the “pull factors,”
which make belonging to “normal” society more attractive; and
reduce the factors that inhibit potential defectors to disengage
from the group. When continued adherence to the group seems
unattractive, and when life outside the group seems attractive,
the probability for disengagement increases (Bjorgo 1997).
From examination of the aforementioned factors that moti-
vate entry, as well as those encouraging and deterring exit, one can
formulate a checklist of prerequisites to be met to ensure an effec-
tive exit by an individual from a terrorist group. By using such a
checklist, one can evaluate different exit strategies and formulate
better ones (such as more effective witness protection or relocation
schemes). Following is a list of criteria based on Bjorgo’s (1997) re-
search on when and how terrorists exit their group: 
1. Positive characteristics of the group need to be
substituted (alternative social support structure)
2. Fear of negative sanctions from the group are
removed/nullified
3. Loss of protection from former enemies is substituted
28
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

4. Problems of social isolation and nowhere to go need to
be resolved
5. A sustainable career, income, and future need to be
developed
6. Negative reactions from society need to be dealt
with/social reintegration
7. Lost faith in the group’s ideology and politics, the
feeling that things went too far in the group, and
disillusionment regarding the group and comradeship
often need to be replaced with the feeling of a sense of
purpose and a cause to fight for
8. Lost status, confidence, and position in the group may
require the encouragement of a new feeling of
confidence, status, and position in another group
9. Exhaustion from the stress of life in a terrorist group
needs to be countered by rest and recovery of
confidence from assured protection
10. Physical separation from the group, often being moved
to another area
The above criteria can differ depending on the individual, region,
culture, and economy. However, these are general guidelines that
can be referred to when examining specific cases.
There are likewise requirements for terrorists to reassure the
public about their exit from the terrorist group and reintegration
into society. They must: 
1. Renounce violence and the use of terror, and perhaps
ideology (publicly) to ensure they can’t go back to the
group (otherwise there might be public outcry and
suspicion that the individual has not really left the
group)
2. Cooperate with authorities against the terrorist group
(to prove further that they have left and renounced
terror, as well as earning any state help in terms of
relocation and protection)
3. Serve a (minimum) sentence or punishment for their
crimes (otherwise there would be public outcry)—this
time can be used to train them for another career,
arrange new identities, and give them the isolation
from the group to change their views independently 
Applying These Findings to Counterterrorism
29

As noted earlier in this chapter, some recruits are driven by
altruistic reasons whereas others have a genuine desire (perhaps
for revenge or from promises of financial rewards for themselves
and their families) to sacrifice their life for the people, the land, or
for any other ideal that could drive a recruit or a serving member
to commit an act of terrorism. Terrorist propaganda that incul-
cates the belief that sacrificing one’s life will create a better future
for the community or religion attracts fresh recruits and increases
the commitment of existing recruits. Inculcating the belief that
death is inevitable and that government troops would harm a po-
tential recruit because of differences in ethnicity, religion, or ide-
ology can drive a recruit to join a terrorist group and contribute
to the cause before dying. This highlights the importance of hav-
ing an effective counterpropaganda capability.
Research suggests that a terrorist group by its own action
alone cannot be successful. Often, government overreaction or
underreaction generates overwhelming support and recruits for
terrorism. Internment without trial, curfews, mass arrests by the
security forces—including arrests on mistaken identity or on false
information provided by a personal enemy—can humiliate and
turn a non–terrorist sympathizer into a terrorist sympathizer.
Furthermore, terrorist propaganda claims of the state being a
bully and unjustified become more credible. Many groups when
organizing demonstrations and riots, for example, encourage
members and supporters to engage security forces with only
sticks and stones so that when the security forces respond it in-
stantly looks (to the media and onlookers) like the security forces
are overreacting by using force when the “rioters” are only using
stones. It is thus important for security forces to have media li-
aisons and to use water cannons instead of live ammunition in
such circumstances.
Similarly, collateral damage by security forces (e.g., the death
of one’s mother, father, brother, or sister) motivates people to join
terrorist groups. Intelligence (along with cultural and linguistic
understanding) is paramount in order to accurately identify and
pinpoint the terrorist and the terrorist infrastructure. When a ter-
rorist is captured, it is important to release information of what
they were involved in (bombings that killed children, recruiting
children to kill targets, etc.) so that the public can see what the
group is really like; this has the effect of reducing potential and
actual support, deterring potential recruits, and possibly “turn-
ing” current members. However, there is the risk that too much
30
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

sharing of this information with the public could damage the in-
dividual’s odds at a fair trial, with the possible result of a court
case being thrown out.
If the terrorist group can recruit five new members for every
terrorist killed or captured, the battle against the terrorist organi-
zation is lost. Often when a colleague is killed, security forces will
enforce collective punishment. As shown in the policy of collec-
tive punishment meted out in Israel, this has proved to be coun-
terproductive. To prevent such counterproductive actions, espe-
cially overreactions, there should be accountability and oversight
at all levels in the counterterrorist organization. Targeting the ter-
rorist rank and file with counterpropaganda and offering irre-
sistible incentives for desertions and surrendees can weaken a
group from within. Nonmilitary methods are equally or more im-
portant than military methods because political and economic
measures are enduring and can have a lasting impact on a terror-
ist group and its support base.
It is hard for a terrorist group to grow in strength and size. It
needs an effective propaganda capability as well as a strong sup-
port base. Terrorist groups often provoke security forces to over-
react to generate sympathy and support. A restrained law en-
forcement response is therefore critical to prevent terrorist groups
from expanding its support bases, essential for both recruitment
and sustenance.
Another factor to consider when looking at how and why
people join terrorist groups, and how to counter or prevent more
from joining, is the actual physical opportunity to do so. Many
groups openly recruit, and if one lives in a community support-
ive of the group that provides many recruits then it may be seen
as natural for people from that community to “join the cause and
fight for their community.” The availability and ease of access to
the group must therefore be reduced, if not removed entirely. Fur-
thermore, the state must reduce any positive aspects of group
membership while increasing the negative aspects, thus deterring
possible recruits from joining and encouraging potential
“leavers” to leave.
Religion plays an apparent role in motivating individuals to
join terrorist groups. The ostensible line is that people volunteer
for suicide attacks, that everyone inside the organization has
freedom of choice, and that sheer conviction of both religious
belief and the organization’s “cause” are the sole factors in mo-
tivating an individual to act. The reality is that a calculated and
Applying These Findings to Counterterrorism
31

intelligent use of different strategies attracts and manipulates
individuals into joining and acting for a group’s ends under the
banner of religious belief.
When discussing counterterrorism, one must first understand
what motivates those whom the counterterrorist is trying to de-
feat; in this way we can treat the causal factors as opposed to the
symptoms. It is thus important to adopt a holistic approach and
take into account the environmental factors surrounding the indi-
vidual prior to membership in the group as well as currently, as
well as the behavior or psychology of the individual or group.
Currently the area of exit and disengagement programs is a
weak one in counterterrorism terms, as many of our democratic
legal and penal systems remain extremely ill-suited to the spe-
cialized tasks of encouraging and effecting disengagement from
terrorist groups. It is an area of very high potential return, given
the intelligence that can be gathered and the overall weakening of
the group as a result; thus it should be paid more attention and
resources.
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism
Since 9/11 many consider terrorism a new phenomenon or threat.
Although one can argue that the scale of 9/11 was unprece-
dented, the concept, risk, and threat of such an attack was not
new. Years ago Ramzi Yousef, for example, had planned to plant
bombs (and detonate them during flight) on board eleven U.S.
airliners over the Pacific. The Lockerbie, Scotland, disaster of 1988
is another example of a large-scale aviation terrorist incident. Al-
though analysts have talked of a new terrorism that began in the
1990s, the idea, along with information on how to conduct such
incidents, has been around for some time. This is the case not only
for aviation terrorism but also for nuclear-biological-chemical
(NBC) weapons and other forms of attacks. Although the level of
risk may be new, the forms themselves are not; thus, one should
not hysterically panic at the existence of a perceived new threat. It
is helpful to realize that the capability and idea to undertake such
actions as an NBC attack, for example, have been around for
decades, and that terrorists have taken advantage of them only a
few times. Furthermore, mass panic is only likely to increase the
attractiveness of such an attack due to the publicity any group
doing so would attract.
32
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Terrorism is not new. As early as A.D. 66–70, Jewish zealous
sects engaged in terrorist acts, as did the “Assassins” at the end of
the eleventh century. The modern concept of international terror-
ism can be traced back to the hijacking of the El Al plane by PFLP
members on July 22, 1968 (Hoffman 1999). This spawned the in-
ternationalization of terrorism—the process of previously isolated
groups developing an international status, developing contacts
with each other, and helping each other in terms of procurement,
training, and so on. This phenomenon began to grow toward the
end of the Cold War; it included the development of more so-
phisticated overseas support structures, diversification in fund-
raising and procurement, and the ensuing blurring between ter-
rorist and organized crime activity. Thus some analysts talk of a
“New Terrorism” emerging in the 1990s. Was this new or not? Let
us first look at how and why these and other trends occurred and
at the impact of changes in the world system.
Although ethnic tensions were restrained during the Cold
War, one could not say that they did not exist; likewise there still
existed state-sponsored terror, state terror, and LICs (low-inten-
sity conflicts). The risk of nuclear Armageddon during the Cold
War kept many ethnic or self-determination issues mostly under
control. But when the world system shifted from a bipolar to a
multipolar one, previously contained ethnic issues arose. States
that had been satellites of one of the Cold War sides suddenly be-
came independent players in a multipolar world system, able to
adopt and pursue their own agendas. The same occurred at a sub-
state level, with many groups better able to pursue dreams of in-
dependence. Decolonization exacerbated these problems, causing
many countries such as India, Congo, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka to
suffer from the consequences of ethnic and religious conflict. The
new political environment freed up previously contained ethnic
tensions and led to new political, geographic, economic, and en-
vironmental debates.
Features of the post–Cold War world included economic
globalization, moves toward global free trade, international mo-
bility of capital, and an easier cross-border movement of people.
The latter resulted in a side effect of mass migration and ensuing
cultural clashes. The proliferation of technology that also oc-
curred at this time increased the ease and lethality of interna-
tional terrorist activities and procurement; as a result there was a
greater potential for more individuals to be involved with or to
benefit from terrorism. The creation and increased accessibility/
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism
33

availability of the Internet and global communications increased
the audience worldwide and, simultaneously, the potential for
more people to be involved or to benefit from terrorism.
Fundamentalism can also be attributed to the rise in  economic
globalization. Sheehan (1996) notes that economic globalization
has produced rapid social change and social dislocation. Although
overall standards of living have risen in many areas, he notes that
growing economic inequality and injustice have exacerbated social
instability and provided a seedbed for armed conflict.
Many of the moves toward economic globalization and free
trade were designed to make it easier for individual and corpo-
rate investors to move assets, whether money or production fa-
cilities, across international borders. The implications of this re-
sulted in the phenomenon of “capital flight” due to global capital
mobility under a global system of free trade. The possibility of
capital flight means that countries are forced to compete with
each other, to attract and keep capital investors in order to avoid
investors “uprooting” their investments and reestablishing else-
where. The main problem with capital flight for “developing”
countries is that they must compete against each other, usually by
lowering environmental, social, and labor standards. Further
worries on this theme emerged when it was realized that one
move toward free trade (Multilateral Agreement on Investment
[MAI]) meant that corporations would be able to challenge local
laws before an international tribunal, but governments or their
citizens will have no corresponding right to take action against
offending corporations. They will have no right to conserve their
environment or protect people against the harmful effects of for-
eign investment (Pilger 1998).
The effects of globalization undermine local industries as
governments would have had no powers to protect them from ex-
ternal competition. Such a system of “free trade” did not seem to
imply “symmetric” or “even” development, as called for in the
1974 UNESCO conference, but “asymmetric” or “uneven” devel-
opment.2 It is for these reasons that economic globalization
seemed undesirable for undeveloped, and certain developing,
countries. It seemed that it would not result in “fairer distribu-
tion” of wealth, as globalization means integration and the drop-
ping of barriers, and thus more likely that the strongest or the
biggest companies would dominate.
The moves made by the “global establishment” toward
global free trade seem to fit the picture portrayed by “depen-
34
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

dency” theorists and subscribers to the “core-periphery” model
of neocolonialism or neoimperialism. It is the reaction and effects
of the “devaluing of social rights and conditions” in developing
and/or undeveloped countries, as a result of the globalization of
free trade, that should be paid more attention to, namely, the ef-
fects on society. This is significant when the result can be nation-
alism and even terrorism, as many terrorist groups in such coun-
tries seem to adopt this view.
Although most of the world’s former colonial states are for-
mally independent, their economic, social, cultural, and even po-
litical relations are dominated by the former colonial power(s)
(Viotti and Kauppi 1993).
This “imperialism without colonies” was characterized by
Ghanaian president Kwame Nkrumah in his book Neo-Colonial-
ism: The Last Stage of Capitalism (1965) when he wrote that neo-
colonialism involves a state theoretically independent and sover-
eign, but whose economic system and political policy are in
reality controlled by an outside power. 
An interesting example of this neocolonialism is that of Al-
geria in the 1990s, where the French term desclassement has been
used to describe the social, political, and economic factors in-
volved in the “fueling” of militant Islam. As they lose out to the
business classes, the working and middle classes are disaffected.
Unemployment was also a major contributing factor in the rise of
terrorism in Algeria. Although there was obviously money in the
country, due to its oil reserves and the Western presence extract-
ing it, few in the middle classes could find jobs, even if they had
graduated from university. The wealth from the oil industry was
blatantly unevenly distributed, and those in the street “are con-
vinced that much of the country’s oil wealth is spirited off to pri-
vate Swiss bank accounts” (Economist 1999, 53). Furthermore, the
injection of “petro-dollars” meant that Algeria’s government was
not accountable to the people. The government relied on foreign
oil companies, French financing, and the army, rather than votes
or taxes, to keep it in power. Some Algerian Islamists have cam-
paigned against oil companies, demanding control of the nation’s
resources and self-determination.
Over the last 100 years Islam was used to express protest
leading to resistance. According to Gellner (1985)  this has cer-
tainly been connected with a position of powerlessness—
political, economic, technological, but also social and cultural
vis-à-vis the dominating West. Many people in Algeria and
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism
35

other countries saw multinational corporations as agents of the
West enforcing neocolonialism and draining the resources from
a country where the public would not benefit. If one looks
through the rhetoric of terrorist groups in developing and un-
developed countries, particularly those involved in the oil in-
dustry, one sees that this is a common theme that terrorist
groups state as being a motivating factor. The FARC in Colom-
bia and factions of the GIA in Algeria are some of many such ex-
amples.
If Western presence is seen as neocolonial—as it may be in
the West’s vested interests to remain in the region, supporting the
oppressive regimes in order to protect and ensure the availability
of affordable energy—then one can see how terrorist groups may
be motivated to target the West. This also helps explain the sig-
nificance of the targeting of the Twin Towers and the hub of the
U.S. economy on 9/11.
The end of the Cold War and the rise of economic and tech-
nological globalization have led to an apparent increase in ethnic,
religious, and cult groups—which see violence as an end in itself
and are less likely to be constrained morally from more lethal at-
tacks (Hoffman 1999). In the 1970s all active international terror-
ist groups had secular goals and beliefs, with the majority having
a Marxist variant. A major trend of the 1980s and 1990s, however,
was an increase in the number and severity of ethnic and reli-
gious conflicts. In the 1990s, one-third of all active international
terrorist groups were religious, and the majority were Islamist; a
high percentage of the remaining international terrorist groups
was motivated by ethnicity. Features include using mass terror
against a designated enemy either to rid the enemy from “their”
country or as an end in itself on the principle that “one less un-
believer” is good. The religious fanatics or those waging a holy
war are unlikely to be inhibited by the prospect of causing large-
scale carnage (Wilkinson 2001). In summary,
[T]he escalation of ethnic conflicts into savage warfare
involving extensive use of the weapon of mass terror
is the more striking feature of the patterns of terror
worldwide in the late 1990s. Moreover, owing to the
intractability of such conflicts and the international
community’s repeated failures to find effective ways
to prevent or resolve them, this form of warfare and its
concomitant mass violations of human rights are likely
to spawn major eruptions of terrorist violence well
36
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

into the next century. . . .The close examination of
trends in terrorism worldwide does not lead one to
conclude that we now confront an entire new phe-
nomenon of postmodern terrorist regimes and move-
ments of the 1970s and 1980s. The regimes using terror
against their own populations have been doing so for
decades. State-sponsored terrorism has been apparent
for over three decades. The majority of the secular in-
ternational terrorist movements active in the later
1990s were established in the 1970s and most of those
motivated by religion emerged in the 1980s. It is sig-
nificant that only 10 of the 41 active major terrorist
groups listed in the U.S. State Department’s patterns
of global terrorism 1998 were founded in the 1990s:
most of these groups have known aims, organisational
structures and leading activists, and various links with
like-minded organisations and/or states.
Since many of these ideological groups have been more domesti-
cally focused, they have not received the same international at-
tention.
The main continuing trends that have been identified and
confirmed by analysts and statistics are as follows: 
•
International terrorist activities are increasing in
lethality
•
International terrorist acts are decreasing in number
•
Domestic terrorist acts are increasing in number and
lethality
Although this book focuses on international terrorism, glob-
alization and the end of the Cold War may also help explain why
there has been a rise in domestic terrorist acts. As to why interna-
tional terrorist acts are declining in number, there is perhaps too
much speculation, and thus no solid explanation can be given.
Perhaps counterterrorism efforts have paid off, and it is thus
harder for such acts to be planned and executed. What we shall
focus on in this book is perhaps the most worrying: the trend of
increasing lethality.
In recent years there has been a dramatic fall of recorded in-
ternational terrorist attacks, yet a dramatic rise in fatalities. In avi-
ation terrorism, for example, there has been a shift from hijacking
to sabotage bombing of jumbo jets, as well as growing evidence
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism
37

of attempts to acquire—and some success in acquiring—surface-
to-air missiles. In vehicle bombs there has been an escalation from
small car bombs to huge truck bombs. In the United States there
have been attempts to bring down whole buildings for maximum
death, such as Oklahoma City in 1995, and the attacks of 9/11.
Why is there increasing lethality? Terrorism has become an
easier tactic due to improvements in technology—it is now easier
to access information, make contacts, and acquire equipment,
weapons, and training; it also is easier to access terrorist groups
through their Web sites. More groups also seem to see violence as
an end in itself rather than as a means to an end. Cult or religious
fanatics or those waging a holy war are unlikely to be inhibited
by the prospect of causing large-scale carnage. Governments and
private-sector targets learn from the past and harden their secu-
rity, so terrorists look for easier targets, such as civilians, again to
maximize publicity through atrocity. As the public becomes de-
sensitized through repeated media viewings of the more spectac-
ular disasters and atrocities, terrorists use even more dramatic
and spectacular methods and attacks to maintain media atten-
tion. Other groups recognize that they must play “one-upman-
ship” in order to attract publicity for their cause. Likewise they
may realize that if there is a significant amount of fear regarding
a certain tactic, they are guaranteed publicity if they employ it. As
Bowyer Bell (1998, 20) noted, “Often it is our reactions to terror-
ism which may constitute the primary danger, not terrorism it-
self.” The current “super-terrorism” scare over the use of NBC
weapons is an excellent example of this (Sprinzak 1998).
There is a popular rumor that after President Clinton read
The Cobra Event, a fictional account of an attack on the United
States using NBC weapons, he ordered preparedness exercises
and contingency planning for the major cities in the United
States. The irony is that in trying to find whether a city can cope,
and in trying to make all the preparations for such an event, these
actions tend to heighten the fear factor, thus increasing the reac-
tion to and thus likelihood of a terrorist attack of this nature. Any
small group wanting easy publicity or large group wanting max-
imum damage and a propaganda victory would thus only need
to launch even a small attack using these methods to be assured
instant notoriety. To see the disruption and fear such attacks
cause, one need only look at the example of the post-9/11 anthrax
letters, or the Aum Shinrikyo 1995 subway attack in Tokyo using
the nerve agent sarin.
38
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Such fears have caused many to ask whether we will see
more use of NBC weapons in terrorist attacks in the future, espe-
cially as it may be easier to get chemical/biological weapons
(CBWs) than to acquire guns or explosives. It is of obvious con-
cern to many that states believed to sponsor terrorism have CBW
programs. There are nuclear materials in Israel, India, Pakistan,
China, Britain, France, North Korea, Russia (and former Soviet
states), Libya, Iran, Iraq, Ukraine, the United States, and South
Africa; and there is always the risk of proliferation of technology
into unauthorized hands. Recent media reports attest to evidence
that groups such as Al Qaeda have attempted to smuggle ura-
nium and plutonium and to acquire and develop such NBC tech-
nology and materials, and that there are plans to use substances
like sarin in the London underground.
Groups such as the LTTE have used chlorine on military
bases in Sri Lanka, U.S. extreme right groups have been caught
with anthrax and ricin, and Aum Shinrikyo used sarin. How-
ever, one must bear in mind that there are problems in employ-
ing such methods as well as reasons why many groups have not
used them (Claridge 2000). First, a great deal of sophistication is
needed to develop and weaponize such materials (usually requir-
ing someone with university-level training to deal with such
material and resources such as laboratories and specialized
equipment). Deploying such materials also carries great risks
(methods are often unpredictable and can be affected by wind,
weather, etc.), posing a risk to those disseminating the sub-
stances, a risk of the direction of the substance, if airborne, being
altered and perhaps affecting nontargets. Targets for optimum
use, therefore, are likely to be contained areas with little venti-
lation and little influence from factors such as weather (the
likely targets for CBW attacks are areas such as underground
tube/subway networks). Nuclear or dirty bombs, however, can
be used anywhere, and likely targets are largely populated
urban areas for maximum damage and disruption, as the af-
fected area cannot be used due to long-term irradiation. An-
other factor affecting the use of such methods is negative pub-
licity. If a group were to use NBC weapons, it would likely
alienate itself and damage its credibility, support, and funding.
However, it is debatable whether Al Qaeda would be as af-
fected by such considerations.
In terms of the internationalization of terrorism, it is useful to
note that the concept of transnational terrorism is also not new.
Trends and Evolution of Terrorism
39

The notion of a Muslim brotherhood and the idea of traveling
to other countries to fight with and support other Muslim
brothers can be traced back to Egyptian Islamists in the early
1900s. As mentioned earlier, examples of networking, alliances,
and international training camps after events such as the PFLP
hijacking (1968) and the Munich Olympics (1972) are evident
from the 1970s onward. What was different from the 1990s on-
ward, however, was the scale of internationalization, through
new technology and globalization. In terms of technology
(apart from new developments in arms), one of the main factors
has been the development and accessibility of the Internet. The
Internet is used to disseminate propaganda; to procure funds;
for information/cyber warfare and sabotage; for swapping and
acquisition of knowledge of tactics, techniques, and bomb mak-
ing; for dissemination of orders to terrorist cells and for meet-
ing other like-minded terrorists; and for setting up strategic al-
liances and recruitment. The process of globalization and the
development of global communications ensures easier public-
ity. Likewise, free trade made it easier to move funds, equip-
ment, and people. Groups thus took advantage and began set-
ting up and sustaining overseas structures for financing,
procurement, rest and recuperation, propaganda, training,
forging documents, and so on.
Although there are some effective multilateral measures that
states can use, international terrorist organizations and networks
are so diverse and widespread that they can be likened to a bal-
loon—if counterterrorist efforts squeeze the balloon in one part,
the balloon will reduce in the area under pressure and expand in
other areas. Furthermore, the problems of multilateral intelli-
gence sharing and compromise of sources, as well as the reluc-
tance for multilateral intelligence sharing, make terrorism ex-
tremely difficult to counter. Chapter 2 examines some difficulties
in countering international terrorism.
A key trend that has not yet been mentioned is the recipro-
cal nature or relationship between the terrorist and the coun-
terterrorist. Terrorism and counterterrorism are evolutionary
processes. Once one side gets used to certain tactics and devel-
oped countermeasures, the other side has to innovate and de-
velop new ones, and so it goes. For example, the 2001 hijacking
of planes caused a “hardening of security,” which caused the
terrorists to instead start planting bombs, in response to which
the authorities hardened security again, which resulted in ter-
40
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

rorist attempts to acquire SAMs. Another example is in North-
ern Ireland, where security forces developed jamming measures
to prevent terrorist bombs from being detonated, after which the
terrorists responded by developing counterjamming measures;
the security forces then developed counter-counterjamming
measures. This theme is evident throughout the history of
terrorism and is evident in the conventions and political moves
following such actions, as can be seen in the chronology in
Chapter 3. Thus the relationship between terrorist and countert-
errorist seems a cyclical one whereby one continues to learn
from the other. What becomes important, then, is to reduce ter-
rorists’ capacity to learn, research, develop, procure, and finance
themselves by making it as hard as possible for them to operate.
Their support structures, both domestic and international, have
to also be reduced if not destroyed. It is important that people
realize that an effective counterterrorism capability does not
only mean having elite military forces but also the capability to
take on terrorists at every level of operation: military, political,
economic, social, and legal. The counterterrorist must not only
learn from the terrorist but also look to other countries and how
they have responded to counterterrorism to identify what works
and what does not. The experience of countries such as the
United Kingdom, Italy, and Israel, for example, can prove ex-
tremely useful in these respects.
Terrorist Organization and Infrastructure
A terrorist organization consists of the terrorist group and its sup-
port base. This group includes the leadership, middle-level
cadres, and the recruits who are constantly trained and retrained
and assigned political and military activities. The lifeblood of a
terrorist group is dependent on the support it generates from its
like-minded ethnic or religious brethren. A terrorist support base
can consist of collaborators, supporters, and sympathizers who
provide political, financial, and military support. Not all support
is voluntary. Coercion, intimidation, robbery, and organized
crime are the usual methods for generating finances. The strength
and the size of the group depend on the support base. The ability
of the group to sustain its operations depends on the capacity of
the support base to replenish the group’s human losses and ma-
terial wastage.
Terrorist Organization and Infrastructure
41

Terrorist groups have two operational wings—an overt or
semicovert political wing, and a clandestine military wing. The
political wing engages mostly in support functions; the military
wing engages in operational functions. The political wing oper-
ates through front, cover, and sympathetic organizations that ap-
pear as commercial, socioeconomic, educational, cultural, reli-
gious, welfare, humanitarian, and human rights organizations.
These terrorist-affiliated infrastructures, some of which are
legally registered as charities and nonprofit organizations both
within and outside the conflict zone, build political and financial
support for the military wing. Terrorist groups will use these af-
filiated infrastructures to disseminate propaganda; generate re-
cruits, supporters, and sympathizers; raise and launder funds; se-
cure forged, adapted, and genuine idendities; hire, rent, or buy
safe houses and vehicles; gather intelligence; procure weapons,
dual technologies, and other supplies; and transport supplies to
the theater of conflict.
The terrorist operational network in the military wing is re-
sponsible for mounting final reconnaissance or surveillance of the
intended target and executing the operation. To ensure opera-
tional security, terrorists assigned to conduct intelligence and mil-
itary operations are organized into compartmentalized cells. Al-
though most active terrorist groups are from the Southern
Hemisphere, they have established significant support networks
in North America, Europe, and Australasia. Liberal democracies
are open to terrorist groups to establish state-of-the-art propa-
ganda, fund-raising, procurement, and shipping infrastructures.
Some of the support networks mutate into operational networks
that conduct assassinations, bombings, ambushes, and direct at-
tacks. It is important to recognize, however, that any democratic
“weaknesses” are also their strength and that counterpropaganda
can and should be used. Furthermore, draconian measures will
benefit terrorist propaganda and often push the public to favor
the terrorist.
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
Terrorist groups pose a significant threat to domestic, regional,
and international security because they provide professional
training and weaponry. The quality of training and weaponry
available to terrorist groups has changed dramatically over the
42
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

years. During the Cold War, the USSR and its satellite states, as
well as the United States and its allies, provided training to a
number of terrorist and guerrilla groups. The superpowers con-
trolled the level of training, weapons, and targeting to ensure that
the conflicts did not escalate from a Cold War to a “Hot War.”
In the past three decades, terrorist training infrastructure has
moved generally from the Middle East to Asia. In the 1970s and
1980s, the Syrian-controlled Bekka Valley in Lebanon was the
main center for training for over forty foreign terrorist groups.
Due to the Oslo Accords, the center of gravity in international ter-
rorism shifted from the Middle East to Asia in the 1990s, at which
point Afghanistan became the major center for training for at least
two dozen groups until the U.S. intervention in October 2001.
Training
Today, many terrorist groups have access to similar levels of train-
ing available to security forces personnel. Five main factors have
facilitated terrorist access to professional training. First, U.S. and
allied sponsorship of anti-Soviet mujahedin groups throughout
the 1980s included provision of field manuals (FM series) reserved
for the U.S. military, including the U.S. Special Forces. For in-
stance, in the New Jersey home of Sayeed Nosair, the FBI recov-
ered secret U.S. military manuals originating from the J. F.
Kennedy Center for Special Warfare in Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
Second, several former security forces personnel from Egypt,
Algeria, and the United States participated in the anti-Soviet and
the global jihad campaigns that followed. For instance, an Egypt-
ian captain named Ali Mohommad (who later joined the U.S. Spe-
cial Forces as a sergeant) was Al Qaeda’s principal military in-
structor in Afghanistan, Sudan, Somalia, and Bosnia and also
trained Osama bin Laden’s bodyguard contingent.
Third, the privatization of security and proliferation of secu-
rity companies and former security forces personnel willing to
serve as both trainers and mercenaries increased at the end of the
Cold War. For instance, when the Sri Lankan government pur-
chased landing craft mediums (LCMs), the LTTE clandestinely
hired experts from Swan Hunter, the manufacturers of LCMs, to
understand their vulnerabilities and limitations.
Fourth, certain government intelligence agencies continue to
provide training to foreign terrorist groups to advance their for-
eign policy against inimical states. For instance, the Revolutionary
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
43

Guards of Iran continues to train Hezbollah. Thus do well-
connected or well-endowed terrorist groups gain access to high-
quality training hitherto reserved for professional militaries.
Fifth, due to the end of the Cold War the development of
globalization, with its attendant freedom of movement of trade,
capital, and information; the lowering of trade barriers and bor-
ders through agreements such as NAFTA and the Schengen
Agreement; and the invention of the Internet increased the reach
of the terrorists.
Terrorist groups provide both ideological and physical train-
ing to their recruits. Although governments tend to focus on dis-
rupting terrorist access to physical training, countering ideologi-
cal indoctrination is paramount.
Ideological Training
Ideological training is continuous during membership in the
group. Often both the motivation and endurance of terrorists, es-
pecially to survive in a hostile zone, depend more on their com-
mitment to ideology than on physical training. For instance, most
of the 9/11 suicide hijackers lived in the United States for over a
year without changing their minds about their mission; this was
undoubtedly due to the high-level indoctrination they had re-
ceived for years. Even after Zacarias Moussaoui was captured,
three weeks before 9/11, his belief in Al Qaeda’s objectives kept
him from divulging the organization’s elaborate plans and prepa-
rations, as well as the identities and location of Al Qaeda mem-
bers and leaders in the United States.
Ideological training differs from organization to organiza-
tion. If the group is driven by ethnonationalist ideology, its mem-
bers will be indoctrinated about the suffering of their ethnic
brethren and the need to sacrifice their lives so that future gener-
ations will be able to live in safety. The opposing ethnic commu-
nity will be portrayed as subhuman, evil, and destructive. Mem-
bers will be indoctrinated to the point that they will believe that
only by waging a sustained terrorist campaign will they be able
to recover their homeland. Members of an Islamist group will be
made to believe that it is a Muslim duty to wage jihad. Almost all
the Islamist terrorist groups waging jihad in Palestine, Algeria,
Kashmir, Bosnia, Chechnya, Afghanistan, Eritrea, Somalia, and
the Philippines are driven by the Salafi school, whose members
are indoctrinated to worship and love Allah above all else. They
44
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

do not follow the teachings of the imams and the sheikhs; instead
they pledge their allegiance only to Allah and his messenger.
Contemporary ideologues draw from the writings of Sayed
Abdul A’la Maududi, the founder of the Pakistani political party
Jamat-I-Islami, and Sayed Qutb, the ideologue of the Egyptian
Muslim Brotherhood who sanctioned the use of violence for the
establishment of Islam. They appeal for the return of the Koran
and Sunnah, with the principles of Islam applied to modern soci-
ety through the use of rational judgment in religious matters.
Maududi and Qutb reaffirmed the function of Islam in politics
and civilized societies under the control of secularism and the
Western development paradigm of democracy. Aligned against
Western political thought, especially the concept of sovereignty,
both called for the establishment of a “revolutionary vanguard of
true believers” to organize Islamic states. Citing the successes of
the Iranian revolution of 1979 and the anti-Soviet Afghan jihad
(1979–1989), they urge taking on their enemies—Muslim regimes
friendly to the West and the West itself.
Physical Training
Physical training of terrorists takes three forms: basic, advanced,
and model. Basic training (or recruit training) involves physical
and weapons training. The training course lasts from one week to
four months, depending on the opportunities available for train-
ing and the sophistication of the terrorist group. A Hamas or a
Palestinian Islamic Jihad member living in the occupied territo-
ries may train for a few days before embarking on a suicide mis-
sion. As the execution phase of a suicide attack against an Israeli
target is short, the Palestinian suicide terrorist does not need ex-
tensive physical training. A member of Al Ansar Mujahedin in
Chechnya who is assigned to infiltrate Moscow and conduct a
spate of bombings will receive extended training so that he will
be psychologically and physically prepared to meet the numer-
ous challenges likely to face him in his long-range deep-penetra-
tion mission.
The type of training, recruitment, and time involved in terms
of access to weapons training depends also on the location. In a
conflict zone the process and techniques used are likely to differ
from those used in a developed country. Members usually must
prove themselves before they are allowed to advance to the next
level of training and operations.
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
45

Although the training to be a guerrilla can differ from that of
a terrorist, the terrorist curriculum is very similar. This is because
most terrorist recruits trained to attack civilians must learn how
to engage security forces when confronted by them. For instance,
a terrorist tasked to plant a bomb in Srinagar, infiltrating across
the line of control in Kashmir, must learn how to move at night
and engage Indian border guards if or when confronted. Terrorist
training for rural and urban environments is very similar. Most
terrorists learn on the job—they survive and progress not accord-
ing to plan but opportunity. Nonetheless, the sophisticated ter-
rorist groups train their members about how to fight in built-up
areas. The training to be a terrorist can be shorter than the train-
ing to be a guerrilla, but many terrorists receive both terrorist and
guerrilla training. Terrorists primarily attack soft targets; guerril-
las primarily attack hard targets. Terrorist training and guerrilla
training both aim to build confidence in their recruits.
The curriculum and duration of recruit training depends on
their environment and role. If the terrorist has to survive a longer
period in the battlefield in a guerrilla role, training is for a longer
period in order to prevent demoralization, desertion, injury, or
death. A poorly trained terrorist in a guerrilla role is likely to suf-
fer injury and die, demoralizing other members, facilitating de-
sertion, and restraining recruitment. Training and retraining are
the keys to success for a terrorist group, whether operating in a
terrorist or a guerrilla context. Therefore, most sophisticated
groups emphasize continuous training to ensure that their mem-
bers are mentally and physically prepared for battle at all times.
Thus the disruption of training facilities and expertise is para-
mount in countering terrorism.
The advanced training by a terrorist group is sometimes akin
to government special forces or commando training. It is like an
advanced infantry-training course where terrorists receive harder
training to increase their confidence and endurance. Usually, the
best members are given the limited opportunities available for
advanced training. Many who receive advanced training end up
as group or subgroup leaders or as trainers. Specialized training
ranges from communication know-how to intelligence gathering
or to the use of specialized weapons or weapons systems (sniper
and heavy-caliber weapons). Terrorists are cost-conscious; they
handpick certain members in relation to their special qualities,
orientation, and aptitude for special missions.
Sophisticated terrorist groups also offer a third category of
46
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

training for specific missions, called model training. The terrorists
assigned for 9/11 were trained to fly commercial aircraft; terror-
ists assigned to bomb the U.S. diplomatic targets in East Africa in
August 1998 were trained to drive vehicles; terrorists assigned to
ram an explosives-laden boat in to the USS The Sullivans in Janu-
ary and USS Cole in October 2000 were trained to pilot boats.
Model training also helps terrorists to gain stealth, speed, and
surprise. The numbers who train in the higher training cate-
gories—advanced and model training—are kept small to reduce
the risk that a trainee will be captured and to protect the secrecy
of the operation. Many terrorist groups often have separate wings
and separate camps for each type of training. For example, the
LTTE has a maritime wing (the Sea Tigers) that trains separately
from the land forces; it also has the secretive Black Tigers, who
conduct suicide operations.
Some recruits have served in the military and the police and
thus have had professional training. For instance, Ahmad Jabril,
the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine–
General Command (PFLP-GC), is a former captain in the Syrian
army; Namangani, the founder and leader of the Islamic Move-
ment of Uzbekistan, was a former Soviet paratrooper; and Said
Bahaji, an Al Qaeda member of the German cell, was a former sol-
dier in the Bundeswehr. The two Al Qaeda military commanders,
Muhammed Atef and Abu Ubadiah al-Banshiri, had served in the
Egyptian police and the army. Both the Algerian and Chechen ter-
rorist groups had several former military officers occupying im-
portant positions in their ranks. Some terrorist groups ask sup-
porters and sympathizers, including those living in Western
Europe, to join security forces in order to obtain police and mili-
tary training—how to mount surveillance or reconnaissance,
manufacture explosives and explosive devices, and use firearms.
Terrorist groups that relied heavily on the training infrastructure
in Afghanistan are likely now to join security forces for profes-
sional training.
The seven-thousand-page, multivolume Encyclopaedia of the
Afghan Jihad outlines the cumulative body of knowledge in the
possession of contemporary terrorist groups. The first ten vol-
umes are on tactics, security and intelligence, handguns, first aid,
explosives, grenades and mines, tanks, manufacturing (improvi-
sation of arms and explosives), topography and land surveys,
and weapons. The cover of each volume shows a belt-fed ma-
chine gun on a window ledge next to a copy of the Koran. The
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
47

treatment of each subject is extensive and detailed. The encyclo-
pedia covers operations in rural, urban, mountain, and jungle ter-
rains. It is simply written, authored by veterans of the Afghan
war; it has trained a new generation of post-Soviet mujahedin to
fight in regional conflicts such as Kashmir, Mindanao, Chechnya,
and Algeria as well as in terrorist campaigns. Every theater has its
own manual.
Al Qaeda uses a manual of the Islamic Group of Egypt for its
terrorist training. A copy recovered in Manchester, United King-
dom, has the title Declaration of Jihad Against the Country’s Tyrants
(Military Series), superimposed on a drawing of the globe with a
sword piercing the continent of Africa and a section of the Mid-
dle East. The manual is dedicated to the “young Moslem men
who are pure, believing and fighting for the cause of Allah. It is
[the authors’] contribution toward paving the road that leads to
majestic Allah and establishes a caliphate according to the
prophecy.” The eighteen lessons include “Necessary Qualifica-
tions and Characteristics for the Organization’s Members,”
“Counterfeit Currency and Forged Documents,” “Means of Com-
munication and Transportation,” “Information-Gathering Using
Covert Methods,” “Assassinations Using Poisons and Cold
Steel,” and “Torture Methods.” The manual draws heavily from
United States, British, and other field manuals—especially those
used by elite forces—as well as the widely distributed The Terror-
ist Handbook, produced in the West. Al Qaeda follows the princi-
ples of “need-to-know” and “operational security” meticulously
when disseminating such information, showing why security
forces have found such difficulty finding these manuals.
The training of Ahmed Saeed Omar Sheikh, the terrorist ac-
cused of kidnapping and murdering the American journalist
Daniel Pearl, provides insight into terrorist training. Omar Sheikh
went with twenty other recruits to a training camp in Afghanistan
staffed by both Harakat-ul-Mujahedin and visiting Al Qaeda in-
structors. The Khalid bin Waleed camp—previously known as
Salman Farsi camp—offered a forty-day “Istakbalia” course.
After morning namaz (prayers) in the mosque, Omar Sheikh en-
gaged in physical exercise until 8 A.M. After breakfast, he received
instruction in the use of small and medium firearms until lunch.
After resting for two hours and namaz in the mosque, religious
education and physical training followed. For firing practice each
recruit including Omar Sheikh was provided six rounds daily.
48
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Recruits were also given night security duties. Of the eight in-
structors, Omar Sheikh mostly stayed with Ayubi, alias Abu Anj-
wari, from Karachi, an educated muhajir (migrant).
After completing basic recruit training Omar Sheikh was se-
lected for specialized training from September to December
1993. According to claims made by Omar Sheikh to his Indian
interrogators, he received training from serving members of the
Special Services Group of Pakistan (SSG). (It is likely that he re-
ceived training from former members and not serving members
of the SSG.) His specialized terrorist training course matches the
standard course tailor-made for the mujahedin provided by for-
mer members of SSG. Omar Sheikh told his interrogators that he
received training in surveillance and countersurveillance, the
art of disguising, interrogation, cell structure, secret meetings,
secret writings, cryptology and codes, free wrestling, and mov-
ing (e.g., how to enter a room by kicking the door open, falling
on the floor and shooting if somebody suspicious is in the
room). He was trained in reconnaissance, checking of equip-
ment, selection of persons for an operation, assignment of tasks,
approaching the target, method of attack, use of signals for
withdrawing, systems of communication, and first aid. He also
received training for urban warfare, use of assault rifles, light
machine guns, rocket launchers, night movement, and raids and
ambushes.
There is a generation of terrorists with knowledge compara-
ble to that of regular soldiers in government service. Well-funded
groups have hired some of the best available special force trainers
in the world. To fight terrorism today, it is essential that troops as-
signed for counterterrorism work receive highly specialized
counterterrorism training. Because most terrorists are better
trained, better armed, and better motivated, regular troops and
police are likely to be unsuccessful without specialized training.
The response of the German police to the massacre of Israeli ath-
letes in the Olympic village in Munich in 1972 provides an insight
into the difficulty of fighting terrorism without creating elite
forces. Training and equipping highly specialized counterterror-
ist forces remains at the heart of sound planning and preparation
to fight contemporary terrorism. This also reinforces the value
and need for disrupting and denying terrorists access to training
as well as information and expertise, as well as the importance of
intelligence.
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
49

Terrorist Weapons
Terrorist weapons include factory-manufactured and improvised
explosives, small arms, and light weapons as well as dual tech-
nologies. A few terrorist groups seek to develop, acquire, and use
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons. None-
theless, the bulk of the weapon types used by terrorists consists of
conventional weapons, especially firearms and improvised ex-
plosive devices.
Explosive devices
Terrorist groups obtain factory-manufactured explosives through
theft or from a terrorist state sponsor. In addition, they sometimes
manufacture their own explosives. Sophisticated terrorist groups
purchase both military and commercial explosives using forged
and adapted end-user certificates. Under the cover of transport-
ing general cargo, terrorist groups transport the explosives by
land, sea, and air. Terrorist groups have gained access to both
fragmentation and incendiary types of explosives. The availabil-
ity of explosives, associated technologies, and expertise enables
terrorist groups to build improvised explosive devices (IEDs) to
attack land, sea, and aerial targets.
Terrorist recruits can master bomb-manufacturing skills in a
short period of time, and knowledge of how to handle and manu-
facture explosives and explosive devices is widely available on the
Internet and in The Terrorist Handbook. The threshold for terrorism
has been raised dramatically through the popularization of terror-
ist devices on the Internet. Security and intelligence agencies have
monitored e-mail communications between terrorist groups, such
as Hezbollah providing Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad with
information on how to manufacture explosives and make impro-
vised explosive devices. Because IEDs can be designed and built
for use in various situations, they are the favored weapon of many
terrorists. Molotov cocktails and pipe bombs are the oldest form,
and often most frequently used by terrorists worldwide, because
the fuel for Molotov cocktails and the gunpowder for pipe bombs
are easily obtainable and inexpensive, and the device is easily
manufactured. Letter and parcel bombs are the most common ex-
amples going back to the end of the nineteenth century. The threat
of letter and parcel bombs is very real because only a fraction of
the millions of letters and packages passing through post offices
and courier companies annually can be scanned.
50
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Terrorists usually prefer high-velocity explosives, which are
more destructive, more stable, and can be molded to any shape
and size. The scale of destruction to humans and infrastructure
depends on the quality of the explosive, the way it is packed, and
the nature of the target. Almost all the explosives demonstrate
fragmentation, blast pressure, and incendiary effects. The shrap-
nel—glass, nails, spikes, ball bearings, barbed wire, and other
pieces of metal—in the device makes it more lethal. Furthermore,
if placed in a metal container, the fragmentation is even greater. If
the target is an enclosed structure of concrete with windows, the
fragmentation will include shattered pieces of concrete and flying
glass. Sometimes Hamas, PIJ, and Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade have
added rat poison, an anticoagulant, to the bomb device to ensure
that the injured bleed to death. Blast pressure can be positive—
the outward wave of air—and negative—the vacuum created that
sucks air into the point of explosion. With the explosion, building
walls and complete floors collapse, and objects and people are
flung at great speed. On occasion those exposed to a blast appear
unaffected but in reality suffer major to minor internal injuries,
with hemorrhaging that takes time to take effect. Often their
lungs are ripped apart, their liver and other internal organs are
damaged, and their eardrums and eyes are injured. Lasting a frac-
tion of a second, the incendiary effects ignite skin, hair, and other
inflammatory material. Some devices are specially designed to
start a fire. The victims suffer from physical and psychological
consequences: shock—pale face, abundant sweating, and slowed
pulse; loss of consciousness—concussion, meningeal hemor-
rhages, and encephalic lesions; and panic attacks—trembling and
amnesia.
Terrorists continue to develop new technologies and tactics
to improve the efficiency and efficacy of their explosive devices,
just as counterterrorists work tirelessly to offset them. The Afghan
Jihad Encyclopedia provides a plethora of information, including
how to booby-trap everyday items. The mujahedin consider ex-
plosives the “safest weapon” because it enables them to get away
from the area and avoid arrest.
Guerrillas or terrorist groups engaged in guerrilla warfare
also often employ mines. Although some groups have acquired
mines by theft or by raiding military facilities, most groups op-
erating in rural and jungle terrains manufacture them. Terror-
ists manufacture land mines to target vehicles, enemy soldiers,
and civilians. The psychological impact of an antipersonnel
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
51

mine attack that leads to injury can demoralize a target. At-
tempts by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and nongovernmental organizations such as International Alert
in London to influence or seek an agreement with terrorist
groups to totally abandon the use of mines have met with par-
tial success. Security forces must disrupt and destroy the access
to, expertise in, and resources relating to mines, terrorist man-
ufacture, and training.
Terrorist groups, especially those operating in rural areas,
use land mines (mostly antipersonnel mines) against counterter-
rorists, especially against search-and-destroy teams. After ex-
ploding a primary device, some terrorist groups place a second-
ary device aimed at targeting reinforcing troops. In most
countries, the technology to detect land mines is primitive, and
though it has improved recently, the use of mine-detection equip-
ment slows down military operations. Thus most counterterrorist
forces do not use mine detection equipment. In contrast, mine de-
tection equipment is widely used by serving or retired explosives
ordinance disposal personnel in mine-clearing operations
mounted by governments and by humanitarian organizations in
post-conflict situations or during periods of cease-fire.
Terrorist groups use both hand-thrown and rocket-propelled
grenades frequently. Some terrorist groups even manufacture
their own grenades. Terrorists lob grenades into vehicles, schools,
homes, offices, and public meetings. Usually the impact of a
grenade is multiplied if it explodes inside a vehicle or a building
rather than in an open space—so when traveling in conflict zones,
it is wise to shutter vehicles fully and to protect the windows of
premises with a wire mesh.
As noted earlier, information on how to manufacture ex-
plosives or an explosive device is widely available in the public
domain. However, manufacturing and transporting explosives
and explosive devices require specialized training and extraor-
dinary skill so that the bomb maker or the bomber doesn’t die
or suffer injury during the manufacturing or the transportation
phases. Even experts such as Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the Febru-
ary 1993 World Trade Center bomber in New York, suffered in-
juries. Although most terrorist recruits are taught the theory of
explosives, only a handful are selected to become explosives ex-
perts. Before the training begins, almost all training manuals
emphasize the need to identify a correct type of person to un-
dergo the highly specialized explosives course: someone calm,
52
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

quiet, and intelligent, not a hothead who might kill himself/her-
self or others.
To overcome enhanced security measures at airports and sea-
ports aimed at preventing the transportation of explosives to the
target location, contemporary terrorist groups are training their
recruits to build bombs by using material commercially available
in the vicinity of the target. After training terrorists in manufac-
turing bombs using commercially available material, they are
dispatched to target zones without any bomb-making material.
The terrorists, who have memorized the bomb-making instruc-
tions and formulae, rent apartments and use their rooms, garages,
and kitchens to produce the explosives and the explosive devices.
The bombs Al Qaeda planned to build to destroy the U.S. Em-
bassy and the American Cultural Center in Paris soon after 9/11
used commercially available chemicals.
With higher detonation rates, military explosives have a
greater shattering effect than do homemade ones. They are also
stable and insensitive to heat, shock, impact, and friction.
Nonetheless, a homemade explosive device can be as devastating
as a military explosive device, as shown by the explosives type
found in the shoes worn by Richard Reid, who planned to bomb
Flight AA63 from Paris to Miami on December 22, 2001. The ex-
plosive TATP is manufactured in terrorist bomb factories in the Is-
raeli-occupied areas of Palestine. It is also the favored explosive
of the Palestinian terrorist groups—Hamas, PIJ, and Al Aqsa Mar-
tyrs Brigade—including that of its suicide bombers. Al Qaeda
trained its explosives experts to manufacture TATP, but it requires
expert handling.
Every bomb has the signature of a terrorist school, if not a
terrorist group, due to a number of factors (the way it is con-
structed, the components used, etc). Every explosive device pro-
vides an understanding of the technical competence of the terror-
ist group. The type of explosive and the method of its
manufacture can help to identify the group responsible and,
sometimes, the bomb maker. The study of the technical capability
of a terrorist group can provide clues about where terrorists ob-
tain their supplies and about the identity of their trainers. Fur-
thermore, it helps to trace the origin and to predict the terrorist
group’s technological trajectory.
Contemporary terrorist groups obtain explosives from se-
curity forces, state sponsors, and manufacturers via deceptive
measures. The Kosovo Liberation Army obtained 80 percent of
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
53

its firearms, including its explosives, from corrupt officers of the
Serbian military. PIRA (the Provisional Irish Republican Army)
obtained Semtex from Libya from a 1,000-ton consignment
Tripoli received from Czechoslovakia. The LTTE received fifty
tons of TNT and ten tons of RDX from Ukraine’s Rubezone
chemical plant by presenting a forged end-user certificate
signed by the secretary of defense of Bangladesh. Although the
French intelligence service and navy interdicted only one PIRA
consignment, the LTTE consignment reached Sri Lankan shores.
Access to explosives enabled terrorist groups to step up their
terrorist campaigns. Even if stringent measures are introduced,
there are already several tens of thousands of tons of explosives
in the hands of terrorist groups, criminal groups, and militaries.
The key to reducing the threat of terrorism should be a multia-
gency task: denying terrorist groups access to funds, punishing
corrupt military officers, instilling sanctions against state spon-
sors, requiring state verification of all transactions, limiting ter-
rorist access to precursor chemicals, and, most important, im-
proving international security, intelligence, law enforcement,
and judicial cooperation.
Manufactured and Improvised Firearms
With the end of the Cold War, the international arms market be-
came saturated. Although there are grave legal and operational
limitations that constrain governments from combating interna-
tional arms procurement and shipping, there is no centralized
controlling body that regulates transactions to counter illicit arms
procurement and shipping. The widespread availability of
firearms, notably small arms and light weapons, has increased
the threshold for terrorist attacks. In a July 1999 study, the Inter-
national Committee of the Red Cross estimated that over 50 per-
cent of the casualties of armed conflicts were civilians. Next to ex-
plosives, this category of weapons—including the AK-47, Type
56, M-16, general purpose machine gun (GPMG), light machine
gun (LMG), submachine gun (SMG), pistols, revolvers, and
rocket-propelled grenade launcher (RPG)—remains the most
widely used by terrorist groups. There are nearly fifty million
copies and variations of the A. Kalashnikov rifle (AK/AKM), the
most used weapon in the world.
Weapons such as the Russian PP-90 submachine gun are
perfect for terrorists. Easy to procure, conceal, transport, and
54
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

use, small arms and light weapons will remain the weapons of
choice of terrorists in the foreseeable future. Therefore, limiting
their availability by denying easy access to conventional
weapons is likely to reduce the threat, as well as incidents, of
terrorism.
The widespread availability of weapons has provided terror-
ist groups access to weapons of all sizes: small, medium, and
heavy infantry. Small arms include rifles, pistols, revolvers, sub-
machine guns, and light machine guns. Medium-size infantry
weapons are mostly belt-fed machine guns, smaller sized mor-
tars, RPGs, light antitank weapons (LAWs), and small-caliber
wire-guided missiles. Heavy infantry weapons includes heavy-
caliber machine guns, heavy-caliber mortars, large-caliber wire-
guided missiles, shoulder-held antitank missile launchers, and
some rockets below the category of artillery. The more sophisti-
cated groups have procured and used standoff-weapons—RPGs,
LAWs, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), and small-, medium-, and
large-caliber mortars. Only limited training is needed to use most
of these weapons. Groups with standoff capabilities attack not
only land targets but also sea and aerial ones. They enable terror-
ists to preserve their strength and conduct mass fatality and ca-
sualty attacks both of combatants and civilians. The terrorist
propensity to procure and employ standoff-weapons increased
during the 1990s.
With easy access to the saturated weapons market, groups
have replaced their improvised weapons with commercially
manufactured weapons. Improvised or homemade weapons
tend to be less reliable than commercially manufactured stan-
dard factory-made weapons. In the Northwest Frontier Province
in Pakistan, a replica of any small arm and light weapon can be
manufactured. Other regions in the world are awash with
weapons: there are huge Soviet and Western stockpiles in
Afghanistan and Pakistan; and many countries in Southeast
Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Balkans (mostly Croatia) are
known to sell weapons without proper verification. In these re-
gions terrorist groups have gained access to sophisticated
weapons, dual technologies, and professional trainers. Saturated
arms markets in Eastern Europe, the southern belt of the former
Soviet Union, and in other regions where Cold War conflicts
have ended feed the international arms pipelines of several ter-
rorist groups. Although the industrialized world produces the
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
55

bulk of light weapons today, the emerging trend is for develop-
ing countries to invest increasingly in light weapon production.
Because developing states have less control over arms produc-
tion and trade, it is likely that the illicit arms markets will grow
exponentially in the future.
Often terrorist groups accomplish large-scale purchase of
arms through the connivance and condoning of governments of
the manufacturing countries. To counter this proliferation, it is
necessary to minimize or supervise the role of unscrupulous pri-
vate arms dealers. The international community should encour-
age arms transactions at a government-to-government level. But
due to the enormity of the illicit arms trade and the profits that ac-
crue to the manufacturing countries, they may not be acceptable
limitations. Alternatively, governments of the manufacturing
states should nominate their arms dealers, renewing their licenses
to trade annually after reviewing whether their transactions have
complied with international and domestic rules and regulations.
Yet there is no international tribunal that can try violations of con-
ventions that regulate illicit arms transactions and transportation,
and no central data bank that can collect, collate, and disseminate
information on illicit transactions.
There is no way to monitor those involved in the illegal arms
trade continuously and adequately. Instead, arms dealers are
changing their modus operandi and adopting more sophisticated
methods and machinery to elude detection. Action to counter il-
licit arms trade should encompass the trafficking of arms both
across national borders and on the high seas. The bulk of terrorist
weaponry is transferred by sea, but it is not an offense for a ter-
rorist group to traffic arms in international waters. There is no in-
ternational maritime police organization like Interpol to monitor
and to counter arms shipments activity by identification, inter-
ception, and arrest of crew and vessels.
Dual Technologies
Dual-user technologies, or dual technologies, are civilian equip-
ment that can also be used for military applications. Terrorist
groups procure dual technologies mostly from Western Europe,
North America, and the Far East. Terrorist groups experiment and
adapt modern dual technologies (GPS, mobile phones, and
pagers) to improve and enhance their performance or as a “force
multiplier.” When Osama bin Laden moved from Sudan to
56
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Afghanistan in May 1996, the Al Qaeda cell in the United States
purchased a satellite phone for its leader in New York. Al Qaeda
also purchased scuba-diving equipment, range finders, night vi-
sion goggles, and communication equipment from the United
States, United Kingdom, Japan, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. Ter-
rorist groups with maritime terrorist and support capabilities
(Hezbollah, Al Qaeda, and the LTTE) have purchased speedboats,
communication gear, semiclosed-circuit underwater scuba, and
antennas from Thailand, Malaysia, Australia, Holland, United
Kingdom, France, and Germany.
Most terrorists are adept at improvisation rather than inno-
vation. Terrorists can turn most dual technologies into impro-
vised weapons or into a component of an improvised weapon.
The world watched with horror when aircraft were used as
guided missiles to attack U.S. civilian targets on 9/11. Likewise
terrorists use commercially available technologies such as pretty
good privacy (PGP), an encryption program, to communicate
messages. PGP cannot be decoded by government security agen-
cies. Perhaps the most dangerous aspect of terrorist use of dual
technologies is the use of laboratory equipment intended to pro-
duce medicines for curing the ill; instead, the equipment is used
to produce biological and chemical agents to kill and injure.
Terrorist procurement of dual technologies is difficult to pre-
vent. By monitoring terrorist support activity and targeting ter-
rorist groups it is possible to deny those groups access to dual
technologies. As most governments target the criminal activities
of terrorist groups and not terrorist groups per se, many foreign
terrorist groups procure dual technologies from countries around
the world. Procuring a dual technology even by an acknowl-
edged foreign terrorist group is not a criminal offense in most
countries. This shows the importance of human and technical in-
telligence in countering terrorism.
CBRN Weapons
Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) weapons
are not synonymous with mass casualty weapons. Similarly,
CBRN attacks are not synonymous with mass casualty attacks.
Although CBRNs are classified as weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), not all CBRN terrorist attacks have resulted in mass ca-
sualties. With the exception of the nerve gas attack by Aum Shin-
rikyo of Japan that killed twelve people, no other chemical,
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
57

biological, or radiological attack to date has resulted in significant
casualties. Most terrorists have not used CBRN material due to
problems of access. However, even terrorist groups with access to
chemical, biological, and radiological materials are reluctant to
use them as weapons due to problems of delivery, lack of control
(its effects on one’s own population), fear of overwhelming retal-
iation, and, in some cases, concerns over loss of public support.
The trend is for terrorists to conduct mass casualty attacks using
conventional means (hijacked fully fuel-laden passenger aircraft
used as guided missiles or coordinated simultaneous bombings
of high-rise buildings and population centers). Nonetheless, a
handful of terrorist groups such as Aum Shinrikyo and Al Qaeda
have shown a sustained long-term interest to acquire, develop,
and use CBRN weapons.
Al Qaeda paid $1.5 million to a Sudanese military officer and
acquired a uranium canister in 1993. Although Al Qaeda tested
the canister, irradiated from outside, with a Geiger counter, the
group was duped. Al Qaeda also purchased a T-389, a military
aircraft, for $230,000, and bin Laden’s personal pilot, Essam Al-
Ridi, flew it from Tucson, Arizona, to Khartoum, Sudan. Bin
Laden asked the Egyptian-born American pilot to learn crop-
dusting techniques with the hidden intention of launching a
chemical warfare attack. In addition to employing an Egyptian
physicist, Al Qaeda persisted in its attempts to purchase CBRN
material through Russian and Ukrainian organized crime groups.
At the time that the United States intervened in Afghanistan, Al
Qaeda had established links with Pakistani nuclear physicists
and established a series of front companies to obtain components
to develop a CBRN capability. Furthermore, Al Qaeda had estab-
lished a special camp next to the Derunta complex for research
into high explosives and CBRN weapons; it is likely that the com-
plex was experimenting on the impact of a radiological dispersal
device. From Al Qaeda camps and safe houses, U.S. troops, CNN
reporters, and other journalists recovered documents on CBRN
material. The computer diskettes of Zacarias Moussaoui, the
would-be twentieth 9/11 hijacker, contained information about
the aerial dispersal of pesticides. On the pretext of launching a
crop-spraying company he had inquired about crop-dusting
equipment, suggesting that the 9/11 operation could have been
wider in scope. It is not possible to prevent a determined group
like Al Qaeda from building a CBRN capability. Even after the Al
Qaeda training infrastructure in Afghanistan was destroyed, the
58
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

trajectory of Al Qaeda clearly demonstrates that the group has
been considering using unconventional weapons. On February
20, 2002, Italian police arrested an Al Qaeda cell consisting of four
Moroccans with nine pounds of cyanide and a map pinpointing
the location of water pipes that lead to the U.S. Embassy in Rome.
On April 11, 2002, seventeen people, including twelve Germans,
were killed when Al Qaeda members detonated a liquid petro-
leum gas truck next to the oldest Jewish synagogue in Djerba,
Tunisia. On May 8, 2002, U.S. authorities arrested Jose Perdilla,
alias Abdullah al Muhajir, a Muslim convert and an Al
Qaeda–trained former American gang member planning to deto-
nate a radioactive dispersal device in the United States. It is just a
question of time until Al Qaeda or another terrorist group will
acquire, develop, and use a CBRN weapon. Indeed, a new vol-
ume to the Encyclopaedia of the Afghan Jihad—a separate CD-Rom
reserved for a few handpicked Al Qaeda members—details
CBRN weapons, especially chemical and biological warfare. Un-
less a state sponsor provides a nuclear weapon to a terrorist
group, it is highly unlikely that a terrorist group will be able to
gain access to a nuclear weapon. However, it is likely that a ter-
rorist group will acquire, develop, or use a chemical, biological,
or radiological weapon. Because preserving biological agents is
difficult, a chemical or radiological weapon is the most likely
weapon of the CBRN categories.
Chemical Weapons.
Terrorist groups have copied state actors
that use chemicals as weapons. In World War I, state actors used
choking agents—chlorine and mustard gas—producing nearly
100,000 deaths and 900,000 injuries. In World War II, Nazis used
zykon-B gas against Jews, gypsies, and Soviet prisoners. Since the
beginning of the contemporary wave of terrorism, two groups
have used these weapons effectively. After besieging the Sri
Lankan military detachment in Kiran, Eastern Sri Lanka, the LTTE
employed chlorine recovered from a nearby paper mill in
Valachchinai against the Sri Lankan troops in 1990. There was nei-
ther international outrage nor a close study of the chemical terror-
ism event (because winds shifted and no one was killed) until the
Aum Shinrikyo successfully used chemical agents five years later.
Aum Shinrikyo used or attempted to use sarin (a nerve gas), VX,
mustard gas, and phosgene gas against Japanese civilians. After
Aum killed twelve people and injured 5,500 in the Tokyo subway
on March 20, 1995, police raided the group’s premises and produc-
tion facility and recovered chemicals sufficient to kill 4.2 million
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
59

people. Aum scientists also manufactured anthrax (fortunately not
weapons-grade) by visiting a sheep farm in Australia and planned
to acquire a thermonuclear device from Russia.
Biological Weapons. Biological, bacteriological, or germ
warfare has the potential to kill more humans than nuclear war-
fare. Of 395 biological toxins, a threat analysis by David Franz in
1988 revealed that seventeen are weaponizable. During World War
II, biological warfare killed several hundreds of thousands of per-
sons. Plague (the Black Death), a rodent-to-human transmitted
disease that began in India, created the first known epidemic in
China, in 1330. A pestilence occurred when Mongol Tatars cata-
pulted plague-infested corpses into the besieged Crimean city of
Caffa. When a few survivors escaped by boat to Genoa, the rats
from the ship spread the plague, resulting in the death of a quar-
ter of the European population by 1349. Laboratory samples of
the plague still exist in government research facilities in the
United States and in Russia. In another example, sixteenth-cen-
tury Europeans reduced Mexico’s native population from 30 mil-
lion to 3 million in just fifty years by unwittingly introducing
measles and smallpox. In 1754, the Native American population
in the United States was decimated when traders in Pennsylvania
gave them blankets exposed to the smallpox (cowpox) virus. Al-
though smallpox, caused by the variola virus, was eradicated
worldwide in 1977, it remains a highly contagious disease that
kills 20 percent of all people contracting it. Ethnonationalist ter-
rorists have been afraid to use emerging pathogens—microbes to
which few individuals have gained resistance—due to the risk of
infecting their own population. But with the advances in biotech-
nology and terrorist access to scientists, terrorist ethnic targeting
is a likely future scenario. Since 9/11 Western governments have
been manufacturing and stocking the smallpox vaccine because
young people have never been vaccinated and because older
people lose their immunity after twenty years. A terrorist group
could always manufacture these agents under the pretext of man-
ufacturing vaccines. A contemporary use of biological warfare
was seen when Oregon’s Rajneeshee Sect wanted to sway the out-
come of an election in 1984. According to RAND expert John
Parachini, the Rajneeshees obtained a strain of salmonella from
the American Type Culture Collection in Maryland with the in-
tent of poisoning ten salad bars in areas where they believed the
vote would not favor them. Although 751 people fell ill, no one
died. As demonstrated in the post-9/11 anthrax attacks, bacteria-
60
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

induced diseases can vary in rate of infection and lethality. In ad-
dition to bacterial agents (anthrax, brucellosis, tularaemia, and
plague) and viral agents (Venezuelan equine encephalitis), terror-
ist groups have expressed an interest in using toxins (ricin and
botulism). In the 1980s, both the Bulgarian and South African se-
cret services used biological material, including ricin, to kill do-
mestic political opponents. Al Qaeda’s Islamic Group of Egypt
training manual, recovered in Manchester, England, lists ricin as
one of its toxins. The French police found a canister of botulism in
the safe house of the Red Army Faction in 1980. After receiving
news that a Japanese tourist had developed hemorrhagic fever
upon returning from a game park in Zaire, Aum scientists trav-
eled to Zaire to obtain infected material either from living persons
or corpses. At the turn of the millennium, a U.S. member of the
Aryan Nations was arrested for obtaining three vials of yersinia
pestis bacterium, which causes bubonic plague. In early 2002, the
Russian secret service is believed to have used a biological agent
in an envelope to kill Ibn-ul-Khattab, the head of Al Ansar muja-
hedin in Chechnya, who was also the leader of the mujahedin in
the Caucuses.
Both chemical and biological agents can be obtained from
government laboratories through the terrorist-organized crime
nexus. By developing links with rogue scientists, terrorist groups
can also produce them in laboratories. As the equipment is dual
technology, terrorist groups can also purchase the equipment re-
quired to produce these agents in the open market. Although
some biological agents are relatively difficult to produce, produc-
tion is within the reach of contemporary terrorist groups who
have access to university-qualified members, collaborators, sup-
porters, and sympathizers. Biological toxins, produced by bacte-
ria, fungi, algae, and other plants and animals, are more lethal
than their chemical counterparts. Terrorist groups face a chal-
lenge over the dispersal of these agents; they are nonvolatile
solids that need to be dispersed by a fine aerosol cloud suspended
with droplets containing nerve, blister, blood, and choking
agents. Nerve agents (fast-acting organophosphate compounds af-
fecting the central nervous system) that are absorbed through
skin and the respiratory tract kill immediately (examples are
sarin, soman, tabun, and VX). Blister agents (affecting eyes and
lungs and blistering the skin upon contact) are persistent agents
that remain in the target area for a considerable period of time
(examples are sulfur mustard, nitrogen mustard, and Lewisite).
Terrorist Training and Weaponry
61

Blood agents are highly volatile and dissipate rapidly in air when
in a gaseous state and affect the normal exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide, rapidly damaging body tissues (examples are
cyanide, cyanogens cyanide, arsine, and hydrogen cyanide).
Choking agents—a heavy gas delivered at ground level—tend to
fill low areas, causing the lungs to fill with fluid and the victim to
choke and cause corrosive effects on the respiratory system (ex-
amples are chlorine and phosgene). According to a post-9/11
Brookings Institute study titled “Protecting the American Home-
land,” dispersing smallpox, anthrax, ebola, or another deadly
agent in a large city could kill one million people and cause a loss
of $750 billion to the economy. The study rates the likelihood of a
biological attack as extremely low.
Nuclear Weapons. Construction of a nuclear device (as op-
posed to a “dirty bomb”) is not believed to be currently within the
reach of a terrorist group. However, the U.S. government has ex-
pressed concern over a state sponsor, especially Iraq, providing a
nuclear device or radiological material to a terrorist group. Sad-
dam Hussein used nerve gas against Iraqi Kurds and VX against
troops in the 1991 Gulf War, and was considered unlikely to hes-
itate to use CBRN weapons against U.S. troops. Nonetheless, un-
known to the international intelligence community, international
measures had effectively degraded and destroyed Saddam’s
CBRN capabilies throughout the 1990s. Although several hun-
dred portable nuclear suitcases and nuclear batteries have disap-
peared over time and the black nuclear market is active, terrorist
groups are more likely to attack a nuclear plant or trigger a radi-
ological dispersal device than detonate a nuclear warhead. Nu-
clear reactors are hardened targets protected by sixteen feet of
concrete, a missile shield, and backup cooling tanks with 600,000
gallons of water. Nonetheless, maps of U.S. nuclear facilities were
recovered in Afghanistan, and potassium-iodide pills are being
distributed to residents within ten miles of U.S. nuclear plants to
try prevent thyroid cancer. U.S. nuclear plants are well protected
by containment facilities, but plants in Europe and elsewhere are
less well protected, and waste and spent fuel there could be a tar-
get. According to statistics released in 2003, the International
Atomic Energy Agency estimates that between 1993 and 2003
there have been 175 cases of trafficking sensitive nuclear material.
A radiological dispersal device or a dirty bomb could be con-
structed using nuclear material, such as uranium or plutonium
from dismantled warheads or from a nuclear power plant. These
62
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

devices are unlikely to kill large numbers but would render a
large area uninhabitable for considerable time and generate mass
panic. According to the Federation of American Scientists, the
legacy of radiation lasts for years. Only a few terrorism groups
have engaged in radiological warfare in the past. A Chechen ter-
rorist group placed a cesium–137 device in a Moscow park in late
1995, and an unknown person dispersed radioactive ura-
nium–235 in the New York City water supply in 1981. The radio-
logical dispersal events did not produce any fatalities. Compared
to deaths resulting from a biological attack (one million), a nu-
clear explosion is likely to produce low fatalities (100,000), and a
radiological explosion is likely to produce the lowest fatalities
(10,000). Climatic conditions disperse the fallout in different di-
rections and distances.
More effective measures should be taken to prevent terrorists
accessing these materials by more monitoring and security where
they are stored, such as in hospitals (which store radioactive ma-
terials) and swimming pools (which store chlorine).
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
Tactics are methods employed by terrorist groups to conduct op-
erations. Targets are either personnel or infrastructure attacked by
terrorist groups. Terrorists select their tactics from a tactical reper-
toire and their targets from a wide range of opportunities. Ide-
ologies often provide the justification and framework for the se-
lection of certain tactics and targets, but the availability of
resources and expertise determines whether a group can engage
a certain target. Tactics vary tremendously from high-tech bomb-
ings to the simple machete. The repertoire ranges from manufac-
turing and using IEDs (victim-operated magnetic switches on
mines targeting ordnance-disposal personnel) to simple pipe
bombs or clubs. Terrorist tactics include bombing, assassination,
collective attack, maritime attack, mortar attack, mining attack,
and ambush. For a tactic to be effective it need not be high-tech,
complex, and expensive. Simple low-tech, low-cost tactics such as
arson can be theatrical and effective.
Hijackings, kidnapping, and hostage taking belong to one
subcategory of tactics. Because terrorists are copycats, hijackings,
hostage taking, and kidnappings become fashionable (if they are
effective and hard to counter) during certain periods and are used
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
63

to gain publicity and income to further a group’s aims. Terrorist
groups also use threats to advance their aims and objectives. The
threat of violent action (bomb, assassination) to cause fear or co-
erce an action or inaction is also an act of terrorism. Terrorist tar-
gets include humans and infrastructures in land, air, and sea.
Human targets include political leaders, administrators, military
personnel, business leaders, and large populations; infrastructure
targets include aviation, maritime, symbolic, and other national
critical infrastructure. Favorite terrorist targets are symbolic and
invested with the high prestige that will magnify terrorist power
and influence.
Terrorist targets include diplomatic (personnel and infra-
structure of embassies, high commissions, consulates, and inter-
est sections), foreign or domestic businesses (personnel or infra-
structure such as Shell Oil or McDonalds), domestic or foreign
military (including UN, NATO, and other peacekeeping mis-
sions), transportation assets (buses, trains, train tracks, airplanes,
ships, ports), domestic government (personnel and infrastructure
such as the police chief or the mayor’s office), foreign government
(nondiplomatic personnel or infrastructure), foreign (nondiplo-
matic, tourists, and students and infrastructure), religious (per-
sonnel or infrastructure such as mosques, gudwaras, kovils, tem-
ples, churches, synagogues), ethnic or racial (by nationality,
linguistic group, color, or geographic religion), the general public
(random attacks on population centers, such as malls), and hu-
manitarian workers (local and foreign personnel and infrastruc-
ture of relief and aid NGOs, including the ICRC). Because it is
impossible to protect all likely targets, governments and corpora-
tions adopt target-hardening measures (alarms, sensors, close-cir-
cuit television [CCTV], special glass, metal detectors, X-ray tech-
nology, space or vision barriers, quality training of personnel)
that make it costly and difficult for a terrorist group to attack the
protected target. However, the key to thwarting a terrorist attack
is intelligence, often advanced information of terrorist plans and
preparations, developed by infiltrating a terrorist group using
human agents.
Assassination
Assassination is a common tactic when a specific person is tar-
geted for a political purpose, retribution, or retaliation. This is not
a random killing, but one focused on an individual for perceived
64
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

grievances. Executions by self-imposed substate courts, “kanga-
roo courts,” or judges fit into this category. Traditionally, assassi-
nation has been used on heads of state to topple the government
(e.g., Anwar Al Sadat of Egypt, Aldo Moro of Italy, Indira Gandhi
of India, Rajiv Gandhi of India, Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, and
Ranasinghe Premadasa of Sri Lanka). By assassinating strong
leaders, especially those who fight terrorism steadfastly, terrorists
often bring to office weak leaders willing to compromise or fol-
low a course of inaction. Leadership targets are strategic targets
aimed at bringing about strategic change. As it has been difficult
to target protected persons, terrorists have assassinated impor-
tant government functionaries, including party leaders, political
officials, and diplomats (e.g., Ahmed Shah Masood, Northern Al-
liance leader of Afghanistan; Ri’fat al-Mahjub, the speaker of the
Egyptian Assembly; Shykh Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahabi, for-
mer minister of Awqaf in Egypt; Lalith Athulathmudali, Demo-
cratic United National Liberation Front leader of Sri Lanka; and
Ranjan Wijeratna, minister of state for defense of Sri Lanka). De-
spite the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes Against Internationally Protected Persons, the threat to
very important persons (VIPs) has persisted and is likely to grow.
Terrorists have also targeted moderates and journalists to elimi-
nate support for a negotiated political settlement against a terror-
ist group. By selectively assassinating important leaders, terror-
ists demonstrate society’s vulnerability to terrorism. Through
assassinations, terrorists seek to break public will. The loss of
good leaders who enjoy mass support has led to mass demoral-
ization. The assassination of military commanders demoralizes
their troops, especially frontline troops.
Assassination has become a common terrorist tactic. Terrorists
also use more specialized weapons to breach VIP security (sniper
and high-powered rifles, land-mine attacks, and vehicle bomb-
ings). Aware that the assassination of a leader leads to massive re-
taliation, terrorists often refrain from claiming assassinations. Some
groups conduct suicide terrorist assassinations because they do not
want the terrorist who perpetrated the assassination to be caught
alive. Before launching the assassination operation, many terrorist
groups tend to criticize the target of assassination and to portray
the target as an unjust person or human rights violator. Often if
there is public revulsion at the political murder, the terrorist group
refrains from claiming responsibility for it on grounds that the
group will suffer loss of public support.
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
65

Armed Assault
The success of an armed assault depends on two factors: (1) ini-
tial continuous and final terrorist reconnaissance/surveillance of
the intended target, and (2) training, retraining, and model train-
ing to gain surprise, speed, and stealth for the strike team. Ter-
rorist planners design a model for the terrorist strike team to en-
sure that each member is fully prepared. Often operational
commanders participate in the final reconnaissance or surveil-
lance of the target before the strike team goes into combat. Plan-
ning and preparation are the longest phases in an operation and
are key to the mission’s success. Examples include Maoists in
Nepal attacking police stations in Rolpa, the LTTE attacking civil-
ian settlements in Eastern Sri Lanka, PIRA firing mortars at
Heathrow on three occasions over five days, and the Abu Nidal
Organization attacking Rome and Vienna airports. A form of
armed assault is collective attack. This includes tactical maneu-
vering on an objective involving coordination and tactics, such as
an attack on a strategic settlement or a border outpost. It normally
involves attacks against protected civilian settlements or military
targets.
Most armed assaults are direct attacks involving the use of
bombs, grenades, and guns. Bombs remain the most favored ter-
rorist weapon and account for about 67 percent of all terrorist at-
tacks. Many groups favor the tactic of bombing because the ter-
rorist is far removed from the event and the elements of surprise
and shock can be preserved. Bombs differ from mines, rockets,
mortars, artillery, or munitions launched from aircraft or ships.
Pipe bombs are used also, but not in all theaters of conflict. Vehi-
cle bombs—packaged inside cars, vans, or trucks—can be either
random victim weapons or personal attack weapons. With ran-
dom victim attack bombs, the bomb is detonated with a timer or
a remote control device and is likely to kill several hundred per-
sons, depending on the quantity of explosives and attack envi-
ronment. But if the car bomb is positioned strategically, it could
kill more people. The plan of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who parked
the car in the basement of the World Trade Center in February
1993, was to topple one WTC tower on top of the other and kill
250,000 people. Terrorists can also target and kill individuals by
placing a bomb in the car’s hood or under the seat or chassis.
Some groups use several bombs detonated after each other in
66
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

places where people are likely to run from the previous bomb to
seek shelter, thus maximizing casualties.
In contrast to armed assault, nonarmed assault includes
physical attacks upon a person or persons by a person or group.
However, this does not belong to the category of tactical opera-
tions. Examples are drive-by shootings, “punishment beatings,”
random shooting of tourists, and beating up citizens attempting
to vote.
Ambush
In terms of volume of attacks, terrorist ambushing follows terror-
ist bombing. In contrast to armed assault, an ambush is also a co-
ordinated surprise attack, but the attacker lies in wait for the tar-
get. If the ambush is well planned, those coming within the kill
zone are unlikely to survive. In a guerrilla situation, there may be
mines and mortars; a mine attack directs an explosion against on-
foot personnel or a vehicle carrying troops or civilians; a mortar
attack uses indirect fire against the intended target. An ambush
against civilians is categorized as an act of terrorism; an ambush
against military personnel is categorized as a guerrilla attack.
Hostage-Taking
International law defines hostage-taking as the seizing or detain-
ing of a person and threatening to kill, injure, or continue to de-
tain that person in order to compel a third party to do or abstain
from doing any act as explicit or implicit condition for the release
of the seized or detained person. The December 1979 convention
followed the hostage-taking of ninety-six Americans in Iran. The
U.S. failure to respond decisively led President Jimmy Carter to
lose his presidency and gave rise to the policy of “no negotiations
with terrorists.”
Terrorists can take hostages either from an aircraft or by bar-
ricading a building, for example, to negotiate demands or to gain
world attention. After taking hostages, the terrorist group sets
forth demands, usually including money and safe passage. Inter-
national attention enables the terrorists to highlight their cause. In
a few cases families, businesses, insurance companies, and even
governments yield to hijacker demands, further increasing the
threat of terrorism. For instance, the Islamic Movement of Uzbek-
istan kidnapped American tourists after a Japanese businessman
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
67

paid to seek the release of Japanese geologists kidnapped in Kyr-
gyzstan. After Libya paid ransom money for the release of one
batch of hostages, the Abu Sayyaf Group kidnapped even more
hostages. When India freed Ahmed Saeed Omar Sheikh after
Harakat-ul-Mujahedin took passengers in an Indian airline flight
hostage, he was involved in the kidnapping and murder of Daniel
Pearl, the first U.S. terrorist casualty since 9/11. Appeasement
rarely works with a terrorist group.
Some terrorist groups, such as Hezbollah, FARC, ELN, AUC,
and Al Ansar mujahedin, are notorious for takings and holdings.
Although most hostages are freed eventually, a few groups kill
their hostages whether their demands are met or not. Hostage-tak-
ing for large cash ransoms is the fastest growing form of terrorist
activity in Colombia, Chechnya, Mexico, Yemen, and the Philip-
pines. Even UN peacekeepers, officials, and aid workers have
been taken hostage in Bosnia, East Timor, and Sierra Leone. Many
of these countries lack either the resources to control the security
environment or the elite units to respond to a hostage taking.
Before hostage-takers start to kill their captives, highly
trained hostage negotiators and rescue commandos with the
skills to help end hostage situations are essential. By investing in
training, equipment, and in sharing experiences, nations can
lower the threat of hostage-taking worldwide. In hostage situa-
tions, governments must work together with the media to fore-
stall coverage of a hostage situation that takes away the element
of surprise and prevents a successful storming of an aircraft or an
embassy. Most hostages freed by a group or rescued by the au-
thorities must be treated psychologically for shock and trauma.
Some hostages rarely overcome their ordeals and eventually com-
mit suicide.
Hijacking
A hijacking occurs when a vehicle or transportation system is
forcibly taken over by a terrorist or a group of terrorists. The ve-
hicle or transportation system can be public or private. In contrast
to other tactics, hijackings offer the terrorists mobility, the oppor-
tunity to highlight grievances, and unparalleled media attention.
The hijacking of aircraft beginning in the late 1960s has been the
single biggest threat to public safety in recent years. By the early
1970s, Israelis greatly reduced hijacking threats through sky mar-
shals and a range of other initiatives.
68
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Hijacking is not limited to air or road transport but is also
possible with maritime transport. Muhammad Tokcan, a Turkish
citizen of Chechen origin, on January 16, 1996, seized a Turkish
Black Sea passenger ferry in the Turkish port of Trabzon. When
hijacked, the Panama-registered ferry, the Eurasia, was about to
depart for the Russian port of Sochi. The terrorists took more than
two hundred hostages, including ninety-five Russian citizens,
and threatened to blow up the ship if Russian forces did not stop
their attacks on the Chechens. The hostages were released un-
harmed after four days. Tokcan was imprisoned after surrender-
ing, but under amnesty he was released by Turkey in 2000.
Kidnapping
A kidnapping occurs when one or more individuals are abducted
by force to be used for ransom or coercion. To increase the ransom
payment or coercive power, some terrorist groups refrain from
immediate publicity about the abduction. Often the target is a
prominent political or military figure, wealthy person, business-
man, or opponent. Kidnapping is a lucrative industry in many
countries, and terrorist groups may even subcontract kidnap-
pings to other organizations. Al Qaeda and some other groups
conduct specialized courses on kidnapping for their members
and for members of other groups. Terrorist kidnappings are mo-
tivated by publicity, to gain political concessions, to release ter-
rorist detainees and prisoners, and for revenge, retaliation, and
funding.
Most sophisticated terrorist groups expend significant re-
sources and time planning kidnapping operations. They monitor
the times and routes taken by a potential target. Thus kidnap-
pings can be reduced by countersurveillance and varying the
routes and times of journeys. Some terrorist groups infiltrate a
target’s home or office in preparation for the kidnapping to learn
about their target’s security measures. Sophisticated terrorists de-
velop contingency plans, check their vehicles or backup vehicles,
and study the security of getaway route or routes.
Although governments may prohibit families and businesses
from negotiating the release of kidnapped victims by paying ran-
som, experience shows that this is virtually unenforceable. Per-
mitting families and companies to pay ransom for the release of a
family member or employees provides the law enforcement au-
thorities the best possibility of capturing the kidnappers. A highly
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
69

trained professional police force can monitor the contacts be-
tween the captors and the negotiators. The success of U.S. police
has led to a remarkably low incidence of U.S. kidnapping.
European elite counterterrorist forces were created as a direct
result of the German police’s failure to respond to the Black Sep-
tember Organization (BSO) kidnapping members of the Israeli
Olympic team from the Olympic Village in Munich on September
5, 1972. Eleven Israelis were killed. In response, West Germany
formed GSG9, and other European governments created their
own counterterrorist forces. Within two years, MOSSAD, Israel’s
foreign intelligence service, launched a worldwide manhunt, as-
sassinating all but two of the Munich kidnappers.
The most publicized terrorist kidnapping of an individual
was that of Aldo Moro, a former prime minister of Italy, by the
Red Brigades on March 16, 1978. His death resulted in a political
crisis prompting the Italian government to strengthen the legal
framework for fighting terrorism. Four years later, when the Red
Brigades kidnapped U.S. general James Dozier, he was summar-
ily released.
Suicide Terrorism
This is one of the most difficult forms of terrorism to counter. A sui-
cide attack is nearly impossible to thwart once the bomber has been
launched because the terrorist is focused on destroying his target
and not on protecting himself. But, if intelligence detects an on-
coming suicide attack in the planning and preparation stages, it can
be disrupted. Suicide terrorism enabled terrorist groups to inflict
severe damage to the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, U.S.
diplomatic targets in East Africa, the USS Cole, the World Trade
Center, and the Pentagon. Suicide terrorists retain a high potential
to destroy asymmetric targets that cannot be attacked successfully
by nonsuicide operations. When suicide terrorism is used in the
CBRN realm, the potential for destruction will be unprecedented.
About 400 suicide attacks committed by over 30 terrorist
groups have taken place since the early 1980s and the beginning
of the contemporary wave with Hezbollah in Lebanon. Al-
though the largest number of groups that conduct suicide at-
tacks is Islamist, secular groups, especially ethnonationalist
groups, have conducted the largest volume of attacks. Today,
fourteen terrorist groups have developed the capability to con-
duct suicide operations: Al Qaeda, Jayash-e-Muhammad,
70
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Harakat-ul-Mujahedin, Islamic Group of Egypt, Egyptian Is-
lamic Jihad, Al Ansar mujahedin, GIA, Hamas, PIJ, Al Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade, BKI, LTTE, PKK, and DHKP-C. The number of
terrorist groups developing this capability is growing dramati-
cally because it is cost effective and hard to defeat. In addition
to Al Ansar mujahedin of Chechnya, there is unverified infor-
mation that other Chechen groups, as well as Uigurs separatists,
have conducted suicide attacks. In addition to Hezbollah, there
are other Lebanese, as well as Syrian, groups that conducted sui-
cide attacks in the 1980s; these groups are not active in a terror-
ist context at this time. The Revolutionary People’s Liberation
Party (DHKP-C) in Turkey, a left-wing terrorist group, is the lat-
est group to adopt suicide tactics. A DHKP-C suicide bomber
killed himself and a police officer and injured seven others at a
regional police headquarters on January 3, 2001. Another sui-
cide bomber detonated himself at a police booth in Istanbul’s
public square, killing two policemen, injuring an Australian
tourist (who succumbed to his injuries), and wounding more
than twenty others on September 10, 2001.
A suicide bomber may be launched to reach the target either
on foot or in a land, sea, or aerial vehicle. The six types of suicide
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) operational at present are:
(1) a suicide body suit; (2) a three-wheeler vehicle, car, van, or
lorry-borne suicide IED; (3) a motorcycle-borne suicide IED; (4) a
naval craft–borne suicide IED; (5) a scuba diver–borne suicide
IED; and (6) a micro-light aerial vehicle, glider, mini-helicopter, or
passenger aircraft–borne suicide IED. All these categories have
been used or tried in South Asia and the Middle East. The first
suicide attack in the United States occurred on September 11,
2001. Because the tactic of crash-diving passenger aircraft is cost
effective, it is likely to be repeated. Suicide bodysuits have been
used mostly by female suicide terrorists, who evade standard se-
curity checks by concealing the device in their lower abdomens.
There have been only a handful of terrorist attempts to buy
aerial vehicles, train pilots, and conduct airborne attacks because
they are costly and difficult. Suicide terrorist attacks with a light
aircraft or a passenger aircraft are the most difficult to detect or
thwart. Al Qaeda used passenger aircraft to attack ground targets
such as the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the White
House because it would have been more difficult to launch a land
attack against such high-profile targets. Terrorist groups continue
to develop methods against security forces’ countermeasures. (An
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
71

Asian terrorist group hired a dog handler to add repellents to ex-
plosives to shield the suicide bombers from detection.) In addi-
tion to intelligence operations and protective security measures to
counter terrorist threats, governments and nongovernmental or-
ganizations need to develop nonmilitary operations to reduce the
threat of terrorism. Educators, clerics, and other prominent fig-
ures need to counter misrepresentations of Islamist ideology and
corrupted versions of the Koran. Islamic clerics who are terrorist
group leaders intertwine Islam with earthly force and increase the
appeal of martyrdom operations. Those spreading terrorist prop-
aganda should be criminalized. Otherwise, suicide terrorism will
persist and grow as a phenomenon especially in rich Western
countries.
Aviation Terrorism
The first wave of hijackings began in the early 1960s with Cuban
refugees armed with grenades, bombs, and guns and grew stead-
fastly after 1967. The hijackings that began with one hijacker in-
creased gradually to a group of hijackers, and they developed
more know-how about the functioning of the aircraft and crew,
concealed their weapons better, and used more sophisticated
weaponry. Although the hijackings continued until the end of the
Cold War, the antihijack pact of 1973 between the United States
and Cuba reduced the threat significantly.
The contemporary wave of terrorism began when three PFLP
members armed with pistols and grenades hijacked an Israeli El
Al commercial flight en route from Rome to Tel Aviv on July 22,
1968. This was the first flight to be hijacked inbound or outbound
to the Middle East. The flight was diverted to Algeria, a country
unfriendly to Israel. The PFLP intended neither to kill the ten
crew members and thirty-eight passengers nor to destroy the air-
craft, but to humiliate Israel; the hijackers injured the copilot but
freed the passengers on landing. Through increased security and
a policy of retaliation El Al was never again a victim of a success-
ful hijacking. When an El Al flight was taxiing to take off from
Athens to Paris on December 26, 1968, two terrorists armed with
grenades and machine guns attacked, killing one passenger and
injuring another and setting one engine on fire; in response, heli-
copter-borne Israeli commandos raided the Beirut airport and
blew up twelve Lebanese-registered aircraft. Multiple hijackings
and mass seizure of hostages took place when PFLP terrorists
72
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

commandeered four jet airliners in September 1970: one plane
was blown up in Egypt after an emergency evacuation; the other
three flights were diverted to the Jordanian desert, evacuated,
and simultaneously blown up.
Terrorist groups continue to develop new hijacking methods
to evade airline security countermeasures. The Black September
Organization (responsible for the 1972 Munich massacre) hi-
jacked SABENA airlines Flight 517 from Brussels with the aid of
two unsuspecting Palestinian women smuggling firearms and ex-
plosives in their cosmetic cases and in special girdles. When the
aircraft (a Boeing 707) stopped in Vienna, two BSO male members
boarded and took control of the aircraft; the terrorists became
bolder as they commandeered the plane to Israel. At the Lodi Air-
port on May 9, 1972, the hijackers threatened to blow up the
plane, demanding the release of more than three hundred im-
prisoned Arab terrorists; Israeli commandos disguised as me-
chanics burst into the cabin and opened fire, killing the two male
hijackers and capturing the two female hijackers. At Heathrow
airport in London, another terrorist, Nizar Hindawi, duped his
pregnant Irish girlfriend to take a bomb on board her flight to Is-
rael, but an alert El Al security officer discovered it. Every inci-
dent has led to new countermeasures (metal detectors, searching
passengers and their baggage before boarding, and sky mar-
shals), and hijackings have declined. The introduction of highly
trained, motivated, and tough sky marshals with a mandate to
negotiate, capture, or kill hijacker(s) drove fear into many hijack-
ers. But only Israel has at least one sky marshal on each El Al
flight; most countries do not post sky marshals on all flights. Mea-
sures such as magnetometer archways, x-ray machines, passen-
ger profiling, a bulletproof partition between the cockpit and the
cabin, and armored luggage and cargo areas have reduced the
threat further. Airlines that do not adhere to strict security guide-
lines have a higher proportion of hijackings. Under the auspices
of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a coop-
erative response against aviation terrorism was developed in
Tokyo (1963), The Hague (1970), and Montreal (1971), resulting in
a series of UN conventions.
Nonetheless, the threat persists. Because aircraft have a lim-
ited supply of fuel and food, the duration of aircraft hijackings is
limited. However, national flag carriers in particular remain vul-
nerable despite a constant upgrading in aviation security. During
the past thirty years Middle Eastern and other terrorist groups
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
73

have used a range of weapons and diverse methods to attack
civil aviation (planting IEDs in cargo, carrying firearms on
board, firing surface-to-air missiles, and using grenades and
knives). A grenade in an airplane is an effective suicidal weapon
that causes immediate structural damage and depressurizes the
aircraft, usually causing the aircraft to crash. More people have
been killed in aircraft IED bombings than in aircraft hijackings
and accidents.
Since Babbar Khalsa International (BKI) perpetrated the sin-
gle worst act of aviation sabotage, on June 23, 1985, the technol-
ogy to detect explosives has improved markedly. The motivation
of that act was to avenge the Indian security force attack on
Golden Temple in Amritsar, Punjab, to flush out Punjabi terror-
ists, and to avenge the massacre of five thousand innocent Sikhs
following the assassination of Indian prime minister Indira
Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards. The Air India flight from Mon-
treal to Bombay exploded and fell into the sea about 110 miles
east of Cork, Ireland, killing 329 passengers, mostly Canadian cit-
izens of Indian origin. Authorities recovered the bodies of only
132 victims and just 35 percent of the wreckage. Although the BKI
poses a lesser threat today, the group continues to operate in the
West, drawing support from radicalized members of the Sikh
community.
The bombing of the Pan Am flight over Lockerbie, Scotland,
a few days before Christmas 1988 demonstrated the role of state
sponsors in targeting civil aviation, a threat the Western intelli-
gence community took seriously. In the case of the Lockerbie in-
cident, the bomb—hidden in a cassette player and killing 269
people—was a direct retaliation to the 1986 U.S. bombing of
Tripoli, Libya, in which the adopted daughter of Colonel Muam-
mar Gaddafi (also spelled Gadhafi) was killed. The covert opera-
tion by the Jamahariya Security Organization (the Libyan intelli-
gence service) prompted the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
and its British counterpart, the SIS (MI6), allegedly to launch op-
erations to assassinate Gaddafi.
Technologically savvy terrorist groups continue to develop
explosives and methods to evade detection. For instance, Ramzi
Ahmed Yousef, the February 1993 World Trade Center bomber,
developed an explosive device with nitroglycerine that was vir-
tually undetectable at airport controls. The detonator of the bomb,
activated by an altitude meter, caused the midair explosion of the
bomb. Yousef tested the bomb on a flight bound for Tokyo, Japan,
74
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

from Cebu in the Philippines on December 11, 1994, with the in-
tention of destroying eleven U.S. airliners over the Pacific Ocean
in early 1995. The test explosion, occurring at 30,000 feet above
sea level on board a Philippine Airlines Flight 434, killed one pas-
senger, injured ten others, and blew a hole in the fuselage; the
plane landed safely in Okinawa. Together with the first Al Qaeda
pilot, Abdul Hakim Murad, Yousef planned separate attacks to
crash-dive aircraft into the Pentagon and the CIA headquarters in
Langley, Virginia. Similarly, the GIA hijackers after hijacking an
Air France flight from Algiers with 283 passengers planned to
ram it into the Eiffel Tower in Paris on December 26, 1994. In Mar-
seille when the terrorists called for a refueling, the GIGN, the
French antiterrorist commandos, stormed the plane, killed all
four terrorists, and freed the passengers. The operation injured
thirteen passengers, three crew members, and nine commandos.
The continuing threat of airliner bombing and hijacking has
prompted governments to enhance x-ray and other advanced ex-
plosive and metallic detection systems. Other effective security
systems that do not require high-level investment to enhance air-
port security checks have been adopted by a number of develop-
ing countries. Comprehensive positive passenger baggage match-
ing, first done manually and later electronically, has ensured that
unauthorized unaccompanied bags are not loaded onto airliners.
With the privatization of security, standards of management,
training, and morale of airport security have tended to decline.
This has resulted in security lapses in Europe, North America,
and around the world. Although it has become increasingly diffi-
cult for hijackers to smuggle a gun onto airplanes, it has not been
difficult to smuggle improvised explosive devices, grenades,
knives, and box cutters. Until 9/11, largely due to lax security, the
rate of detection of these weapons was low. Considering the de-
tection and confiscation of several hundred sharp instruments at
airport controls every day, a repeat of a scaled-down version of
9/11 is not unlikely. If the threat persists, hand searches of all lug-
gage and frisking passengers will become a necessity. The 9/11
tragedy has led to an erosion of the public confidence in the avi-
ation industry, but the enduring need to fly is likely to improve
aviation security further. One of the biggest problems is the sub-
stantial difference and inconsistency in security levels and mea-
sures between international airports. In February 2003, height-
ened security fears, due to intelligence on impending terrorist
attacks connected to expected U.S. and U.K. military operations
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
75

in Iraq, led to the unprecedented posting of U.K. military at sev-
eral U.K. airports. Because many countries cannot afford the same
levels of security, it is hard to counter aviation terrorism; a
Venezuelan who boarded in Colombia managed to get a hand
grenade into the United Kingdom despite heightened security.
During the 1990s, terrorists were trained in flying schools in
Western Europe and in North America and also in Australia, Pak-
istan, and Sudan, with authorities turning a blind eye to terrorists
and known local supporters learning to fly. A number of terrorist
groups, including Al Qaeda, have attempted to infiltrate airports
to plant bombs in airline cargo; an Al Qaeda cell from northern
Germany penetrated airport security in Amsterdam during the
planning stage of 9/11, intending to plant bombs in American
passenger planes. There have been terrorist attacks on airline
staff; Hesham Mohamed Hadayet, armed with two pistols and
one knife, killed two and injured four at the El Al ticket counter
in the Los Angeles international airport on July 4, 2002. Although
he is unlikely to have had a direct link with Al Qaeda, it appears
that he was influenced by Al Qaeda jihad ideology. The shooting
prompted authorities to screen all passengers at a remote site be-
fore entering the airport, and it is likely that tight security pre-
vented Hadayet from boarding an aircraft with a firearm. Due to
increased airport security and the concern for passenger safety of
passengers at high altitude, terrorist groups now are likely to in-
vest in missiles to shoot down airplanes. The proliferation of sur-
face-to-air missiles (SAMs) is gradually threatening commercial
aviation. Two dozen terrorist groups have gained access to SAMs.
Several hundred high-speed military jets and helicopters fell prey
to SAMs during and after the anti-Soviet Afghan period. The
most popular of the aerial weapons can target only low-flying air-
craft or on takeoff or landing.
Although the U.S. Congress in 1985 approved the transfer of
SAMs to the Afghan mujahedin and to UNITA in Angola, the CIA
expressed reservations and unsuccessfully tried to buy back
Stinger missiles that survived the anti-Soviet Afghan campaign
(1979–1989). During the same period, many terrorist groups pur-
chased SA-14s, an advanced version of the SA-7. The LTTE office
in Paris in 1994 purchased SA-14s from Bulgaria and used them
against both military and commercial aircraft in the second half of
the 1990s. In December 2001, a Sudanese member of Al Qaeda
fired a Stinger missile at a U.S. warplane near the Prince Sultan
airbase in Saudi Arabia. By enhancing perimeter security, flying
76
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

over the missile bubble, and using antimissile flares, military air-
craft have minimized the threat, but commercial aircraft remain
vulnerable to terrorist attack. With the decline in hijackings due
to increased security, the threat of SAMs to the aviation industry
is likely to increase.
The single biggest threat to the aviation industry will re-
main the terrorist use of explosives. As such, both governments
and corporations continue to invest significant resources to im-
prove the rate of detection of explosives. Post-9/11 explosive
detection equipment and trace explosive detection equipment
have a success rate of over 90 percent. In contrast to the explo-
sive detection equipment that tests bulk explosives, the trace ex-
plosive detection equipment detects minute amounts of explo-
sives. Trace explosive detection equipment was introduced at
airport controls after an Al Qaeda operative named Richard
Reid tried to destroy a U.S. airliner in December 2001. This lab-
style equipment analyzes passenger items (money, tickets, etc.)
to find out whether they have come into contact with explo-
sives. Thus the threat of an attack from the West is likely to re-
cede, though the threat against the West will not. When terror-
ists cannot target a national carrier from a Western country, they
are likely to penetrate security in a developing country and suc-
cessfully target a carrier providing passage to Western nation-
als. Although national authorities throughout the international
aviation system are enjoined to abide by ICAO security stan-
dards, most developing countries lack the resources to imple-
ment a well-designed, well-managed, and adequately resourced
national aviation security system. An international authority in
aviation security, Paul Wilkinson, recently called for a thorough
system of international inspection and enforcement of aviation
security and safety standards.
Maritime Terrorism
The maritime security environment was altered significantly even
before 9/11, when two Al Qaeda suicide bombers rammed an ex-
plosives-laden skiff into the USS Cole off the coast of Aden, Yemen,
killing seventeen U.S. naval personnel and injuring forty-two oth-
ers while inflicting extensive damage to the Arleigh-Burke–class
destroyer on October 12, 2000. The international alarm and pub-
licity generated by the Cole incident triggered two other terrorist
groups (one Asian and another Middle Eastern) to mount similar
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
77

terrorist attacks. Four LTTE suicide stealth boats breached the
heavily fortified defenses of the Trincomalee naval port on Octo-
ber 23, 2000. The explosives-laden boats destroyed one fast per-
sonnel carrier and damaged a second. A Hamas suicide boat at-
tempting to ram an Israeli naval craft exploded prematurely, with
insignificant damage to the naval craft, on November 7, 2000.
Three attacks within four weeks demonstrated the copycat effect,
a phenomenon not uncommon among modern terrorist groups.
The low-cost, high-impact attack prompted several terrorist
groups to plan and prepare for targeting objects at sea.
Although a relatively new environment for most terrorist
groups, the application of land techniques and tactics at sea is not
too difficult. The idea of attacking a U.S. warship was born in
May 1998, when the USS Mount Vernon visited Aden for three
days. When Osama bin Laden was informed of the visit by the
leadership of the Islamic Army of Aden Abayan, an associate
group of Al Qaeda, he dispatched an operational commander to
plan a long-term operation. On January 3, 2000, Al Qaeda’s TNT-
laden boat was brought from an Al Qaeda safehouse by a trailer
and launched into the sea, but due to excess weight, the explo-
sives-laden boat sank within minutes. Deprived of high-grade in-
telligence on Al Qaeda, the U.S. intelligence community failed to
realize that it had been targeted. Within ten months, Al Qaeda
mounted a second operation, this time using C-4, a plastic explo-
sive. Like most sophisticated terrorist groups, Al Qaeda too had a
steep learning curve whereby it improved its know-how con-
stantly. In keeping with its doctrine of maximizing its successes
and minimizing its failures, Al Qaeda dispatched the USS Cole
masterminds to Kuala Lumpur to plan an attack on another U.S.
ship visiting a Malaysian port in 2000.
Since the closure of U.S. bases in the Philippines in the early
1990s, Singapore has become the U.S. military’s most important
resupply point in Southeast Asia; an average of one hundred
Navy vessels stop each year, and several thousand sailors take
shore leave. Although the Singaporean Internal Security Depart-
ment (ISD) has disrupted the Jammah Islamiyyah (JI) organiza-
tion in Singapore, and Malaysia and the Philippines have fol-
lowed suit, Indonesia’s failure a to disrupt the JI organization and
arrest its leadership continues to threaten security in Southeast
Asia and Australasia. In addition, Al Qaeda’s successful attack on
the USS Cole and attempted attacks on the USS The Sullivans and
other U.S. warships off Malaysia, Singapore, and Gibraltar
78
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

demonstrate the continuing threat posed by this one group.
Hezbollah has also mounted surveillance of U.S. warships in
Southeast Asia.
Prior to 9/11, the U.S. and the international community had
no effective system to monitor the movement of terrorists operat-
ing across borders. In preparation for the USS Cole bombing,
Khalid Almihdhar and Nawaf Alhazmi visited Kuala Lumpur in
January 2000 and met with Al Qaeda’s Asian leadership, Hambali
and Sufaat, planning a similar operation in the Malacca Straits.
Despite their visit to Malaysia coming to the attention of the CIA,
Almihdhar and Alhazmi entered the United States under their
own names and participated in 9/11.
The lessons of 9/11 are being incorporated into the U.S.
counterterrorist doctrine but slowly; the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) is laying the foundation for an international
terrorist tracking system. The preparedness of the international
community to fight the post–Cold War wave of terrorism has
been poor. Post–Cold War terrorists are highly mobile, well edu-
cated, and willing to die for their beliefs. In many ways, interna-
tional and national security, intelligence, and law enforcement
agencies only began the framework for fighting the new terror-
ism after 9/11.
Terrorist know-how and technology for attacking ships have
proliferated. A manual about sea mines was recovered in
Afghanistan. A 1,086-page Harakat-ul Mujahedin terrorist train-
ing manual in Arabic (“Mujahideen ki Lalkaar—War Cry of the
Mujahideen”) was found near Kabul by Sandeep Unnithan and
Mohammad Waqas. Under techniques for disabling ships, the
manual reads: “A warship can be immobilised by placing 1.2 kg
of plastic explosive on the propeller shaft. A mere 1.3 kg can de-
stroy the engine . . . 4 kg on the base can sink it.” Although
Afghanistan is landlocked and over three hundred miles from the
nearest sea, the Harakat family of terrorist groups operates from
Australia to the Balkans and from the United Kingdom to
Canada. All the major terrorist groups active today have estab-
lished external networks; as such they influence the conduct of
each other directly and indirectly. Like governments, most con-
temporary groups learn from one another, either by direct trans-
fer or indirect emulation of technology, techniques, and tactics.
The threshold for maritime attacks has escalated with the in-
creased interaction between Caucasian, African, Middle Eastern,
and Asian terrorist groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
79

In addition to targeting ships and other objects at sea, a ter-
rorist group can use a ship both to transport supplies and per-
sonnel and as a weapon. After 9/11, the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) warned that terrorists “could use hijacked oil
tankers or liquefied natural gas carriers.” The New York port, the
third largest port in the United States, is located in the middle of
New York City. It is impossible to check each container that ar-
rives there. The carnage from detonating a conventional or a non-
conventional device on board a ship inside the harbor is likely to
kill and injure a number far exceeding the death toll of 9/11. This
illustrates the need for increased, maintained, and universal mar-
itime security.
Despite the looming threat, less than 5 percent of all terrorist
groups have developed maritime support and attack capabilities.
Yet any determined terrorist group can develop a maritime ter-
rorist capability in a short period of time. Replicating land capa-
bilities in the maritime environment is not difficult, but the mar-
itime infrastructure of terrorist groups is vulnerable to detection.
Therefore, only a few terrorist groups with maritime capabilities
have attacked commercial and military shipping in a sustained
manner. Most terrorist groups have emulated pirates and staged
surface attacks both to send a political message and to accumu-
late general cargo. Aboard fast power boats, terrorists have fired
at ships mostly with RPGs, LAWs, and heavy machine guns. The
attacks have been infrequent because most commercial and mili-
tary ships navigate the deep oceans, and because most terrorist
groups can operate only within the coastal or territorial waters.
When ships divert from shipping lanes and navigate to ports
of call, the marine police, coastguard, or navies of host countries
protect them. Therefore, the risk of terrorist attack on commercial
and military shipping is low except when they navigate along nar-
row sea-lanes that are not secured or well policed. Examples in-
clude the Islamic group of Egypt that conducted terrorist attacks
against cruise liners sailing on the Nile River in the 1990s;
POLISARIO, which staged similar attacks off Morocco; and Al
Qaeda and its associate groups, which planned to stage suicide at-
tacks and destroy U.S. and British warships in the straits of
Malacca in 2000–2001 and off Gibraltar in 2002. Terrorists have also
fired at ships from low- and high-trajectory weapons based on
land. For instance, the Portuguese terrorist group FP-25 claimed re-
sponsibility for an unsuccessful mortar attack on six NATO war-
ships in the port of Lisbon on January 28, 1985. There have been
80
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

similar attacks off Greece. Therefore, commercial and maritime
shipping is vulnerable to terrorist attack by sea (on the surface
when moving and underwater when stationary) and by air.
Anchored or berthed ships especially when in port are vul-
nerable to underwater attack by terrorist groups. Maritime ter-
rorist attacks involving the use of underwater explosives are few
but lethal. Only a few groups with access to military explosives,
essential to construct an underwater explosive device, can stage
an underwater attack. Furthermore, only a handful of groups
have members trained as skin or scuba divers (e.g., the “Sea-
Tigers” of the LTTE). Al Qaeda manuals recovered in Afghanistan
and intelligence of an attack in the making in the United States in-
dicated that the group had access to trained divers willing to die.
It is mostly groups with past and present access to state sponsor-
ship that conduct underwater maritime terrorist attacks. They
place underwater explosive devices on the hulls of vessels, espe-
cially under the engine room. Damage to any part of a ship can be
repaired without much difficulty except for the ship’s engine. In
the past, U.S., Soviet, Middle Eastern, and Indian intelligence
agencies, together with their naval counterparts, provided under-
water demolition training to a number of terrorist groups. Un-
derwater maritime terrorist attacks inflict significant damage to
boats and small ships, but not big ships. This is because terrorist
groups have not yet perfected the art of transporting large un-
derwater explosive devices and attaching them to the hulls of
large ships. The LTTE has used underwater scooters purchased
from Denmark to attack Sri Lankan and foreign ships off north-
eastern Sri Lanka. As most ships do not have hooks in the hull to
attach an explosive device, terrorist divers tie the device to the
ship’s propeller. To inflict greater damage, suicide divers position
the device under the ship’s engine and detonate the device.
Therefore, using the commonly used underwater explosive de-
vice, a terrorist group cannot inflict a mass casualty attack on
crew and passengers. In underwater warfare, only terrorist
groups with access to military explosives pose a sustained high
threat to maritime security. However, a terrorist group can strate-
gically place a sea mine on a shipping lane or ram a boat laden
with explosives. Therefore, the threat to commercial and military
shipping is high from terrorist mine warfare and maritime sur-
face warfare.
Using front shipping companies and flags of convenience,
and by changing their names frequently, terrorists use ships to
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
81

smuggle members, weapons, and supplies as well as to smuggle
humans, narcotics, and other contraband. A few Middle Eastern
groups (including the Palestinian Authority, PA) enjoying state
sponsorship, and others such as Al Qaeda, LTTE, KLA, ASG, and
MILF, have contracted or acquired ships that can navigate over
long distances. For instance, Karine A, a 4,028 dwt Tongan-flagged
ship with fifty tons of rockets, mortars, and explosives was seized
by Israeli commandos in international waters in the Red Sea in
January 2002. Registered to an Iraqi national, the ship was used by
the PA to smuggle weapons from Iran. Some terrorist groups have
expressed an interest in using their ships as a weapon, rigging
them as bombs. Others have expressed an interest in shipping con-
tainers laden with explosives to target either ships or ports. After
Norwegian intelligence uncovered in December 2001 that Al
Qaeda owned or controlled twenty-three ships, a number of ships
were searched by U.S. Special Forces and other military forces.
Prior to 9/11, Western intelligence agencies only monitored (as op-
posed to interdicted) terrorist ships, as they were believed to pose
limited or no threat to Western interests.
Although both commercial and military maritime industries
have invested significantly in security, terrorist groups have also
expressed a greater interest in exploiting the maritime environ-
ment. Within three weeks of the USS Cole attacks, both Hamas
and the LTTE mounted maritime suicide operations against Is-
raeli and Sri Lankan naval craft. Terrorist success, industry fear,
and public alarm generated after the Cole attack drove several ter-
rorist groups to consider developing maritime capabilities. The
threat to the maritime industry has continued to escalate, with
terrorists planning to develop mini-submarines, use explosives-
laden ships as weapons to attack port cities in the aftermath of
9/11, attack warships in the Indian Ocean by crashing commer-
cial airliners on them in early 2002, and plant explosives in cargo
containers. With heightened security, the trend is for maritime
terrorist attacks to be few but more lethal.
Just as terrorist groups continue to exchange land and aerial
technologies, they exchange maritime technologies, techniques,
and tactics. Initially the terrorist knowledge base of maritime ter-
rorist technologies improved when state actors provided them
with specialized training and resources. CIA-trained Cuban exile
groups in the United States staged the largest number of terrorist
attacks against Cuban and Soviet maritime targets during the
1960s; several Latin American and Middle Eastern groups re-
82
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

ceived similar training from Soviet bloc countries. India and sev-
eral other countries developed underwater demolition tech-
niques for foreign terrorist groups. Maritime conflicts between
states have also raised the threshold for maritime terrorism. Dur-
ing the post–Cold War period, state-to-state conflicts in the mar-
itime environment declined. There are a few exceptions: a North
Korean ship sinking a South Korean ship killed four people and
injured eighteen others on June 28, 2002. Although a few terrorist
groups innovate their own terrorist technologies, techniques, and
tactics, most are copycats and receive or emulate know-how and
resources from state actors.
Post-9/11 countermeasures include government hiring of
additional immigration and investigative personnel; develop-
ment of machine-readable, tamper-resistant visas and other travel
and entry documents using biometric identifiers; advanced noti-
fication of all cargo, vessels, crew, passenger, and other personnel
arrival and departure information; and civil penalties to those
who fail to conform. In addition to arrangements with foreign
governments to search and seal U.S.-bound cargo in their ports, it
became mandatory for all vessels to inform governments ninety-
six hours before entry to a port. Especially after the successful sui-
cide bombing of the oldest Jewish synagogue in Djerba, Tunisia,
using a liquid petroleum gas vehicle on April 11, 2002, there is
fear that Al Qaeda will use a ship with dangerous cargo to attack
a port. The threat posed by liquefied natural gas and petroleum
tankers is likely to persist until ports create special areas to ser-
vice such vessels. In light of the new threat, the United States has
amended the definition of “certain dangerous cargo” to include
any explosive materials, oxidizing materials, blasting agents,
spontaneously combustible products in bulk packaging, highway
route–controlled quantity radioactive material, controlled ship-
ments of fissile material, and bulk cargoes such as butylenes
oxide, chlorine, and elemental phosphorous.
Although countering conventional threats, the United States
will also need to invest more in thermal, infrared, chemical, bio-
logical, and radiological detection systems. In addition to declar-
ing all U.S. ports as security zones, the U.S. Coast Guard will de-
velop passenger-profiling systems to screen all commercial vessels
with the intention of identifying high-interest vessels for closer
examination. With several tens of thousands of ships entering U.S.
ports annually, and with as many as four thousand containers in
one ship in some cases, the U.S. government will have no option
Terrorist Tactics and Targets
83

but to invest in better-quality intelligence. Together with Lloyds
Maritime Intelligence Group in London, the Maritime Intelligence
Group in Washington, D.C., has developed the best vessel profil-
ing system to date. The U.S. Coast Guard has also established pro-
tection zones for a distance of five hundred yards around all U.S.
naval vessels in navigable waters of the United States. The U.S.
government has stipulated that nonmilitary vessels are not al-
lowed to enter within one hundred yards of a U.S. naval vessel,
whether under way or moored, unless authorized by a U.S. Coast
Guard or U.S. Navy patrol. Open ports like New York and New
Jersey came under restrictions with revised traffic management
plans, and vessels were barred from within 150 yards of Liberty
and Ellis Islands. Furthermore, unauthorized vessels and persons
are prohibited from approaching within 175 yards of the head-
quarters of the United Nations, on the East River in New York
City, and vessels must remain at least twenty-five yards away
from bridge piers and abutments, overhead power cables, and
tunnel ventilations. Although clarifying and amending various
other restrictions in the wake of 9/11, the United States also elim-
inated the requirement that deep-draft vessels enter the New York
port via Ambrose or Sandy Hook Channels as well as the security
zones around piers 90, 92, and 94 on the Hudson River. The secu-
rity of cruise ships too came under greater scrutiny. The threat is
likely to be greatest in zones where protection of U.S. naval vessels
is shared by host navies, coast guard, and maritime police author-
ities. Port security will include cargo security, where containerized
cargo will be identified, tracked, screened, and physically secured
by standard seals and locks; personnel security; and foreign port
assessments including screening containerized cargo, access re-
strictions, vessel security, certification of compliance with security
measures, and security management.
The future security of U.S., allied, and coalition partner mar-
itime assets will depend on the ability and the willingness of
Western governments to work with the rest of the world to en-
hance maritime security worldwide.
Terrorist Financing
Financing, the lifeblood of terrorist groups, has developed dra-
matically over the past thirty years. Only creative and innovative
terrorist groups survived the transition from the Cold War to the
84
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

post–Cold War. The dramatic loss or decline in state sponsorship
led several groups to abandon violence as a means to political
power. Post–Cold War terrorist groups are becoming dependent
on organized crime for their survival. The trend is for sophisti-
cated groups with an international reach to move from dirty-clean
money routes to clean-clean money routes. Penetration of legiti-
mate businesses, from manufacturing to trade and investment, is
evident. Today, all the major terrorist groups enjoy a transbound-
ary presence. With traditional state sponsors distancing them-
selves, several Middle Eastern, Asian African, and Latin American
terrorist groups generate support for terrorism in North America,
Europe, and Australasia. Political and economic conditions in lib-
eral democracies allow foreign terrorist groups to establish sup-
port infrastructure far away from their theaters of conflict. Terror-
ist groups have become highly mobile during the 1990s and move
rapidly in search of new opportunities. Only by host and target
states both sharing the burden of counterterrorism can terrorism
be reduced and suppressed. Target governments are dependent on
host governments for intelligence, security, and judicial coopera-
tion to combat externally supported terrorism.
Traditional law enforcement attacks on only the criminal ac-
tivities of terrorist organizations have neither mitigated nor de-
terred terrorism because there has been no worldwide attack on
noncriminal infrastructures that generate the lifeblood for terror-
ist groups. The international environment has permitted most ter-
rorist groups to generate support in one theater and fight in an-
other. The community of nations recognized the need for an
international response to terrorism during the Cold War, but a
well formulated, multipronged, multidimensional, and multina-
tional response became feasible only after the end of the East-
West confrontation. After recognizing this threat, the interna-
tional community formulated a UN convention to suppress
terrorist financing of terrorism—calling on governments to dis-
mantle front, cover, and sympathetic organizations, especially of
foreign terrorist groups operating on their soil. However, imped-
iments to developing a global strategy that will suppress the fi-
nancing of terrorism still remain. Host governments have been
confronted with legal, political, and operational impediments
against disrupting terrorist front, cover, and sympathetic organi-
zations engaged in fund-raising. Most countries lack comprehen-
sive legislation to regulate their financial and banking institu-
tions. Legislation in some countries forbids operational agencies
Terrorist Financing
85

from mounting surveillance on any particular community con-
tributing funds to a terrorist group. Some terrorist-infiltrated eth-
nic and religious communities exert pressure on their politicians
to legitimize their cause in return for the ethnic and religious
vote. Likewise, liberal democracies (e.g., Canada, United King-
dom, France, Switzerland, Germany, Scandinavia, Australia, and
New Zealand) have permitted foreign terrorist groups to raise
funds openly and even issue receipts to their contributors. The re-
ality is that most host governments allow foreign terrorist groups
to operate on their soil unless the terrorists directly threaten ei-
ther host domestic or foreign interests.
Aside from preserving the core and penultimate leadership
and ideologically indoctrinating the support base, building up
the financial, supply, and logistical infrastructure is paramount
for the success of any group. Sustained support (domestic, inter-
national, or both) has enabled the terrorist leadership to replenish
losses and wastage in the rank and file. By creating innocuous
front, cover, and sympathetic organizations, terrorists draw sup-
port from domestic and foreign governments, intergovernmental
and nongovernmental organizations, and individuals. Registered
charities in liberal democracies and in some emerging democra-
cies generate support, evade taxation, and launder and transfer
funds for procurement. Broad democratic latitudes help a num-
ber of Asian, African, Middle Eastern, and Latin American terror-
ist groups exploit the open society and liberal immigration laws.
In response, the terrorists establish bases, gateways, or spring-
boards to either stage or transit terrorist operations. By taking ad-
vantage of the liberal constitutions, a few hundred terrorists vio-
late the right to life and human rights of several million citizens
in other countries. Most terrorist groups move from diaspora-
migrant “taxation” to investment in enterprise (trade and busi-
nesses) depending upon the host country’s laws and regulations.
Any host government that turns a blind eye to terrorist fund-
raising and structure for disseminating propaganda risks sup-
porting terrorist training and procurement. The incremental esca-
lation of support is intimately linked to the incremental escalation
in violence. Disrupting the financial infrastructure of terrorist
groups—constraining access to sophisticated weaponry, expert-
ise, and other resources—can appreciably affect the sustainability
of a terrorist group and its campaign.
The study of opportunities available and strategies adopted
by terrorist groups to accumulate economic wealth reveals that
86
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

the post–Cold War political climate facilitated terrorist groups in
accruing significant international and domestic political, eco-
nomic, and military support. Because international terrorist infra-
structures are not subject to national jurisdiction, they are a
greater threat to national and international security. International
terrorist infrastructures disseminate propaganda, lobby foreign
governments and potential supporters, raise funds, invest funds
in trade or businesses, procure weapons and hire expertise, re-
cruit and train personnel, and ship personnel, weapons, and
other supplies to the theaters of conflict. Contemporary sources of
terrorist finances are varied, as will be examined next.
Domestic
All terrorist groups enjoy varying degrees of domestic or territo-
rial financial support. However, only a few groups generate more
funds domestically. Domestic support (both individual and cor-
porate) can be voluntary or involuntary. Terrorist groups institute
either a mandatory or an ad hoc tax to ensure a continuous fi-
nancial flow.
Diaspora-Migrant
The conflicts of the 1990s, along with the end of the Cold War and
the ensuing phenomenon of globalization, generated unprece-
dented displacement and refugee flows. This in turn facilitated
the formation of diaspora and ethnic networks that provide the
rudimentary international infrastructure for insurgent/terrorist
groups to operate overseas with relative ease. With external sup-
port, most insurgent/terrorist groups of the 1990s have been
transformed from rag-tag assemblies to sophisticated groups.
Groups that have vibrant external support networks are mostly
ethnonationalist groups (Irish, Kurds, Sri Lankan Tamils, Kash-
miris, Basques, Croats, Albanians, Armenians, etc). The insur-
gent/terrorist campaigns that are hardest to defeat are those em-
powered by ethnonationalist sentiments and emotions. They
have the longest staying power; their struggles can be dampened
more politically and less militarily. However, to make such
groups more amenable to negotiation, they have to be militarily
weakened and politically marginalized. For instance, had U.S.-
U.K. security cooperation not disrupted the PIRA transatlantic
pipeline, PIRA would not have reached a military stalemate with
Terrorist Financing
87

British troops. Similarly, had Indo-Bangladesh cooperation not
ended Indian support to the Chakmas in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts, the Shanthi Bahini rebels would still be fighting the
Bangladeshi troops. Multipronged political, military, economic,
and diplomatic countermeasures are required to disrupt insur-
gent/terrorist support networks.
After 9/11, terrorist infrastructures tapping their overseas-
based communities have become more clandestine, although ter-
rorists continue to raise funds from their diaspora and migrants
through individual and corporate contributions and coercive
measures. Force, or the threat of force, may be used against fam-
ily members in the homeland to make reluctant members of the
diaspora-migrant communities pay; to prevent threats coming to
the attention of the host law enforcement, implicit coercion is
used rather than explicit coercion.
At a domestic level, countermeasures must be aimed at the
country of origin of the insurgent/terrorist organization itself. It
is important to meet the aspirations and grievances of the eth-
nonationalists before the insurgent/terrorist group gathers mo-
mentum. Because the diaspora represents the thinking of the do-
mestic population, it is imperative for governments to focus first
on altering the internal dynamics that have spawned rebellion.
Many governments have lacked the skills and expertise to de-
velop nonmilitary (political, socioeconomic, and international)
dimensions of counterinsurgency. Many governments have failed
to develop and implement sustained political and economic
strategies to provide an alternative leadership to their minorities
from “getting sucked into the gun culture.” Therefore, to dampen
popular support for insurgency/terrorism, political reform to
give the marginalized and the deprived members of society more
autonomy and enhanced security is essential.
When the insurgency/terrorist campaign persists, the
groups can develop international infrastructures, some even in-
dependent or semi-independent of their diasporas. Procurement
operations are sustained by finance generated both by diaspora
collections and insurgent/terrorist investments. Therefore, the
key to restraining procurement is to generate an effective coun-
terpropaganda network. Most states have made some headway
by launching coordinated counterpropaganda initiatives against
insurgent/terrorist-infiltrated diaspora organizations. Most gov-
ernments operate overseas through pro-state diaspora organiza-
tions and through their foreign missions. Effectively disseminat-
88
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

ing the “right” propaganda can strategically weaken the fund-
raising capability of an organization. The nongovernmental com-
munity has played a major role in curbing the activity of insur-
gent/terrorist fronts. Many NGOs have pressurized host
governments to withdraw their support to, or even to ban, an or-
ganization. In the United States until October 1997 and in the
United Kingdom until September 1998, it was not an offense for
insurgent/terrorist groups to raise funds for perpetrating vio-
lence. In continental Europe and in Canada, several groups con-
tinue to publicly raise funds to procure weapons.
The key to regulating procurement and shipping per se is in-
ternational and regional interagency and security cooperation.
Some states have been successful in developing frontline intelli-
gence on the international procurement and shipping operations
of their insurgent/terrorist groups. There should also be a politi-
cal commitment to embark on high-risk operations both overseas
and on a domestic level. Many states have failed to thwart the ex-
ternal threat due to a lack of a comprehensive understanding of
the international networks of their insurgent/terrorist groups.
This understanding is a paramount requirement before develop-
ing a counterstrategy. At a domestic level, institutions should be
created to ensure that there is cooperation and coordination, and
not confrontation or competition, between government intelli-
gence and investigative agencies. However, the problem of shar-
ing intelligence and protecting sources will always arise.
Co-ethnic and Co-religionists
Contributions from members of a kin ethnic background are re-
ferred to as co-ethnic support. In contrast, co-religionist support re-
lates to contributions made from the members of the same faith
and is driven by religious affinity. Islamic groups in particular
have benefited from donations from wealthy Arabs in the Persian
Gulf, Middle Eastern, and North African countries. Although
there is no conclusive proof, it may be surmised that the habit of
providing such donations originated when the Afghans were
fighting the Soviets from 1979 to 1989.
State Sponsorship
State sponsors (or patron states) provide active contributions to
terrorist groups to attack inimical states. Usually foreign policy
Terrorist Financing
89

considerations drive states to sponsor terrorist groups in inimi-
cal countries. For instance, the government of India sponsors a
number of Pakistani groups, and the government of Pakistan
sponsors a number of Indian groups. The late 1990s witnessed a
decline in state sponsorship. Because the international commu-
nity now punishes state sponsors, many states have distanced
themselves from sponsoring groups engaging in terrorism as op-
posed to guerrilla warfare. Finance is the key component of any
terrorist support infrastructure. With the international commu-
nity targeting terrorist state sponsors, the terrorist capacity inde-
pendently to generate terrorist finance appears to be the key to
their survival.
During the height of the Cold War, a large percentage of ter-
rorist groups funded their existence and activities by receiving
the active sponsorship of superpowers or their satellite states.
The Soviet Union and its satellite states provided finance and
weapons to the MPLA in Angola, SWAPO in Nambia, FRELIMO
in Mozambique, ANC in South Africa, PLO in the Middle East,
POLISARIO in Western Sahara, and the PKK in Turkey. The
United States provided finance and weapons to groups in An-
gola (UNITA), Cambodia (Khmer Rouge), and Nicaragua (FDN:
Contras) as well as to Cuban exile groups and the Afghan muja-
hedin. For instance, between 1980 and 1989, the CIA provided
through the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) $2 billion in weapons
and 80 percent of the CIA’s covert budget to Afghan groups. The
bulk of the weapons and finance went to Hezb-e-Islami, led by
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who was vehemently opposed to the
United States and who supported Al Qaeda, led by Osama bin
Laden. Similar to other agencies that acted as conduits for
weapon and financial transfers to guerrilla and terrorist groups,
the ISI retained a bulk of the weapons and finance for use in sub-
sequent campaigns, including to support the Taliban and Kash-
miri mujahedin.
The CIA also supported the Sudanese Peoples Liberation
Army (SPLA) against Dr. Hasan Al-Turabi’s National Islamic
Front, which worked closely with Al Qaeda. The CIA supported
the Northern Iraqi opposition forces beginning in late October
1994. NATO members supported the KLA until the UN Security
Council passed a binding resolution in March 1998 forbidding
such activity. Turkey supported Chechen groups, and while Pak-
istan supported several Kashmiri and other Indian groups, India
supported several Pakistani groups.
90
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Low-Level and Organized Crime
Organized crime differs from low-level, individual, and casual
crime in the degree of scale and coordination. Whereas organized
crime is conducted by an organization, low-level crime is done by
disconnected individuals. Organized crime can be broadly di-
vided into fraud (e.g., taking a percentage from prisoner welfare
or social security; illegal logging; cultivating or refining narcotics;
video, CD, and cassette piracy; taxi scams such as running un-
registered taxis; not paying taxes), smuggling (cigarettes, alcohol,
narcotics, humans), racketeering (extorting percentages from pros-
titution, human smugglers, narcotic trafficking, forgers of iden-
tity and travel documents, drinking clubs, and taxi services), kid-
napping for ransom, and armed robbery. In addition to developing
links with organized crime groups, terrorist groups engage di-
rectly in organized crime. For instance, in exchange for weapons,
FARC provided cocaine to Russian organized crime groups.
With the end of the East-West confrontation, the porosity of
borders enhanced terrorist mobility. The geographic range of ter-
rorist organizations, especially in operations into Western coun-
tries, has increased. Contemporary groups can operate over long
distances with relative ease. Today most terrorist groups engage
in the narcotics trade, human trafficking, illicit weapon transfers,
kidnapping, extortion, credit card fraud, and video, audio, and
CD piracy. As such, they have a lesser need to depend on state
sponsors. The international environment has also favored many
of these groups establishing front, cover, and sympathetic orga-
nizations in Western European countries and North America. Ap-
pearing as human rights, humanitarian, cultural, and social or-
ganizations, these terrorist affiliates engage in organized crime.
Often migrants from the conflict zone help terrorist groups estab-
lish such organizations and conduct such operations. As a result,
there is an extensive organized crime infrastructure in Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, France, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium,
Austria, and Scandinavia (mostly Sweden and Norway). Today
funds raised by terrorist groups operating in these host countries
are comparable to (and in some cases more than) the contribu-
tions that they have received from state sponsors. Weapons, ex-
plosives, and dual technologies purchased from funds raised by
terrorist groups through organized crime in Western liberal
democracies have killed several thousand civilians and security
force personnel around the globe.
Terrorist Financing
91

The proceeds from organized crime constituted a small per-
centage of terrorist financing during the Cold War. Only the in-
novative terrorist groups, able to develop alternative sources of
income, have survived. The decline of state sponsorship and the
distancing of states from sponsorship is forcing terrorist groups
to be dependent on organized crime. Today, many groups engage
in or are linked to organized crime groups trafficking narcotics
(FARC, ELN, AUS, IMU, PKK, LTTE, ASG, MILF, several Myan-
mar groups), weapons (almost all groups), and humans (PKK,
LTTE, GIA). Although most groups depend on organized crime
proceeds, the more sophisticated groups finance themselves by
investing in legitimate businesses, thus reducing chances of get-
ting caught “laundering.” They want “clean money”; they don’t
want to “dirty their hands.”
Traditionally, terrorists have used criminal funds or proceeds
from organized crime to fund their existence and activities. How-
ever, the terrorist modus operandi for generating funds is under-
going a major change. With the transition from accruing vast
profits through legitimate businesses, should investments and
the profits of legitimate businesses owned by terrorists be con-
sidered criminal funds? Because the motivation of the terrorist
group is to use clean money for illegitimate purposes, it is neces-
sary to think of ways and means of criminalizing the generation
of clean money for nefarious activities. With the sweeping
changes in the post–Cold War international strategic environ-
ment, almost all major terrorist groups engage in organized crime
or transact with organized crime groups. The access to criminal
groups has strengthened many terrorist groups. In addition to at-
tempts to procure CBRN material, Al Qaeda used the criminal
groups operating in Europe to purchase weapons. For instance,
when the Belgian Special Intervention Unit (Escadron Special
d’Intervention) raided the apartment of an Al Qaeda suicide
bomber named Nizar Ben Abdelaziz Trabelsi on September 13,
2001, they found among his clothes a machine-gun type Uzi N
ERO 168302 Croatia with two big magazines, containing 9-mil-
limeter para caliber cartridges.
With governments allocating significant resources to combat
money laundering, it will become increasingly difficult for
groups to rely on the proceeds of organized crime. To evade po-
lice tracing, the clever groups are likely to develop and maintain
clean money sources. Irrespective of who does it, it is not a crim-
inal offense in most countries to generate funds through busi-
92
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

nesses and to raise funds through charities. This again illustrates
the need for international cooperation between law enforcement
and intelligence agencies. Dirty money can be traced back to drug
cartels, alien smuggling networks, and so on. The dirty money
trail is obvious and relatively easy to trace. Clean money sources
are not as easy to trace. In the future, terrorists are likely to be rag-
tag groups using “dirty to clean” money routes and sophisticated
groups using “clean to clean” money routes. This development in
the terrorist environment should be viewed in light of the latest
UN convention to suppress terrorist financing. The terrorists are
probably a step ahead of the convention, segments of which are
being integrated into domestic legislation by a number of states.
It is worth remembering that many groups have accountants and
lawyers working full-time to identify international and domestic
legal loopholes and ways of hiding money in order to finance
themselves and operate. The organized crime-terrorist nexus will
ensure terrorist survival. With the decline in state and public sup-
port (sanctuary, recruitment, finance, and weapons), investment
in crime will be essential to maintain a viable terrorist organiza-
tion. Future terrorist existence and activities are dependent on a
sustained and consistent flow of support from organized crime.
Thus any successful counterterrorist agenda should include
measures to combat organized crime also.
Financial Crime
Several terrorist groups (especially groups operating outside
their territorial borders) engage in financial crime using credit
cards and checks. Using blank credit cards, a card embossing ma-
chine, a skimmer (mobile card data reader), a computer, a data
reader/writer, and cables to connect devices, terrorist support
cells operating throughout Europe counterfeited and cloned
credit cards, raising millions of dollars annually. At restaurants,
gas stations, garages, and stores, as a person swipes a genuine
credit card through a skimmer, the terrorist cell downloads it to
a computer, then saves it or e-mails it to a second cell, usually in
another country. This data can be loaded onto the magnetic strip
of any plastic card, or it may be edited and given a new name.
Thus counterfeit cards are prepared for an individual who may
have supporting identity documents in that name. Terrorist
groups have overcome many countermeasures by obtaining gen-
uine credit cards and replacing the magnetic information on the
Terrorist Financing
93

rear with details from skimmed cards. Visual examination, how-
ever, showing whether a card is genuine or not, still reduces risks
of fraud.
Support members of terrorist groups using genuine (mostly
stolen), forged, and adapted identifications have established ac-
counts in reputed financial institutions and built strong credit his-
tories by frequently depositing small sums. By putting in cash
and taking it out, it builds up a turnover. After churning, build-
ing credit histories, and generating bank confidence, they take
huge loans and overdrafts and disappear at times, making in ex-
cess of $100,000. Often a terrorist supporter will open a dozen ac-
counts to build a legend around the false identities of the account
holders, making his time and resources profitable; when one ac-
count is defrauded, there will be another dozen accounts avail-
able under multiple fictitious identities. In world capitals like
London, Paris, and Amsterdam, some terrorist groups built fi-
nancial networks to issue checks and amass several tens of thou-
sands of dollars. The depth of activity includes a dozen members
stockpiling checkbooks and issuing the checks all at once, backed
by check guarantee cards. Terrorist modus operandi includes dif-
ferent types of bank fraud, including getting a loan and repaying
it the first time, and then getting a bigger loan or issuing checks.
Until recently, most banks did not aggressively investigate these
frauds because insurance covered the losses. Since 9/11, bank
managers have become more alert. However, because banks want
to open as many accounts as possible, they are reluctant to run
detailed credit checks on new customers. One of the biggest fail-
ures of governments, especially Western governments, in regulat-
ing financial crime is their failure to target the terrorist organiza-
tion as opposed to criminal activity. By targeting criminal activity
and the individuals engaging in it, the activities of the group be-
come increasingly clandestine. Thus financial fraud is more an
embarrassment than a loss for a bank. Bank frauds are rarely re-
ported and are least likely to be detected. Among the many
groups that engage in financial fraud are, for example, Al Qaeda,
GIA, GSPC, LTTE, PKK, and BKI. Terrorist groups often favor op-
erating in countries such as Latin America or South Africa, where
there is a need for foreign investment, financial regulation mech-
anisms are weak, and officials can be bribed fairly easily.
94
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

Investments and Legitimate Businesses
Although money laundering is investment to lose the dirty track
and generate clean money, many contemporary groups invest
money to generate high profit both in safe and high-risk ventures,
including in trade and enterprise investments. Following the UN
convention on the suppression of the financing of terrorism in
January 2000, more terrorist groups are investing in legitimate
businesses to become less reliant on individual contributions that
can be easily monitored by government authorities. This is prob-
lematic for counterterrorist agencies, as special legal powers are
needed to target legitimate businesses. However, an example of
what can, and arguably should, be done is in the case of new laws
being brought into Northern Ireland. According to the Northern
Ireland Office, a support agency for the Secretary of State for
Northern Ireland (http://www.nio.gov.uk), if there is adequate
suspicion, instead of the courts or law-enforcement agencies hav-
ing to prove the guilt of a suspected terrorist using a legitimate
business as a front, the onus will be on companies and individu-
als to prove that they are indeed legitimate and have no involve-
ment with the suspected illegal activities.
Nongovernmental Organizations
Several well-endowed and respectable NGOs active in the politi-
cal, religious, cultural, judicial, human rights, and humanitarian
fields located in the northern hemisphere contribute vast sums of
funds to poorer and needy organizations in the southern hemi-
sphere. Usually, the terrorists or their political activists cultivate
vulnerable individuals with either compatible ideologies or inter-
ests in the NGO sector to channel funds to front, cover, and sym-
pathetic organizations of terrorist groups.
Individual Financiers
The Afghanistan-based Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden is the
best known of the individual terrorist financiers. Several less-
known individual financiers living in the Persian Gulf region
support terrorist-controlled welfare, social, and religious organ-
izations.
Terrorist Financing
95

Community Organizations
By infiltrating or establishing community organizations, terrorist
groups protect their identity and gain respectability. Organiza-
tions as well as individuals sympathetic to terrorists have little or
no hesitation of interacting with community organizations that
promote community interests, provide services and incentives,
and care for the needs of a community. Some community organi-
zations controlled by terrorist groups initiate grant applications
under the guise of promoting community interests.
Public and Private Donor and Other
Benevolent Organizations
By operating through registered human rights, humanitarian,
and other organizations committed to humanity, terrorist groups
deceive their donors and benevolent organizations into making
considerable public and private contributions. To accumulate and
transfer wealth and to evade paying taxes, several terrorist
groups seek charity status.
Sale of Products
To generate funds, terrorist groups have produced newspapers,
magazines, books, videos, audios, CDs, T-shirts, clocks, watches,
radios, and other products that promote their aims and objec-
tives, and have marketed them at sympathetic stores or terrorist-
organized public and private events.
Lobbying
Although not a source of financial support for terrorism, some
terrorist groups with overseas infrastructure have developed a
capability to affect the economic sustainability of some target
states. If the target state is dependent on foreign sources of sup-
port, terrorist lobbying against country donors, travel agencies,
and investors, as well as terrorist attacks on tourist infrastructure,
has had an adverse impact on the national economy. Operating
through terrorist front, cover, and sympathetic organizations,
several terrorist groups attempted to influence country contribu-
tions at the Paris Aid Group, a meeting held annually to assist the
countries of the developing world. Terrorist groups operating
96
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

through human rights and humanitarian organizations, includ-
ing some reputable nongovernmental organizations, have placed
country consortiums under pressure. If the target state is hard-
pressed for revenue to combat terrorism, overseas terrorist infor-
mational infrastructures have a capacity to damage government
counterinsurgency procurement, training, recruitment, and infra-
structure.
Terrorist groups are capable of organizing and maintaining
highly sophisticated operational and support networks. In order
to counter an international or transnational problem, there needs
to be an international response. However, with this comes the
immediate issues and problems of jurisdiction, sovereignty, and
intelligence sharing. What is needed, though problematic, is more
effective and rigorous monitoring of capital and transactions, and
universalized banking standards. But who should take the lead in
these problems and how are questions important to debate.
Notes
1. See Bjorgo’s definition of bounded and unbounded groups, Racist and
Right-Wing Violence in Scandinavia.
2. The concept of “uneven development” (UD) is mainly used by Marx-
ists to emphasize capitalism’s unequal spread of global economic bene-
fits. The spread of capitalism according to this theory resulted in the ex-
ploitation of colonies, and in the present period characterizes the world
economy. See Viotti and Kauppi, International Relations Theory (New York:
Macmillan, 1993), 596.
References
“Algeria’s Army Picks Its Man.” 1999. The Economist, March 20, 53.
“Arms Availability and the Situation of Civilians and Armed Conflicts.”
1999. Report of the International Committee of the Red Cross, July.
Bjorgo, T. 1997. Racist and Right-Wing Violence in Scandinavia. Oslo: Tano
Aschehoug.
Bowyer Bell, J. 1998. The Dynamics of the Armed Struggle. London: Frank
Cass.
Buzan, B. 1991. People, States, and Fear: An Agenda for International Security
Studies in the Post–Cold War Era. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
References
97

Claridge, David. 2000. “Exploding the Myths of Super-Terrorism.” The
Future of Terrorism. London: Frank Cass.
Clark, R. 1983. “Patterns in the Lives of ETA Members.” Terrorism 6, no.
3: 423–454.
Douglas J., Burgess, A., and Ressler, R. 1997. FBI Crime Classification Man-
ual. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Douglas, J., and Olshaker, M. 1997. Mindhunter. London: Arrow.
———. 1998. Obsession. London: Pocket.
Gellner, E. 1985. Islamic Dilemmas: Reformers, Nationalists, and Industrial-
ization. New York: Mouton.
Hoffman, B. 1999. Inside Terrorism. London: Indigo.
Jamieson, A. 1989. The Heart Attacked. London: Marion Boyars.
Journal of Prohibited and Concealed Weapons 3, 12 (Autumn 2000).
Kobrin, S. J. 1998. “The MAI and the Clash of Globalizations.” Foreign
Policy 112 (fall): 97–109.
McGartland, M. 1998. Fifty Dead Men Walking. London: Blake.
———. 2000. Dead Man Running. London: Mainstream.
Nkrumah, K. 1965. Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage of Capitalism. New
York: International Publishers.
O’Callaghan, S. 1999. The Informer. London: Corgi.
Pelton, Robert Young. “Dangerous Places.” http://www.comeback-
alive.com/df/dplaces/algeria/index.htm.
Pilger, J. 1998. Hidden Agendas. London: Vintage Publications.
Post, J. 1996. “Terrorist Psycho-logic.” In Origins of Terrorism, ed. Walter
Reich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reich, W., ed. 1996. Origins of Terrorism. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Sheehan, M. 1996. “A Regional Perspective on the Globalization
Process.” Korean Journal of Defence Analysis 8, no. 2 (winter): 53–74.
Sprinzak, E. 1998. “The Great Superterrorism Scare.” Foreign Policy 112
(Fall): 110–124.
Stohl, M. 1990. “Demystifying the Mystery of International Terrorism.”
In International Terrorism, ed. C. W. Kegley Jr. New York: St. Martin’s.
Taylor, Max, and John Horgan. 2000. The Future of Terrorism. London:
Frank Cass.
Viotti, Paul, and Mark Kauppi. 1993. International Relations Theory. New
York: Macmillan.
Wilkinson, P. 2001. Terrorism Versus Democracy. London: Frank Cass.
98
Terrorism and Counterterrorism in the Global Context

2
Counterterrorism:
Perspectives, Issues, and
Solutions
Moral and Legal Issues
T
errorists commit acts of great atrocity and inhumanity, and
many affected by such acts may be tempted to take “an eye for
an eye” approach, but it is important that any response or
emergency powers follow democratic principles. By retaliating
harshly, the state runs the risk not only of looking like an “oppres-
sive bullying regime” (according to terrorist propaganda, any-
way) but also of alienating the public, thus perhaps causing
sympathy for the terrorists and making it harder for the state to
refuse their demands.
With the capture in March 2003 of the Al Qaeda number-
three man, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, who was widely thought to
have masterminded 9/11, a question was raised about whether
more extreme measures of interrogation and torture should be
used in order to capture other Al Qaeda members planning fur-
ther attacks, to prevent such attacks and casualties, weaken Al
Qaeda, and bring those responsible to justice. Would torturing a
person already responsible for taking the lives of thousands, and
planning more, be morally and legally justifiable if it resulted in
preventing further loss of life and bringing to justice the perpe-
trators of such past and future acts? Utilitarians, who believe that
99

“the greatest happiness of the greatest number should be the
basis of all (political) action” (see, for example, works by J. S.
Mills), feel that given majority interests this would be justified; in
contrast, Universalists, who believe that there are some moral
truths that are universal, not ambiguous, and that such rules
should apply to all without exception (see, for example, works by
Immanuel Kant), consider this unacceptable. A problem with the
utilitarian approach is that once started, where does one stop?
Who decides how important the situation has to be to allow such
acts/behavior by the state and its agencies? Could the state then
be accused of terrorism? Israel takes a utilitarian approach and
has been accused regularly of human rights abuses, state terror-
ism, and murder. But doesn’t such action erode public confidence
and undercut the social contract whereby the state protects the
citizen? (On the notion of a social contract between state and citi-
zen, see works by Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau.) It is ironic
when the state resorts to more invasive, intrusive measures that
affect the population in the name of protecting the population. On
the subject of morality in counterterrorist actions one could argue
that it is the politicians, as elected representatives with the inter-
ests of the electorate in mind, who must make the decision, and
that a different type of morality exists for them due to their posi-
tion. It is hard to imagine a president or prime minister who
would not allow extreme emergency measures to be undertaken
if a city or nation were at risk. This may be a more Machiavellian
approach, but many argue that it is more realistic. In any event,
what is needed is a way to make such measures under emergency
circumstances more accountable and less open to abuse.
The counterterrorist approach/capability needs to have a
preventive (before), responsive (during), and “post” or “after”
approach to deal with incidents and eventualities afterward. If
conflict prevention and deterrence fails (prophylaxis), then there
must be an effective law-enforcement, military, and emer-
gency/contingency services combination to react to events and a
strong accountable and clear criminal justice system to punish
perpetrators fairly afterward.
Models for a Counterterrorism Response
In combatting terrorism, the criminal justice model (CJM) priori-
tizes the preservation of democratic principles as being the fun-
100
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

damental premise in the fight against terror, even at the expense
of reduced effectiveness of counterterrorist measures.
The war model (WM) places a stronger emphasis on restrain-
ing or countering terrorism rather than upholding liberal demo-
cratic rights. Viewing terrorism as an act of revolutionary war-
fare, the onus for response is placed on the military, ranging from
using elite special forces, retaliatory strikes, and large troop de-
ployment. The reasoning behind this is that because terrorists are
“waging war,” the state must deploy its war-fighting capability in
order to counter the problem effectively. But this raises several
civil liberties problems, such as what are the legal ramifications of
soldiers taking over a policing role, given that they are trained to
kill rather than to use minimum force and to know the law and its
application.
Many academics think these two models are mutually exclu-
sive. However, most democracies use a hybrid of the CJM and
WM. Indeed, an “expanded criminal justice model” (ECJM)
would be a useful analytical tool, covering the “gray areas” be-
tween the other two models and dealing with theoretical, moral,
and legal considerations. Paul Wilkinson, a leading expert on ter-
rorism and counterterrorism, argues that the need for flexibility
and the ability to use and combine all measures to suit specific
cases are paramount in countering terrorism effectively.
The ECJM and the WM belong to the school of utilitarianism,
where any efforts or actions are justified if they are in the interests
of the “greater good” or serve the interests of the majority. The
CJM, in contrast, belongs more to the philosophical school of uni-
versalism, where one rule should apply to all without exception,
such as “one should do to others as you would have done to your-
self.” Under utilitarianism a person giving his life to save others
would be justified, whereas it would not under universalism.
Many political decisions in countering terrorism are viewed
as controversial or quasi-legal—the choice of the “lesser of many
evils.” It is noteworthy that the meaning of the word politics de-
rives from the Greek politik, which roughly translates as the
search for the good life, the greater good, or the action that best
serves the majority of the population. Counterrorism response
depends on two criteria: effectiveness and acceptability. It is impor-
tant to note that the most effective measures against terrorism
may not be acceptable; thus, counterterrorism response involves
finding the balance between the two. It is thus important to ex-
amine the ethical dimensions of counterterrorism response to
Models for a Counterterrorism Response
101

help explain the difference between, and the justification for, the
various models of response (Crelinsten and Schmid 1993,
307–341).
Counterterrorism Measures
When referring to counterterrorism measures we mean both defen-
sive measures, to reduce vulnerability to terrorist acts, and offen-
sive measures, to prevent, deter, and respond to terrorism, along
with any contingency measures preparing for and having the
ability to respond to a terrorist attack/incident.
There are a number of different measures that can be used in
the fight against terrorism. Remember that because terrorists op-
erate at a number of different levels and dimensions (political,
economic, illegal, military, national, international), one needs a
capability to counter the terrorist at each level. Many of these
measures are listed on the UN Web site “Classification of
Counter-Terrorism Measures” (http://www.undcp.org/terror-
ism_measures.html).
Political Measures
A number of political measures can be used to counter terrorism
and to try to ameliorate or resolve its causal factors. States need
thus to address the terrorists’ specific political, economic, or so-
cial grievances by changing policy to accommodate the terrorists
or by offering some kind of concessions. But concessions send out
the message that terrorism works; concessions often encourage
other groups, or those that might become more hard-line, to try to
achieve their demands. However, by addressing a group’s legiti-
mate grievances, the state shows that it has done something in re-
sponse; then, if the group persists, it may lose support and credi-
bility. The state can also appease the general populace. For
example, if grievances are social or economic, engaging in mea-
sures that are seen to redress grievances (employment schemes,
antidiscrimination measures, poverty-reduction schemes like
land redistribution, and opening legal economic alternatives to
black-market activities) can work.
Conflict resolution measures such as public dialogue, secret
mediation, or negotiations to try and initiate peace processes can
102
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

also be used, although many groups may only consider them if
they are either at a position of stalemate or are losing (perhaps
with casualties or arrests too high) and need time to regroup and
rearm; the group needs to feel it cannot win, increase its position,
or afford (in terms of resources, personnel, finance, support, etc.)
to continue using violent means. When dialogue or negotiations
and a cease-fire are acceptable, it is important to be sure that the
group does not use the time to regroup, reorganize, and rearm it-
self. Intelligence is key here. Provided the group shows its com-
mitment to democratic means (through public announcement
and cease-fire, for example), a further option is to allow it to par-
ticipate in elections. To counter a group’s actual and potential
support base, information pertaining to any atrocities committed
by the group that shows its undesirability for political involve-
ment can be leaked to the press to minimize support. Steps can be
taken to encourage opposition groups or to develop alliances
with opponents of terrorist groups in order to further decrease
the appeal of the group.
Amnesties can be used to weaken the group and its cause.
But in Northern Ireland many terrorists walked free and as a re-
sult attracted severe criticism. Although amnesty may work to
some extent, there is still a strong argument, especially from pro-
ponents of the Criminal Justice Model, that terrorists should be
punished for the crimes they commit and not their beliefs. At the
opposite end of the scale, banning membership of such groups
and their front organizations can work, and declaring the politi-
cal and military wings illegal can also be effective. It is important,
however, not just to ban the groups but to ban their sponsors also.
With the use of diplomatic pressure and punitive measures, one
should use both positive and negative means and always leave a
face-saving option for the country if terrorists respond and wish
to cooperate. Diplomacy and foreign liaison between intelligence
and counterterrorist agencies are extremely important, as a great
deal of intelligence comes from such practices. Diplomatic pres-
sure can be used to lever state sponsors to decrease their support
by expelling diplomats from states supporting terrorist organiza-
tions, by breaking off diplomatic relations with sponsors of ter-
rorist organizations, and by listing and thus ostracizing states and
other entities that sponsor terrorists. The gathering of intelligence
and evidence is vital here.
More of an international approach to countering terrorism is
essential, given that most groups have international operational
Political Measures
103

and support structures; yet, many countries continue to proscribe
groups that only pose threats to themselves. If there are areas
where terrorists can operate or reside legally, for example, they
will shift operations there; if places to go become harder to find,
groups will find it harder not only to operate but also to survive.
Examples of international political measures include the G7 and
G8 declarations over extradition and intention for cooperation,
the Paris summit in 1996, The Hague convention, and the ten re-
cent UN conventions. Such multilateral initiatives are beneficial
as they help provide an international framework for making de-
mands and implementing responses, as well as reinforcing inter-
national opinion against terrorism and providing common stan-
dards that facilitate cooperation on issues such as terrorism
Punitive Measures
A key aspect of counterterrorism is the severing of a group’s
means of financing, such as by banning fund-raising and the
transfer of funds from potential front organizations of terrorist
groups. This must be done nationally and internationally. Other
measures listed by the UN include the boycotting or placing of
sanctions on state sponsors or supporters of terrorists; freezing
assets; banning trade, travel, arms sales, and the sale of dual use
and precursor substances; and placing sanctions on companies
that invest in countries alleged to be state sponsors of terrorism.
Tracing terrorist funds is very important but difficult, as many
groups have become very skillful in covering their tracks. Popu-
lar suggestions have included trying to reduce bank secrecy, but
this is problematic when dealing with the unregulated Hawallah
system (an informal financial system based on trust), for example,
and is almost useless when one realizes that many groups invest
in legitimate businesses. Facilitating the exchange of information
between states on the movement of funds suspected of support-
ing terrorism can help, but practical problems appear when states
and agencies are reluctant to share information and compromise
sources, especially if it means that someone else may gain credit
for any resulting captures or prosecutions. Offering financial re-
wards for information leading to the arrest of terrorists is another
measure that can be effective, but many are deterred from doing
so because group reprisals on informers are extremely severe. In
areas where kidnapping is rife, a long-term deterrent can be to
104
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

freeze the assets of families of kidnap victims to prevent a ransom
payment; this is a very unpopular and controversial strategy, but
some argue that the terrorists would eventually get the message if
they realized that families could not pay ransoms.
Punitive measures can include economic sanctions, such as
those on Iraq, Iran, or Cuba, arms embargoes, freezing assets, and
diplomatic boycotts. Blocking the assets of state sponsors can be-
come bargaining tools over policy/actions later. However, to be
effective, the international community must agree and adhere to
the measures. There have been cases in the past when one state
has continued to trade and reduced the effectiveness of such
measures.
Judicial Measures
International judicial measures for countering terrorism include
the signing and ratification of international conventions and proto-
cols, such as the ten UN conventions and some regional agree-
ments. There has been an expansion of extradition treaties and ef-
forts to increase compliance with well-founded extradition
requests for suspected terrorists on states’ territories, efforts to en-
hance mutual legal assistance with other states, and an exchange
of information with judiciaries in other countries.
There are many obstacles to overcome in using extradition
measures. Whether to extradite or prosecute terrorists domesti-
cally is one problem. The lack of universal levels of judicial re-
sponse is another. If a terrorist is caught in one country, the au-
thorities who hold him may not want to extradite him to the
country where he is wanted if he would face the death penalty.
However, they may not want to prosecute the terrorist them-
selves for fear of retaliation from the terrorist group. For effective
international judicial measures, there would need to be an effec-
tive and enforced international criminal court.
Another problem is proving the link between terrorist and act.
Due to the international and sophisticated nature of many terror-
ist networks and their ability to cover their tracks, it is hard to
prove that money from a legitimate business or registered charity
in London, for example, paid for arms and explosives in the
Balkans that ended up in Sri Lanka. A further example is the
Omagh bombing in Northern Ireland, where it is widely believed
that the authorities know exactly who planned and committed it
Judicial Measures
105

but lack the evidence required to convict them, or cannot give ev-
idence that would compromise source(s) that provided the intel-
ligence. This sends a message to other terrorists that they can get
away with such acts.
Prosecution is another area riddled with problems for coun-
tering terrorism. First, terrorism is hard to define (many different
definitions are used by different academics, agencies, and coun-
tries) so that legal authorities have problems convicting terrorists.
Terrorists benefit when discrepancies or ambiguities give their
lawyers loopholes. Judges often have no experience or little un-
derstanding of terrorism. Intelligence agencies are reluctant to
identify sources in court, and there are poor witness protection
schemes for sources who are identified in court or for repentant
terrorists (O’Callaghan 1999; McGartland 2000). Lawyers, judges,
and jury members need better protection, given ways in which
groups protect their secrets and their members. The judicial
process is lengthy and costly. The slow nature of the court system
often means that terrorist actions arise before there is legislation
over them, such as terrorist use of encryption. Measures to rectify
some of these problems include trying to increase the speed of the
judicial process against terrorism, introducing special courts to
deal with terrorist crimes, and holding trials in absentia. In each
case the value of a prosecution must also be weighed against the
possible opportunities to learn of, and prevent, further terrorist
activity, as intelligence sources often “dry up” after investigations
and prosecutions (Pillar 2001, 84).
What happens after the court case, in terms of the actual sen-
tence or punishment? If the sentence is death, there is the problem
of finality (the need for there to be no doubt). There is also the risk
of creating martyrs and inciting retaliation. Bobby Sands, the IRA
hunger striker, has near-legendary status because he died for his
cause; many believe that Sinn Fein sprang from the Dublin insur-
rection and hangings that created martyrs and the cause. But if a
prison sentence is given, how should one separate and treat pris-
oners? Political prisons need to be avoided, as they can and usu-
ally turn into terrorist training schools. The experiences of author-
ities in Northern Ireland and Israel have shown that if terrorists
are allowed political or prisoner of war status and not isolated,
they keep their organizations intact while in prison, and that any-
one not a terrorist on entry would be one on leaving. Prison sys-
tems are not properly adapted to hold large numbers of terrorists,
especially when they demand to be treated as prisoners of war
106
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

and use hunger strikes and other tactics to gain concessions. There
should be more research to develop measures to inhibit the for-
mation and perpetuation of terrorist networks in prison.
Extending judicial powers, either in accordance with the war
or expanded criminal justice models, is inherently risky because
any “extrajudicial powers” are often incompatible with the funda-
mental principles of the law. In Italy people were convicted by as-
sociation and found guilty until proven innocent; in Israel people
can be held on suspicion for years. Miscarriages of justice due to
“faceless courts” in Colombia and Northern Irish efforts for “in-
ternment without trial” alienated most of their populations and
resulted in greatly increased support for the terrorists. To avoid
this the state must try to fully and widely explain that any mea-
sures that affect the public are in their best interest. If measures are
not explained, and the public does not understand the reasons for
them, how long they will be for, who they are targeting, and their
effects, the public is more likely to side with the terrorists. Al-
though countries should avoid examples of failed initiatives by
other states, they should likewise learn from their successes by re-
viewing and updating emergency legislation and monitoring and
adopting successful measures/legislation from other countries.
Wilkinson argues that the criminal justice model can work,
citing such successes as the Italian Pentiti (repentant) laws used in
the 1980s. These were very effective, as the courts were given the
ability to discreetly bargain with terrorists to reduce sentences
provided they gave significant information and cooperation. A
certain degree of flexibility and discretion is advantageous to em-
power the courts to adjust (either to increase or decrease) sen-
tences for terrorist crimes where deemed appropriate. However,
there remain issues over who should hold such a decision and at
what level. Given that many judges do not have sufficient experi-
ence or understanding of terrorism, should the decision be made
at the ministerial (government) level or at a specialized terrorism
court? Further questions arise, such as how to justify such deci-
sions and make them accountable so they are not abused.
The Military
In the fight against terrorism there are two main uses of the mil-
itary: the MACP—military aid to the civilian power (in the CJM and
ECJM), and the retaliatory response (WM). Examples of MACP
The Military
107

include military units with specialist expertise that police units
may not have sufficient resources for or experience in (bomb dis-
posal, surveillance, hostage rescue, “snatch-squads,” or units that
detect and deal with CBRN threats/incidents). In many cases,
highly skilled special forces trained to be used surgically to
achieve a limited goal, for example, are extremely valuable assets.
The use of such units does not mean that the war model is sud-
denly in play, as they can be incorporated into the civil system
with the government ultimately holding on to its power. In the
United Kingdom, for example, the Special Air Services (SAS),
often used for hostage rescue and police support such as in North-
ern Ireland, are controlled by COBRA, a 24-hour emergency unit
(named for the cabinet office briefing room where the unit meets)
and the Joint Operations Command (JOC). They are also account-
able to the law because after each operation they have to hand
over their weapons for forensic investigation, provide detailed ac-
counts of what happened, and so on. The military can be incorpo-
rated into the civil system and perform peace-keeping duties,
erecting roadblocks to prevent clashes (as in Northern Ireland),
setting up vehicle checkpoints, helping the police by patrolling
areas and searching for weapons, and assisting in cross-training.
Through the use of military skills, resources, and experience, civil
powers can avoid spending money to duplicate and develop sim-
ilar capabilities in other agencies and services.
When examining the various uses of special forces, the “will-
ingness to take the fight to the terrorists; to meet them on their
own ground rather than passively wait for them to strike,” has
led to major counterterrorist successes (Adams 1989, 81–82). In re-
lation to international cooperation against terrorism, although co-
operation may be lacking at an official, political level, special
forces in the West have shared information and run exchange pro-
grams so that officers and men have had access to extensive de-
briefings following an operation and learned from it. Also, if any
country mounts a major counterterrorist operation, most of the
major Western countries will usually send a special forces repre-
sentative to observe the action and report back what is learned.
Other examples of military use include protecting facilities such
as those forming the critical infrastructure, such as nuclear power
plants, electricity grids, oil depots and rigs, data flow switch-
boards, water-storage tanks, and propane gas tanks.
The use of the military for retaliatory response insinuates the
108
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

adoption of the war model and implies the suspension of a
civilian legal system being replaced with martial law. However,
this fuels terrorists and often alienates the public, as well as
possibly creating more sympathy and support for the terrorists.
In the international context it has serious implications, as any
international response to a substate group that operates or re-
sides in a state could be seen as an act of war. Furthermore, the
various missile strikes against Bin Laden in Afghanistan gave
him folk-hero status, as “the might of the West,” with all its re-
sources and expertise, could not (so far) manage to kill or catch
bin Laden. The strikes on the pharmaceutical factory in Sudan
were controversial, as it was never made publicly clear whether
the factory was being used for NBC production. Collateral
damage in such situations where intelligence has been lacking
can also decrease international will for cooperation. Such re-
sponses can do more harm than good; thus, only the most sig-
nificant, credible, and unambiguous targets should be engaged.
The attempts to justify the motives for an invasion of Iraq in
order to topple Saddam Hussein’s regime by the United States
(pointing to links between Iraq and Al Qaeda) were widely per-
ceived as tenuous and have caused international rifts in rela-
tions in the U.S./U.K. partnership and with countries such as
Russia, France, and China. These events have also raised seri-
ous questions about the effectiveness and credibility of the
United Nations. With retaliation there are also issues over le-
gality and legitimacy, whether it is a just war, justified under
UN Charter Article 51 (self-defense). Such justification is usu-
ally argued on the basis of either: 
•
Jus ad bellum (justice of the cause), for example, self-
defense against aggression or helping victims of
aggression, after exhausting peaceful means, and with
reasonable hope of achieving legitimate objectives
•
Jus in bello (justice of the conduct), for example, that the
means employed are proportional to the ends sought,
and actions taken with the right intention to accomplish
legitimate military objectives and to minimize collateral
death and destruction.
A main danger of a militarized response is that it can lead to
war, which is more of an evil than terrorism because it usually
The Military
109

causes more deaths and incites further retaliatory acts of terror-
ism (Wilkinson 2001). Although we have mentioned the outcry
and controversy involved in international retaliatory responses,
as well as the fear felt by liberal democracies over losing public
support if they fight terrorism with strong and proactive counter-
measures, what we have yet to see, however, is whether the pub-
lic might favor stronger counterterrorist measures in the face of
the emerging threat of the terrorist use of nuclear, biological, and
chemical weapons.
There are examples where the use of stronger, proactive
countermeasures have arguably been taken too far; in Peru, Prime
Minister Fujimori found that liberal democratic constraints were
restricting the response to terrorism, so, supported by the mili-
tary, he took more of a dictatorship approach. In Northern Ireland
in the 1970s and 1980s there were allegations of the British Special
Forces operating under a shoot-to-kill policy and of the military
intelligence Force Research Unit (FRU) colluding with loyalist ter-
rorists to aid the locating, targeting, and killing of PIRA members
and supporters. The latter example blurs the distinction between
the war model and the CJM and perhaps illustrates the need for
further discussion over an expanded model that would make
emergency measures more accountable. It is important that any
complaints of alleged abuses of powers by security forces are in-
vestigated by an independent body, and that any agencies in-
volved be held accountable. This not only reassures the public
that the state and its agencies do not abuse their power, but also
can help counter any possible terrorist propaganda. The use of
military force should also be timely and appropriate, have public
support and a high probability of success, and be used as a last re-
sort (Weinberger in Jenkins 1985, 34).
The contribution that can be made from the military in coun-
terterrorism, such as the specialized tasks mentioned, cross-
training, and establishing links for cooperation both domesti-
cally and internationally, all help formulate a valuable
counterterrorism capability. Although it is understood that ex-
ceptional circumstances might warrant exceptional measures,
they must at least be clear and accountable and perhaps have a
specific time frame so that they will correspond as far as possible
with the principles of liberal democratic and human rights. A
high standard of proof should also be evident before military
force is employed against those believed responsible for terrorist
acts (Pillar 2001, 101).
110
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

Intelligence Agencies
Before the Madrid bombings of March 2004, a leading Spanish
specialist on terrorism, Fernando Reinares, once suggested that
“the resort to oppressive responses reflects, in part, inefficiency
(such as poor intelligence) and, in part, a lack of government con-
trol over its security agencies” (Reinares 2001).
The role of intelligence agencies is paramount in the fight
against terrorism. Valuable information that can be turned into
intelligence can be acquired and gathered through signals (SIG-
INT), electronic communications (ELINT), and human sources
and agents (HUMINT), as well as through open and closed
sources, surveillance, and a variety of other means. The United
States has spent millions on technical and technological superior-
ity but seems to falter in terms of human expertise. What is
equally, if not more, important is to ensure that intelligence agen-
cies have plenty of personnel with diverse experience; agents and
analysts need to have cultural, linguistic, and regional expertise
in all the geographic areas. Such people are needed for a variety
of reasons—to infiltrate terrorist cells, recruit agents/informers,
and acquire information—to understand the nature of terrorist
objectives and plans, their political motivations, and alignment;
the leadership and membership; the logistics and financial re-
sources; the links, if any, with other terrorist groups, terrorist
states, and international organized crime; and ultimately to help
prevent terrorist acts. Such personnel also make good analysts if
they understand the language, as well as the culture, so that they
can make balanced judgments on any intelligence acquired and
not fall foul of cultural misunderstandings such as the notorious
remark by Soviet prime minister Nikita Khrushchev at the height
of the Cold War: interpreted by U.S. analysts as a threat against
the United States, “We shall bury you” was ”merely a folksy way
of predicting that communism would outlast capitalism” (Cohen
1996, 114).
As with the use of the military, it is important that all emer-
gency measures are accountable and under government regula-
tion; as far as possible they must be in accordance with the princi-
ples of liberal democratic and human rights. There are examples
where intelligence agencies either have been allowed to become
laws unto themselves due to lack of control or regulation by the
government, or have been tasked by the government to execute ex-
treme duties. In the earlier section on the role of the military, the
Intelligence Agencies
111

example of Northern Ireland and the FRU, with allegations of se-
curity forces colluding with loyalists to kill terrorists, illustrated the
theory that if loyalist targeting of PIRA terrorists was so effective
then potential PIRA recruits would be deterred and PIRA would
have to think about peaceful negotiations as opposed to bombings
and murders. A further example is that of the Defense Information
Service (Servizio Informazioni Difesa, SID) in Italy colluding with
neofascists over the “strategy of tension.” Here the SID aimed to
create and exploit an atmosphere of extreme civil unrest through-
out the country with the expectation that this would induce public
demand for increased law and order measures against the Red
Brigades (Brigate Rosse—BR). This is thus an example where an in-
telligence agency almost orchestrated a coup d’etat that threatened
liberal democracy. There is also the example of the “dirty war” in
Spain where antiterrorist death squads called GAL operated. This
example shows a violation of several principles: of using minimum
force to apprehend suspects, of being innocent before guilty, and of
the right to a fair trial. Although due to the nature of the work, in-
telligence agencies must retain levels of secrecy, it is important that
they do not become laws unto themselves and thus need to be ac-
countable and under the control of their government. One option
for this is an intelligence committee composed of former intelli-
gence members as well as politicians who are familiar with the re-
quirements and nature of intelligence operations/activities, as op-
posed to a body of people with no experience or knowledge of the
nature of such activities having involvement in what should and
should not be done. The use of intelligence or military agencies to
assassinate leaders/members is often counterproductive as it is un-
democratic, usually creates martyrs and encourages other and po-
tential terrorists as it plays into the propaganda of the group, and
can cause doubt or lack of confidence in the state from the popula-
tion; it should not be used unless it appears accidental and would
seriously disrupt the group.
The role of intelligence agencies also includes the planning,
acquisition, processing, and dissemination of intelligence. L. K.
Johnson notes that the planning phase must identify the correct tar-
gets/threats and direct adequate resources against them; the col-
lection phase must be riveted on tracking the terrorists and must
employ the right mix of intelligence-gathering techniques and
agencies; and the processing phase must move faster and with
greater skill to determine what’s important and what’s not—
analysts must possess a deep understanding of foreign countries
112
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

that harbor terrorist cells, as well as a solid comprehension of
what makes terrorists tick. In the dissemination phase, intelligence
officers must provide policymakers with information that is per-
tinent, on time, reliable, all-source, and unbiased, as opposed to
information that supports the president’s political agenda rather
than reflects the often unpleasant reality that an administration’s
policy has failed. Equally, policymakers must hear the truth
rather than brush it aside if it does not fit with their political
agenda (Kegley 2003, 239–252).
Intelligence can also be disseminated to sister agencies, af-
fected parties/entities, and increasingly to intelligence/security
agencies abroad. Although there have been calls for a multilateral
intelligence agency in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime, Wilkinson (2001, 196) illustrates the problems associated
with the example of Interpol, where “[some of] the states engaged
in sponsoring terrorism belong to Interpol, and hence other states
are reluctant to allow highly sensitive information into the Inter-
pol network.” This lack of control of information that can find its
way back to the wrong hands and compromise sources shows
why bilateral intelligence sharing has been more productive. Ex-
amples of the type of information that can be shared internation-
ally are records or databases containing information on all sus-
pected and actual terrorists that can be accessed by intelligence
agencies as well as customs and excise agencies, airport security,
and border control police.
Movement Restriction
Economic globalization, the reduction of trading barriers and
borders, initiatives such as the Schengen agreement, and the en-
suing freedom of movement have benefited terrorists and al-
lowed them to move not only themselves but funds, materials,
and equipment more easily. A substantial problem associated
with this phenomenon is that there are extremely diverse security
and border controls throughout the world. Security varies greatly
from port to port, airport to airport, border to border, city to city,
and country to country.
Therefore, more effective travel and immigration measures
should be introduced, as listed on the UN Web site—the tighten-
ing of visa restrictions and harmonization of visa policies with
neighboring countries; the tightening of border controls, and the
Movement Restriction
113

use of spot checks; profiling; deportation, banishment, and ex-
pulsion; the introduction of counterfeit-proof passports; and the
maintaining, updating, and sharing of a database of suspected
terrorists/criminals, as well as more efforts to prevent the abuse
of asylum. Further efforts to standardize border control, avia-
tion/airport security, maritime and port security, and so on,
should also be made in order to prevent terrorists accessing areas
with good security from areas with poor security.
The Police
The main role of the police in counterterrorism is to ensure that
the law and its principles are upheld and maintained, along with
gathering and preparing evidence for use in law courts ranging
from forensics to eyewitness accounts.
Other police roles associated with counterterrorism include
protective security and the hardening of possible, probable, and
high-risk targets (high-profile persons and events they attend, as
well as components of critical infrastructure like communica-
tions, power grids, and nuclear/energy plants) in order to deter
and prevent attacks. The police also engage in preparedness ex-
ercises and contingency planning for, i.e., an NBC attack or
hostage-taking, as well as in cross-training such as joint simula-
tion exercises with the military and other agencies and emer-
gency services.
The police also have their own intelligence capability, run
their own undercover agents, use informers, and organize wit-
ness protection and relocation schemes. Attempts at controlling
infiltration of the police are sometimes made through external
checks on police officers by internal affairs departments or intel-
ligence agencies. The police also try to enhance national and in-
ternational police cooperation by stationing liaison officers
abroad, organize connections with other organizations involved
in similar duties (intelligence agencies and the military), and par-
ticipate in multinational and regional initiatives or conferences.
A common problem in terms of the police and counterterror-
ism is that the necessary specialized expertise is fragmented re-
gionally. In the United Kingdom, counterterrorism expertise is
centralized in a few urban areas; what is needed is a more effec-
tive nationwide response capability. Further difficulties arise
from competing rivalries and turf wars over jurisdiction, funding,
114
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

and so on. A more coordinated response is required in order to be
more effective.
It is important that a state agency does not act as a law unto
itself. Because the police uphold and maintain the law and its
principles, questions arise over quis custodiet ipsos custodies: “who
will guard the guards themselves?” Procedures thus are needed
to ensure an independent investigation of any charges of police
brutality, and the regulation of the use of deadly force, to ensure
that the police are also accountable, regulated, and under the con-
trol of the government, and also that they uphold and operate
within the principles of liberal democratic and human rights.
Counterpropaganda
The importance of propaganda and publicity to the terrorist is
paramount; thus the importance of countering such propaganda,
from a counterterrorism perspective, is both extremely valuable
and beneficial.
Conflict resolution techniques—encouraging and facilitating di-
alogue, mediation, and negotiation—are important in breaking
down negative stereotypes of opposing factions that may perpet-
uate the use of violence. One tactic is to target those involved with
the conflict or terrorist campaign by trying to establish and ulti-
mately build on a common theme, belief, or value base with po-
litical opponents (a value of dignified life, prosperity, treating
others as you would like to be treated, not becoming a victim).
This is most applicable to cases where the conflict is linked to and
mainly occurs in a geographic location between communities,
such as in Northern Ireland. Another tactic is to provide a forum
for free speech by finding and providing a public space where
any conflicts between affected/involved parties can be discussed
openly, in an academic forum, for example, on neutral territory.
Any initiatives toward dialogue should also include victim
support; this not only helps deconstruct negative stereotypes and
animosity but can also lead to the gathering of valuable informa-
tion from postincident debriefing. Victim-support organizations
can also provide platforms for political opposition against vio-
lence/terrorism. These organizations can also encourage poten-
tial and actual repentant terrorists to leave the group if there are
counseling, rehabilitation, and reintegration services that offer
victims a sense of purpose and an opportunity to voice political
Counterpropaganda
115

opinion and opposition to the group, the campaign, or the conflict
(as seen in Chapter 1 in the section examining factors motivating
entry to and exit from terrorist groups).
A counterterrorism public relations campaign should include
a variety of initiatives, such as those listed by the UN—measures
to initiate or strengthen public awareness programs and activities
on the illegitimacy of terrorism, as well as the human and eco-
nomic costs of terrorism. The media might condemn terrorist acts,
perhaps using highly respected people and celebrities, former
victims of terrorism, and former (repentant) terrorists to speak
out against terrorism. Other measures might include the use of
“wanted” posters showing terrorists and listing their crimes (in
full detail), as used so successfully in Germany in the late 1970s.
To delegitimize the group, it is important to convey and em-
phasize the inhumanity and immorality of the terrorists’ activities
while emphasizing that the actual impact (death, injuries, etc.) is
relatively small (McEwen 1984, 10). However, “a balance must be
struck between the ‘delegitimation’ of terrorism in political life,
typical of offensive [psychological/media] operations, and leav-
ing the door open to those who wish to come back [but felt there
was no return from terrorism], typical of defensive [psychologi-
cal/media] operations” (Schmid and Crelinsten 1993, 329). These
techniques help reduce the support/sympathy base as well as de-
tracting from any propaganda successes through sensationalized
media reporting. As the use of other counterterrorism measures
causes “disruption of the infrastructure [it] thus deals a blow to
terrorist capabilities, by sowing various forms of doubt [through
counterpropaganda] among those not rousted” (Pillar 2001, 119).
It also affects terrorist intentions, as the group can become con-
fused or paranoid over informers and disloyalty. Furthermore,
moderate terrorists will be more likely to leave the group after re-
alizing the actual atrocities caused, leaving hard-line terrorists to
which a hard-line response can be more surgically applied. This
prevents the hardening of any moderate resolve through a hard-
line response to the whole group.
The Media
The relationship and importance of the media to terrorism and
counterterrorism warrant further examination. The media can
convey the terrorists’ message, spreading terror and fear. This is
116
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

significant when one realizes that “the public’s fear of terrorism
and sense of insecurity influence political, social, and economic
decisions regionally and internationally. One may therefore ‘win
the battle’ against terrorism by thwarting terror attacks, but ‘lose
the war’ when the threat of terrorism succeeds in disrupting the
daily life of civilians” (http://www.ict.org.il/).
As one of the leading American specialists on terrorism,
David Rapoport (1996) notes, “The relationship between public-
ity and terror is paradoxical. Publicity focuses attention on a
group, strengthening its morale and helping to attract recruits
and sympathizers. But it also helps an outraged public to mobi-
lize its vast resources and produces information that the public
needs to pierce the veil of secrecy all terrorist groups require.”
What we know as “the media” includes newspapers, radio,
television, books, magazines, movies, theater, and word of
mouth. Terrorists—from medieval Muslim sects to nineteenth-
century groups in Russia and the Balkans—have used word of
mouth in marketplaces and houses of worship to relay news of
their attacks (Wilkinson 2001, 174). It was no coincidence that in
1968 with the first TV satellite being launched, the first terrorists
began to hijack airliners, resulting in the birth of what we now
refer to as international terrorism (Hoffman 1998, ch. 3). The
media benefit from terrorism in terms of ratings and units sold.
As Wilkinson observes, the media do not create terrorists, but
they convey the terrorists’ cause; the relationship becomes sym-
biotic because terrorism by nature is a psychological weapon de-
pendent on communication to a wider society. Terrorists use the
media to: 
•
Convey propaganda of deed and create fear in a target
group
•
Mobilize wider support for and attempt to legitimize
their cause in the general population and in the
international community
•
Frustrate and disrupt the response of government and
security forces
•
Mobilize a constituency of actual and potential
supporters (and thereby boost recruitment and
funding)
Margaret Thatcher once stated that “Terrorists crave public-
ity: it gives them purpose, spreads their message, and is their
The Media
117

‘oxygen’ for survival” (Apple 1985). The nature of broadcast jour-
nalism, in particular, to air a story first means that more sensa-
tional stories are often taken, with less time for editing, thus lead-
ing to more reckless reporting as opposed to portraying a
balanced analysis of the situation. In the rush for the “scoop” and
high ratings, little thought is given to the possible consequences.
Accuracy is often sacrificed for speed or emotional impact, but
television runs on financial impetus, not moral principles. There
is a theory referred to as the “Heisenberg principle,” whereby the
media are supposed to be independent and neutral but by cover-
ing something, actually change or influence the situation.
Reckless reporting has challenged counterterrorism policy
and endangered operations several times. In Somalia the footage
of one marine dragged through the streets caused an actual re-
versal of U.S. foreign policy. A media circus over the TWA flight
in 1985 with heart-rending personal accounts put immense pres-
sure on government negotiations. News reporters are thus becom-
ing news makers. In such a situation “does an American president
stick unswervingly to his principles and philosophies or does he
react to daily opinion polls and listen to spin doctors in formula-
tion of policy?” (Adams 1999). When thousands of Americans
cancelled flights to Europe after the Lockerbie crash, the press did
not put the risk into perspective (one was more likely to be killed
by a dog in 1989 than a terrorist) and caused the travel industry
to suffer unduly. Bruce Hoffman (1999, 149) once stated that “ar-
resting footage or pithy phrases/sound-bites are [now] valued
above considered analysis.” Some argue that the objectives and
concerns of law-enforcement agencies in terrorist situations are
intrinsically in conflict with the media. Media action has also en-
dangered counterterrorism operations: at the 1972 Munich
Olympics, terrorists watched live footage of where armed police
were positioning themselves; during the Iranian Embassy siege in
1980, one TV crew continued filming and could have jeopardized
the whole operation if the terrorists had had access to TV; when
the international media surrounded the Kuwaiti airliner in
Cyprus with Hezbullah members aboard and used infrared
equipment, it prevented any hostage rescue operation from being
mounted; and in England, media printed material caused a judge
to declare a mistrial, thus freeing five IRA members.
The media also help feed propaganda because there is less
time to research and balance stories with objective analysis due to
118
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

the rush to get on the air or in print before other corporations do.
Television journalists in particular fail to look at the wider pic-
ture; for example, in the context of the PLO against Israel, the
media rarely mention that the PLO deliberately uses stones
against Israeli guns, so it looks like the Israelis are overreacting
when they respond. Equally, the media focus on the unusually
high numbers of children both demonstrating and being injured,
often failing to mention that in the occupied territories, over 50
percent of the population is under age seventeen. The fact that
terrorist groups often have press spokesmen illustrates the im-
portance of the relationship, as bad publicity can affect levels of
support and funding for the group. U.S. Attorney-General John
Ashcroft banned the media from interviewing Oklahoma City
bomber Timothy McVeigh before his impending execution be-
cause the interview could serve the interests of McVeigh and his
comrades. As Margaret Thatcher observed, “The news media
should consider whether those who, like terrorists, use freedom
to destroy freedom, should have so much publicity for their
work” (Apple 1985). 
Although the media can benefit the terrorist and impede
counterterrorism efforts, it can also benefit the government and
democracy, serving as a check on government power by inform-
ing citizens of the implications of government policies and abuses
of government. Through coverage of terrorist acts and atrocities,
the media also harden public resolve against terrorists, dispelling
myths of “Robin Hood”–type images or reputations of terrorists
by showing the savagery of their nature and activities. The media
can help create heightened public awareness or vigilance, provide
public warnings, and advise how to react in emergencies. Inves-
tigative journalism often provides information and leads on for-
eign movements, personalities, and descriptions of personnel.
The media can also provide a forum for discussing counterterror-
ism policy formulation and remind the government of the need to
adhere to democratic norms.
Although the contributions of the media outweigh the dis-
advantages, there is room for improvement. Free press is a vital
aspect of democracy. Currently, as noted by Wilkinson, a laissez-
faire approach is likely to leave current problems unsolved and to
encourage spectacular attacks, as well as more challenges to pol-
icy and counterterrorism efforts. Censorship, in contrast, is unde-
mocratic and can cause distrust of the government and the media,
The Media
119

and creates a vulnerability to terrorist propaganda. “If the free-
dom of the media is sacrificed in the name of combating terror-
ism, one has allowed small groups of terrorists to undermine the
democratic values, institutions, and processes and rule of law”
(Wilkinson 2001, 220). The best way forward is arguably for the
media to exercise voluntary self-restraint, trying to avoid live cov-
erage, using experts on terrorism, obeying the police, and work-
ing closely with security forces. Journalists also need training
about responsible coverage of terrorist events and the harmful ef-
fects of premature or full disclosure of information on terrorist ac-
tivity. The capacity of the mass media to convey terrorist propa-
ganda needs to be more widely understood in order to prevent
the media from becoming unwitting accomplices to the political
goals of terrorists. In serious crime cases in both the United States
and the United Kingdom, the police, the FBI, and forensic psy-
chologists already work closely with the media and have seen
real benefits result from close cooperation and liaison.
Problems of Transnational Response
A useful tool for analyzing causes of terrorism is Buzan’s def-
inition of security: 
Generally speaking, military security concerns the two-
level interplay of the armed offensive and defensive
capabilities of states, and states’ perceptions of each
other’s intentions. Political security concerns the orga-
nisational stability of states, systems of government
and the ideologies that give them legitimacy. Economic
security concerns access to the resources, finance and
markets necessary to sustain acceptable levels of wel-
fare and state power. Societal security concerns the sus-
tainability, within acceptable conditions for evolution,
of traditional patterns of language, culture and reli-
gious and national identity and custom. Environmental
security concerns the maintenance of the local and the
planetary biosphere as the essential support system on
which all other human enterprises depend. These five
sectors do not operate in isolation from each other.
Each defines a focal point within the security prob-
lematique, and a way of ordering priorities, but all are
120
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

woven together in a strong web of linkages. (Buzan
1991, 19–20)
This definition is important, as “intra-state” problems should not
be viewed in isolation but in the context of the state within which
they exist.
Looking briefly at Latin America, for example, we can see
that in many areas several “sectors of security” are denied to large
portions of the population. Political security does not exist in
many areas or is either not legitimate or nonrepresentative of sub-
stantial factions of the population. Similarly, economic security
does not exist partly because of the lack of resources and indus-
try, but also because money and resources are available to a select
(corrupt) few. Various Latin American leftist terrorist groups use
this information in their propaganda. Many groups are also “anti-
globalization,” viewing large multinational corporations (MNCs)
as international parasites that come into the country, suck the re-
sources dry, and allow only corrupt elites and MNC members to
benefit. Corruption encourages people to turn to crime, especially
when their standard of living is so poor and they have few or no
alternatives. The lack of societal security is another causal factor,
although to a lesser extent; people sometimes turn to terrorism
if they feel their culture or way of life is threatened and there is
no alternative. For the most part, the main causal factors for ter-
rorism are political and economic, with environmental issues
playing a minor part when resources are not widespread or
shared fairly in order to promote a better standard of living for
the masses.
Economically, many countries are facing domestic difficulties
and are becoming increasingly dependent on external or foreign
financial investment. It then becomes harder for institutions to re-
fuse foreign currency, even when sources are illegal or under
question. Corruption is likely to continue and increase in regions
like Latin America and other developing/undeveloped countries,
and illegal groups and activities are more likely to move into and
increase their operations in these areas.
Where generally poor standards of living, poor economic
prospects, and the increase of illegal activities exist, the phenomena
of a “culture of crime” is also likely to increase as more individuals
turn to illegal activities to feed themselves and their families.
Countering terrorism in such areas is not easy. It is well
known that in “lawless areas,” organized crime syndicates are
Problems of Transnational Response
121

“first in,” taking advantage and setting up new operations due to
their entrepreneurial nature and from having savvy businessmen
involved in planning. As seen in the Balkans, Afghanistan, and
elsewhere, this occurs mainly because of the lack of rapid and ef-
fective action by any international force, such as the United Na-
tions. Whereas international forces take time (as is often the nature
of bureaucracy and democracy) to decide, agree, and mobilize, or-
ganized crime syndicates do so quickly, and by the time any inter-
national action is taken these syndicates have become so deeply
entrenched that it is extremely difficult to do anything effective
about them. Similarly, terrorist organizations are not merely
groups of people who “make and then plant bombs,” but often
huge sophisticated transnational organizations with involvement
and contacts in a number of areas that require an equal or greater
degree of sophistication, organization, and response to counter
them. In areas where country borders are close, the question of
sovereignty also comes into question as groups pick areas where
they can shift operations into the neighboring country quickly.
To prevent terrorism, one cannot merely prevent the placing
and detonation of bombs but must also prevent financing,
procuring, recruiting, researching, networking, and mobility. Fur-
thermore, by targeting operations in one place, the structure
(cells) and mobility mean that if that cell does not relocate, an-
other one will pop up elsewhere. Thus, to counter international
terrorism we need an international response and a full set of
counterterrorism measures; it is almost a certainty that if there is
a loophole or weakness, the organization will find and exploit it.
The same can be said of organized crime due to its huge and di-
verse international operations; only an international response can
counter such entities.
Response
The response needed is a multidimensional counterterrorism ca-
pability—including preventative economic, military, legal, politi-
cal, punitive, social, psychological, and communication measures.
These measures must deal with every possible aspect of terrorism
and means to counter it. A mechanic would not respond to a call
of a car breakdown with only a wrench, but would take a whole
toolbox in preparedness for any situation or possibility causing
the problem.
122
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

Implementing counterterrorist measures at any level is often
extremely difficult. A local, regional, or national response has its
own problems and obstacles; with an international response,
problems multiply and become much more complex (especially
in sensitive areas of internal security and law and order) when
sovereign states are involved. Lack of a clear (independent) single
forum for Western democratic cooperation compounds this prob-
lem. Furthermore, many states are afraid of attracting revenge at-
tacks through international cooperation.
“Areas of lawlessness” illustrate some of the obstacles to in-
ternational counterterrorism. Many areas in developing and un-
developed countries are showing trends of growing instability,
weak policing and financial laws, corruption, and transnational
criminal and insurgent operations, as well as growing involve-
ment of international criminal and terrorist organizations.
Colombia is one of many examples of “safe havens” where ter-
rorist and paramilitary groups are becoming involved in the
drug-trafficking business and are forging links with organized
crime syndicates as well as other terrorist groups and “rogue
states” due to the needs and nature of their organisations and ac-
tivities. If left unchecked, this could develop into a serious secu-
rity problem of international scope. In some areas it already is ex-
tremely serious, but nothing significant has been done to counter
it effectively. Another concerning example is the “triborder area”
between the cities of Puerto Iguazu, Foz do Iguazu, and Ciudad
del Este, where the borders of Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay
meet, and where arms dealers, drug traffickers, contrabandists,
and terrorists have met and partaken in illegal activities worth
billions of dollars.
Countering Terrorist Activities
Some of the practical problems in countering terrorist activities
become apparent when one views some examples of activities in
more detail. The U.S. State Department notes that Paraguay, for
example, is a major transit country for cocaine. U.S. government
experts estimate that approximately 1,500 kilograms of “HCl” tra-
verse Paraguay’s territory every month, primarily from Bolivia en
route to Argentina, Brazil, the United States, Europe, and Africa.
The cocaine trade benefits from Paraguay’s central location in the
heart of Latin America, its extensive river network, its lengthy
Countering Terrorist Activities
123

and undeveloped land borders, numerous unpoliced airstrips
(both registered and unregistered), and persistent official corrup-
tion. In addition, election-year politics lessen the Paraguayan
government’s and opposition parties’ political will to confront
the politically influential and economically powerful frontier
commercial and contraband interests (U.S. State Department
1998). Such problems are in danger of becoming increasingly the-
matic of Latin America in general.
Banking sources confirm that significant money laundering
occurs, but they claim it is fueled primarily by the regional con-
traband trade, tax evasion, and capital flight rather than by nar-
cotics trafficking. Recent intelligence reports suggest that most
South American countries, with clandestine financial networks
based on drug trafficking, have become a favorite location for
Osama bin Laden and his associates to stack their resources be-
yond regulatory scrutiny. The main hindrances to money-laun-
dering investigations are the lack of police investigators in this
field and the reluctance of banking institutions to cooperate with
police. A law to facilitate police/bank cooperation was not ap-
plied to any public official in 1997 due to the involvement of gov-
ernment, police, and other officials in the illicit production or dis-
tribution of drugs or controlled substances, or the laundering of
proceeds from illegal drug transactions (U.S. State Department
1998). Illegal drugs and money-laundering problems are wide-
spread and compounded by borders, sovereignty, and other is-
sues. Sufficient measures to prevent or punish officials engaged
in corruption, specifically with respect to drug trafficking, have
not been taken. For example, judicial corruption was suspected in
the release of four traffickers caught in possession of over twenty-
six kilograms of cocaine, as well as in the rejection of a request
from France to extradite a suspected French trafficker. The judge
who released the four suspects was sanctioned only with one
month’s suspension and a letter of reprimand. Judges and prose-
cutors continue to work also under outdated criminal and crimi-
nal procedure codes.
Both the ease and range of such activities have attracted ter-
rorist organizations for several reasons; for funding their opera-
tions by involvement in such activities, for support structure
bases in order to procure weapons and launder money, and as a
staging post for terrorist cells to rest or prepare before and/or
after an attack. Many activities are interlinked, both in terms of
the growing network formed by those who take part in them and
124
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

in terms of the linking of each activity in the same process. Fur-
thermore, terrorists and criminals know that it is relatively easy
to enter Latin American countries, as entry visas are often issued
without sufficient checks, border controls are inefficient, customs
are often corrupt or disorganized, police corporations are weak
and mostly corrupt, identification papers such as passports and
driving licenses are easy to counterfeit, civil servants can be
bribed to obtain real identification documents, and lack of effec-
tive state cooperation among these countries facilitates their
movements. Some countries are also used to “naturalize” or pro-
cure false identity documents as, for example, Argentina has no
verifiable registry of births. It has been alleged by Richard Tom-
linson, the rogue SIS/MI6 agent, that the SIS (and Eastern Bloc
agents during the Cold War) have used this loophole to provide
their agents with false passports and identities for some time
(Tomlinson 2000, 109). Once inside these countries, it is very easy
to hide or escape due to the close borders with different countries,
and especially where there are diaspora communities to blend in
with and utilize existing contacts. In terms of Islamist terrorism,
this is significant when one realizes that approximately six mil-
lion people of Muslim descent live in Latin America: 1.5 million
in Brazil; 700,000 in Argentina, and large communities of strong
Muslim faith in Venezuela, Colombia, Paraguay, Chile, Peru,
Honduras, and Bolivia (Andersen 2001, 20). In sum, all these
characteristics help terrorists and criminals to move easily and
operate clandestinely in Latin America.
Perhaps the most significant and primary concern of so
many different organizations operating in such small areas is
the danger of hitherto independent or isolationist criminal or
terrorist organizations developing links with others or effec-
tively joining forces or pooling their resources to further their
campaigns. Such a problem is not unlikely when one realizes
that in the past, organized crime groups tended to try to control
all activities in a particular territory. Recently, however, many
groups have realized that it is easier, and indeed often more
profitable, to specialize in one or a few activities and then hire
their services to others. This is a worrying feature, as many ter-
rorist groups are well known for their ability and willingness to
adapt, diversify, and embrace new technology, links, and oper-
ations. This could cause immense problems for those counter-
ing such groups due to obstacles associated with multilateral
intelligence sharing and cooperation. This is especially so when
Countering Terrorist Activities
125

one considers the international scale of certain terrorist or crime
organizations. In Latin America alone, Osama bin Laden laun-
ders money through banks and financial institutions in Colom-
bia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay,
Paraguay, Brazil, French Guiana, Surinam, Guyana, and
Venezuela, along with the British Virgin Islands, Cayman Is-
lands, and the Bahamas. These are only the areas in Latin
America that are known.
Continue with the Latin American example and look at the
case of the triborder region between Argentina, Paraguay, and
Brazil. It has been extremely hard to determine exactly how many
groups and organizations either operated in or used the area and
the nature of their involvement, strength, and possible links; the
best we can do is speculate. More effort should go into investigat-
ing and countering such links and activities, as the “worst-case
scenario” is truly a bad one: the possibility of these groups forming
closer links has serious international implications. For instance, it is
interesting to look back to Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colom-
bia (FARC) links with Hezbollah and Iranian intelligence and spec-
ulate about linkages and cooperation. It is believed that FARC has
links with the Russian mafia, PIRA, ETA, ELN, EPL, ARG, and
Cuba, to name but a few, and FARC operates in Venezuela,
Panama, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, and Paraguay (for rest and recu-
peration, procurement, drug trafficking, etc.). In 2000 the Peruvian
government investigated allegations that a small group of Peru-
vian military officers sold a substantial quantity of small arms to
FARC. Paraguayan counternarcotics police in October 2000 ar-
rested an individual believed to be representing FARC for possible
involvement in a guns-for-cocaine ring between Paraguay and
FARC. Despite these counterterrorism successes, an ineffective ju-
dicial system and pervasive corruption facilitate criminal activity
supporting terrorist groups and hamper most counterterrorism ef-
forts. If left unchecked, the possibilities for terrorist and organized
crime organizations are endless and extremely disadvantageous to
those targeted by terrorists and to groups that oppose or work
against terrorists and organized crime.
A number of possible countermeasures can be used to re-
spond to these problems, including developing an international
registration mechanism for firearms, ammunition, explosives,
and other related materials; regional, national, and international
agreements dealing with each of the problems mentioned; and
stricter enforcement of immigration laws to crack down on the
126
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

use of falsified entry documents. However, regardless of such ini-
tiatives, there still remain many diverse and multilevel problems
that impede such measures.
Latin American governments must increase cooperation and
coordination at all levels, particularly among security, police, and
intelligence agencies. The lack of cooperation between some
countries in the region has permitted terrorists to cross their bor-
ders with impunity. Like many developing regions worldwide,
Latin America has poor antimoney laundering and terrorist fi-
nancing laws. In some countries those laws simply do not exist.
Where they do exist, the law enforcement is so weak and/or cor-
rupt that the law is not applied. Drug trafficking in the region,
from Mexico to Brazil, proved this. In Mexico, for example, 2,817
suspicious financial transactions were reported in 2001, generat-
ing thirty-one apprehensions. However, none of the thirty-one re-
ceived any sentence (Becerra 2003).
Problems of Response
“No single state, no matter how powerful, can make an effective
response to the problems of global terrorism” (Sederberg, in Keg-
ley 2003, 282). In terms of responding to, or dealing with such
problems, obstacles appear through limitations and lack of will
and resources in many, if not all, of the sections mentioned
throughout this chapter: 
•
Political measures
•
Punitive measures
•
The judicial/legal aystem
•
The military
•
Intelligence agencies
•
Movement restriction
•
The police
•
Counterpropaganda
Even if a government takes a proactive role trying to counter
global terrorism, corruption, practical policing problems, and a
lack of resources and infrastructure in bordering countries often-
times impedes what little there is in the way of enforcement, bor-
der control, or police presence, thus illustrating the need for
transnational approaches or solutions to transnational problems.
Problems of Response
127

Obviously more of an international approach is needed be-
cause not only do terrorist organizations have transnational oper-
ations, but also many of the countries in and around these lawless
areas lack both the resources and incentives to curb illegal activity.
Corruption is so rife at so many levels that countries “turn a blind
eye” (especially as it is so lucrative to do so). In terms of an inter-
national response, the problems/obstacles also include: 
•
Lack of political will (and weight of public opinion) for
solutions that cost money
•
Lack of economic resources (and MNCs’ lack of
adherence to economic sanctions)
•
Lack of military and police resources/expertise
•
Practical coordinating problems (different modus
operandi, different national interests, different political
views and sympathies, intelligence concerns for secrecy
and protecting sources, etc.)
•
Domestic constitutional/legal problems (e.g.,
extradition)
•
Sovereignty—how do you pursue terrorists/criminals
in another country?
•
Who oversees it?—(UN, NATO, WEU, OSCE,
INTERPOL, etc.)
This further demonstrates the importance of multilevel, mul-
tilateral approaches incorporating and coordinating political, so-
cial, economic, legal, and military measures in order to predict,
preempt, prevent, and respond. Otherwise, the terrorists and
criminals will always remain several steps ahead.
The situation in lawless areas illustrates the permeability of
borders and the dangers of lax controls and weak enforcement.
If one country fails to control terrorist activity, the whole subre-
gion will likely feel the effects, thus a preemptive, as well as re-
active, multinational response is needed. All the causal factors
of terrorism must be addressed, as must be the factors allowing
such activity to occur. The transnational problems of terrorism
can only be countered by carrying out a policy of prevention, co-
operation, and control, which puts aside national pride and re-
sentment and unites forces against a common enemy: organized
crime and international terrorism (Montoya 2001). As Montoya
further notes, it is necessary to use human and material re-
sources jointly; the task of removing corruption from institu-
128
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

tions actively involved in social life can be difficult, especially
when those institutions are suspected of having taken part di-
rectly or via alliances with foreign crime. The juridical-political
system must also be adjusted to deal with new types of crimi-
nality that often have a technical and economic capacity greater
than the state. Ordinary criminality and organized crime can
form part of a sociocultural and political phenomena typical of
the area, and they have connections with foreign organizations
that are more powerful and more experienced than local au-
thorities. This further demonstrates the need for a multilevel,
multilateral approach incorporating and coordinating political,
social, economic, legal, and military measures. However, in
terms of multilateral international response, further obstacles
arise from getting states to agree on definitions, laws, policies,
and actions, as when countries join forces they are often reluc-
tant to relinquish sovereignty to any single driving state or
supranational body.
Conclusion
Sederberg (in Kegley 2003, ch. 21) drew the following conclusions
for countering terrorism: 
•The more limited the support for the adversary, the more
likely coercive or repressive tactics will prove effective
•Conciliatory strategies increase in relevance as the base of
support for the adversary expands
•The more diffuse and decentralized the terrorist
organization, the more emphasis will need to be placed
on intelligence and interdiction
•Sincerely held, totalistic ideologies preclude conciliation
and compromise (extremist/religious groups are more
likely to see their struggle in totalistic terms, and thus
will be less likely to be open to negotiations and
concessions—Hoffman, RAND 1988)
•Insincerely held ideologies open opportunities to
promote pragmatic transformation
•Inconsistently held ideologies create opportunities to
promote disintegration through defections (although
they may be worth keeping in the group if they turn
into informers)
Conclusion
129

•
Ideological appeals reflecting concrete objectives (e.g.,
greater autonomy, representation, etc.) create
opportunities for compromise
•
Given the number of factors that can affect groups
(internal cohesion, competition with other groups,
nature of groups leadership, etc.), increasingly complex
organizations create opportunities to pursue either their
transformation or disintegration through conciliatory
measures
•
The more substantive the concessions proposed by the
regime, the greater will be the internal political
resistance to a strategy of accommodation
•
Conciliatory strategies that encourage defection of
moderates tend to increase violence from remaining
radicals—this is fine, as hard-line measures can then be
directed against hard-liners (those with less support)
Otherwise, if direct measures are taken against all
elements of the organization, this will likely encourage
moderates to stay in and perhaps become more violent
•
Any negotiations are likely to be frustrated by the
challenger’s desire to expand the agenda and the
regime’s desire to narrow it
Any measures that aim to appease the terrorist, such as reform leg-
islation that makes concessions to the legitimate concerns and
demands of moderates, can reduce levels of terrorist violence, but
residual terrorist violence by an irreconcilable minority is likely to
persist. Emergency measures to combat the terrorist are hard to
justify continuing when violence or terrorist activity decline, and
there is a danger of becoming dependent on emergency powers.
Quasi-legal or extrajudicial measures are often incompatible with
the fundamental principles of law, and it is also important to have
compensation procedures for any grievances under emergency
powers. A state must be careful of whom any measures affects
and how, and it must keep in mind that suspending democratic
rights puts the government on the same moral plane as the ter-
rorist. Examples of proactive emergency measures like the “terror
from above” campaigns demonstrate that such actions delegit-
imize the state and legitimize the terrorists.
There must be adequate checks and balances to prevent the
abuse of power; the response to terrorism must be firm, but not
taken too far; and there must be safeguards to legitimize and gen-
130
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

erate public acceptance of the state’s use of coercive violence in
the exercise of criminal justice. Any response has to have a com-
mitment to uphold and maintain constitutional principles of law
and order (Chalk 1998): 
•
Any response needs to be limited, well defined, and
should only be directed against the terrorists
themselves. There should be no question of extending
the antiterrorist campaign to the families or
sympathizers of terrorists, as this alienates the
government from the people and encourages
moderates to join extremist organizations
•
Any response needs to be credible (in the eyes of the
general population)
•
All counterterrorist measures need to be made subject
to constant parliamentary supervision and judicial
oversight (accountability)
Any emergency powers should also be clearly and simply
drafted, published as widely as possible, and administered im-
partially. Taken together, the three principles of limitation, credi-
bility, and accountability detailed above can help to ensure that
the state’s response to terrorism is well defined, controlled, and
exercised in a manner that is consistent with the imperatives of
due process. The best way to achieve legislative and judicial con-
trol of antiterrorism operations is to ensure that they take place
within a clear framework of legal controls. Scrutiny of the crimi-
nal justice system should not be left to the judiciary, as self-regu-
lation does not work. Independent scrutiny is therefore needed to
prevent or weaken any terrorist propaganda campaigns regard-
ing corruption.
Furthermore: 
•
The effectiveness of the liberal democratic state’s response
to terrorism depends on its acceptability
•
Any solution must bear in mind the long-term impact
that it will have on the wider process of liberal
democratic life
•
Counterterrorism policies that disregard democratic
norms are a symptomatic treatment (that is, the
problem is still inherent) (Chalk 1998)
Conclusion
131

It is important to address the causes of terrorism while also coun-
tering its symptoms. For this there need to be effective measures
that both deter and prevent terrorism, along with appropriate leg-
islation and the other mechanisms discussed earlier. Every mech-
anism needs to be used (or have the capability to be used) and co-
ordinated together to work successfully. Consideration must be
given to applying the mechanisms most appropriate to each case,
treating each case as unique and tailoring different policies to dif-
ferent challenges (as there are different motivations for terrorism
as well as varying aims). As certain measures may take some time
to organize/mobilize, it is important to have interim “quick”
measures until the other measures are in place. One cannot gen-
eralize over terrorism due to the diversity of factors involved,
thus tailor-made policies are often more effective than legislation,
which is better suited to general rules than specific applications
(Pillar 2001, 224). A pressing question for U.S. counterterrorism
efforts will be whether the new Homeland Security initiative will
be able to effectively coordinate the various agencies and over-
come the problems such as rivalries and turf wars in the fight
against terrorism.
In terms of the debate over the theoretical models, the war
model predominantly uses the military, and the criminal justice
model predominantly uses the police, but the reality today is that
most cases are a hybrid, with joint operations using all tools. An
expanded criminal justice model could be a good method or the-
oretical framework for analysis and for laying foundations for po-
litical, legal, and moral accountability in those occasions when
democracies need to invoke emergency powers, while keeping in
mind Wilkinson’s warnings and guidelines with regard to emer-
gency measures.
Terrorism is not new, and it will not go away. It is impossible
to completely eradicate; thus, more needs to be done in order to
prevent, manage, and minimize its effects. Repression and concil-
iation are not mutually exclusive counterterrorism tactics (the at-
tractiveness of conciliatory carrots depends on the threat of re-
pressive sticks), and neither repression nor conciliation obviates
the need for lessened vulnerability (defense), interdiction of
planned attacks (intelligence), or emergency preparedness (re-
covery) (Kegley 2003, 279). In concert with contemporary conflict
resolution theory and practice, what is needed is a multidimen-
sional, multilevel, comprehensive approach to terrorism. It takes
a multitude of different actors working at different levels to try to
132
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

attain peace, increase understanding and tolerance, and develop
credible and feasible pathways out of terrorism at all levels while
addressing causal factors. This should not be done at the expense
of other counterterrorism measures—intelligence gathering, pro-
phylaxis, and a strong criminal justice system—but in combina-
tion with them. There must be a multidimensional, multilevel co-
ordinated capability to counter terrorism. Cross-training,
cooperation, and liaison are all integral parts. The role of each
arm of the state is important, and as we have seen from the im-
portance of counterpropaganda, effective liaison with the media
is equally important. One important method to promote such ap-
proaches can be interagency working committees, where there is
a framework to both discuss threats, scenarios, and responses as
well as to implement any decisions. As the varying parties (mili-
tary, law enforcement, etc.) will favor and push their own meth-
ods to respond, it is best to have such a committee in order to as-
certain the many means of response and how best to approach
each specific situation. Counterterrorism policy should also not
be viewed in isolation, but along with any major domestic and
foreign policy decisions.
References
Adams, J. 1989. Secret Armies. London: Pan.
———. 1999. The Next World War. London: Arrow.
Andersen, M. E. 2001. “Al Qaeda across the Americas.” Insight on the
News 17, 44 (November 26): 20.
Apple, R. W., Jr. 1985. “Meese Suggests Press Code on Terrorism.” New
York Times, 18 July.
Buzan, B. 1991. People, States, and Fear: An Agenda for International Security
Studies in the Post–Cold War Era. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Chalk, P. 1998. “The Response to Terrorism as a Threat to Liberal Democ-
racy.” The Australian Journal of Politics and History 44, 3 (September): 373.
Cohen, Raymond. 1996. “Cultural Aspects of Mediation.” In Resolving In-
ternational Conflicts, ed. R. Bercovitch. London: Lynne Rienner.
Doran, James. 2001. “Global Search for bin Laden Blood Money.” The
Times (London), Business section, September 20.
Hoffman, B. 1999. Inside Terrorism. London: Indigo.
Jenkins, B. M. 1985. “The U.S. Response to Terrorism: A Policy
Dilemma.” Armed Forces Journal (April). 
References
133

Johnson, L. K. 2003. “Strategic Intelligence: The Weakest Link in the War
against Terrorism.” In The New Global Terrorism, ed. C. W. Kegley Jr.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kegley C. W., Jr., ed. 2003. The New Global Terrorism. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
McEwen, M. 1984. “Intelligence and PSYOP in Terrorism Counterac-
tion.” Military Intelligence (January–March).
McGartland, M. 1998. Fifty Dead Men Walking. London: Blake.
———. 2000. Dead Man Running. London: Mainstream.
Montoya, Mario Daniel. 2001. “War on Terrorism Reaches Paraguay’s
Triple Border.” Jane’s Intelligence Review (December 1).
O’Callaghan, S. 1999. The Informer. London: Corgi.
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Ranstorp, Magnus, and Pedazhur, Ami. 2001. “The Expanded Criminal
Justice Model.” Terrorism and Political Violence 13, 2: 1–26. 
Rapoport, David. 1996 “Editorial: The Media and Terrorism; Implications
of the Unabomber Case.” Terrorism and Political Violence 8, 1 (Spring): viii.
Reinares, Fernando. 2001. European Democracies against Terrorism, Govern-
mental Policies and Intergovernmental Cooperation. Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.
Schmid, A, and Crelinsten, R. 1993. Western Responses to Terrorism. Lon-
don: Frank Cass.
Tomlinson, R. 2000. The Big Breach. Moscow: Narodny Variant.
U.S. State Department. 1998. International Narcotics Control Strategy Re-
port, 1997. Released by the Bureau for International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of State, March.
Available at http://www.state.gov/www/global/narcotics_law/1997_
narc_report/samer97_part2.html (accessed May 10, 2004).
Wilkinson, P. 2001. Terrorism Versus Democracy. London: Frank Cass.
134
Counterterrorism: Perspectives, Issues, and Solutions

3
Chronology
1968
July 22. PFLP hijacking of (Israeli) El Al plane B-707 to
Algiers in order to coerce Israel to release prisoners
(following the June 1967 “Six Day War,” the Palestini-
ans realized their situation was desperate and needed
to change tactics).
1969
August 29. PFLP hijacking of (U.S.) TWA B-707 in
order to coerce Israel to release prisoners.
1970
September 6–12. PFLP members hijack three planes
and fly to Jordan, release hostages, and then blow up
all three aircraft, along with a Pan Am B-747 that is
blown up in Cairo. Jordanian authorities retaliate
against Palestinians resulting in many lost lives.
Palestinians respond by forming the terrorist group
Black September.
1972
July 21. A PIRA bomb kills eleven and wounds 130 in
Belfast.
September 5. At the Munich Olympics, eight Palestinian
Black September members take eleven Israeli athletes
hostage (shooting and killing two) and demand the re-
lease of two hundred imprisoned Palestinians. Advice
from Israel is ignored (as were warnings that an attack
was likely and that security was inadequate). West
German police volunteers with no specialized rescue
135

1972
training attempt rescue but fail, resulting in the death
(cont.)
of the remaining nine hostages and five terrorists,
partly because the terrorists are able to watch the res-
cue attempt live on TVs in the hotel rooms as the
world’s media filmed. This event leads governments
to set up hostage rescue commando units and coun-
terterrorist exchange programs between international
units (SAS, GSG9, GIGN, etc.).
1976
February 3–4. The Front de la Côte des Somalis (FLCS)
hijacks a school bus near Djibouti with thirty children
on board, demanding the immediate independence of
the French territory of Afars and Issas; otherwise, they
would cut the children’s throats. Groupe d’Interven-
tion de la Gendarmerie Nationale (GIGN) snipers kill
four terrorists, but a fifth manages to kill one child be-
fore being shot. The remaining twenty-nine child
hostages are safely freed.
June 27–July 3. Israeli counterterrorism operation at
Entebbe, Uganda, rescuing 258 passengers of a hi-
jacked airliner kidnapped by PFLP and Baader-Mein-
hoff Group members.
1977
May 23. Nine Moluccan terrorists seize about fifty
hostages onboard a train in Holland while simultane-
ously 105 children and six teachers are taken hostage
at a school in Bovensmilde, Holland. In the train, the
terrorists released children and the elderly. Dutch
marines stormed the train and freed the remainig
hostages while killing six terrorists. Some of the
hostages at the school are released due to a stomach
illness, after which the terrorists are caught unawares
by an assault that results in their capture. All the
hostages are unharmed.
October 13. A German GSG9 counterterrorism opera-
tion (with the assistance of two SAS members) at Mo-
gadishu, Somalia, results in the rescue of passengers
of a hijacked airliner (Lufthansa Flight LH181).
136
Chronology

1978
March 16. Prime Minister Aldo Moro of Italy is kid-
napped by the Brigate Rosse (Red Brigades). He is ex-
ecuted fifty-five days later.
1979
November 4. Iranian extremists seize sixty-six diplo-
mats in the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Iran gives no pro-
tection or help to the embassy, and Ayatollah Khomei-
ni, Iran’s religious leader, openly sanctions the siege.
A U.S. military rescue operation fails with heavy U.S.
military casualties. Many hostages are not released
until January 1981.
November 20. Two hundred Islamic terrorists seize the
Grand Mosque in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, taking thou-
sands of pilgrims hostage. Joint Saudi and French
teams retake the shrine after 250 are killed and 600 in-
jured.
1980
April 30. Princes Gate Siege—six anti-Khomeini ter-
rorists take twenty-six hostages at the Iranian Em-
bassy in London. The SAS (U.K.) storms the building,
carrying out one of the most effective hostage rescues
ever. The operation demonstrates the increasingly ef-
fective response of counterterrorist organizations and
acts as a deterrent to terrorists from using such tactics
(thereby causing the terrorists to evolve and develop
different tactics).
1981
October 6. The president of Egypt, Anwar Sadat, is as-
sassinated while inspecting troops. Since then, on
such presidential inspections, no soldiers are allowed
to have either live ammunition or loaded weapons on
their person.
1983
April 18. Lebanese Hezbollah suicide bomber deto-
nates (by ramming) a 400-pound truck-bomb at the
U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, killing sixty-three
and injuring 120.
Chronology
137

1983
October 23. Lebanese Hezbollah use same tactics but
(cont.)
with  12,000 pounds of explosive against U.S. Marine
barracks in Beirut, killing 242, and also against French
barracks, killing fifty-eight.
1984
April 12. Hezbollah targets U.S. Air Force personnel
and civilians at a restaurant near their base at Torrejon,
Spain. Explosives kill eighteen and injure eighty-three.
June 5. Sikh separatists seize the Golden Temple in
Amritsar, India. Hundreds are injured or killed in the
daylong gun battle that ensues when Indian forces
launch an operation to restore order and retake the
temple. Among those killed is the Sikh leader, Jarnail
Singh Bhindranwale. The government’s response
sparks a violent backlash by militant Sikhs.
October 12. PIRA attempts to kill the entire British gov-
ernment cabinet at the Grand Hotel in Brighton, En-
gland, with a bomb that had been built into the hotel
during construction work earlier. PIRA famously
stated afterward, “Today we were unlucky, but re-
member we have only to be lucky once; you will have
to be lucky always.” Such an act, were it successful,
would have paralleled the Gunpowder Plot of No-
vember 5, 1605, wherein Guy Fawkes conspired to
blow up the Houses of Parliament. Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher allegedly responds with a “shoot
to kill” policy in Northern Ireland and more severe re-
straining of terrorist activity.
October 31. Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is
killed by her Sikh bodyguards. Her assassination is in
retaliation of her order to seize the Golden Triangle,
the most holy site of the Sikh religion.
1985
June 23. Babbar Khalsa International plants and deto-
nates a bomb onboard an Air India B-747, killing the
329 passengers and crew. The India-bound flight is
above Ireland when the bomb explodes.
138
Chronology

September 30. Sunni terrorists kidnap four Soviet
diplomats in Beirut and kill one, causing the Soviets to
respond by kidnapping relatives of the terrorists and
mutilating them. The terrorists release the three re-
maining diplomats shortly afterward.
October 7. Palestinian terrorists seize the Achille Lauro
cruise ship in the Mediterranean, taking seven hun-
dred hostages. After they kill a sixty-nine-year-old
wheelchair-bound U.S. citizen named Leon Klinghof-
fer, an Egyptian government negotiator promises safe
passage home if the terrorists cease the siege. U.S. in-
telligence organizes an ambush of the EgyptAir flight
taking the terrorists home and uses U.S. warplanes to
force the plane to land in Italy, at which point Italian
authorities take the terrorists into custody.
1986
April 5. Libyan terrorists target off-duty U.S. service-
men in a discotheque in West Berlin. A bomb in the
nightclub kills two and injures as many as two hun-
dred people.
May 9. Members of the Abu Nidal Organization hijack
Pan Am Flight 73 in Pakistan, taking 374 passengers
and fifteen crew members hostage for sixteen hours.
On the second night, the power runs out on the plane,
causing the terrorists to panic (thinking a hostage res-
cue operation is about to be launched) and begin fir-
ing, resulting in twenty-one hostages being killed and
sixty injured.
1987
November 8. PIRA bombs a Remembrance Day gather-
ing at the war memorial in Enniskillen, County Fer-
managh, Ireland, killing eleven people and injuring
sixty-three.
1988
December 21. Libyan sabotage of Pan Am 103—the
biggest terrorist act in the United Kingdom—killing
259 passengers and crew and an additional eleven
people on the ground in Lockerbie, Scotland.
Chronology
139

1992
March 17. Hezbollah bombs the Israeli Embassy in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, resulting in twenty-nine
dead and 242 injured; the embassy building is com-
pletely destroyed.
1993
February 26. The World Trade Center (New York)
bombing. Al Qaeda detonates a car bomb in one of the
underground levels, killing six and injuring more than
one thousand.
April. PIRA detonates a huge truck bomb (a month
after the Warrington bombing) in London at Bishops-
gate, killing two, injuring forty-four, and causing ap-
proximately £350m (US$ 635m) of damage. The gov-
ernment responds by instituting a “ring of steel”
around the city.
April 16. The first suicide bombing by Hamas. A driver
in a stolen van packed with explosive devices plunges
into a roadside cafeteria near Mehola. The blast kills
the driver, an Arab worker, and injurs nine other
people. The bombing shows clear evidence of cooper-
ation with Hezbollah.
1994
February 25. Jewish right-wing extremist (and U.S.
citizen) Baruch Goldstein fires an automatic
weapon at Muslims attending a mosque in Hebron,
the West Bank, killing twenty-nine Palestinians and
injuring 150 before being overpowered and beaten
to death.
December 24. GIA members hijack Air France Flight
AF8969 in Algiers, killing three passengers in the
process. They fly to Marseilles, France, and then
threaten to fly and destroy the plane over the city of
Paris. Upon receiving this news, the GIGN on Decem-
ber 26 are authorized to storm the plane, resulting in
all terrorists being killed and the remaining 170 pas-
sengers and crew being rescued.
140
Chronology

1995
March 20. Aum Shinrikyo launches an attack on the
Tokyo underground using the nerve agent Sarin,
killing twelve and injuring up to five thousand. This
watershed moment causes mass fears of a new trend
of superterrorism and prompts leaders such as U.S.
president Bill Clinton to order cities to conduct emer-
gency exercises. The ensuing hysteria also encourages
more terrorist groups to acquire chemical/biological
weapons capabilities.
April 19. Right-wing U.S. extremists Timothy McVeigh
and Terry Nichols detonate a truck-bomb that de-
stroys the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Okla-
homa, killing 166 and injuring hundreds. Believed to
be a response to the Waco siege of April 19, 1993, this
event shocks the United States, inducing the fear of
the “enemy within.” The event has implications for
gun laws and results in increased budgets for coun-
terterrorism agencies nationwide.
September 19. The Washington Post prints the complete
46-page manifesto of the U.S. “Unabomber.” 
November 4. Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin is as-
sassinated by a Jewish fanatic.
1996
January 5. An Israeli cell-phone bomb that kills a Pales-
tinian Hamas operative leads to retaliatory suicide
bombings by Hamas and the Islamic jihad, which re-
sults in an election turnaround of Benjamin Ne-
tanyahu being elected prime minister of Israel over
the favorite, Shimon Peres (the message being that ter-
rorism works).
January 31. LTTE members detonate a truck-bomb by
ramming it into the Central Bank in Colombo, Sri
Lanka, killing 91 and injuring 1,400.
February 9. PIRA bombs the Canary Wharf in London,
signifying a continuing trend of larger-scale attacks
and a shift in targeting of “soft” economic targets. Two
Chronology
141

1996
people are killed in the blast, and a large number are 
(cont.)
injured; damage is valued in the millions.
February 26. A Hamas suicide bomber boards a bus in
Jerusalem and detonates a bomb that kills twenty-six
and injures eighty.
June 15. PIRA detonates a truck-bomb in Manchester
City, England, injuring 206 people and resulting in
damage to the city center that takes years to repair.
June 25. U.S. servicemen are targeted when a bomb in
a fuel truck is detonated outside Khobar Towers in
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing nineteen and injuring
around four hundred.
June 27–29. The G8 Summit and follow-up ministerial
meetings on terrorism.
July 27. Atlanta Olympics bombing; believed links to
U.S. white supremacist groups.
December 17. The Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Move-
ment (MRTA) seizes the Japanese ambassador’s resi-
dence in Lima, Peru, taking hundreds hostage, in-
cluding many foreign diplomats, and demanding the
release of three hundred jailed MRTA members. After
negotiations lasting months that result in the release
all but seventy-two hostages, a rescue operation is
launched. All the terrorists are killed, along with one
hostage and two rescue team members; the remaining
hostages are freed.
1998
August 7. Al Qaeda bombings of U.S. embassies in
Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam leave over 270 dead and
over five thousand injured. The United States re-
sponds with cruise missiles, targeting training camps
in Afghanistan and a pharmaceutical factory in Sudan.
142
Chronology

August 15. PIRA detonates a 500-pound car bomb in
the center of Omagh, Northern Ireland, killing
twenty-nine and injuring more than 300.
1999
Hijacking of a plane from Afghanistan to Russia, then
on to the United Kingdom for claimed asylum raises
implications for asylum laws in the United Kingdom
and elsewhere.
2000
October 12. Al Qaeda suicide attack of the USS Cole
while in port in Aden, Yemen, kills seventeen service-
men and injures forty.
2001
Planned for February 11–14. Planned sarin attacks on
the London underground are thwarted by U.K. secu-
rity forces. It is believed that the Islamic terrorists
(mostly Algerian and Al Qaeda members) based in
Britain were also planning a sarin attack on the Eu-
ropean Parliament building in Strasbourg as part of
the operation: they planned to kill all 625 Euro-MPs,
as well as officials in the vicinity, by releasing the
nerve agent into the building. The attack was to be
the first in a series of assaults against prominent
buildings across Europe. The London cell, appar-
ently funded directly by Osama bin Laden, worked
with other cells in Milan, Italy, and Frankfurt, Ger-
many.
September 11. The unprecedented hijacking of four
large passenger aircraft in the United States results in
devastation at the World Trade Center in New York
City (both Twin Towers are completely destroyed)
and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C.; one of the air-
craft was thought to be on its way to the U.S. Capitol
building but crashed in a field in Pennsylvania. More
than three thousand people were killed, and direct
and indirect damage estimated at billions of dollars. 
Chronology
143

2001
The events of this day, now obliquely referred to as 
(cont.)
“9/11,” also precipitate mass trauma in the United
States and throughout the world, which responds
with increased international cooperation against ter-
rorism, the reprioritizing of national security with ter-
rorism as the top threat, and huge budgetary increases
of counterterrorism and intelligence agencies.
October 12. The bombing of a Bali nightclub kills
nearly two hundred people and injures over three
hundred (many young Australian tourists included).
Jemaah Islamiyah is believed responsible.
October 23. A group of mainly Chechen terrorists (ap-
proximately thirty males and twenty females) seizes a
Moscow theater with automatic weapons and large
suicide bombs, holding hostage the audience and pro-
duction crew of approximately seven hundred. Some
hostages (mainly Muslims) are released in return for
airtime on television to convey the terrorists’ message.
The Russian counterterrorism Alpha Team uses gas to
render those inside unconscious in order to minimize
collateral damage from a firefight and then launches a
rescue mission. More than one hundred hostages die
as a result of the effects of the gas and inadequate med-
ical treatment afterward when officials refuse to iden-
tify the gas for medical staff so that the victims could
be given the appropriate treatment. Many others are
permanently injured.
November 28. Simultaneous attacks in Kenya: three
suicide bombers kill sixteen people at the Israeli-
owned Paradise Hotel near Mombasa, and two SAMs
are fired at an “Arkia” B-757 carrying 261 passengers.
The plane lands safely at Ben Gurion Airport in Tel
Aviv, Israel, shortly after takeoff.
144
Chronology

2003
May 12. Nearly two hundred people are injured and
thirty others killed in an Al Qaeda suicide attack on a
residential compound housing mostly foreign work-
ers in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
May 16. Suicide bombings in Casablanca, Morocco, in-
volve twelve bombers, eighty-seven collaborators,
and five physical targets (Western and Jewish), result-
ing in forty-five dead. The attacks are attributed to the
hard-line Islamic groups Salafia Jihadia and Al-As-
sirat al-Moustaquim. Both have suspected Al Qaeda
links.
For a comprehensive list of all terrorist events worldwide, it
is advisable to view the RAND-MIPT database of events at
http://db.mipt.org/mipt_rand.cfm.
Chronology
145


4
Profiles of Terrorist and
Counterterrorist Leaders
and Organizations
I
n terms of countering or understanding terrorism it is often not
enough to develop a “profile.” It is also important to consider
the position of the terrorist in the hierarchy within the organi-
zation. For example, one should differentiate between the roles in
the hierarchies of terrorist organizations, as Allison (2003) notes
regarding the bomb designer, bomb maker, and bomb layer (the
person placing, arming, or initiating the device). The latter will
generally be an expendable person who only has a very basic
knowledge of the workings of the device, which will have been
imparted from the bomb maker, to allow the layer to fulfill his or
her mission. The bomb maker is more valuable, with more
advanced knowledge/expertise received from either a senior
bomb maker or the bomb designer, and thus is a group asset and
therefore unlikely to be tasked with dangerous operational mis-
sions that may result in the loss of his or her life and expertise.
The bomb designer is a valuable group asset who provides the
group with new and innovative methods of IED attack in
response to security force countermeasures. Bomb designers will
usually have a particular skill or university qualification in a sub-
ject transferable to IED design/production.
There will be differing motivations and personalities for the
persons undertaking the different roles. Almost all terrorist train-
ing manuals (e.g., the Afghan Jihad Encyclopedia, the Terrorist
147

Handbook, and the “Declaration of Jihad against the Country’s
Tyrants”) emphasize the need to identify a correct type of person
to undergo the highly specialized explosives course: someone
calm, quiet, and intelligent, not a hothead who might kill him-
self/herself or others. A different personality profile may likely be
required for a suicide bomber.
In terms of profiling terrorists one can thus begin to see the
problems inherent given the different roles. Equally, people in-
volved in the financing or support aspects of terrorism (e.g.,
lawyers, business people, petty criminals) will have different
“profiles” to those involved in the operational aspects of terror-
ism. It is thus important to not look for a “one-size-fits-all” pro-
file of a terrorist, but treat each case uniquely, or at least use gen-
eral characteristics.
As regards leadership backgrounds and profiles, it is impos-
sible to portray a standard profile as there are so many different
types of factors that motivate a person to become a terrorist, as
seen in Chapter 1, as well as the various and diverse range of
aims of each group, which can all affect the membership and pro-
files of groups as well as their leaders. Although the following list
illustrates some of the common characteristics of leaders, there
are obviously different personalities, backgrounds, experiences,
intellects, and different levels of success in their respective aims
and campaigns. Thus one should not generalize and should only
use it as a general guide.
General Terrorist Leader Profile: 
•
Often educated to university level, often in subjects that
have terrorist applications, such as engineering,
business, architecture, or sciences (thus giving them
natural leadership through expertise or advanced
knowledge)
•
Often organized planners, sometimes with some military
training/experience, and able to plan operations as well
as train members in certain operational aspects
•
Usually are the brains behind operations or targeting
and so have the most detailed knowledge of their
group’s workings and intentions; it is thus important
for them to not be noticed by the authorities. For these
reasons they will often appear to be law-abiding
persons of normal disposition with the ability to mix
and interact
148
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

•
Often charismatic, having the ability to convince and
manipulate individuals to join their cause, as well as
being able to conceptualize an idea and turn it into a
real-time mission, as well as articulate it
•
Truly believe their cause is right and just, and the
killing of combatants and civilians is both justified
and incorporated into the mission for psychological
effects
•
Sometimes may get involved in personal risk-taking
endeavors such as monitoring or executing the mission,
but will usually try to distance themselves from all
aspects so as to avoid capture and prosecution and
maintain plausible deniability in order to survive and
continue (Olivares 2001)
Although one will see from the following profiles that
many of these points are evident in terrorist leaderships, not all
of these factors need to be present for a terrorist to be a leader,
and indeed there will sometimes be leaders who display none or
few of these characteristics. Types of leadership also vary from
group to group; some groups have single leaders whereas
groups like PIRA take their direction from a seven-member
“Army Council,” as well as from their political leadership, Sinn
Fein. For these reasons it is important to look at the roles and
importance of group leaders in the context of the organization
and to examine and counter each case according to its own spe-
cific circumstances.
Due to the vast number of terrorist groups and leaders, it is
beneficial to examine a select few in more depth in order to illus-
trate the complexity and sophistication of such entities rather
than list basic (widely available) data about many groups.
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
Al Qaeda—“The Base”
Osama bin Laden
Position: Head of Al Qaeda
Significance: Figurehead and symbol of Islamic resistance
and hatred against the West (wanted for the murder of U.S. na-
tionals outside the United States, conspiracy to murder U.S.
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
149

nationals outside the United States, and attack on a federal facil-
ity resulting in death).
Aliases: The Emir, Hajj, the Director, the Prince, Abu Abdal-
lah, Mujahid Shaykh, Shaykh Usama bin Laden, Usama bin
Muhammad bin Laden
Date and Place of Birth: Believed to be July 30, 1957, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia (it was not compulsory to register births in Saudi at
that time).
Description: Height—6’4” to 6’6”; weight—approximately
160 pounds, thin build; language—Arabic (probably Pashtu)
A tall, thin man weighing about 160 pounds with a full
beard, bin Laden walks with a cane. He wears long,
flowing Arab robes fringed with gold, and wraps his
head in a traditional red-and-white checkered head-
dress. He is said to be soft-spoken, extremely courte-
ous, and even humble. He is described in some sources
as ordinary and shy. He speaks only Arabic. Bin Laden
has been linked to a number of Islamic extremist
groups and individuals with vehement anti-American
and anti-Israel ideologies. His name has been con-
nected to many of the world’s most deadly terrorist
operations, and he is named by the U.S. Department of
State as having financial and operational connections
with terrorism. Because he has dared to stand up to
two superpowers, bin Laden has become an almost
mythic figure in the Islamic world. Thanks to the inef-
fectual U.S. cruise missile attack against his camps in
Afghanistan following the bombings in Kenya and
Tanzania in August 1998, thousands of Arabs and
Muslims, seeing him as a hero under attack by the
Great Satan, have volunteered their service. (Hudson
1999, 170–176)
Background: Osama bin Laden’s father, Muhammed bin
Awdah bin Laden, and his family moved from southern Yemen to
Saudi Arabia, where Muhammed distinguished himself as a con-
struction magnate. After Muhammed renovated the holy cities of
Mecca and Medina, the bin Laden family came to be highly re-
spected by both the Saudi house royalty and the public. They
were the richest nonroyalty in Saudi Arabia. Muhammed’s ap-
proximately sixty-five children rarely saw their father, and when
150
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

they did, it was not an individual one-on-one meeting but as a
group, and very brief. As such, none of the children, including
Osama, were close to the father. Muhammed’s death left his fam-
ily a financial empire believed to be worth $10 billion. (The Saudi
bin Laden Group is now run by Osama’s family, who publicly
condemn terrorist activities and claim to have no contact with
him.) Osama invested the bulk of his inherited wealth overseas.
The intelligence community is divided over exactly how much
Osama inherited. The Australian government believes it is over
$250 million. The British estimate $280 million–$300 million.
Swiss intelligence, with access to superior banking information,
provides a figure of $250 million–$500 million.
Osama’s Syrian mother, Hamida, is still alive and main-
tains contact with him. Although Osama’s mother travels to Eu-
rope—mostly to Paris and London—and to the Middle East,
she lives in Saudi Arabia. Osama had no other immediate
brothers (from his mother), only sisters, including one who
married Mohammad Jamal Khalifa. All his half-brothers were
sent to boarding schools in Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt except
for two of his half-brothers: Ali and Abdullah. Like Osama,
they stayed in Jeddah and studied at Saudi schools. Osama
married a Syrian, a relative of his mother, and attended King
Abd Al-Aziz University, where he studied economics and man-
agement with the intention of joining the family construction
and contracting company. He was an average student who
often traveled to Beirut, Lebanon, to frequent nightclubs, casi-
nos, and bars. He left university during his third year of study.
(Contrary to several other writings, he neither studied engi-
neering nor completed his degree.) After leaving university,
Osama worked in his father’s construction business. It was at
this time that Osama not only became deeply religious but also
began preaching the necessity of armed struggle and world-
wide monotheism. He credits Dr. Abdullah Azzam, a Palestin-
ian of Jordanian origin and an influential figure in the Muslim
Brotherhood, with forming his worldview.
His exact date of arrival in Pakistan or Afghanistan remains
disputed, but some Western intelligence agencies place the date
in the early 1980s. Bin Laden’s early mentors were Azzam, today
regarded as the historical leader of Hamas, and Prince Turki ibn
Faisal ibn Abdelaziz, chief of security of Saudi Arabia. Subse-
quently, Dr. Ayman Zawahiri started to fill the role of religious
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
151

mentor. Between 1982 and 1984, Azzam founded Maktab al
Khidimat il mujahidin al Arab (MaK), known commonly as the
Afghan Bureau, Office Bureau, or Service Bureau. As MaK’s prin-
cipal financier, bin Laden was considered the deputy to Azzam,
the emir of MaK. At the height of the foreign Arab and Muslim in-
flux into Pakistan-Afghanistan from 1984–1986, bin Laden spent
more time traveling widely and raising funds in the Arab world.
In addition to recruiting, ideologically and physically training
several thousand Arab and Muslim youth from around the world
to fight the Soviets, MaK channeled several billions of dollars of
Western governmental financial and material resources for the
Afghan jihad. Bin Laden transformed it into an international net-
work, recruiting Islamic fundamentalists with special expertise,
such as engineers, medical doctors, and drug smugglers; he also
volunteered the services of the family construction firm to blast
elaborate tunnels and new roads through the mountains. MaK
worked closely with Pakistan, especially the Inter-Services-Intel-
ligence (ISI), Pakistan’s formidable military intelligence organiza-
tion; the wealthy Saudi government and its philanthropists; the
Egyptian government, the leader of the Arab world; and the vast
Muslim Brotherhood network in the Arab world.
The ISI was both the CIA’s conduit for arms transfers and
source of training for the Afghan and foreign mujahedin. The CIA
configured special weapons and provided state-of-the-art tech-
nologies from Stingers to satellite imagery to the mujahedin. Both
the fighting and relief efforts were assisted by two banks; the Dar
al Mal al Islami, founded by Turki’s brother, Prince Mohammad
Faisal, in 1981, and Dalla al Baraka, founded by King Fahd’s
brother-in-law in 1982. The two banks channeled funds to twenty
NGOs, the most famous of which was the International Islamic
Relief Organization (IIRO). Both IIRO and the Islamic Relief
Agency functioned under the umbrella of the World Islamic
League, led by Mufti Abdul Aziz bin Baz. In addition to benefit-
ing from the vast resources and expertise of governments chan-
neled through domestic and foreign sources, MaK developed an
independent global reach. Several mosques and charities, includ-
ing the Kiffah refugee center in Brooklyn, New York, and its
mosque, served as MaK outreach offices in the United States.
As a philanthropist, Osama bin Laden became popular in
Afghanistan. Although he came from one of the richest families in
the Arabian Peninsula, his commitment to the jihad, his qualities
of humility and simplicity, and his ability to befriend and com-
152
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

municate with the fighters on the ground appealed to the muja-
hedin. A fellow mujahedin claimed that not only had bin Laden
given them his money, but he also gave himself. They said that
the bin Laden way was to renounce his wealth and status and
come and live with the Afghan peasants and the Arab fighters.
Many spoke of how bin Laden cooked, ate, and dug trenches with
them. While living in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area, bin
Laden became increasingly religious and built close relationships
with several religious personalities, including the spiritual leader
of the Egyptian Islamic Group Omar Abdel Rahman, the Blind
Sheikh, during his first visit to Pakistan in 1985. Although bin
Laden played more of a support role than a combat role, he par-
ticipated as a frontline fighter in the battles fought in the late
stages of the campaign. In 1986 he joined the Afghan Arabs and
participated in the battles for Jalalabad. In 1987 the mujahedin
mounted a daring and spectacular attack against a powerful So-
viet offensive involving land and air power. It was one of the
most famous battles during the whole war and, due to the high
risk encountered, it was known as “The Lion’s Den Operation of
Afghanistan.” Many notable mujahedin personalities partici-
pated in this operation, including Abu Zubair al-Madani and
Shaykh Tameem Dnani. Shaykh Abdullah Azzam was in the sec-
ond line of the front. Bin Laden was exposed to poisonous gas
during an attack and also suffered minor physical injuries. Bin
Laden again joined the mujahedin in a decisive battle. His per-
sonal participation in battle made him a hero in the eyes of many.
By winning one battle against the Soviets, he demonstrated and
argued that the Soviet military machine could be defeated. His
wealth, influence, and fearlessness made him a natural leader for
the Arab mujahedin contingent in the second half of the 1980s.
Although Soviet troops withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989,
the Soviets installed Najibullah, a procommunist leader, in Kabul.
As such, MaK continued to strengthen the organization to fight
the Najibullah regime and channel resources to other interna-
tional campaigns where Muslims were perceived as victims. In
addition to benefiting from MaK’s pan-Islamic (as opposed to the
pan-Arab) ideology, Al Qaeda drew from the vast financial re-
sources and technical expertise mobilized during the decade-long
anti-Soviet campaign.
At the end of the anti-Soviet campaign, bin Laden returned
to Saudi Arabia. While there, he helped create the first jihad
group in south Yemen, under the leadership of Tariq al Fadli. His
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
153

support for the Saudi-based Islamists of Yemen continued well
after the end of the Afghan jihad, until the ousting of the com-
munists of south Yemen. Although very little is known about his
role, bin Laden was one of the key players in the fight against the
communists in Yemen for nearly two decades.
After the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the United States be-
came involved in the Persian Gulf War. At the request of Saudi
Arabia, the United States based its troops in Saudi Arabia. A dis-
turbed bin Laden, who did not want armed non-Muslims on the
land of the two holy mosques, expressed his displeasure to
Prince Turki. The failure of the Saudi royalty to honor the U.S.
pledge to withdraw foreign troops as soon as the Iraqi threat di-
minished led bin Laden to initiate a campaign against the Saudi
rulers. In his eyes they were infidels. He claimed that the Saudi
rulers were false Muslims and that it was necessary to install a
true Islamic state in Saudi Arabia. Meanwhile, the National Is-
lamic Front, led by Hasan al Turabi and which came to power in
Sudan, sent a delegation to Pakistan. Within three years of the
departure of the Soviets from Afghanistan, bin Laden started to
relocate a part of the Al Qaeda infrastructure of well-trained and
well-experienced fighters from Pakistan and Afghanistan to
Sudan. Beginning in 1991 he started to use Khartoum, Sudan, as
Al Qaeda’s headquarters. He established about thirty compa-
nies in Sudan, including high-tech labs engaged in genetic re-
search, and funded the construction of a road from Khartoum to
Port Sudan.
According to Hudson (1999, 170–176), “Osama also financed
and help set up at least three terrorist training camps in cooper-
ation with the Sudanese regime, and his construction company
worked directly with Sudanese military officials to transport and
supply terrorists training in such camps. During the 1992–96 pe-
riod, he built and equipped 23 training camps for Mujahidin.
While in Sudan, he also established a supposedly detection-
proof financial system to support Islamic terrorist activities
worldwide.” In 1992 he focused his efforts against Egypt and
also claimed responsibility for attempting to bomb U.S. soldiers
in Yemen. In 1993 he again attacked U.S. soldiers, this time in So-
malia, and that winter he traveled to the Philippines to show his
support for the terrorist network that would launch major oper-
ations in that country and the United States. Convinced that the
House of al-Saud was no longer legitimate, bin Laden began ac-
154
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

tively supporting Islamic extremists in Saudi Arabia also that
year, prompting Saudi authorities to revoke his Saudi citizenship
on April 7, 1994, for “irresponsible behavior,” and he was offi-
cially expelled from the country. As Hudson (1999, 170–176) de-
tails, bin Laden “subsequently established a new residence and
base of operations in the London suburb of Wembley, but was
forced to return to Sudan after a few months to avoid being ex-
tradited to Saudi Arabia.” In early 1995 he instructed Al Qaeda
to increase activities against Egypt and Saudi Arabia. The fol-
lowing year, the Saudi government began to pressure Sudan to
exert some form of control over bin Laden, at which point he and
his family returned to Afghanistan on board his unmarked trans-
port plane.
Bin Laden established a mountain fortress near the city of
Kandahar, southwest of Jalalabad, under the protection of the
Afghan government. Between 1996 and 1998 he issued three fat-
was (religious rulings), each threatening a jihad against U.S.
forces in Saudi Arabia and the Holy Lands, and each calling for
Muslims to concentrate on “destroying, fighting and killing the
enemy.”
Bin Laden appears to use marriage as a binding tactic, simi-
lar to the concept of the Italian mafia family. At one of his son’s
marriages in Afghanistan several years ago, he invited the re-
gional chiefs of Al Qaeda, as well as leaders of Islamic terrorist
groups from around the world. Osama’s son Muhammad, born in
1985, “rarely leaves his father’s side. Muhammad has already re-
ceived extensive military and terrorist training and carries his
own AK-47. He serves as his father’s vigilant personal body-
guard” (Hudson 1999, 170–176).
Ideological Influence: Toward the end of the anti-Soviet
Afghan campaign, bin Laden’s relationship with Azzam began
to suffer. Throughout the second half of 1988 and in 1989, he and
Azzam disagreed over several issues. Despite these differences,
they maintained public appearances and worked together.
Although bin Laden and Azzam agreed on the principal issue of
continuing to support Muslims in distress worldwide and on the
creation of Al Qaeda, they disagreed on the future tactics to be
adopted. The tension between them came to head over an
Egyptian proposal to train the mujahedin in terrorist tactics. The
Egyptians were keen to train a force that would use these tactics
back home in Egypt, but Azzam insisted that the funds were
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
155

only for use in Afghanistan. Having lived in Egypt, Azzam knew
the futility, danger, and limits of starting a terrorist campaign
there. As the Egyptian Islamic Group wished to invest in terror-
ism, Azzam issued a fatwa stating that using the money to train
in terrorist tactics would be a violation of Islamic law. On the
killing of noncombatants, Azzam’s writings clearly reflect the
finer points of fighting combatants as well as his position on
jihad to aid the suffering Muslims. One of the final disputes was
over Azzam’s support for Masood, the leader of the Russian-
backed Northern Alliance fighting the Taliban. Bin Laden always
preferred Hekmatiyar, who was both anticommunist and anti-
West. During the anti-Soviet campaign, when Hekmatiyar vis-
ited the UN headquarters in New York, the Afghan mujahedin
spurned an invitation to meet the U.S. president. However, bin
Laden never openly expressed any hatred toward the United
States while living in Afghanistan or Pakistan. When the Soviets
decided to withdraw from Afghanistan, bin Laden decided to
form his own group for the purpose of making a khalifa, uniting
the whole Muslim world into a single entity. He wanted to es-
tablish Islamic states where there were non-Islamic rulers in
power. Despite their differences, Azzam and bin Laden worked
together until Azzam was mysteriously assassinated on Novem-
ber 24, 1989, along with his sons Ibrahim and Mohommad by a
20-kilogram TNT device activated by remote control while he
was driving to Friday (jummah) prayer. Since then, bin Laden
has never criticized Azzam in public and in his writings only
praised him. Nonetheless, it is very likely that bin Laden, a ge-
nius in deception, was behind Azzam’s murder. Nearly a decade
later, an Al Qaeda Palestinian member (Mohammed Saddiq
Odeh alias Mohammed Sadiq Howeida) was arrested in Pakistan
and told his interrogators that bin Laden personally ordered the
killing of Azzam.
In many ways, Azzam had controlled bin Laden. With
Azzam’s death, bin Laden reached his full potential as a radical
under the religious mentoring of Dr. Ayman Muhammad Rabi Al-
Zawahiri. Ten years younger than Azzam, Al-Zawahiri came
from one of the most influential families in Al-Sharqiyyah, Egypt,
and was the leader of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. Largely due to
Al-Zawahiri’s influence, bin Laden was perceived as favoring the
two Egyptian terrorist organizations—the Egyptian Islamic Jihad
and the Egyptian Islamic Group. Bin Laden was so impressed by
156
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Al-Zawahiri that many believed that he was supporting Egyp-
tians more than Al Qaeda members and their families. Gradually,
he resolved many of the differences between the two Egyptian
groups, which pertained to the religious issue of dealing with ex-
cusing ignorance as well as the leadership structure and the shura,
or consultation body. As the Egyptian Islamic Group leader, Rifa
Taha Ali (alias Rifai Ahmad Taha) disagreed on the organizational
structure and the appointment of Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman,
the Blind Sheik, as the new international group leader. However,
Al-Zawahiri and Taha agreed to preserve their organizational
structures, retain their group leaderships, and cooperate under
bin Laden’s leadership.
Many insiders including, Al-Zawahiri’s former lawyer,
Muntasir Al-Zayyat, have argued that bin Laden was trans-
formed from a guerrilla into a terrorist by Al-Zawahiri. What is
clear is the extent of influence Al-Zawahiri wields over bin Laden.
In almost all the media and public appearances after bin Laden
moved to Afghanistan, Al-Zawahiri has been by his side. Al-Zay-
yat has stated that Al-Zawahiri is bin Laden’s “brain” that con-
trols and determines his actions and reactions. Al Qaeda’s first
military commander, Ali Al-Rashidi (alias Abu-Ubaydah al-Ban-
shiri), an Al-Zawahiri loyalist, may well have been bin Laden’s
“heart.” When he drowned in Lake Victoria in Kenya in 1996, he
was not only Al Qaeda’s military commander but also its emir.
His deputy and successor, Subhi Abd-al-Aziz Abu-Sittah (alias
Muhammad Atef), was also an Al-Zawahiri loyalist. Muhammed
Atef always sat next to bin Laden during his public appearances,
suggesting that Atef held the post of military commander and
emir in Al Qaeda. The U.S. bombing of Afghanistan in November
2001 killed Atef.
In many ways, both Zawahiri and bin Laden fit the bill of
the new generation of terrorists. Unlike the leaders of the ter-
rorist groups during the Cold War, the rank and file of contem-
porary terrorist groups come from wealthy, educated, and well-
to-do families. It is a clear demonstration that the terrorist
ideologies equally appeal to all classes and strata of society.
Both the Al Qaeda leader and the deputy leader came from
privileged families. Bin Laden came from the wealthiest non-
royal Saudi family in Saudi Arabia. Al-Zawahiri came from one
of the most educated families in Egypt. Although Al-Zawahiri
did not hold an important administrative or military position in
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
157

Al Qaeda at its formative stage, he was very much present from
the inception. In addition to attending all the important Al
Qaeda meetings starting in 1989, Al-Zawahiri influenced the
thinking both of bin Laden and the organization. Al-Zawahiri
was head of the religious committee, one of the key Al Qaeda
committees that issued fatawa, or legal rulings, and the consul-
tative council “the Shura.” Under Al-Zawahiri’s influence, bin
Laden began to assign a high priority to the military structure
of his organization. Bin Laden appointed the Al Qaeda military
commander also as emir of Al Qaeda. Successive military com-
manders dominated the meetings and the decision-making. In
all public appearances, the military commander sat next to Bin
Laden. After Al Banshiri’s death, Atef was always with Bin
Laden and Al-Zawahiri.
Both Al-Zawahiri and bin Laden are followers of the Salafi
school of Islam and not the Wahabi school, as stated by many ex-
perts and in many publications. The Wahabi school is a part of the
Salafi school. The followers of the Salafi school are called “the
pious pioneers of Islam.” The Salafi Dawah is Islam in its totality.
It addresses all humanity irrespective of culture, race, or color. It
is this aspect that has enabled bin Laden’s message to reach be-
yond Sunni Muslims and to the Shias and to establish links with
Shia groups such as Hezbollah. The Salafi school aims to return
the entire Islamic nation to the sublime Koran and to the
Prophet’s authentic Sunnah. It also strives to revive Islamic
thought within the boundaries of Islamic principles, meaning the
presentation of realistic Islamic solutions to contemporary prob-
lems and to establish a true Islamic society governed by Allah’s
laws. It is pure and free from any additions, deletions, or alter-
ations. As such, for the Al Qaeda member, the Salafi school is
complete, perfect in the methodology of understanding Islam,
and acting according to its teachings. Members also believe that
the Prophet has deemed the Salaf the best generation of muslims,
and all who follow them are guaranteed success, victory, and sal-
vation from hell. For the current generation of Al Qaeda mem-
bers, bin Laden is considered a Salafi.
Khalid Shaikh Mohommad
Position: Third in command of Al Qaeda (captured as of March 1,
2003)
Significance: Masterminded 9/11 
158
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Aliases: In the 1990s, law enforcement, security, and intelli-
gence agencies have identified at least fifty aliases for Khalid.
Among them are Walid Muhammad Salih Ba Attas, Khalid Al-
Shaikh, Mohammad Khaled, Salim Ali, Ali Salem, Muhammed
Khalid Al-Mana, M Almana, Ashraf Refaat Nabith Henin, Nabih
Hanin, Fahd bin Abdallah bin Khaled, Muhammad Muhannadi,
Ashraf Ahmed, Ahmed Refaat, Khalid Abdul Wadood, Khalid
the Kuwaiti, Babu Hamza, Mukhtar, Al-Mukh, Muhammad Ali
Al Balushi, Mukhtar Al-Baluchi, Abdul Rahman Abdullah Al-
Ghamdi, Khalid Mohammad Mohammad, Khalid Abdul
Wadood, and Khalid Saeed Muhammad.
Date and Place of Birth: Although he appears to be older, he
used the birthdates of April 14, 1965, and March 1, 1964, Kuwait.
Description: Khalid frequently altered his appearance. He
is portly, light brown in complexion, with brown eyes and thin-
ning dark hair, and has a long round face. He has been described
as “relatively short” and “slightly overweight” by Al Qaeda de-
tainees in U.S. custody. He is 5 foot 5 inches (1.55 meters) tall
and weighs 160 pounds (72 kilograms). He often sported a
closely trimmed beard and mustache and wore glasses. He
tinted his hair, the color ranging from dark brown to black. He
wore Western clothes, speaks very good English, and traveled
frequently.
Background: Khalid’s origin remains in dispute. U.S. govern-
ment reports initially stated that Khalid’s father was the first imam
of Al-Ahmadi Mosque in Kuwait and was stripped of his citizen-
ship after a dispute with a leading Kuwaiti family. Born as Khalid
Al-Shaikh Muhammad Ali Dustin Al-Blushi in Kuwait, Khalid
spent his early years in Fahaheel, south of Kuwait City. After
Khalid was identified as the mastermind of 9/11, the U.S. intelli-
gence community stated that he was a Kuwaiti national; however,
being born in Kuwait does not automatically qualify someone as a
citizen. After the European Union issued in December 2001 a ter-
rorist list citing Khalid as a Kuwaiti, the Kuwaiti information min-
istry stated that neither Khalid nor his father were Kuwaitis. The
Kuwaiti intelligence service checked all its records, and its Ministry
of Foreign Affairs through its missions overseas clarified to gov-
ernments worldwide that the “said person in question is not a
Kuwaiti national and does not hold a Kuwaiti passport.” In fact, he
acquired Pakistani citizenship and obtained a Pakistani passport
from the Pakistani Embassy in Kuwait on December 6, 1982, after
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
159

which he left Kuwait for the United States. He studied at Chowan
College in northeastern North Carolina for one semester in 1984,
then transferred to another university in North Carolina where he
obtained a degree in mechanical engineering. Thereafter, he moved
to Pakistan and served as the secretary of Abdul-Rab Rasool
Sayyaf, leader of Ittehad-e-Islami, one of seven large groups that
fought against the Soviet troops and Najibullah in Afghanistan.
Sayyaf was well disposed toward bin Laden and to Abdul Rajak
Janjalani, the founding leader of the Abu Sayyaf Group. As there
were many Arabs in the ranks of Ittehad-e-Islami, Khalid estab-
lished a wide network during the second half of the 1980s.
While in Pakistan, he engaged in anti-Shia operations in Pak-
istan, including the assassination of prominent Shia leaders and
bombing of Shia shrines, and trying to assassinate Benazir
Bhutto, Pakistan’s pro-West prime minister. He also expanded his
network by recruiting and enlisting many followers from Kuwait.
From Fahaheel, where a significant percentage of Palestinians
lived, many Arabs and Pakistanis joined, supported, or sympa-
thized with Al Qaeda. Among them were Ramzi Ahmed Yousef;
Abdul Shakur, the attempted assassin of Benazir Bhutto; Wadi Al
Hage, secretary to bin Laden; Abdul Hakim Murad, the first Al
Qaeda pilot; and Murad’s associate Nasir Mubarak, also a pilot
who had trained at the same U.S. flight school. Once again, this
demonstrated that Al Qaeda recruited from familial and social
networks.
Khalid visited the Philippines and lived there in 1994. Until
Yousef’s cell was exposed, Khalid lived mostly on the top floor
of Manila’s Dona Josefa Apartments, where Yousef experi-
mented with explosives to destroy U.S. airliners. The apartment
was Al Qaeda’s operational center until a fire erupted. In fact,
Khalid arrived at Yousef’s apartment just as it caught fire, but he
managed to escape. After the detection of the Yousef cell in
Manila, Yousef fled to Pakistan, where he was arrested. Khalid,
who had known Yousef since childhood, was affected by his ar-
rest but remained in the Philippines. Due to the security meas-
ures he adopted, Khalid was confident that he would not be ar-
rested. According to an FBI officer, he was observed visiting the
VIP Restaurant in the Harrison Plaza Complex in Manila almost
everyday at around the same time. After Yousef fled Manila, the
FBI mounted an operation together with its Philippine counter-
part to arrest Khalid at the Bandido (Bandit) restaurant in
160
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Manila, which he had begun to frequent. The operation was un-
successful (due to the visibility of FBI and other agents), and
Khalid immediately left Manila for Doha, Qatar. There he lived
at the estate of Abdullah bin Khalid, an influential Islamist who
supported Al Qaeda and had hosted bin Laden twice in the mid-
1990s, and worked at the Public Works Ministry. When the FBI
and CIA tracked Khalid to an apartment in Doha and was about
to arrest him, the U.S. government believes that a senior Qatari
official tipped him off. Although Qatar government officials
were willing to hand him over to the United States, the process
of getting permission to arrest him took time. Together with an
associate, Khalid fled Qatar using forged passports. In the fall of
1996, Khalid surfaced in Brazil. The CIA arranged through its li-
aison with Brazil’s security service to arrest him, but he again
slipped away. Khalid reappeared in the Middle East and Europe
in 1997 and 1998, building a network for the purpose of attack-
ing U.S. targets.
Unlike most other Al Qaeda terrorists and leaders, Khalid’s
motivation was not religion but retribution, retaliation, and re-
venge. He appeared to be driven by pure vengeance—a single
mission to punish the United States of America and its friends.
Khalid was not an operative but an organizer of terrorist attacks.
As he did not directly conduct terrorist attacks, his identity re-
mained illusive and his personality largely unknown to the intel-
ligence community until mid-2002. After Khalid was identified as
a foreign terrorist in the mid-1990s, he remained on the run. How-
ever, he demonstrated his ability to function effectively over long
periods of time under extreme pressure. Despite being placed on
nearly one hundred watch lists and tracked by two-dozen gov-
ernments even before 9/11, he managed to both organize and op-
erate across the world, portraying himself as either a rich busi-
nessman from Doha, Qatar, or a trader of holy water from
Medina, Saudi Arabia.
Khalid belongs to the rare category of highly experienced or-
ganizers of terrorist attacks across international borders. As an
important functionary and thereafter the head of Al Qaeda’s mil-
itary committee, Khalid was the key planner of several Al Qaeda
landmark operations: As far back as 1992, he developed a plan to-
gether with his nephew and protégé Ramzi Ahmed Yousef to
bomb the World Trade Center in New York, topple one tower
onto the other, and kill several tens of thousands of people. The
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
161

resulting operation in February 1993 killed six people, injured
more than a thousand others, and caused extensive damage to the
structure. He also was the architect of the assassination attempt
on Benazir Bhutto (1993), the Oplan Bojinka (a complicated plan
to destroy a dozen U.S. airliners over the Pacific, assassinate Pres-
ident Bill Clinton and Pope John Paul II, and crash commercial
airliners into CIA headquarters and the Pentagon in 1994–1995),
and Operation HOLY TUESDAY (to be discussed in detail below).
There are several other operations where his hand has not
been exposed but is suspected, such as the slaying of two Ameri-
can officials in Karachi, Pakistan, in March 1995, and four Amer-
ican oil workers slain in Karachi in November 1997, both in retal-
iation for Pakistan’s extradition and U.S. sentencing of Mir Aimal
Kansi, a Pakistani responsible for the murder of two and injury to
three CIA employees outside CIA headquarters in Langley, Vir-
ginia, in January 1993. (Although Kansi did not belong to Al
Qaeda, like Khalid he was a Baluchi from Quetta, the capital of
the Balochistan Province of Pakistan, which borders Afghan-
istan.) Most infamously, Khalid organized “Holy Tuesday,” the
operation to strike America’s most outstanding landmarks on
September 11, 2001, the single biggest terrorist attack the world
has ever witnessed. As the mastermind of Holy Tuesday—the Al
Qaeda term for 9/11—Khalid became the world’s most hunted
terrorist.
Furthermore, although Ahmad Saeed Omar Sheikh of
Jayash-e-Mohomad, an associate group of Al Qaeda, is accused of
committing the murder of journalist Daniel Pearl, it was an Al
Qaeda operation. Pearl’s research of Richard Reid, the shoe
bomber, led him to Karachi, also the forward headquarters of
Khalid. Sensing the threat, the Pakistani intelligence community
believes that Khalid ordered Pearl’s death. As Yosri Fouda of Al
Jazeera, who interviewed Khalid in Karachi in June 2002, was
leaving the safe house where the interview had taken place,
Khalid gave him a copy of the Daniel Pearl slaying video and a
112-page manifesto justifying the 9/11 operation.
Khalid was responsible for introducing two principles to Al
Qaeda: first, its “losing and learning” doctrine. If Al Qaeda fails
in an operation or suffers human and material losses, it is not con-
sidered a strategic loss provided the group learns, improves, and
vows not to repeat its mistake again. As such Al Qaeda could re-
visit its failed operations and engage in retargeting the same old
targets using improved or better tactics; Al Qaeda failed to de-
162
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

stroy the World Trade Center in February 1993, but it succeeded
on September 11, 2001. The second principle is that Al Qaeda
should be goal-oriented rather than rule-oriented; for instance,
when plans to attack government, diplomatic, and other hard tar-
gets were disrupted in Southeast Asia, Khalid approved a pro-
posal by his Southeast Asian representative, Hambali, to attack
population, economic, and other soft targets. The bombing of
nightclubs, cafés, and other establishments frequented by West-
erners in Southeast Asia—including the Bali attack on October 12,
2002—received the blessings of the Al Qaeda leadership.
Among the fraternity of terrorists, Khalid was one of the few
surviving leaders still able to conceptualize grand designs, pre-
pare a blueprint, and carry out his plans effectively and effi-
ciently. To quote an Al Qaeda member, “Khalid thinks big . . . he
engages in systematic and meticulous planning of spectacular or
theatrical terrorist operations. He is a creative genius.” To quote a
former intelligence chief of the Philippines National Police,
Colonel Rodolfo Mendoza: “He behaves like he’s an intelligence
officer. He appears and disappears. He has safe houses. He is
very, very clever.” In his capacity as the head of the military com-
mittee, Khalid dealt with a wide range of personnel both within
and outside his committee. In addition to consulting with bin
Laden and Al-Zawahiri, he regularly interacted with Al Qaeda
experts who were young and impressionable. At the time of their
capture, Abu Zubeidah, head of external operations, was thirty-
one years old; Mohommad Mansour Jabara, coordinator of the
suicide attacks in Southeast Asia, was twenty-two; Ramzi Bin Al
Shibh, chief logistics officer of 9/11, was thirty; and Hambali,
head of operations for Southeast Asia, was thirty-six.
Instead of communicating over the phone or by e-mail,
Khalid dispatched couriers and operatives with guidelines and in-
structions. Although he remained in touch with his field organiz-
ers and operatives, quite early on in his profession Khalid mas-
tered the art of protecting himself by positioning “cut-outs”
between front-end organizers and operatives. Khalid used several
layers of protection—even if one was breached, there was another,
and behind that a third. As an extremely cautious and security-
conscious terrorist, Khalid could afford to operate near the center
of action but at the same time remain untouched. The security
measures taken by Khalid prevented several governments investi-
gating terrorist attacks throughout the 1990s from identifying bin
Laden as the financier and himself as the organizer. Thanks to
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
163

countermeasures enacted by Khalid following 9/11, the United
States and other governments took eight months to identify
Khalid as the key planner of Holy Tuesday. The U.S. government
identified Khalid as the mastermind of 9/11 only after Abu
Zubaydah, Al Qaeda’s head of foreign operations, was arrested
after a gunfight in Pakistan in March 2002. Although Abu Zubay-
dah identified Khalid as the mastermind of 9/11, the U.S. intelli-
gence community did not believe him. For three months, FBI and
CIA operatives worked to corroborate Abu Zubaydah’s statement.
Indeed, Holy Tuesday was so well compartmentalized that the
U.S. authorities came to know of the details of 9/11 only after the
arrest of Al Shibh, exactly one year after the event. The revelations
of Al Shibh after his arrest in Karachi on September 11, 2002, en-
abled the U.S. government to conclusively identify Khalid as the
mastermind of 9/11. Considering his past, Khalid was fortunate to
evade capture for so long. For conspiring to hijack and bomb sev-
eral transatlantic flights heading for the United States in January
1995, U.S. federal prosecutors in New York indicted Khalid in Jan-
uary 1996. Although the FBI offered $2 million for information
leading to his capture, there was little effort to specifically target
him until October 2001. In December 2001, the FBI placed him on
the list of the twenty-two most-wanted terrorists and offered $25
million, the same reward offered for information leading to the
capture of Osama bin Laden.
Khalid filled a void in the operational community by taking
an idea and turning it into a reality with the vast global network
he built over the years. As much as he had access to youth will-
ing to kill and die, Khalid had sufficient funds. Whenever he
needed funds, Khalid discreetly approached businessman, politi-
cians, and charity workers he had cultivated over the years.
Rarely did anyone decline or refuse a request for assistance from
Khalid. What Al Qaeda lacked were trusted individuals located
in the West with sufficient knowledge of the West to receive, pro-
tect, and guide the suicide terrorists to their enemy targets. Re-
cruiting and positioning Al Qaeda members and supporters
strategically in forward and rear bases for immediate and subse-
quent exploitation was Khalid’s specialty. It was Khalid who al-
ways communicated with these assets and not the other way
around. Although he knew the weaknesses and limitations of
technologies in conducting terrorist operations, he intelligently
exploited the technologies available to him. In July 2002, his four-
bedroom apartment in Karachi, Pakistan, had three laptops and
164
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

five mobile phones. His roles varied depending on the operation
and circumstances—directly participating in the bombing of a
Philippines Airline flight from Cebu to Tokyo that killed a Japan-
ese executive and injured others in December 1994, chairing the
planning meetings of Holy Tuesday, and wiring money to Yousef
for Oplan Bojinka and to 9/11 hijackers. With experience, his op-
erations were complex, often involving assets and operatives
across many countries. For instance, Holy Tuesday involved op-
erational planning in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Malaysia, Germany,
Spain, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. With his unrivaled and unmatched career, he pre-
sented a clear and present danger to the international system.
The Planning of 9/11: Al Qaeda’s watershed operation to
wage a terrorist attack on U.S. soil took two and a half years of
planning and preparation. It began after Al Qaeda established
links with an Islamist cell in to Hamburg, Germany, in early 1999.
Khalid met with Ramzi bin Al Shibh and Mohommad Atta (alias
Mohamed El-Emir), the nucleus of the Al Qaeda cell in Hamburg.
Beginning in mid-1999, Khalid dispatched four reconnaissance
units to the United States in pairs or singles over the space of five
to six months to mount surveillance on the intended targets. Due
to navigation reasons, the White House was taken off the list and
replaced with the U.S. Capitol building. The operation was origi-
nally referred to as “the Manhattan and Washington Raids.” Al
Qaeda used the Arabic word ghazwah, which refers to a raid
against enemies of the Prophet. Al Qaeda leader Osama bin
Laden’s intention was to force the United States to withdraw
from Saudi Arabia and disengage itself from the Middle East; the
intention of the 9/11 operational team was to inflict maximum
social and economic damage as well as to humiliate the United
States.
In the autumn of 1999, Atta—who hated high-rise build-
ings—traveled to Kandahar and met with Khalid at Al-Ghumad
House in Afghanistan. The house, where they planned Holy
Tuesday, was named after the Saudi Al Ghamdi clan—four of
whose young members would be the musclemen in the hijack-
ings. The Holy Tuesday operational team, chaired by Khalid,
configured into a consultative council. In addition to the pilots
Mohommad Atta, Marwan al Shehhi, Hani Hanjor, and Ziad Jar-
rah, the council consisted of Khalid Al-Mihdar, Nawaf Al-
Hazemi (Atta’s deputy), Said Bahaji, and Ramzi bin Al-Shibh, all
of whom had left Hamburg in late 1999 or early 2000 and trained
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
165

in Afghanistan. If Atta was arrested or killed, Al-Hazemi was
designated to lead the operation. As their passports had Pak-
istani visas and to prevent them from being subjected to suspi-
cion when they applied for their U.S. visas, immediately after
Atta, Al-Shehhi, and Jarrah returned to Germany, they reported
that their passports were stolen. Believing that it would be a risk
for the members of the operational team to return to
Afghanistan, they decided to hold the first planning meeting in
Malaysia in January 2000. Twelve Al Qaeda members arrived at
the meeting; of those, the CIA identified Khalid Al-Mihdar and
Nawaf Al-Hazemi. Except for Hani Hanjor, who was living in the
United States prior to launching the operation, Al-Mihdar and
Al-Hazemi were the first 9/11 operatives to enter the United
States, from Bangkok, on January 15, 2000. Al-Midhar obtained a
multiple entry visa to enter the United States, yet the CIA failed
to ensure he be placed on a State Department Watch List to pre-
vent him from coming to the country. Al-Midhar and Al-Hamzi
were not placed on U.S. Watch Lists until August 23, 2001. Both
Al-Mihdar and Al-Hazemi traveled to Thailand with the assis-
tance of Hambali, who organized the Malaysia meeting. Both
Tawfiq Al-Attash (alias Khallad from Yemen), chief planner of
the USS Cole bombing, and Hambali paid the hijackers. For the
9/11 operation, Khalid wanted to personally lead it, but his re-
quest was turned down. (This demonstrated Khalid’s fearless-
ness to enter the very heartland of his enemy in order to strike
and destroy its landmarks.) When Atta arrived in New York in
June 2000, he carried with him a report of potential targets made
by Al Qaeda reconnaissance teams in mid-1999. Atta and Al-She-
hhi enrolled in a flying course at Huffman Aviation in Venice,
Florida; Jarrah enrolled in the nearby Florida Flight Training
Center. Hanjour, already living in the United States and a trained
pilot, underwent further training in Arizona.
Atta, Al-Hazemi, and other pilots studied security arrange-
ments at airports and aircraft. The hijackers determined the best
time to attack the cockpit was fifteen minutes after takeoff. Five
months before 9/11, Khalid chose a dozen Saudis from the Mar-
tyrs Department of Al Qaeda as musclemen. After they were
trained in the spring of 2001, Al Qaeda recorded their last will. Al-
though they knew that they were going to die, they did not know
how, when, and where until the last moment. They entered the
United States by July 2001, demonstrating Al Qaeda’s ability to
infiltrate the nation without much difficulty. From an agent in
166
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Afghanistan, Egyptian intelligence quickly knew that twenty Al-
Qaeda members—four of them Cessna-trained—had entered the
United States. Although the Egyptian service informed the CIA,
there was no response.
In mid-July 2001, Atta flew to Madrid, Spain, and drove five
hundred miles to Cambrils, the Spanish coastal holiday resort
near Tarragona, for a second planning meeting. In keeping with
Khalid’s wish of giving operational leverage to Atta, the field op-
erational commander decided on the choice and timing of the op-
eration. Atta brought for Al-Shibh books and documents about
the United States that would strengthen Al Qaeda’s knowledge to
conduct future airborne suicide operations inside the United
States. He also brought the annual flight schedules for airlines
and other information that enabled the Al Qaeda operational
leadership that met in Europe to meticulously plan the hijacking
of the airliners. This was necessary because Al Qaeda code for-
bade Atta from discussing the overall plan with any one of the
nineteen hijackers. In preparation for the assault, the final recon-
naissance of targets was conducted from the ground and the air,
with the Al Qaeda pilots traveling as passengers or renting planes
and flying over the intended targets at close range but without
evoking suspicion. The spirit of the hijackers was reinforced by
multiple techniques. They were even named and referred to after
Islamic heroes: Ziad Jarrah as Abu Tareq, alias Tareq bin Ziad, the
conqueror of Andalusia (Spain); Marwan Al-Shehhi as Abul
Qaqaa, alias Abu Qaqaa, the conqueror of the Persians; and
Khalid Al-Mihdar as Sinan, a reference to the great Islamic archi-
tect of Istanbul. Similarly, they each received an “Instructions and
Prayers” manual that kept them on course.
Throughout the operation, Al Qaeda remained undetected in
the United States by adhering to the strictest principles of security.
When Atta in the United States and Al Shibh in Germany com-
municated by e-mail in German through the Internet chat rooms
in July and August 2001, Atta pretended he was a young man in
America talking to Jenny, his girlfriend in Germany. “The first se-
mester starts in three weeks. . . . Nothing has changed. Everything
is fine. There are good signs and encouraging ideas. Two high
schools and two universities. Everything is going according to
plan. This summer will surely be hot. I would like to talk to you
about a few details. Nineteen certificates [reference to the 19 hi-
jackers] for private study and four exams [reference to the four
missions]. Regards to the professor. Goodbye.” In keeping with his
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
167

operating procedure, Khalid, perhaps the professor, communi-
cated with Al-Shibh and not with Atta until the last moment.
Atef’s last phone call to Khalid on September 10, 2001, was moni-
tored by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA), but it was
translated from Arabic to English only after the attacks. In code,
Khalid approved the operation for the four teams to strike. (Simi-
larly, Nizar Naouar, the Al Qaeda suicide bomber who targeted
German tourists visiting the Jewish synagogue in Djerba, Tunisia,
on April 11, 2002, placed three calls three hours before the bomb-
ing, of which one was to Khalid.)
Khalid ordered key Al Qaeda operatives to withdraw from
Europe and North America immediately prior to 9/11. For in-
stance, Al-Shibh dispatched his flat mate Said Bahaji, a German
Moroccan, to Karachi, Pakistan. Although some operatives have
since been identified by government intelligence agencies, others
have not. It is likely that Al Qaeda may task these operatives to
return to the West using false, forged, and adopted identifications
to plan, prepare, and execute further operations. After gathering
his belongings, Al-Shibh cleared the Marienstrasse apartment of
any evidence before arriving in Pakistan to inform bin Laden,
through a messenger, only of the date of Al Qaeda’s watershed
operation.
Khalid’s capacity to conceptualize, plan, and actualize low-
cost, high-impact operations was consistently underestimated by
the international intelligence and security community. As Khalid
made things happen, arguably more so than bin Laden, intelli-
gence analysts increasingly developed the opinion that targeting
Khalid was a priority. When Khalid met with Al Jazeera journalist
Fouda in June 2002, he said that initially Al Qaeda “considered at-
tacking U.S. nuclear facilities but decided against it” due to the
risk of failure. To quote Khalid, “We decided not to consider this
for now” (emphasis added). Khalid told Fouda that Al Qaeda
“hope[s] to accomplish a thousand more assaults similar to Sep-
tember 11,” meaning that Al Qaeda has not given up the fight. As
an individual terrorist, Khalid posed one of the single biggest
threats to domestic, regional, and international security.
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef
Significance: Mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing on
February 26, 1993.
Aliases: Real Name: Abdul Basit Mahamoud Addul Karim.
Reportedly operated under forty aliases.
168
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Date and Place of Birth: April 27, 1968, Kuwait
Description: Often described as slender, Yousef is six feet
tall, weighs 180 pounds, and is considered white, with an olive
complexion. Sometimes clean-shaven, he wears a beard in his FBI
wanted poster. Ramzi got married and settled in Quetta in Pak-
istan where he bought a house. He has two daughters from this
marriage.
Background: Ramzi Ahmed Yousef was born in Kuwait
where his father Muhammad Abdul Karim moved from Pakistan
to work as an engineer for the Kuwaiti airlines and married one
of the Palestinian refugees. Ramzi, drawing his Palestinian origin
from his mother’s side, considers himself a Palestinian. Like other
expatriates, he nourished the feeling that the Kuwaitis were treat-
ing him and his family as second-class citizens. This laid the foun-
dations on which Ramzi’s radical beliefs developed when he
came under the influence of Sunni Wahhabi and Sufi preachers.
Yousef completed his schooling in Kuwait, was an above-average
student excelling in all subjects, especially chemistry, and was
also very popular. In 1986, the Karim family migrated to Turbat,
a village in the remote province of Baluchistan in Pakistan near
the border of Iran and Afghanistan. Lack of policing and lawless-
ness made the area a haven for smugglers and traffickers of drugs
and illegal weapons. The local tribesmen occasionally joined
Afghan Mujahidins to attack the Soviets forces.
In 1986 Yousef went to Britain for his college education. He
spent several months in Oxford studying English as a foreign lan-
guage, and in 1987 he joined West Glamorgan Institute of Higher
Education in Swansea University studying computer-aided elec-
trical engineering. His major project was applying computer de-
sign to geometric Islamic patterns, but he also took a course in mi-
croelectronics, which the FBI believe almost certainly gave him the
expertise to develop miniature nitroglycerin bombs. While at the
university he mixed freely with students and locals and indulged
in luxury (despite his internal hatred against the West that was
building). He joined the Swansea branch of the outlawed Egypt-
ian Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan al- Muslimin), which he found
to be inadequately committed to the Islamic revolutionary cause.
In 1988 Yousef went to Pakistan and spent several months in
training camps at Peshawar, funded by Al Qaeda, where he both
learned bomb-making skills and taught electronics to other terror-
ists. There he met Zahid al-Shaikh, his maternal uncle and a sen-
ior functionary in Mercy International, a Saudi Charity providing
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
169

assistance to Afghan veterans and refugees. He also met and be-
friended Mahamud Abouhalima, an Afghan war veteran who
later worked with Ramzi on the World Trade Center bombing in
1993. Yousef graduated from Swansea University in 1989 with a
degree in engineering.
When Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Yousef was in
Kuwait and allegedly became a collaborator with the Iraqi forces,
not surprising given his known antipathy toward the Kuwaiti
regime. In 1991, Ramzi went back to Pakistan where he forged
links with the radical Sunni group Sipah-e-Sahaba, of which his
father was a member.
While in Peshawar, Ramzi met Abdurajak Abubakar Jan-
jalani, the founding leader of the Abu Sayyaf group in the Philip-
pines and on Osama’s request returned with him to the Philip-
pines in December 1991. A Libyan missionary named Mohammed
Abu Bakr, leader of the Mullah Forces in Libya, also accompanied
Ramzi. Yousef stayed until May 1992, providing training together
with Abdul Hakim Murad and Wali Khan Amin Shah (who were
close bin Laden associates) to Abu Sayyaf guerrillas in the Madin
camp in Basilan in the southern Philippines where he acquired the
nickname “the Chemist” for his bomb-making skills.
Ramzi acquired forged travel documents in the Philippines
and traveled to Pakistan on his way to New York. He arrived at
New York’s John F. Kennedy Airport on September 1, 1992, carry-
ing an Iraqi passport in the name of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef and
claimed political asylum on the plea that the Iraqi army had per-
secuted him. Passport control officers at John F. Kennedy Airport
detained his Palestinian friend and fellow terrorist, Ahmad Ajaj,
who was traveling with Yousef on September 1, 1992, for carrying
a false Swedish passport. Ajaj was carrying papers containing for-
mulas for bomb-making material, which prosecutors said were to
be used to destroy bridges and tunnels in New York.
Yousef was allowed to stay in the United States while his po-
litical asylum case was being considered. U.S. immigration offi-
cials apparently accepted his false claim that he was a victim of
the Gulf War who had been beaten by Iraqi soldiers because the
Iraqis suspected that he had worked for Kuwaiti resistance.
Yousef went to stay at the apartment of Musab Yasin, an Iraqi liv-
ing in Jersey City where Abdul Rahman Yasin, Musab’s younger
brother, arrived from Iraq. In November, Yousef began to prepare
the World Trade Center bomb.
On November 9, 1992, just after finalizing the bombing
170
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

plans, Yousef reported to Jersey City police that he had lost his
passport. He claimed to be Abdul Basit Mahmud Abdul Karim, a
Pakistani born and reared in Kuwait. Then, between December 3
and December 27, Yousef made a number of calls to Baluchistan.
On December 31, 1992, Yousef went to the Pakistani consulate in
New York with photocopies of Abdul Basit’s current and previ-
ous passports. Consistent with his story told to police in Jersey
City, he claimed to have lost his passport and asked for a new
one. The consulate did not give him a new passport, but provided
him with a six-month, temporary passport.
In mid-November, Yousef and the group started making the
bomb, as appeared to be the case from many calls that he made to
the chemical and supply companies. Meanwhile, two other local
fundamentalists were recruited into the plot, Nidal Ayyad and
Mahmud Abu Halima. In January 1993, Yousef and Salameh
moved into another Jersey City apartment, where the bomb was
actually built. Set well back from the street, the building provided
seclusion. On February 21 a twenty-one-year-old Palestinian
named Eyyad Ismail arrived from Dallas. Ismail is charged with
having driven the bomb-laden van. On February 23, Salameh
went to the Ryder rental agency to rent the van that carried the
bomb. Yousef placed the bombs he made using mainly chemicals
such as nitroglycerin in four canisters in the basement parking lot
of the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993. The explosion
killed six, about 1,000 were injured, and the damage to property
ran into millions of dollars. That evening Salameh drove Yousef
and Ismail to John F. Kennedy Airport. Yousef escaped to Pak-
istan on falsified travel documents, but Mahamud Abouhalima
and Muhammad Salameh and Alah Jobrony were arrested.
Yousef arrived in Pakistan and lived in his home in Quetta and an
Al Qaeda safe house in Peshawar. There—together with Abdul
Hakim Murad and Abdul Shakar, both from Kuwait—Yousef
planned to assassinate Benazir Bhutto, who was then running for
election as prime minister, but the bomb exploded prematurely
and injured Yousef’s left eye.
With Murad’s help, Yousef returned to the Philippines in
1994. This time Yousef planned something big—code-named
Opan Bojinka—reportedly in retaliation for the arrests of his co-
conspirators in the World Trade Center bombing. Yousef, Murad,
and Wali Amin Shah rented an apartment in Manila and made
several plans: to assassinate Pope John Paul II and President Clin-
ton during their visit to Manila, to assassinate President Fidel V.
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
171

Ramos, two senior government officials, several foreign ambassa-
dors to the Philippines, other diplomats, military and police offi-
cials; to bomb commercial centers, department stores, the U.S.
embassy, an international school, Catholic churches, and vital
government installations; to kidnap prominent personalities for
ransom, hold up banks and financial institutions, and rob com-
mercial establishments such as department stores; to assassinate
U.S. and Israeli nationals; and most important of all, to bomb
eleven U.S. passenger aircraft flying over the Asia-Pacific region.
The audacious plan involved five operatives planning to
bomb eleven aircraft, all belonging to American Airlines. One of
the operatives, Mirqas, was to plant a bomb on a United Airlines
flight from Manila to San Francisco, timed to explode in midair
after it departed Seoul. Mirqas was to go to Seoul to plant another
bomb on a Delta flight from Seoul to Taipei, timing the bomb to
explode en route to Bangkok. Another operative, Markoa, was to
plant a bomb on a Northwest flight from Manila to Chicago
through Tokyo, where Markoa was to get out to plant a bomb in
another Northwest flight from Tokyo to New York through Hong
Kong. Both the bombs were to be timed to go off over the Pacific
Ocean. Markoa, who was to disembark at Hong Kong, was to
plant another bomb, set to explode a day later over the Pacific
Ocean.
The operative, Obald, was to plant a bomb on another North-
west flight from Singapore to Los Angeles through Hong Kong,
where Obald was to board a United flight from Hong Kong to
Singapore and plant a bomb that was to explode on its return
flight to Hong Kong. On another United flight from Taipei to Los
Angeles through Tokyo, Malbos was to plant the bomb, then get
out at Tokyo and board and plant another bomb on a United
flight, timing it to explode twenty-four hours later as the plane
was to fly from Tokyo to New York. Zyod was to plant a bomb on
a United flight from Bangkok to Los Angeles through Tokyo,
where he was to get out and plant another bomb, fly to Taipei,
and place a bomb on a United flight to the United States.
The airline bombings were to use a virtually undetectable
bomb that Ramzi had created converting Casio digital watches
into timing switches that use lightbulb filaments to ignite cotton
soaked in nitroglycerine explosive.
Yousef carried out a practice run on a Philippine Airlines
flight 434 bound for Tokyo on December 9, 1994. A contact lens
172
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

wearer, Yousef concealed the nitroglycerin compound in a bottle
normally used to hold saline solution, left it taped under a seat,
and disembarked in Cebu. The explosion blew a hole in the fuse-
lage and killed one Japanese while eleven others were injured.
The pilot safely descended the aircraft at Okinawa Airport.
The bombing in rapid succession would have caused untold
deaths involving nationalities from all over the world, had it not
been for a sudden accident in the flat where Yousef was staying:
a fire broke out and Yousef was forced to escape. Police raided the
apartment and seized the laptop computer left behind by Yousef
(it survived the fire along with explosives); a map of the Pope’s
route, clerical robes, and a computer disk describing the plot
against the Pope; as well as planned attacks against U.S. airlines.
Yousef’s fingerprints were on the material. The FBI decoded the
complex data from the computer, which led to the arrest of
Yousef, whose capture provided details of his plans..
Yousef, however, had escaped to Peshawar after ditching his
Manila girlfriend Carol Santiago. For most of the three years be-
fore his capture in early 1995, Yousef reportedly resided at the bin
Laden–financed Beit Ashuhada (House of Martyrs) guest house
in Peshawar, Pakistan, and plotted to bomb the U.S. embassy in
Bangkok as well as involve himself in the bombing of a Shia
mosque in Iran.
On February 8, 1995, Yousef was picked up from the Su Casa
guesthouse (also owned by a member of the bin Laden family) in
Islamabad by the Pakistani authorities, who were tipped off by a
former accomplice. He was arrested and extradited to the United
States to face charges relating to the 1993 World Trade Center at-
tack and his plans to destroy an American aircraft. Yousef had in
his possession the outline of an even greater international terror-
ist campaign that he was planning, as well as bomb-making prod-
ucts, including two toy cars packed with explosives and flight
schedules for United and Delta Airlines. His plans included using
a suicide pilot to crash a light aircraft filled with powerful explo-
sives into the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, as well as
blowing up eleven U.S. airliners simultaneously as they ap-
proached U.S. airports. Also found in his room was a letter threat-
ening Filipino interests if comrades held in custody were not re-
leased. It claimed the “ability to make and use chemicals and
poisonous gas . . . for use against vital institutions and residential
populations and the sources of drinking water.” On June 21, 1995,
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
173

Yousef told federal agents that he had planned and executed the
World Trade Center bombing. On January 8, 1998, he was sen-
tenced to 240 years in prison. He has remained incarcerated in the
new “supermax” prison in Florence, Colorado.
FARC—Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia)
Pedro Antonio Marín
Position: FARC founder and commander in chief
Significance: Since its inception in May 1966, the FARC has
operated under the leadership of Pedro Antonio Marín
Aliases: Manuel Marulanda Vélez or Tirofijo (“Sure-Shot”)
Date and Place of Birth: May 1930 (according to Marín), or
May 12/13, 1928 (according to his father), in Génova (a coffee-
growing region in west-central Colombia), making him the
world’s oldest guerrilla leader
Description: Five feet tall
Background: Marín is the oldest of five brothers of a peasant
family. His formal education consisted of only four years of ele-
mentary school, after which he began a series of jobs that in-
cluded cutting wood and selling candy. His family supported the
left-wing Liberal Party. When a civil war erupted in 1948 follow-
ing the assassination of Liberal president Eliecer Gaitan, Marín
and a few cousins took to the mountains to become guerrillas for
the Liberal Party. Marín later fought with “peasant defense
groups” and in 1964 became one of the founders of FARC. On be-
coming a guerrilla, Marín adopted the pseudonym or nomme de
guerre of Manuel Marulanda Vélez in tribute to a trade unionist
who died while opposing the dispatch of Colombian troops to the
Korean War, but he is also known by other aliases.
It is not known whether he ever married, but there are re-
ports of numerous offspring from various women. According to
journalist María Jimena Duzán, “Marulanda” lives simply, like a
peasant, although he does smoke cigarettes.
Leadership: Marulanda Vélez has been officially pro-
nounced dead several times in army communiqués, but has al-
ways reappeared alive and active in guerrilla/terrorist actions.
174
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

He is described as a charismatic and determined guerrilla leader
who has been personally involved in combat, inspiring confi-
dence among his followers. He achieved the top leadership posi-
tion after the death of Jacobo Arenas from a heart attack in 1990.
He is reported to be a member of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Colombia (Partido Comunista de Colom-
bia—PCC), historically associated with FARC. Marulanda has
been described as very astute with a great capacity for command
and organization, and his peasant origins and his innate sense of
military strategy have earned him nationwide recognition as a
leader among politicians, leftists, and other guerrilla groups, al-
though critics accuse him of putting his own quest for power
above the needs of Colombia’s poor. Marulanda represents the
historical and agrarian line of FARC, which dreams of a rural
utopian society and which “fears” the globalized world, even
though FARC has its own Web page and releases communiqués
through the Internet.
After helping Conservative Party presidential candidate An-
dres Pastrana win election in 1998 by implying that Pastrana en-
dorsed Marulanda’s peace plans, Marulanda persuaded Pastrana
to grant FARC a safe haven the size of Switzerland in southern
Colombia. Marulanda failed to make any concessions to the gov-
ernment in return and used the safe haven to expand FARC’s
reach into the lucrative drug industry. Operating in nearly half of
Colombia, its 15,000-strong army continues to attack civilian, po-
litical, military, and economic targets rurally as well as in cities,
towns, and military outposts.
Jorge Briceño Suárez
Position: Second in command of the FARC; commander, Eastern
Bloc of the FARC; member, FARC General Secretariat since April
1993
Aliases: Mono Jojoy
Date and Place of Birth: 1949, Duda region, Colombia
Description: Jovial-looking, heavily built, with a handlebar
moustache; usually wears a simple green camouflage uniform
with black beret
Background: His father was the legendary guerrilla Juan de
la Cruz Varela, and his mother was a peasant woman, Romelia
Suárez. He is known to have one brother, Germán Briceño Suárez
“Grannobles,” who later became a FARC front commander before
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
175

being caught and charged in 1999. Briceño is reportedly a high
school dropout and has spent his entire life as a guerrilla, where
he grew up and learned to read and write within the FARC under
the mentoring of Manuel Marulanda Vélez (nee Pedro Antonio
Marín).
Briceño is another of the new second-generation FARC mili-
tary chiefs who was born in the FARC. Both he and “Eliécer” cre-
ated the FARC’s highly effective school for “special attack tac-
tics,” which trains units to strike the enemy without suffering
major casualties. He later decided that this limited the FARC’s ef-
fectiveness, because the most it could muster were harassment at-
tacks. Since then he appears willing to accept limited casualties in
order to maximize pain and political leverage on the government,
and has thus been known to mass several hundred guerrillas to
attain decisive results at a time and place of his choosing. Mono
Jojoy is credited with introducing specialized commando units by
taking the best men from each front and assigning them high-risk
missions.
Briceño is one of the most respected guerrilla leaders within
FARC ranks, becoming second in command when Marulanda
succeeded Jocobo Arenas in 1990, and now considered to be the
FARC’s chief military strategist. Some believe that due to his life
as a guerilla/terrorist, he knows no other way of life and thus is
most resistant/opposed to the peace process. Unlike most other
university-educated FARC commanders, he rose through the
ranks and learned everything about guerrilla warfare in the field.
He easily moves among the departments of Boyacá, Cundina-
marca, and Meta. He is said to know the Sumapaz region “like the
palm of his hand.” He is known as a courageous leader, with lit-
tle emotion. His great military experience helps to compensate for
his alleged low intellectual level. He is said to be unscrupulous
and to advocate any form of warfare in pursuit of power, includ-
ing using negotiations or peace processes to stall for time to re-
group and rearm.
Under his command the Eastern Bloc has earned record
amounts of cocaine-trafficking profits. In 1992, he arranged a
large shipment of Soviet and Israeli-made weapons for the FARC
from Central America, and he may have received advisers and/or
training there as well, accounting for his ensuing battlefield suc-
cesses circa 1996. He personally led the attack on Miraflores in
August 1998. He is opposed to extradition of Colombians, in-
cluding his brother, a FARC hard-liner who was charged on July
176
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

21, 1999, in the slayings of three U.S. Indian rights activists. He is
contemptuous of the prospect of U.S. military intervention, stat-
ing that U.S. soldiers would not last three days in the jungle, but
welcomes the idea of U.S. economic assistance to rural develop-
ment projects, such as bridge building.
HAMAS—“Zeal”/“Enthusiasm”/“Islamic
Resistance Movement”
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin
Position: Hamas founder and spiritual leader
Date and Place of Birth: 1937 or 1938, near Ashqelan (in the
south of what was then Palestine under the British mandate).
Sheik Ahmed Yassin was killed on March 22, 2004, after three mis-
siles fired from an Israeli helicopter exploded outside the Gaza
mosque that he had left minutes earlier after the Fajr prayer.
Description: Wheelchair-bound quadriplegic, blind and vir-
tually deaf
Background: Ahmed Yassin lived as a refugee in the Shati
camp in Gaza following the Israeli occupation in 1948. As with
many others, his political motivation and aims derived from his
growing up in an environment of inequality, discrimination, hu-
miliation, and defeat for Palestinians. As a result of an accident in
1952, he became a quadriplegic and was confined to a wheelchair.
His involvement with the Islamic fundamentalist Muslim Broth-
erhood organization began in the 1950s. After attending school in
Gaza he worked as a teacher and preacher from 1958 to 1978. In
1973 Yassin founded the Islamic Center in Gaza. He studied Islam
in Cairo at Al-Azhar University, where the Muslim Brotherhood
originated. It was at this time that he adopted the view that Pales-
tine was an Islamic land “consecrated for future Muslim genera-
tions until Judgment Day,” and that no Arab leader had the right
to give up any part of this territory. Inspired by the Islamic revo-
lution in Iran in 1979, he set up and directed an Islamic Society in
Gaza (Mujamma).
In 1984 he was jailed for ten months for security reasons and
so had to relinquish his post as director of Mujamma. Up until the
first Palestinian Intifada of 1987 (against Israeli occupation),
Yassin had organized welfare and educational services through
the Palestinian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood. In the same
year he formed Hamas, which means “zeal” or “enthusiasm,”
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
177

and became the spiritual leader of the grassroots Palestinian
organization. The military wing of Hamas, Izzedine al-Quassam,
has been responsible for multiple attacks and suicide bombings
against Israel. Hamas was against previous agreements between
“Palestine” and Israel, and the following year it published a state-
ment asserting that Israel was the enemy of Islam and as such,
any actions against Israel were a religious duty. In May 1989,
Yassin was arrested by the Israelis and sentenced to life impris-
onment for ordering Hamas members to kidnap and kill two
Palestinians alleged to have worked with the Israeli army. His
popularity and importance as a symbol of resistance against Is-
raeli oppression grew while he was in prison; however, Yasser
Arafat remained more important and popular.
In October 1997, under a deal facilitated by the late King
Hussein of Jordan, Yassin was released in exchange for the release
of two Israeli Mossad agents arrested in Jordan after a failed as-
sassination attempt against a Hamas leader there. On his release,
Yassin returned to Gaza. Although Arafat was widely regarded as
Yassin’s rival, Yassin believed that the Palestinian leadership
needed to be united, and so he started building relations with the
Palestinian Authority and other Arab regimes. In 1998 he visited
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Iran, Yemen, Syria, Kuwait, Sudan, and the
United Arab Republic to improve relations and procure funds.
Saudi Arabia and Iran are believed to have donated between $50
million and $300 million for Hamas’s military operations against
Israel. He also received medical treatment in Egypt due to his de-
teriorating health, after which he returned to Gaza.
Yassin continued to hold substantial influence over Palestini-
ans, disillusioned with peace process attempts that did nothing to
improve their lives. He advocated violent activities, stating that
the peace process did not constitute peace and was thus not a sub-
stitute for jihad and resistance. He advocated and inspired sui-
cide-bombing as a tactic, stating that suicide bombers would
achieve martyrdom. Attempts to reign in Yassin’s activities had
been violently resisted by his supporters, who responded with
clashes with police and sustained suicide-bombing campaigns
against Israel. Yassin led Hamas in building support by offering
material help to Palestinians suffering from economic hardship
and established charitable funds to establish schools, clinics, and
hospitals that provide free services to families in distress. Such ac-
178
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

tivities have attracted millions of dollars from the Persian Gulf
area and around the world, as well as portraying a humanitarian
dimension to a terrorist organization, and have done much to in-
crease the credibility and legitimacy of their cause both locally
and internationally. Yassin justified the use of violence through
the concept of self-defense (including defending dignity and
pride [Juergensmeyer 2001]) based on an interpretation of the
Koran.
LTTE—Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(Tamil Tigers)
Velupillai Prabhakaran
Position: LTTE leader
Significance: Mastermind of operations and campaigns and
figurehead of resistance of “oppression of Tamil cause”
Date and Place of Birth: November 26, 1954, Velvettithurai,
Sri Lanka (on the Jaffna Peninsula)
Description: Described as being of portly build, with black
hair and moustache. He would only dress in military fatigues
until the recent peace-process attempts, for which he adopted a
more media-friendly attire of suit, shirt, and tie.
Background: Vellupillai Prabhakaran was the youngest child
in his family (he has three older siblings) and is said to have been
shy and introverted as a child. Although he did not excel at his
studies, he developed an interest in reading as well as martial arts
later on. His political motivation and aims for an independent
Tamil homeland are believed to derive from his teenage years,
where it is said that he was angered by inequalities and discrimi-
nation against Tamils in politics, employment, and education,
and so began attending political meetings and became more po-
litically active. From these early political beginnings he became
instrumental in the foundation of the Tamil Tigers.
It is alleged that during some of his rare interviews, he listed
his influences and heroes as including Napoleon, Alexander the
Great, the Indian leaders Subhash Chandra Bose and Bhagat
Singh (who were involved in the armed struggle for indepen-
dence from Britain), and actor Clint Eastwood. He is married to
Mathivathani Erambu, with at least one son and one daughter.
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
179

To pro-Tamils, Prabhakaran is a freedom fighter struggling
for emancipation from Sinhalese oppression. To his rivals and
enemies he is a terrorist megalomaniac with a brutal disregard for
human life and property.
Obsessed by security, Prabhakaran rarely gives interviews
and keeps his movements between jungle hideouts under the
strictest secrecy after having narrowly avoided assassination and
capture attempts several times. The many attempts at capture and
assassination have caused him to become somewhat paranoid,
and as a result he has murdered many of his trusted commanders
for suspected treason. He is seldom seen in public except before
battles or to host farewell banquets for any of the Black (suicide)
Tiger divisions setting off on their missions. He wears a cyanide
capsule around his neck, to be swallowed in the event of his cap-
ture. It is rumored that Tiger soldiers are expected to do the same.
Prabhakaran has also been described as a military genius and
charismatic leader, inspiring fanatical devotion from his “Tigers.”
He has a reputation for being fearless and ruthless, and under his
command, the LTTE has become a highly disciplined and highly
motivated terrorist group to be reckoned with. The LTTE operates
substantial international networks and shows no sign of being
defeated militarily by the Sri Lankan army, which arguably led to
the recent peace-process attempts. Prabhakaran has repeatedly
warned the Western nations providing military support to Sri
Lanka that they are exposing their citizens to possible attacks.
Prabhakaran became heavily involved in the Tamil move-
ment beginning in the 1970s. He was accused of being responsi-
ble for the murder of the mayor of Jaffna in 1975 (Prabhakaran re-
mains the prime suspect), which was one of the first killings
carried out by the Tamil movement. In Tamil Nadu, Prabhakaran
gained the reputation and status of a folk hero due to his exploits,
and he gradually assumed control of the Tamil uprising. In 1983
he married; since then, Tigers have been allowed to wed after five
years of combat.
Prabhakaran is wanted on suspicion of involvement in a
number of high-profile crimes. He has been accused by India of
playing a key role in the murder of the former prime minister,
Rajiv Gandhi, in 1991. The Indians allege that Gandhi was killed
by a suicide bomber acting under direct orders from Prabhakaran
in response to Ghandi’s decision in the mid-1980s to deploy In-
dian peacekeeping troops in Sri Lanka. In 1998, warrants were is-
180
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

sued for the arrest of Prabhakaran, LTTE military leader Pottu
Amman, and eight others in connection with the killing of sev-
enty-eight people and destroying the Central Bank Building by a
bomb explosion in 1996, as well as other criminal acts between
1995 and 1996.
The success of the LTTE tactics and operations (such as the
storming of Colombo airport), as well as the ineffectiveness of Sri
Lankan counterefforts, causing a stalemate for so long, is believed
to have been the key factor behind the recent attempts at a peace
process. Due to Prabhakaran’s strong leadership and influence it
is believed that no attempts at peace will work unless they have
his approval. The negotiations for a peace process broke down in
early-mid 2003.
Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA)
Gerry Adams
Position: Head of Sinn Fein (elected political party member), al-
leged member of the PIRA Council
Significance: An alleged former active terrorist and now al-
leged member of the leadership of the terrorist group PIRA, while
at the same time being an elected politician
Date and Place of Birth: October 6, 1948, West Belfast,
Northern Ireland
Description: Dark hair with full beard, large square glasses.
Average build.
Background: The oldest of ten children in a strongly repub-
lican family growing up in the working-class area of West Belfast
(Ballymurphy estate), where he still lives with his wife and son.
Adams was interned by the British government in 1971 but
was considered important enough to the republican movement,
even at the young age of twenty-four, to be released in July 1972
to join the IRA delegation to take part in secret talks in London
with then secretary of state William Whitelaw.
In security circles he is thought to have held senior positions
in all branches of the republican movement, including the IRA,
and apparently is believed by British intelligence sources to be the
Belfast PIRA commander, graduating as one of the three-man
group running PIRA after the arrest of Sean MacStiofain in 1973.
He has never been convicted of membership in PIRA, however,
Profiles of Terrorist Leaders
181

and denies ever being in the IRA, though many believe it would
have been extremely difficult for him to have risen to the position
he now holds if that were not the case. It is rumored that he is re-
sponsible for many deaths in Northern Ireland and the United
Kingdom throughout his alleged career as a terrorist, terrorist
commander, and leader. Along with his close colleague, Martin
McGuinness, he has been the key strategist in developing the po-
litical strategy of the republican movement: moving republicans
from bullet to ballot box, having stated in 1979 that victory could
not be achieved solely by military means—a concept the hunger
strikes of the early 1980s helped to reinforce after the sympathy
and electoral gains that ensued. Adams appears committed to the
pursuit of a United Ireland through peaceful means, having rec-
ognized that an armed conflict will not produce the results repub-
licans want. The main reason Adams and McGuiness allegedly
maintain such close control over PIRA is that they need to avoid a
split in the republican movement in order to have a strong negoti-
ating position with the U.K. government. It is thought that Adams
leaves the day-to-day, week-to-week running of PIRA to other fig-
ures such as Brian Keenan in order to concentrate on political mat-
ters, and only interjects on strategic matters.
In 1983 he was elected MP (Member of Parliament) as well as
president of Sinn Fein, and was apparently more able to steer PIRA
and Sinn Fein in the directions he wanted, and abandoned their pol-
icy of abstention from the Irish parliament. In 1984 he was shot and
wounded when loyalist gunmen opened fire on his car in Belfast.
His leadership was strongly challenged by Ruairi O’Bradaigh at the
1986 Sinn Fein Ard Fheis, which led to the formation of Republican
Sinn Fein and the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA).
Adams began a series of contacts with John Hume, the SDLP leader,
which later helped to form the basis of what became known as the
peace process. At the same time the U.K. and Irish governments
continued with intensive negotiations, which helped lead to the
Downing Street Declaration in 1993, with the first IRA cease-fire in
1994. He was also challenged at the October 1997 General Army
Convention by Mickey McKevitt, which led to the formation of the
Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) and the thirty-two-member
County Sovereignty Movement (CSM). Since then, however, his
leadership has been practically undisputed.
Cease-fires have often been used by terrorist groups as a
stalling tactic in order to rearm and regroup. There are varying
182
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

amounts of hope and doubt as to whether the current cease-fire is
genuine, and the issue of decommissioning is one example that
had run for years without a single weapon being placed “beyond
use.” Although there have been cease-fires and peace processes,
PIRA has allegedly continued to operate, gather intelligence for
targeting, commit punishment beatings, kill, maim, acquire funds
and weapons, as well as network with other terrorist organiza-
tions and train them in tactics that cause maximum casualties,
under the alleged leadership of Gerry Adams.
There is speculation that Adams has internal management
problems regarding preventing further splits by disillusioned
members joining dissident groups. If Adams can prevent further
splits/defections while engaging the political institutions in-
volved in the peace process, then some believe peace is possible.
However, further defections are likely, as are coordination and
links between dissident groups such as CIRA and RIRA, thus pos-
ing a real future threat.
Countering the Leadership
Terrorist leadership consists of core and penultimate leaders.
They formulate the ideology, develop concepts, delineate strate-
gies, decide on the tactics, and direct the organization. Often ter-
rorist campaigns continue for decades because the leadership re-
cruits fresh members and generates support to replace the
members killed or captured and the weapons and munitions
wasted. Despite the high fatalities and casualties among the ter-
rorists, terrorist groups have survived because the targeting has
been at the membership and not the leadership.
Often the membership is expendable but not the leadership.
The capture of Abimael Guzman, the founder/leader of Sendero
Luminoso; Rohan Wijeweera, the founder/leader of the Janatha
Vimukthi Peramuna; and Abdullah Ocalan, the founder/leader
of the Kurdish Workers Party seriously weakens their groups.
Similarly, after Shoko Asahara was captured, Aum Shinrikyo’s
new leader Fumihiro Joyu rejected the violent and apocalyptic
teachings of its founder. After the arrest of Fusako Shigenobu, the
leader of the Japanese Red Army, in November 2000, she an-
nounced her intention to abandon violence and pursue demo-
cratic politics. On April 4, 2002, shortly after the death of its
Countering the Leadership
183

leader Jonas Savimbi, the National Union for the Total Indepen-
dence of Angola (UNITA) signed a cease-fire agreement with the
government of Angola. Therefore, it is paramount to target the
terrorist leadership—Osama bin Laden in the case of Al Qaeda,
Prachanda and Bhattrai in the case of the Nepali Maoists, and
Manuel Marulanda in the case of FARC. However, there are limi-
tations to destroying or weakening a terrorist group by targeting
the leadership. Although the Palestinian Islamic Jihad nearly suf-
fered total collapse after MOSSAD operatives in Malta assassi-
nated its leader, Shiqaqi, the conditions in Palestine led to the
reemergence of the group under the leadership of Ramadan Shal-
lah. Similarly, the new leader of the terrorist group can be much
more effective, deadly, and unpredictable than the known assas-
sinated leader. As an example, the assassination of Al Qaeda
founder/leader Abdullah Azzam in Peshawar, Pakistan, by
Egyptian terrorists created the conditions for Osama bin Laden to
assume the mantle of Al Qaeda leadership. Especially if the group
has widespread appeal and the support base is large, targeting
the leadership is unlikely to be an effective strategy. Therefore,
targeting the leadership will be effective when the group is at the
formative phase. Nonetheless, targeting the leadership even at
the mature phase of the campaign can break the momentum of
the terrorist campaign and create opportunities for weakening
the group’s influence on the wider support base.
In general, a better tactic (in terms of being more manageable
and more effective) is to target the “middle management” of the
terrorist group. By taking out this level one separates the influen-
tial, charismatic leadership from the foot soldiers. Such a strategy
will considerably weaken any of the larger groups, as most intel-
ligence and expertise on operational and support structures and
practices are held in the middle-management level.
The capture of a terrorist leader is preferred to the assassina-
tion of a terrorist leader. Upon capture, most leaders portray a
poor image of themselves. With the elite forces of Turkey and Sri
Lanka capturing Ocalan, the PKK leader, and Wijeweera, the JVP
leader, they pleaded not to be tortured. Like the execution of a ter-
rorist leader, the assassination of a terrorist leader inevitably ele-
vates the dead leader to the rank of a martyr. Thereafter, the dead
leader’s ideals are likely to be the inspiration for a new genera-
tion of committed terrorists. However, there is a danger that a ter-
rorist group will engage in hostage taking and kidnappings to
184
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

seek the release of their imprisoned leaders. For instance, the Abu
Sayaaf Group kidnapped a number of Americans in the Philip-
pines and in Malaysia to seek the release of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef
(the World Trade Center bomber of 1993) and Sheikh Omar
Abdel Rahman (the leader of the New York landmarks bomb
plot of 1995). Similarly, Ahmed Saeed Omar Sheikh of Harakat-
ul Mujahedin kidnapped three Britons, one Norwegian, and one
American in New Delhi, India, in 1994 to seek the release of
Maulana Masood Azhar. When the Indian government did not
respond positively, the group kidnapped five Western tourists
and killed four of them in Kashmir in 1995. Finally, Harakat-ul
Mujahedin secured the release of its leaders in Indian custody by
hijacking an Indian airliner with 155 passengers and crew in
1999. One tactic to preempt and prevent this is to discredit or dis-
grace the leader, such as through publicly stating that the leader
told the authorities everything or broke down and repented or re-
alized that the aims (and activities) of the group are wrong and
they should stop. This dampens the morale of the group as well
as affecting support. The important thing is to ensure that the
leader does not become a martyr, legend, or folk hero, as this
strengthens the resolve of the group and encourages others to
join. This is why a captured and discredited leader is better than
a dead one, especially as the potential intelligence gleaned from
such a person if he or she cooperates is of extreme value. Another
tactic is to develop and strengthen the international court that has
the authority to try and sentence such persons. An imperative as-
pect here is that the court must be seen to be fair and not a satel-
lite for any superpower in order to minimize any backlash from
the terrorist group/supporters.
As mentioned earlier, while the leaders provide the broad
framework for action, the middle-level cadres or experts plan, pre-
pare, and execute operations. Therefore, in the counterterrorist
agenda, targeting the penultimate leaders or the middle-level
cadres is equally important. After identifying potential recruits,
the experienced middle-level cadres indoctrinate and train them
to become full-fledged terrorist operatives. Acting as coordinating
officers or agent-handlers, the middle-level cadres provide tactical
direction. For instance, the losses of Al Qaeda military commander
Muhammed Atef and head of external operations Abu Zubaidah
have been major blows to the organization. Similarly, with the
Shin Bet assassination of Yahiya Ayyash, “the Engineer,” Hamas
Countering the Leadership
185

suffered the loss of its most experienced bomb maker. However,
dependent on the availability of human and material resources,
terrorist groups adapt to the changing circumstances and recover.
For instance, Ayyash’s death made Hamas aware of the risk of
providing training in bomb-making only to a few, and provoked
the group to retaliate. Hamas thus trained an unprecedented num-
ber of Palestinian terrorists in bomb-making and dispersed them
throughout the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to counter or pre-
vent such a problem from recurring.
Profiles of Counterterrorism Leaders 
An apparent problem in counterterrorism is that counterterrorist
leaders are often restricted by chains of command, the law, bu-
reaucracy, “red tape,” accountability, budgets, and so on, whereas
terrorist leaders are not.
Department of Homeland Security—
http://www.dhs.gov
Tom Ridge—http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/
Significance: Secretary/leader
Background: Born Aug. 26, 1945, in Pittsburgh’s Steel Valley,
Tom Ridge was raised in a working-class family in veterans’ pub-
lic housing in Erie. He earned a scholarship to Harvard, graduat-
ing with honors in 1967. After his first year at the Dickinson
School of Law, he was drafted into the U.S. Army, where he
served as an infantry staff sergeant in Vietnam, earning the
Bronze Star for Valor. After returning to Pennsylvania, he earned
his law degree and was in private practice before becoming assis-
tant district attorney in Erie County. He was elected to Congress
in 1982. He was the first enlisted Vietnam combat veteran elected
to the U.S. House and was overwhelmingly reelected six times.
He and his wife, Michele, the former executive director of the Erie
County Library system, have two children, Lesley and Tommy.
Career: Ridge was twice elected governor of Pennsylvania,
serving from 1995 to 2001. He kept his promise to make Pennsyl-
vania “a leader among states and a competitor among nations.”
His aggressive technology strategy helped fuel the state’s ad-
186
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

vances in the priority areas of economic development, education,
health, and the environment. He cut taxes every year he was in
office. To ensure Pennsylvania was home to the jobs of the future,
he also created industry-led Greenhouse initiatives in advanced
computing technologies and the life sciences. He signed into law
the Education Empowerment Act, to help more than a quarter-
million children in Pennsylvania’s lowest-performing schools.
His education technology initiatives brought “anytime, any-
where” learning to Pennsylvanians from preschool to adult edu-
cation. During his years in the governor’s office the number of
children receiving free or low-cost health care through Pennsyl-
vania’s nationally recognized Children’s Health Insurance Pro-
gram increased by 145 percent. His common-sense Land Recy-
cling Program is a national model. He won passage of “Growing
Greener” to make Pennsylvania’s largest environmental invest-
ment ever, nearly $650 million.
Current: On January 24, 2003, Tom Ridge became the first
secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. He now
works with more than 180,000 employees from combined agen-
cies to strengthen U.S. borders, provide for intelligence analysis
and infrastructure protection, improve the use of science and
technology to counter weapons of mass destruction, and create a
comprehensive response and recovery division.
Tom Ridge was given his initial assignment by President
George W. Bush in October 2001, just weeks after 9/11. The charge
to the nation’s new director of homeland defense was to develop
and coordinate a comprehensive national strategy to strengthen
the United States against terrorist threats or attacks. In the words
of President Bush, Ridge has the strength, experience, personal
commitment, and authority to accomplish this critical mission.
State Department Counterterrorism Office—
http://www.state.gov
J. Cofer Black—http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/biog/15367.htm
Significance: Coordinator, Office of the Coordinator for Coun-
terterrorism
Background: Black was born in Stamford, Connecticut, and
received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in international re-
lations from the University of Southern California.
Profiles of Counterterrorism Leaders
187

Career: Black has had a distinguished 28-year career in the
Directorate of Operations at the Central Intelligence Agency. Prior
to joining the State Department, he was the director of the CIA
Counterterrorist Center. In this capacity he served as the CIA di-
rector’s special assistant for counterterrorism as well as the na-
tional intelligence officer for counterterrorism.
During his CIA career, Black served six foreign tours in field
management positions. In 1995 he was named the Task Force
Chief in the Near East and South Asia Division. From June 1998
through June 1999 he served as the deputy chief of the Latin
America Division.
In addition to numerous exceptional performance awards
and meritorious citations, Black received the Distinguished Intel-
ligence Medal, the George H. Bush Medal for Excellence, and the
Exceptional Collector Award for 1994.
Current: J. Cofer Black was sworn in on December 3, 2002, as
the State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism with the
rank of ambassador at large. The State Department is the lead fed-
eral agency dealing with international terrorism, and Ambas-
sador Black’s office, S/CT, has primary responsibility for devel-
oping, coordinating, and implementing U.S. counterterrorism
policy. On behalf of the secretary of state, Ambassador Black rep-
resents the department on the Counterterrorism Security Group.
His office plays a leading role on the Department of State’s coun-
terterrorism task forces, organized to coordinate responses to in-
ternational terrorist incidents. Among Black’s responsibilities are
coordinating U.S. government efforts to improve counterterror-
ism cooperation with foreign governments, including the policy
and planning of the department’s Anti-Terrorism Training Assis-
tance Program.
Group Profiles
An apparent problem in counterterrorism is that terrorist groups
often have more funds than the agencies that work against them
and sometimes even the states they operate in. Furthermore,
many groups are so sophisticated, with structures and networks
spanning across the world, that it becomes almost impossible for
national agencies to counter them without help and coordinated
efforts internationally. A comprehensive analysis of terrorist
groups is necessary to challenge this threat.
188
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

FARC—Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia)
Symbols: Shield (white or black) with region placed on Colom-
bian flag, upon which is placed the name FARC-EP (EP stands for
“peoples army”) and two crossed rifles
History/Development: Established in 1964 as the military
wing of the Colombian Communist Party (original aims of land
reform), the FARC is Colombia’s oldest, largest, most capable,
and best-equipped Marxist-Leninist insurgency.
The FARC-EP developed its “war of resistance in an uninter-
rupted manner” beginning on May 27, 1964, “when 48 patri-
ots . . . took up arms in the municipality of Marquetalia (Tolima)
against the aggression of the establishment, which the different
governments have continued” (http://www.farcep.org).
Aims: “The construction of a new Colombia, without ex-
ploited or exploiters, in peace, with dignity and sovereignty and
for the fundamental rights of the majority of Colombians”
(http://www.farcep.org).
Other than self-determination, FARC has hidden its actual
aims under an ideological struggle that is no longer credible. Fol-
lowing three years of peace talks (1998–2001) with former Colom-
bian president Andres Pastrana, FARC obtained an area the size
of Switzerland (42,139 square km) known as “Zona de Despeje”
(demilitarized zone). FARC uses it as a sanctuary from which to
launch operations, rest and refit its forces, move drugs and arms,
and hold prisoners and hostages (Rabasa and Chalk 2001, 43). To
make matters worse, the territory was ceded without enough
controls, and now FARC uses it to arrange kidnappings, carry out
summary executions, and sponsor coca plantations. After FARC
started to charge war taxes to the drug producers, it was able to
obtain enormous sums of money to buy weapons on the black
market.
Areas of Operation: Colombia—extortion, kidnapping, lo-
gistics, drug trafficking, and “taxation.” Venezuela, Panama,
Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, and Paraguay—used for rest and recupera-
tion, procurement, drug trafficking, extortion, and kidnapping.
Mexico—for more than ten years FARC operated an office in
Mexico City with the authorization of the Mexican government
and the knowledge of the Colombian government. Marco León
Group Profiles
189

Calarca, a member of FARC, directed the office. On April 12, 2002,
the Mexican government closed the office. However, a line of in-
vestigation by Mexican authorities shows that FARC is still oper-
ating in Mexico, involved with hard-line left-wing students or
“pseudo-students” at the National University of Mexico
(UNAM), the FARP (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias del
Pueblo), and EPR (Ejercito Popular Revolucionario) guerrillas
that operate in the states of Oaxaca and Guerrero (and who had
presence in Mexico City). The real aims of these links remain un-
known. There are two theories: to open drug corridors through
the areas under EPR-FARP control, or to strengthen political sup-
port from left-wing radicals in Mexico to justify their activities
(Becerra 2003).
In 2000, the Peruvian government launched investigations
over allegations that a small group of Peruvian military officers
sold a substantial quantity of small arms to FARC. Drug traffick-
ers and producers had moved to remote regions of Colombia, and
some of them had already crossed the porous Colombian borders
and arrived in Ecuador as well as Peru. The northern part of Peru
was the area where the Shining Path (Senderoso Luminoso) main-
tained its presence during its years of guerrilla activity. This area
is well known for its poppy plantations, which had been used by
the Shining Path to finance itself. It is possible that FARC is in-
volved in heroin production and trafficking in that area.
Ecuador has become a strategic corridor for arms, ammuni-
tion, and explosives destined for FARC. Ecuador has weak con-
trol over its porous borders, turning them into passages for drug
traffickers and terrorist groups. The regions of Nariño and Putu-
mayo, Colombian departments bordering on Ecuador, are the
main areas of drug production and are partially under FARC con-
trol. This “gray area” adjoining Ecuador is creating instability on
both sides of the border. The incursion of FARC into Ecuadorian
territory has already set off danger signals. FARC’s sympathizers
in northern Ecuador are launching a campaign supporting FARC,
and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Ecuador (FARE), a copy-
cat group imitating FARC, has already emerged in the country. It
is possible that the so-called FARE is formed by Ecuadorian crim-
inals who use this name to spread fear across the region.
Paraguayan counternarcotics police in October 2000 arrested
an individual believed to be representing FARC for possible in-
volvement in a guns-for-cocaine ring between Paraguay and
FARC. (Despite these successes, an ineffective judicial system and
190
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

pervasive corruption, which facilitate criminal activity support-
ing terrorist groups, have hampered counterterrorism efforts in
Paraguay.)
External Support: Cuba provides some medical care and po-
litical consultation. In the past, Hezbollah-run camps, arming and
training would-be groups, had the potential of becoming a major
destabilizing force on the continent. However, so far the only
group that Hezbollah has been known to have had a connection
with, albeit circumstantially, is FARC, and even this is uncertain.
Iran, a known supporter of Hezbollah, had planned to build
an enormous refrigeration complex in the heart of the FARC-con-
trolled demilitarized zone in the jungles of Colombia. The initial
plan was for Iran to build a $3 million–$5 million beef processing
and refrigeration plant in the FARC stronghold of San Vicente del
Caguan. There were legitimate reasons for the Colombian gov-
ernment to approve the project. The Colombian government, in
need of direct foreign investment, used the project as a negotiat-
ing tool during difficult peace negotiations with FARC. However,
it turned out that the location of the plant was approximately 300
miles (480 km)—and on the other side of the Andes—from the
main Colombian ranching areas. The United States was worried
that the plant could, sooner or later, become a terrorist training
facility, and the investment plan was soon exposed as an Iranian
intelligence operation. The Iran Press Service revealed in Decem-
ber 2000 that the factory was a cover for the Iranian Ministry of
Intelligence and Security and the Revolutionary Guards to give
assistance to FARC. It is likely that Hezbollah cells would have
been involved in some way or other with this project. However,
the Colombian government canceled the project reportedly after
Iranian “project” officials refused to let their luggage be inspected
by Colombian Customs. There is speculation that U.S. pressure
on Colombia hastened the project’s demise.
Strength: Approximately 8,000–12,000 armed combatants.
Further (unknown) number of supporters, mostly in rural areas.
Organizational and Command Structure: The FARC is gov-
erned by a secretariat, led by septuagenarian Manuel Marulanda,
a.k.a. “Tirofijo,” and six others, including senior military com-
mander Jorge Briceño, a.k.a. “Mono Jojoy” (see leader profiles).
The national command of the FARC-EP, elected in the Na-
tional Guerrilla Conference, is the Central High Command, of
which the National Secretariat is part. This is composed of seven
members: commander in chief Manuel Marulanda Velez and
Group Profiles
191

commanders Raúl Reyes, Alfonso Cano, Timoleón Jimenez, Iván
Marquez, Jorge Briseño, and Efraín Guzmán.
The National Guerrilla Conference is the highest level of au-
thority in FARC and defines the politics of the organization, while
the “Statutes” define the organic and hierarchical structure of
FARC. The group is organized along military lines and includes
several urban fronts: 
1. Squad: the basic unit, consisting of twelve combatants
2. Guerrilla: consists of two squads
3. Compañía (company): consists of two guerrillas
4. Column: consists of two or more companies
5. Front: consists of more than one column. The Central
High Command (Estado Mayor Central) designates the
highest command of each front
6. Block of fronts: consists of five or more fronts. It
coordinates and unifies the activity of the fronts in a
specific zone of the country. The Central High
Command or its secretariat designates the High
Command of each block, which coordinates the areas of
the respective blocks.
7. The Central High Command is the superior organism
of direction and command of the FARC-EP. Its
agreements, orders, and decisions rule over the entire
movements and all its members.
Political Capability: The political wing is the Patriotic Union
(UP), a legal political party formed by FARC and the Colombian
Communist Party (PCC), also called Aida ABELLA.
Significant Events: In 2000, FARC continued a slow-moving
peace negotiation process with the Pastrana administration,
which has gained FARC several concessions, including a demili-
tarized zone (Zona de Despeje) used as a venue for negotiations.
FARC continues to reach out to government and nongovernment
groups throughout the world and especially in Europe and Latin
America through international representatives and attendance at
regional conferences and meetings, such as the Sao Paulo Forum,
in order to strengthen its status, support, and negotiating powers.
Recently, a high-level Venezuelan military officer met clandes-
tinely with FARC leader Marulanda in FARC-controlled territory
in Colombia to negotiate a nonaggression agreement. It is possi-
ble that Venezuela is concerned about its border security with
192
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

Colombia. However, other concerns may include the fact that cor-
rupt law enforcement and military officers have sold weapons to
FARC. According to Colombian authorities, half of the weapons
confiscated from FARC had Venezuelan army markings.
Tactics: Bombings, murder, kidnapping, extortion, and hi-
jacking, as well as guerrilla and conventional military action. In
March 1999, FARC executed three U.S. Indian rights activists on
Venezuelan territory after it kidnapped them in Colombia. For-
eign citizens often are targets of FARC kidnapping for ransom.
The group has well-documented ties to narcotics traffickers, prin-
cipally through the provision of armed protection. In early 2003,
three U.S. agents were kidnapped by FARC and continue to be
held hostage.
Targets: Colombian political, military, and economic targets.
Foreign tourists and businessmen (especially U.S. citizens), usu-
ally for ransom. U.S. military personnel (declared as “legitimate
targets” in October 2000 by FARC leaders in response to U.S. in-
volvement). Colombian state/government personnel. Oil compa-
nies and workers, and coal companies (e.g., Drummond Inc.)
Supply/Financing: Taxation and other involvement in the
drug trade, along with armed “protection” of the “narcotrafi-
cantes.” Kidnap and Ransom (“K&R”)—in a five-year period
ending in March 2001, there were approximately 13,000 kidnap-
pings, with an average individual ransom of $400,000. Internet
sites with an international network of sales of calendars, music,
and books as well as collection of donations. Growing belief of
possible involvement in piracy of software, CDs, and DVDs.
Annual Budget: According to The Economist (April 19, 2001):
“The best estimate of [FARC’s] income from drugs, extortion and
kidnapping is perhaps $250 millions to $300 millions a year.”
However, a better-placed source is that of Jeremy McDermott,
who states that FARC makes “at least $300 million from the drug
trade alone every year, added to which is their income from kid-
napping and extortion, making them probably the richest insur-
gent group in the world” (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/ameri-
cas/1746777.stm).
Links/Associations: There are increasing links with interna-
tional drug trade and international organized crime (especially
with Mexican drug cartels), and Colombia is increasingly seen as
a haven for criminal activity. The Russian mafia supplies FARC
with weapons, mainly AK-47s, and is believed to have partici-
pated in the shipment of 10,000 AK-47s to FARC in 1998 through
Group Profiles
193

former Peruvian intelligence director Vladimiro Montesinos.
There is speculation of tenuous links in the past with Hezbollah
and Iranian Intelligence, and known links between the ELN, EPL,
and ARG (all Colombia); PIRA; ETA; Cuba; and the Japanese Red
Army.
State Response: In 2000 the peace negotiation process led to
several concessions, including the aforementioned demilitarized
zone used as a venue for negotiations. Using additional resources
available under “Plan Colombia,”
President Pastrana in
2000–2001 launched a major antidrug effort that features mea-
sures to curb expanding coca cultivation. He is also cooperating
with the United States on other important bilateral counternar-
cotics initiatives, such as extradition. An elite antiterrorist unit,
GAULA, was developed and is seen as an international model be-
cause it includes its own intelligence, lawyers, psychologists/
counselors, hostage rescue team, and so on. Alvaro Uribe, Co-
lumbia’s president since 2002, has created a network of infor-
mants who received excellent rewards. Uribe’s government has
received millions in military aid from the United States for coun-
terinsurgency activities.
Projected Activities: FARC and ELN have stepped up their
attacks on Colombia’s economic infrastructure. This has soured
the country’s investment climate and complicated government
efforts to promote economic recovery, following a major recession
in 1999. Moreover, the insurgent violence has fueled the rapid
growth of illegal paramilitary groups, which are increasingly
vying with FARC and ELN for control over drug-growing zones
and other strategic areas of rural Colombia. Like FARC, the para-
militaries rely heavily on narcotics revenue and have intensified
their attacks against noncombatants in recent months. Paramili-
tary massacres and insurgent kidnappings are likely to increase
as groups move to strengthen their financial positions and ex-
pand their areas of influence. Furthermore, government conces-
sions to FARC and ELN over land and demilitarized zones serve
to encourage other groups to follow similar paths. Recent exam-
ples are of right-wing paramilitary groups that continue to ex-
panded their reach, most notably in southern Colombia’s prime
coca growing areas. In addition to massacring civilians in their at-
tempts to erode FARC and ELN areas of influence, the groups
also abducted seven national congressional representatives in De-
cember 2000, demanding negotiations with the government.
After FARC insisted the “anti-drugs” aspects of Plan Colombia be
194
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

dropped, the peace process was opposed by large sections of the
population (including civilians, businesses, and paramilitary
groups), and as a result a new president was elected for his hard-
line attitude and rhetoric. FARC has since resumed attacks and
activities, and the peace process has dissolved.
FARC thus poses an immediate and long-term threat on its
own, but it also serves as a greater threat through its influence
and effects on other potentially insurgent groups causing grow-
ing instability, spreading violence, and eroding the rule of law in
Colombia, its neighbors, and in Central America.
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
Other Names/Aliases: Tigers, Tamil Tigers, Tamil National Army,
Liberating Tigers of Tamil Eelam, Tami-er chi hoo (Mandarin name,
as known in China and Mandarin media sources, translated as
“Tigers of Tamil”)
Symbols: Central Tiger’s head and paws emerging from a
ring, with crossed rifles in the background.
History/Development: The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) saw its origins in 1972 when Vellupillai Prabhakaran (see
his profile earlier in this chapter) formed the “Tamil New Tigers”
as a reaction against the perceived discrimination of Tamils in Sri
Lanka. It drew its support from both economically deprived
Tamil agricultural workers whose families lost their livelihood
due to economic reforms in the late 1970s, as well as unemployed
urban Tamil youth who faced economic and social discrimination
stemming from the accession to power of a Singhalese-majority
government in 1956. The persistent feeling of neglect of Tamil
grievances by the Colombo authorities led to the formation of
various Tamil militant groups. The LTTE, which assumed this
name on May 5, 1976, from Prabhakaran’s “Tamil New Tigers,”
emerged as the most prominent among them. The LTTE de-
manded the secession of the Tamil-dominated areas of north and
east Sri Lanka and the formation of a sovereign political unit, the
state of Tamil Eelam. Capitalizing on the politicization of the
Tamil public by the Tamil United Liberation Front (TULF) and the
existing support for independence, the LTTE launched an armed
campaign in 1983. Since the widespread anti-Tamil riots in July
1983, the LTTE emerged as the most powerful Tamil group in Sri
Lanka. Initially the group targeted Tamil political and adminis-
trative figures affiliated with the government. Subsequently it
Group Profiles
195

widened the target set to engage in large-scale open confrontation
with Sri Lanka’s military establishment. By eliminating co-ethnic
competitors and successfully engaging the Sri Lankan armed
forces, the LTTE prevented the government from gaining access
to and control of the northeast provinces of the country. By 1987,
the LTTE effectively ruled the northern peninsula—levying taxes,
implementing its own policing, and providing civil services such
as transport and education.
Following the Indo–Sri Lanka Accord in 1987, Indian peace-
keeping forces were stationed in Sri Lanka from October 1987.
After three months of uneasy peace, LTTE declared war on the In-
dian peacekeeping forces and was successful in checkmating a
much larger, resourceful, and formally trained military. In 1990
LTTE agreed to peace talks with the government in Colombo,
which resulted in the withdrawal of the Indian peacekeeping
forces on March 24, 1990. Within three months, LTTE went back
on the cease-fire, declared war against Colombo, killed about 400
surrendered policemen, and quickly regained control of the Jaffna
peninsula and established a quasi-administration.
In 1987 the group formally adopted suicide tactics and
staged a number of high-profile suicide attacks, assassinating
India’s ex–prime minister Rajiv Gandhi, Sri Lanka’s navy com-
mander Clancy Fernando, and Sri Lankan president Ranasinghe
Premadasa. The LTTE also used suicide terrorism to destroy eco-
nomic and religious targets, such as the Central Bank of Colombo
in January 1996, the World Trade Center in October 1997, and Sri
Lanka’s holiest Buddhist shrine, the Temple of the Tooth, in Janu-
ary 1998.
The LTTE initially based its ideology on Marxist-Leninist
teachings, which it followed up to the early 1980s. The basic ob-
jective was to establish a casteless Tamil society by armed strug-
gle. The LTTE also sought to play up its attempts to preserve the
cultural and ethnic identity of Tamils, with various organized cul-
tural activities and celebrated festivals. With the failure of com-
munism, the LTTE abandoned its Marxist image and in contem-
porary times is more of a strongly ethnonationalistic outfit.
This group is notorious for suicide bombings. It was in-
volved in 168 suicide attacks during a period from 1980 to 2000.
In the post-9/11 environment, the LTTE declared a cease-fire in
December 2001 in order to avoid being blacklisted by more gov-
ernments. Currently, peace talks are going on between the LTTE
and the Sri Lankan government under Norway’s mediation. The
196
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

first round of talks ended in Thailand on September 18, 2002.
Since the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991, the group
has been proscribed as a terrorist group by India since 1991 and
the United States since 1997.
Aims: To create a separate Eelam (nation) for ethnic Tamils
out of the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka. (However, the
group claimed on September 18, 2002, that they would demand a
separate Eelam only as a last resort.)
Areas of Operation: The LTTE controls most of the northern
and eastern coastal areas of Sri Lanka but has conducted opera-
tions throughout the country. The LTTE headquarters is currently
in Kilinochchi (northern Sri Lanka). For a brief period the LTTE
shifted its operational headquarters from Sri Lanka to the Palk
Straits in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu where Prabhakaran re-
mained from 1984 to 1986. The group makes a point of not carry-
ing out terrorist acts outside Sri Lanka (except for one case in
India), as it does not want foreign governments to act against the
Sri Lankan Tamil diaspora. The LTTE has established offices in
fifty-four countries, with the largest and most important ones op-
erating in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia.
External Support: One million Sri Lankan Tamils are spread
throughout the world, especially in Western countries. Many of
them give financial support. The LTTE is said to have offices and
cells in at least fifty-four countries. About 80 percent of over forty
Tamil newspapers in North Atlantic countries are either managed
by the LTTE or its front companies. There were reports that dif-
ferent Indian administrations at the central, as well as the state
level, have provided training and armaments to the Tamil rebels
in the past. Its international wing, which operates from London
and Paris, was instrumental in procuring a substantial quantity of
sophisticated weaponry. Most of the finances for the purchase of
arms and other political and military activities is raised through
expatriate activists. The LTTE remains very active in Canada.
There is considerable speculation that the fear of proscription
post-9/11 has not prevented the group from continuing its activ-
ities in Canada. The Canadian government has not listed the
group under amendments to its criminal code even though more
obscure groups such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan are
listed. There is speculation that the group has strong ties to the
Liberal Party of Canada and has been able to exert some influ-
ence. One of its fronts, the Tamil Chamber of Commerce, held a
substantial convention in Toronto in the summer of 2002. Paul
Group Profiles
197

Martin, a former finance minister and prime minister, attended a
LTTE fund-raising dinner in Canada.
Strength: LTTE has developed into a formidable fighting
force with air, land, and sea capabilities. The group’s armed
wings also possess heavy weaponry, including artillery, surface-
to-air missiles, and rocket launchers. The group uses both con-
ventional and unconventional tactics, with few qualms about en-
gaging and hurting civilians. However, such actions are
deliberate—to serve some purpose or objective—and are not due
to breakdown in discipline. Jane’s Terrorism Intelligence Center,
a center maintained by the Jane’s Group of Publications, has esti-
mated the strength of the LTTE at 15,000 and the Sea Tigers (the
LTTE naval unit, usually suicide bombers tasked with using ex-
plosive-laden speedboats) to be between 3,000 and 4,000. The
LTTE cadres wear uniforms with unique patterns of jungle cam-
ouflage resembling tiger stripes, which also act to identify the in-
dividual’s affiliation (“The LTTE’s Ideology”).
Cadre members are highly disciplined and trained with a
strict LTTE code. Upon completion of the basic military training
and acceptance into the LTTE ranks, all cadres are given a
cyanide capsule, to be consumed upon capture or in the event of
mission failure. Cadres are trained to obey orders from their
leaders unquestioningly. Severe and brutal punishments are
meted out for crimes such as negligence, cowardice, and disobe-
dience. Torture and execution by painful deaths are not uncom-
mon. It is regarded as disgraceful if cadres are captured by Sri
Lankan forces or should missions fail, and suicide is the only al-
ternative. The LTTE code requires cadres to abstain from pre-
marital sex, which is punishable by death. Cadres are allowed to
marry after a five-year period of service to the LTTE. Suicide
bombers are venerated and treated with great honor. This cadre
consists of highly motivated men and women who turn them-
selves into human bombs by strapping explosives onto their
bodies. Upon the death of a suicide attacker in performing his
mission, his photograph and name are displayed in the LTTE
headquarters as examples for future cadre. The group is also
known to recruit underage children to fight—boys and girls
sometimes as young as twelve years old.
All LTTE fighters undergo a program of rigorous training. A
typical training schedule includes the handling of weapons, bat-
tle and field craft, communications, intelligence gathering, as
198
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

well as an exhaustive physical regimen and rigorous indoctrina-
tion. Recruits are given little free time to idle or rest during their
training phase.
A typical suicide bomber would go through about two years
of training, including rehearsal training with dummy targets
(goats and dogs). Prior to the actual operation, LTTE surveillance
elements gather detailed and minute information of the target
well beforehand. Surveillance operations take place with the
LTTE scouts/spies/reconnaissance disguised as non-attention-
seeking civilians typical of the environment they operate in. This
information is then transferred to the Black Tigers (suicide
bombers), who will train the selected suicide bomber specifically
in the unique mission. The selected suicide bomber studies the
route and other relevant details about the target meticulously and
spends much time prior to the actual mission itself rehearsing the
entire route so as to ensure maximum success.
The LTTE also has extensive funding, research, and develop-
ment capabilities, which it uses to develop mini-submarines,
stealth attack boats, new types of mines, etc.
Organizational and Command Structure: The group is led
by Vellupillai Prabhakaran (alias Tambi). Anton Balasingham,
who lives in the United Kingdom, is the political ideologue and
spokesman of the group. Tamil Selvam leads the political wing,
and Pottu Amman heads the intelligence wing. The entire LTTE
hardcore leaders are from Velvettihura or from the “fisher”
caste, which has achieved some social standing because of the
AK-47s carried by many of its militant members.  However, sev-
eral of the important Tiger groups are led by Tamils who are rel-
atively uneducated and nonprofessional, from a middle-status
caste. The LTTE organization includes a political wing, military
wing, intelligence wing, women’s wing, Sea Tigers (suicide
bombers tasked with using explosive-laden speedboats), and
Black Tigers (suicide bombers tasked to assassinate earmarked
targets by the LTTE).
Its international operations can be broadly divided into three
categories: political representation and propaganda; arms pro-
curement; and fund-raising. Its international activity is mostly in
two dozen Western countries and certain states in the Aus-
tralasian region. Since 1999, it runs public offices in eleven coun-
tries, operating under four centralized fronts—the Tamil Co-coor-
dinating Committee (TCC), the World Tamil Co-coordinating
Group Profiles
199

Committee (WTCC), the United Tamil Organization (UTO), and
the Tamil Co-coordinating Group (TCG) (Kloos 1999). The fifth
front, the World Tamil Movement (WTM), active in Canada and
Germany, has recently downscaled its operations after the arrest
of some of its members for extortion. The LTTE indoctrinates the
expatriate Tamil public by encouraging participation in public
rallies, seminars, and political demonstrations in support of the
Tamil cause. All proceeds from ticket sales, goods purchases, and
donations during these events go to fill LTTE’s coffers. To rein-
force public interaction between the group and the Tamil popula-
tion, the LTTE runs community organizations providing social
services and benefits—namely, welfare, housing, immigration as-
sistance, legal aid, information, education, communication,
money transfers, etc.
Political Wing: The LTTE has its own press and newspaper
and propaganda section. It is the first group to make use of the In-
ternet to spread its messages and disseminate propaganda to gar-
ner support.
Military Wing: Land Army—The conventional army consists
of an artillery regiment, a bodyguard unit (for protecting Vellupil-
lai Prabhakaran), and an engineer regiment, apart from other
guerilla formations and units. The commanders of these three
special units report directly to Vellupillai Prabhakaran. The LTTE
reputedly tried to build two airfields for the Air Tigers. Black
Tigers are suicide bombers tasked to assassinate targets ear-
marked by the LTTE. Leopard Commandoes are believed to be
the elite troops selected from other units and given special train-
ing and better equipment similar to that of special forces in con-
ventional state armies. Sea Tigers is the naval wing of the group,
with its suicide bomber section using explosive-laden speed-
boats, ramming into seagoing vessels, usually in coastal waters.
The LTTE owns and operates a fleet of at least ten freighters,
equipped with the most up-to-date surveillance technology. The
role of these seagoing ships is to provide logistical support by
transporting explosives, arms, ammunitions, and other war-
related materials to Sri Lanka. The LTTE also has exclusive female
units for each wing, for example in the Sea Tigers unit, the suicide
brigade, etc. The female suicide volunteers have played a major
role in LTTE targeted killings. For example, Rajiv Gandhi, the for-
mer Indian prime minister, was killed by “Dhanu,” a female sui-
cide bomber.
Intelligence Wing: The LTTE has built a secure, sophisticated,
200
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

and efficient intelligence network. It encompasses military and
political aspects and has units in all units of the LTTE organiza-
tional structure. The chief of the intelligence wing is Pottu
Amman, who was one of the key planners for the assassination of
Rajiv Gandhi, the former prime minister of India. Pattu Amman
was trained in military warfare in India. 
Command Structure: The LTTE Central Committee is the high-
est decision-making body; Prabhakaran is the chairman. The
structure has both political and military wings. Area commanders
are responsible for tactical decision making. The LTTE hierarchy
uses army ranks and grades similar to the Sri Lankan Army—with
the three categories of enlisted ranks, non-commissioned officers,
and commissioned officers. The military subunits also typically
follow such formation patterns, with squads as the smallest tacti-
cal unit and the regiment as the largest (http://www.tamiltigers.
net/fallencomrades/fallen.htm).
Research and Development (R&D) Wing: LTTE maintained con-
siderable interest in R&D, especially applying this to marine use.
Its maritime R&D wing was operating out of Mangai Tikkam
under Moorthy Master, alias Major Moorthy, for many years, con-
structing and modifying boats, maintaining and repairing boat
engines, and drawing blueprints for new boats. About one hun-
dred paid civilians worked in this unit. Moorthy, also responsible
for the LTTE submarine project (discussed below), was inter-
dicted by air and killed in Mulathivu. The Sea Tigers are highly
innovative. In addition to manufacturing floating mines and un-
derwater improvised explosive devices (IEDs), they produced
several craft, including three mini-submarines. There are records
about attempts to construct, and at least to procure, a midget sub-
marine. The LTTE attempted to buy a midget submarine from the
former USSR (most likely Ukraine) in the early 1990s and from
North Korea in the late 1990s, and made enquiries about the sale
of submarines from South Africa in the late 1990s. In mid-July
1990, within three months of the departure of the Indian peace-
keeping forces from Sri Lanka, the LTTE launched a secret, bold,
and ambitious project in Tiruvanmiyur, Tamil Nadu. The project
to construct a midget submarine suffered when MV Sunbird, a
LTTE ship transporting batteries and accessories for the vessel,
was seized in Malaysia, and the LTTE crackdown by the Tamil
Nadu police forced the LTTE to move the vessel to Pattipulam,
Madras. Two years later on April 20, 1992, parts of the disassem-
bled submarine were recovered by the Indian police from a house
Group Profiles
201

in Mahapalipuram, Madras. The submarine, with the outer body
made of steel, measured 15 feet in length and 5 feet in width. The
radar manufacturing unit, which was manufactured by Raytheon
Marine Company, was type M-88391, and another one by Mariner
Path Finder was type M-88391. To build the body alone Rs
400,000 (about $10,000) had been spent. The construction—the
pressure hull, ballast tanks, rudder, engine cabin, and conning
tower—was completed by December 1990. The brass pump set,
compressors, propellers, and propeller shaft were fabricated in
Tamil Nadu. In early 1991, the LTTE initiated a project to design,
build, test, and manufacture an underwater vehicle for the pur-
pose of conducting suicide attacks against Sri Lankan naval craft.
David, a celebrated Sea Tiger who died with eight others in a sea
accident, initiated the project. The vessel was designed in the base
complex in the Mulathivu jungles and tested at sea, east of Po-
likandy. Since the vessel was unstable, the test was a failure. The
LTTE redesigned a second vessel, and the task of building it was
given to Moorthy Master, who was in charge of the Sea Tiger me-
chanical workshop in Polikandi. The vessel, known as Neer Mulhi,
when completed was 14 feet in length, had a wingspan of 6 feet,
and height of 4 feet. The power for the craft came from two ex-
ternally fitted 55-horsepower outboard motors. Within the craft,
there was considerable space for packing explosives. A watertight
hatch, sealed and armed from outside, permitted the suicide
driver into the vehicle. The suicide driver was given a device for
maintaining sea-to-shore communication. A trailer fitted with
tractor wheels was used to transport the vehicle. However, dur-
ing a test-cum-training run, conducted in the sea near Polikandy
junction during daylight hours, the vessel failed to perform.
Political Capability: The LTTE has refused to participate in
mainstream Sri Lankan politics but tacitly supports some Tamil
politicians, who can further the cause of the LTTE by striking
some clandestine deals. Fear of assassinations of elected govern-
ment candidates even led to the LTTE indirectly influencing po-
litical elections in Sri Lanka. Areas under LTTE’s control are run
like a government (LTTE has even set up police stations in its ter-
ritory). The LTTE enjoys widespread support from a network of
overt, legitimate front and cover organizations of overseas Tamils
and their various communities. These international contacts are
also used to procure funds, weapons, technologies, communica-
tions, and bomb-making equipment. These organizations also
lobby for international support from foreign governments and
202
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

the United Nations. Residents and businesses in areas under
LTTE control and influence must demonstrate support to the
group by contributing in financial or manpower terms. A certain
“tax” of fixed amount is imposed on every family. Only families
of cadre members (alive or dead) are exempted from this tax.
Significant Events: Founded in 1972 as a Sri Lankan political
opposition group. Every year on November 27, LTTE marks
Hero’s Day, the day after Prabhakaran’s birthday, to honor the
sacrifice of LTTE “martyrs.” LTTE emerged as an armed insur-
gency following the anti-Tamil riots of July 1983 in which some
160 people were killed, mainly Tamils. The riot was triggered by
a LTTE ambush on an army patrol, which killed thirteen soldiers.
May 21, 1991
LTTE female suicide bomber, Dhanu,
killed India’s former prime minister Rajiv
Gandhi.
August 8, 1992
Army chief Lt. Gen. Denzil Kobbekaduwa
was killed in a land mine blast in Kayts,
northern Sri Lanka.
November 16, 1992
In a suicide attack, the LTTE killed the
commander of the Sri Lankan navy, Vice
Admiral Clancy Fernando.
May 1, 1993
President Ranasinghe Premadasa was
assassinated by an LTTE suicide attacker at
a rally.
October 24, 1994
Opposition leader Gamini Dissanayake
and fifty-six others were killed in
Colombo.
January 31, 1996
An estimated ninety-one persons were
killed in an attack on the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka in Colombo.
July 24, 1996
Seventy persons were killed and
approximately 600 others were injured as
LTTE bombed a passenger train near the
capital Colombo.
December 18, 1999
LTTE made an unsuccessful attempt on the
life of President Chandrika Kumaratunga,
in which she lost eyesight in one eye.
Group Profiles
203

July 24, 2001
LTTE attacked Bandaranaike International
Airport, destroying eleven aircraft and
damaging another thirteen planes.
February 8, 2003
Three LTTE cadres blew themselves up in
a boat carrying arms and ammunition off
Delft Island.
March 20, 2003
Sea Tiger cadres of the LTTE sank a
Chinese fishing trawler 33 kilometers
northwest of Mullaithivu. Sixteen
fishermen were reported missing and
sixteen more were rescued.
Tactics: 
•
Building up of strength during cease-fire periods
•
Surveillance and target selection
•
Suicide attacks, assassinations, bombings, kidnapping,
extortion, hijacking, as well as guerrilla and
conventional military action
•
Propaganda and the deliberate spreading of fear
Targets: The LTTE has assassinated many Sri Lankan politi-
cians, election candidates, and other political figures and even
two national leaders. They also target Sri Lankan military and po-
lice personnel, as well as Sinhalese civilians. Sometimes, Tamil
civilians are also caught between the conflict and cross fires be-
tween the LTTE and the government. The LTTE justifies this fact
as being inevitable. The LTTE is known to be anti-Buddhist and
they have also destroyed rival Tamil political and insurgent
groups, becoming the sole insurgent group in Sri Lanka. Traitors
or ex-cadre who have left the group are targeted as well.
Supply/Financing: LTTE enjoys diaspora financial support
and procurement of arms and nonparamilitary products. Some
estimates state that the LTTE receives up to $5–$10 million every
month. For instance, the LTTE demands that Tamil families living
in Germany contribute an estimated DEM1,000 (about $630) per
family annually. Internet sites have an international network of
sales of calendars, music, books, etc., as well as a collection of do-
nations. Methods used for collecting funds are reported to vary
from extortion, illegal trade, and front organizations to legitimate
business and charities. There is a growing belief about the group’s
204
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

possible involvement in piracy of software, CDs and DVDs. Its in-
ternational contacts are also used to procure funds, weapons,
technologies, communications, and bomb-making equipment as
well as international support from foreign governments and the
United Nations.
The LTTE has harnessed many sources of funding through
front, cover, and sympathetic organizations. In Canada, LTTE-af-
filiated associations—such as the WTM, the Federation of Associ-
ations of Canadian Tamils (FACT), and especially the Tamil
Eelam Society of Canada (TES)—received grants amounting to
over CAD$1 million (about $750,000) from the money earmarked
to assist Tamil “newcomers” to adapt, resettle, and integrate into
Canada. The Tamil Rehabilitation Organization (TRO) in France
obtained monetary support from the Lions Club of Cergy. Simi-
larly, the TCC received both governmental and nongovernmental
humanitarian, refugee, and welfare grants in France. In Germany,
the LTTE-affiliated WTM obtained financial assistance from the
German government to provide informational, educational, legal,
housing, immigration, financial, and cultural services to incom-
ing Tamil refugees. In the United Kingdom, the LTTE-affiliated
TCHA and its precursor, the Tamil Refugee Housing Association
(TRHA), both received donations from local borough councils
(“LTTE Abusing London Housing Assn., Allege Lankan Mem-
bers,” 2001). The LTTE-affiliated Medical Institute of Tamils
(MIOT) received sponsorship from pharmaceutical companies,
most notably the Boehringer Ingelheim.
Annual Budget: Not known but believed to be $60 million.
Links/Associations: Some LTTE elements are known to have
trained in Palestinian camps but not known to have any direct
links with external terrorist groups. The LTTE is also alleged to
have helped the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA). The
group has many front and cover organizations overseas, such as
the World Tamil Association (WTA), the World Tamil Movement
(WTM), the Federation of Associations of Canadian Tamils
(FACT), the Ellalan Force, and the Sangillan Force.
State Response: Since February 2002, the LTTE had been en-
gaged in peace talks with the Sri Lankan government. After
many years of hiding, Prabakaran spoke to the world press in a
press conference on April 10, 2002, with an uncompromising
stand of continual insistence that a separate state of Tamil Eelam
was the desire of the Tamil people of Sri Lanka. Since peace talks
began, there had been only isolated incidents of violence in
Group Profiles
205

violation of the truce. Loans and grants worth $4.5 billion were
promised but were made contingent on satisfactory progress in
the peace process.
In March 2004, there was a major division in the LTTE or-
ganization after its special commander for Batticaloa-Amparai
whose overall charge of the LTTE’s military operations in the
eastern province, Vinayagamoorthi Muralitharan (alias Colonel
Karuna), was sacked by Prabhakaran for alleged treachery
against the Tamil people and the Tamil leadership party and also
for conspiring to leave the liberation organization. Karuna was
replaced by Ramesh as special commander. Prabhakaran also or-
dered about 500 cadres from the eastern province to be disarmed
and placed under house arrest. Karuna reportedly approached
the Sri Lankan authorities and the Norwegian monitoring mis-
sion for a recognition of the separate role of his setup in the now
stalled peace process, for physical protection and for
ensuring safe passage for the nearly 2,000 eastern cadres. Though
Karuna is not in a very strong position to effectively challenge
Prabhakaran’s leadership, the emerging rift and the possibility of
a bloody encounter between the factions may contribute to a
weakening of the strength of the group.
Negotiations, however, broke down in April 2003 after the
LTTE pulled out. The LTTE accused the Sri Lankan military of a
series of provocative measures, including the sinking of its ves-
sels and demands from Washington to disarm. At the same time,
it faced growing hostility from the Tamil masses as living con-
ditions failed to improve following the February 2002 ceasefire.
The peace process also ran into rough weather after the sacking
of ministers by the Sri Lankan president and subsequent elec-
tions that returned a new government to power in Sri Lanka. For
the time being there has been no progress in peace talks though
the Norwegian interlocutors were hopeful of getting it back on
track.
Projected Activities: Governments’ “zero-tolerance” attitude
toward terrorism since 9/11 has delayed the return of the group
to open hostilities. However, during the stalled peace process the
LTTE has continued to recruit, train, collect intelligence, and pro-
cure weapons. Some believe that it is only a question of when they
will return to war rather than if.
LTTE 
Web 
Sites: 
http://eelam.com; 
http://www.
eelamweb.com; http://www.Tamilnet.com
206
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

References
“Colombo Lifts Ban on Tamil Tigers.” 2002. Straits Times, September 6, 29.
Dias, Wije. 2003. “Moves to Restart Sri Lankan Peace Talks.” (August 14).
Available at http://www.wsws.org/articles/2003/aug2003/sril-a14.
shtml (accessed May 14, 2004).
Fanney, Rob. 2002. “Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), Jane’s
World.” Insurgency and Terrorism 15, no. 24 (May).
FAS Intelligence Resource Programme. “Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam.” Available at http://www.fas.org/irp/world/para/ltte.htm (ac-
cessed May 14, 2004).
Gunaratna, Rohan. 2000. “The LTTE and Suicide Terrorism.” Frontline 17,
no. 3 (February 5–8). Available at http://www.frontlineonnet.com/
fl1703/17031060.htm (accessed March 22, 2004).
———. 2002. “Peace Talks: The Transformation of Terror.” South Asia In-
telligence Review 1, no. 10 (September 23).
———. 2003. “Factors Facilitating and Inhibiting Escalation and De-Es-
calation of Political Violence by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE).” Unpublished article.
Harrison, Frances. 2003. “Sri Lanka’s Child Soldiers.” BBC News (Janu-
ary 31). Available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/
2713035.stm (accessed May 14, 2004).
http://eelam.com/
http://www.tamiltigers.net/fallencomrades/fallen.htm
Kloos, Peter. 1999. “Violent Youth Movement in Sri Lanka: The JVP and
LTTE Compared.” Antropologische Bijdragen 3. Available at http://cas-
nws.scw.vu.nl/publicaties/kloos-jvp.html (accessed March 22, 2004).
Krishnan, S. 1999–2000. “The Internationalization of Ethnic Conflicts—
Tamil Separatism and LTTE.” IDSS MSc Dissertation.
“Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE): Organization and Leadership,
Military.com.” Available at http://www.military.com/Resources/Re-
sourceFileView?file=LTTE-Organization.htm (accessed May 14, 2004).
“LTTE Abusing London Housing Assn., Allege Lankan Members.” 2001.
The Island, November 8.
“LTTE Tamil Tiger Atrocities.” Available at http://www.spur.asn.au/
ltteatrp.htm (accessed May 14, 2004).
“LTTE Terrorism in Sri Lanka.” Available at http://members.tripod.
com/~sosl/terror.html (accessed May 14, 2004).
References
207

“The LTTE’s Ideology.” Available at http://www.military.com/Re-
sources/ResourceFileView?file=LTTE-Ideology.htm (accessed March 22,
2004).
Raman, B. 2004. “Prabhakaran’s Eastern Challenger.” The Rediff.com
(March 9). Available at http://www.rediff.com/news/2004/mar/
09spec1.htm (accessed May 14, 2004).
“Sri Lankan Suicide Bomb Kills 13.” 2000. Available at http://
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/591352.stm (accessed March
22, 2004).
Straw, Jack. 2001. “Tigers Raid Colombo Airport.” Sri Lanka Monitor
(July). 
Available 
at 
http://brcslproject.gn.apc.org/slmonitor/
july2001/raid.html (accessed March 22, 2004).
“Tamil Tigers: A Fearsome Force.” 2002. BBC News (May 2). Available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/526407.stm (accessed
May 14, 2004).
“Wanted: VELUPILLAI, Prabhakaran.” Lyon, France: Interpol General
Secretariat. Available at http://www.interpol.int/public/Wanted/No-
tices/Data/1994/54/1994_9054.asp (accessed May 14, 2004).
208
Profiles of Terrorist and Counterterrorist Leaders and Organizations

5
Framework for
Counterterrorism Policy
T
he basis of U.S. counterterrorism policy is regarded as deriving
from two presidential directives signed by President Clinton
in 1995 and 1998. Reinforced by legislation, these directives
treat terrorism as a crime and instigate procedures to apprehend
and punish perpetrators worldwide (http://www.opsec.
org/opsnews/Sept99/opscounterterroristsept99.htm). On the
practical side, the U.S. Congress has appropriated funds to
enhance federal agencies’ capabilities to prevent, counter, and
manage the consequences of international terrorism (http://
www.opsec.org/opsnews/Sept99/opscounterterroristsept99.
htm). Furthermore, the National Security Council is mandated
with coordinating the U.S. policy on combating terrorism. The
director of the Central Intelligence Agency is charged with coor-
dinating intelligence community issues and sharing information
through the Counterterrorist Center (CTC) and the Interagency
Intelligence Committee on Terrorism (IICT) (http://www.
cia.gov).
In the global domain there are twelve major multilateral con-
ventions that form an international counterterrorism framework
that relate to states’ counterterrorism efforts and responsibilities.
It is imperative for the success of countering terrorism that as
many states as possible sign and adhere to such conventions.
States that do not sign or adhere to such conventions leave loop-
holes and room for terrorists to maneuver, survive, and continue
their activities. Most of these conventions provide that parties
209

must establish criminal jurisdiction over offenders. Nation-states
are encouraged to develop the necessary legislation to empower
their law enforcement and judicial authorities to take action by
considering the location of the offense or the nationality of the
perpetrator or victim (http://wwwserver.law.wits.ac.za/salc/re-
port/pr105-chs1–5.pdf).
In addition to the twelve multilateral conventions, there are
other instruments that are relevant in particular circumstances.
They are bilateral extradition treaties, the 1961 Vienna Conven-
tion on Diplomatic Relations, and the 1963 Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations. A significant number of important regional
treaties and initiatives have taken place especially since Septem-
ber 11, 2001 (http://www.informationheadquarters.com/Sep-
tember_11_2001/Terrorism.shtml). Furthermore, there are several
important UN Security Council and General Assembly Resolu-
tions on international terrorism. They include three important Se-
curity Council resolutions dealing with Libya’s conduct in con-
nection with the 1988 sabotage of Pan Am 103, which includes
UN Security Council Resolutions 731 (January 21, 1992), 748
(March 31, 1992), and 883 (November 11, 1993) (http://www.
state.gov/www/global/terrorism/980817_terror_conv.html).
Most counterterrorism conventions are penal in nature. They
have a common format. Typically, they: 
•
Define a particular type of violence as an offense under
the convention, such as seizure of an aircraft in flight
by threat or violence
•
Require state parties to penalize that activity in their
domestic law
•
Identify certain bases upon which the parties
responsible are required to establish jurisdiction over
the defined offense, such as registration, territoriality,
or nationality
•
Create an obligation on the state in which a suspect is
found to establish jurisdiction over the convention
offense and to refer the offense for prosecution if the
party does not extradite pursuant to other provisions of
the convention. This is commonly known as the
principle of “no safe haven for terrorists.”
(http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/terrorism_
conventions.html) 
210
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy

The UN Security Council in Resolution 1373 of September 28,
2001, stressed that member states have an essential antiterrorism
obligation.
For the full text of international and regional conventions and
protocols pertaining to terrorism, see http://www.state.gov/
www/global/terrorism/980817_terror_conv.html, http://untreaty.
un.org/English/Terrorism.asp, or http://www.ict.org.il/. We
will now look at specific dates in history on which counterterror-
ism policy was made: 
1963
Tokyo Convention on Offenses and Certain Other Acts
Committed on Board Aircraft
Concerns actions affecting in-flight safety; gives cap-
tain/pilot authority to restrain any person believed to
have committed or about to commit an act that would
endanger the safety of the flight. Requires contracting
states to take custody of offenders and to return con-
trol of the aircraft to the lawful commander.
1970
December 16. Hague Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft
This convention was in response to a string of hijack-
ing attempts after the “success” of PFLP in highlight-
ing its cause, and makes it an offense to threaten or at-
tempt to seize control of an aircraft. Signatories are
required to impose severe punishment on hijackers as
well as to cooperate with other signatories including
for extradition and prosecution.
1971
February 2. Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of
Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes against Persons and
Related Extortion That Are of Significance
This convention was formed by the Organization of
American States (OAS) after the series of kidnappings
in Latin America beginning in 1968, with signatories
expected to cooperate in the prosecution or extradi-
tion of any persons attempting or committing such ac-
tions.
1971
September 23. Montreal Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy
211

This convention was a reinforcement of The Hague
convention but focused more on aviation sabotage
such as bombings aboard aircraft in flight, and ex-
tends it to direct or indirect (e.g., accomplice) attempts
to place IEDs or bombs.
1973
December 14. UN Convention on the Prevention and Pun-
ishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Per-
sons, Including Diplomatic Agents
This convention was a response to the increasing
trend for kidnappings of diplomats. It defines an in-
ternationally protected person as a “Head of State, a
Minister for Foreign Affairs, a representative or offi-
cial of a state or of an international organization who
is entitled to special protection from attack under in-
ternational law.” This covers the person at work,
home, in transport, and so on, and is also aimed at
standardizing strict response internationally to any
such attempts or acts in order to deter and prevent
them. Signatories are required to cooperate in the in-
vestigation, prosecution, and extradition of any per-
sons attempting or committing such actions.
1979
December 17. International UN Convention against the
Taking of Hostages
The drafting of this convention began in 1976. It was
spearheaded by Western states, most notably West
Germany (http://wwwserver.law.wits.ac.za/salc/
discussn/chs1_5.pdf). However, during the drafting it
was weakened to the point of inefficacy. This conven-
tion states that “any person who seizes or detains and
threatens to kill, to injure, or to continue to detain an-
other person in order to compel a third party, namely,
a State, an international intergovernmental organiza-
tion, a natural or juridical person, or a group of per-
sons, to do or abstain from doing any act as an explicit
or implicit condition for the release of the hostage
commits the offense of taking of hostages within the
meaning of this Convention.” The signatories are re-
quired to cooperate in the investigation, prosecution,
212
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy

and extradition of any persons attempting or commit-
ting such actions.
1980
March 3. Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material
Adopted in October 1979 and signed in 1980, this con-
vention was designed to combat and criminalize any
unlawful possession, taking, transfer, moving, or use
of nuclear material with the intention of using the
threat or use of such material to kill, injure, or damage.
Signatories are required to cooperate in the investiga-
tion, prosecution, and extradition of any persons at-
tempting or committing such actions/breaches.
1984
Comprehensive Crime Control Act
This act (18 U.S.C. 1203) authorized federal prosecu-
tion of hostage taking overseas that involves U.S. citi-
zens/targets, providing a basis for extraterritorial ju-
risdiction on terrorism.
1986
Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act
This act (18 U.S.C. 2331) enhanced extraterritorial ju-
risdiction to any terrorist act against U.S. citizens or
interests.
1988
February 24. Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Avia-
tion, Supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation
This convention was an extension of the 1971 Mon-
treal convention to include terrorist acts at airports
serving international civil aviation.
1988
March 10. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation
This convention applies to terrorist activities on ships
and makes it an offense for a person to seize or exer-
cise control over a ship by force, threat, or intimida-
tion, as well as to perform an act of violence against a
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy
213

person on board a ship if that act is likely to endanger
the safe navigation of the ship. It also makes it illegal
to place a destructive device or substance aboard a
ship or any other acts against the safety of ships, and
requires signatories to cooperate in extradition and
prosecution.
1988
March 10. Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Conti-
nental Shelf
This protocol applies to terrorist activities on oil rigs
and, similar to other conventions, requires signatories
to cooperate in prosecution and extradition following
any such attempt or action. In the United Kingdom
this resulted in the formation of Commachio, the royal
marines special forces unit with the responsibility of
protecting nuclear bases and oil rigs, and providing
assaults and rescues if necessary.
1991
March 1. Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives
for the Purpose of Detection
This convention was organized in response to the
problems of unmarked plastic explosives and the dif-
ficulties in monitoring and tracing it. The convention
initiated chemical marking to facilitate detection of
plastic explosives, to combat aircraft sabotage, for ex-
ample. The convention consisted of the convention it-
self and a technical annex that together aim to control
and limit the used of unmarked and undetectable
plastic explosives (negotiated in the aftermath of the
Pan Am Flight 103 bombing). Each signatory must
take necessary and effective measures to prohibit and
prevent the manufacture, movement, possession, and
transfer of unmarked plastic explosives, as well as
monitoring and enforcing the holding and disposal of
such materials held by the police or military.
1993
September 13. Oslo Accords
The Oslo Accords, also known as the “Declaration of
Principles,” are the basis of current Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations. They were secretly negotiated by
214
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy

Israeli and Palestinian delegations in 1993 in Oslo,
Norway. The Norwegian foreign minister, Johan Jor-
gen Holst, played a pivotal role in the negotiations.
They laid out the long-term goals to be achieved, in-
cluding the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Furthermore,
they guaranteed the right of the Palestinians to self-
rule in those territories. Palestinian leader Yasser
Arafat and Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin fa-
mously shook hands during the signing in Washing-
ton 
(http://www.cnn.com/interactive/specials/
0007/mideast.documents/oslo.html). The PLO was
no longer seen as a terrorist organization but as a
peaceful political movement, demonstrating that ter-
rorism can be successful in achieving its objectives.
Many analysts saw the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as
the catalyst for the rise of international terrorism.
Therefore, they assumed that if peace could be
reached between the two parties, it would reduce in-
ternational terrorism.
1995
September 28. Oslo Accords
At this extension to the 1993 agreements, Israelis and
Palestinians signed another deal known as the Interim
Agreement or, popularly, as “Oslo 2.” The 400-page
pact allowed further autonomy for the Palestinians. It
gave them self-rule in the cities of Bethlehem, Jenin,
Nablus, Qalqilya, Ramallah, Tulkarm, parts of He-
bron, and 450 villages. It also allowed Israeli-guarded
Jewish settlements to remain in Palestinian-controlled
land.
1996
April 24. U.S. Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act (AEDPA)
This act established the death penalty for certain ter-
rorist crimes. As most other Western governments do
not support the death penalty, the act also reduced co-
operation (or the likelihood of cooperation) between
foreign governments and the U.S. government. It is
widely regarded that not enough attention was paid
to the implications for U.S. foreign policy with this act.
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy
215

1996
June 27. G-7 Declaration on Terrorism
Released at the G-7 Economic Summit in Lyon,
France, following and condemning the June 25 fuel
truck bomb attack in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, that
killed nineteen people and injured around four hun-
dred others, this declaration attempted to unite and
strengthen resolve, actions, and opinion against ter-
rorism activity and support.
1997
December 15. International Convention for the Suppres-
sion of Terrorist Bombings
This convention attempted to internationalize the re-
sponse against terrorism due to growing transnational
phenomena and the problems in countering it by ex-
panding the legal framework (against unlawful and
intentional use of explosives and other lethal devices
in or against public places with intent to kill, injure, or
damage) for international cooperation in the investi-
gation, prosecution, and extradition of persons who
engage in terrorist bombings.
1999
December 9. UN International Convention for the Sup-
pression of the Financing of Terrorism
An attempt to internationalize a response and combat
the financial infrastructure of terrorists, this UN con-
vention signified the acknowledgment of the interna-
tional scale and sophistication of terrorist overseas
support structures exploiting sovereignty and state
loopholes. The United States signed the convention on
January 10, 2000.
2001
Patriot Act
This act enhanced U.S. intelligence and law-enforce-
ment powers in a number of areas, including investi-
gating and monitoring of electronic transmissions,
communications, and banking. For a summary and
analysis of key sections, see http://www.cdt.org/se-
curity/011031summary.shtml.
216
Framework for Counterterrorism Policy

6
Directory of
Counterterrorism Agencies
and Organizations
“Since September 11, 2001, more than 3,000 Al-
Qaeda leaders and foot soldiers have been taken
into custody around the globe; nearly 200 suspected
terrorist associates have been charged with crimes
in the U.S.; and as many as a hundred terrorist
attacks or plots have been broken up worldwide.” 
FBI Web site (http://www.fbi.gov/terrorinfo/
counterrorism/waronterrorhome.htm)
T
he achievements against terrorism have been due to the efforts
of the following agencies and their international allies. This list
is a select guide, as there are many more organizations in oper-
ation around the world.
Government Agencies
U.S. National Agencies
Bureau of Diplomatic Security (DS)
Background: The DS was formally established in 1916 under Sec-
retary of State Robert Lansing. The office was headed by a chief
special agent, who also carried the title of special assistant to the
217

secretary and reported directly to the secretary of state on special
matters. Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the DS has played an ac-
tive role in the global war on terrorism, utilizing over 486 special
agents assigned to diplomatic missions in 157 countries.
Mission: To provide a secure environment for the conduct of
American diplomacy.
Activities/Responsibilities: To design tailor-made security
programs for every U.S. diplomatic mission in the world; investi-
gate domestic passport and visa fraud; conduct personnel secu-
rity investigations; protect VIPs such as the secretary of state at
home and abroad, as well as high-ranking foreign dignitaries and
officials visiting the United States; and train foreign civilian law
enforcement officers in disciplines designed to reduce the threat
and repercussions of terrorism throughout the world.
The DS also works with other federal agencies, the intelli-
gence community, international law enforcement agencies, and
the private sector to prevent terrorism against U.S. nationals both
at home and abroad.
References
http://www.defenselink.mil
http://www.state.gov/m/ds/
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Headquarters: Langley, Virginia
Background: Created in 1947 with the signing of the Na-
tional Security Act by President Harry Truman, which charged
the director of Central Intelligence (DCI) with coordinating the
nation’s intelligence activities and correlating, evaluating, and
disseminating intelligence affecting national security. The agency
is accountable to the president through the DCI and to the U.S.
nation through the intelligence oversight committees of the U.S.
Congress.
Mission: To support the president, the National Security
Council, and all officials who make and execute the U.S. national
security policy.
The activities of the CIA include providing accurate, com-
prehensive, and timely foreign intelligence on national security
topics, conducting counterintelligence and special activities, and
any other functions related to foreign intelligence and national se-
curity (as directed by the president).
Activities: In order to do this, research, development, and
218
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

deployment of high-leverage technology for intelligence pur-
poses are undertaken. The CIA acts as an independent source of
analysis on topics of concern and works closely with other or-
ganizations in the intelligence community (see http://www.in-
telligence.gov) to ensure that the intelligence consumer receives
the best intelligence product possible. The CIA also works closely
with its U.K. equivalent, known as MI6/SIS—“Secret Intelligence
Service,” based at Vauxhall Cross, London, England, as well as
MI5, or “the Security Service,” based in Thames House, London.
As new challenges and threats arise in the international sys-
tem, the CIA responds by creating and operating multidiscipli-
nary centers to address high-priority issues (e.g., nonprolifera-
tion, 
counterterrorism, 
counterintelligence, 
international
organized crime and narcotics trafficking, environment, and arms
control intelligence), being proactive in forging stronger partner-
ships between the several intelligence collection disciplines, and
producing all-source analysis on all issues affecting national se-
curity.
References
http://www.cia.gov
Counterterrorism Division (CTD) of the FBI
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Mission: To consolidate all FBI counterterrorism initiatives.
Activities: The National Infrastructure Protection Center
(NIPC) and the National Domestic Preparedness Office (NDPO)
are assigned to this division. The NIPC serves as the U.S. govern-
ment’s focal point for threat assessment, warning, investigation,
and response for threats or attacks against the nation’s critical in-
frastructures. The NDPO coordinates all federal efforts to assist
state and local first responders with planning, training, and
equipment needs necessary to respond to a conventional or non-
conventional weapons of mass destruction incident.
The Tactical Support Branch of the FBI is made up of the
Hostage Rescue Team (see entry) and Operations Training Unit.
They ensure that the FBI has a full-time, national-level tactical
team capable of being deployed to protect the American people at
home and overseas. (See also Federal Bureau of Investigation.)
References
http://www.fbi.gov/hq.htm
Government Agencies
219

Counterterrorism Security Group (CSG)
Background: During a crisis, representatives from the U.S. coun-
terterrorism agencies meet to form the CSG. The CSG is chaired
by the national coordinator for security, infrastructure protection,
and counterterrorism. The other core members of the CSG are the
heads of the counterterrorist elements of the CIA, FBI, Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and departments of State, Justice, and Defense.
Any other entity that could be affected by, or have a bearing on,
either the situation or recommended course of action is brought
in to consider specific matters that bear on its responsibilities. The
current charter for the CSG is Presidential Decision Directive 62,
signed in May 1998.
Mission: To produce a recommendation for the national se-
curity advisor on how to react to a terrorist threat.
Activities: Prior to the CSG meeting, members often have lim-
ited time to review news reports, intelligence reports, and briefings
from other members/representatives involved in the crisis. Each
representative meets with the following points in mind: The coun-
terterrorism capabilities and resources of their agency, the equity
their agency has in coordinating its efforts with other agencies, the
concerns and criteria their agency considers in making decisions,
and the primary goals of their agency in a crisis. From the informa-
tion and advice available, as well as their own professional expert-
ise and opinions, they are then asked to build their case and formu-
late their recommendations. During the meeting they work with
other agency representatives to make their case to the CSG chair-
person and reach consensus on a recommendation for the national
security advisor to submit to the president. The national security
advisor will then make the final decision on what recommendation
goes forward from the CSG to the Principals Committee.
References
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press.
Counterterrorist Center (CTC)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: In the mid-1980s a series of high-profile terror-
ist attacks galvanized U.S. policymakers to take the offensive
against international terrorism. A task force chaired by the vice
president at the time, (former CIA member) George H. Bush, was
220
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

formed in 1986 to address the problem of international terrorism.
The task force concluded that U.S. government agencies collected
information on terrorism but did not aggressively operate to dis-
rupt terrorist activities. As a result of these findings, the DCI at
that time, William Casey, created the DCI Counterterrorist Center
(CTC) and directed it to preempt, disrupt, and defeat terrorists.
Mission: To assist the DCI in coordinating intelligence com-
munity counterterrorism in preempting, disrupting, and defeat-
ing terrorism.
Activities: The CTC is charged with implementing a com-
prehensive counterterrorist operations program to collect intelli-
gence on, and minimize the capabilities of, international terrorist
groups and state sponsors; exploiting all-source intelligence to
produce in-depth analyses of the groups and states responsible
for international terrorism; ensuring that counterterrorism activi-
ties are coordinated so as not to be detrimental to other counter-
terrorism activities; and disseminating to all of the departments
and agencies any terrorist threat report that cannot be disproved.
Around a dozen agencies have personnel assigned at the
CTC, including intelligence agencies such as the FBI and CIA as
well as law enforcement agencies such as the Secret Service, and
policy or regulatory agencies such as the Federal Aviation Ad-
ministration (FAA).
The chief of the CTC also serves as special assistant to the di-
rector of Central Intelligence for counterterrorist matters. CTC’s
charter allows it to draw on all CIA resources and the talent of
other U.S. government agencies.
References
http://www.cia.gov
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press.
Delta Force
Headquarters: Fort Bragg, North Carolina
Background: Formed in 1977 by Charlie Beckwith, a U.S.
Special Forces officer who had served with the SAS (U.K.), the
new unit was modeled after the SAS and called the 1st SFOD-
Delta, or Delta Force (also known as CAG, for Combat Applica-
tions Group). Delta Force soldiers are mainly recruited from Spe-
cial Forces Green Berets and Rangers. Estimates are of up to 2,500
personnel at Fort Bragg, with smaller numbers in other bases.
Government Agencies
221

Mission: Military counterterrorism; maintaining and execut-
ing effective rapid response counterterrorism/hostage rescue ca-
pability and operations.
Activities: The Delta Force maintains an operational profi-
ciency on land, sea, and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles,
and equipment pertaining to its mission. Activities also include
the defense of territories, long-range and close-target recon-
naissance (CTRs), intelligence gathering, crisis response/man-
agement, and covert/clandestine operations. The force also
takes part in exchange programs with other counterterrorism
units and some training of other countries’ units. It is inte-
grated with Seal Team 6 (now known as NSWDG), which con-
ducts maritime operations but retains the ability to function as
an independent unit. Delta Force personnel work closely with
the 160th SOAR for air support, but they also have their own
“civilian” fleet of helicopters (the aviation platoon) for air sup-
port and transport for covert operations. They also work with
the CIA’s Special Activities Staff. Delta Force and the FBI’s
Hostage Rescue Team (HRT) train together at the $80 million
upgraded Range 19 in Fort Bragg. The Delta Force and HRT
train together at Quantico, Virginia, where they have exclusive
use of a new airstrip with enlarged C-141 capability. The 160th
SOAR out of Fort Campbell, Kentucky, flies the Delta Force and
HRT to their urban assault assignments. (See also FBI HRT,
SOAR, and JSOC.)
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
http://www.bragg. army.mil/
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/dod/jsoc.htm
http://www.specialoperations.com/Army/Delta_Force/default.html
http://www.specwarnet.net/americas/delta.htm
Department of Defense (DoD)
Headquarters: The Pentagon, Washington, D.C.
Background: The War Department, established in 1789, was
the precursor to what is now the Department of Defense. In 1947,
the U.S. Congress established a civilian, cabinet-level secretary of
defense to oversee the national military establishment. Subse-
quently, the three services, army, navy, and air force, were placed
222
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

under the direct control of the secretary of defense. In 1949, as a
result of congressional amendments, the national defense struc-
ture was consolidated further to create what is now known as the
Department of Defense.
Mission: According to the Department of Defense Web site,
"To provide the military forces needed to deter war and to protect
the security of the United States."
References
http://www.defenselink.mil
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Background: After 9/11, President George W. Bush decided that
twenty-two previously disparate domestic agencies needed to be
coordinated into one department to better protect the nation
against threats to the homeland. For a list (and links) of the agen-
cies that fall under the DHS, see http://www.dhs.gov/dhspub-
lic/display?theme=13.
Mission: To protect the United States against further terror-
ist attacks.
Activities: Component agencies analyze threats and intelli-
gence, guard U.S. borders and airports, protect critical infrastruc-
ture, and coordinate the response of the United States for future
emergencies. Besides coordinating U.S. defense efforts, the DHS
also dedicates offices to missions such as those protecting the
rights of U.S. citizens, as well as enhancing public services, such
as natural disaster assistance and citizenship services.
References
http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
Headquarters: Pentagon, Washington, D.C.
Background: The DIA became operational on October 1,
1961, as the nation’s primary producer of foreign military intelli-
gence. It filled the need for a central intelligence manager for the
Department of Defense to support the requirements of the secre-
tary of defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the armed forces.
Mission: To provide combat support to the Department of
Defense (DoD).
Government Agencies
223

Activities: With estimates of over seven thousand military
and civilian employees worldwide, the DIA is a major producer
and manager of foreign military intelligence, which it provides to
armed forces and policy makers in support of U.S. military plan-
ning and operations and weapon systems acquisition. Activities
include improving threat assessment and counterterrorism
preparation, enhancing intelligence integration and interoper-
ability, and building a skilled response community.
The DIA also has major operational activities at the Defense
Intelligence Analysis Center (DIAC) in Washington, D.C.; the
Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center (AFMIC) in Frederick,
Maryland; and the Missile and Space Intelligence Center (MSIC)
in Huntsville, Alabama.
References
http://www.dia.mil
Director of Central Intelligence (DCI)
The DCI is the head of the CIA, but he or she also acts as the head
of the United States intelligence community and thus is also the
principal adviser to the president on intelligence matters pertain-
ing to national security.
George J. Tenet is the current DCI (since July 10, 1997—see
profile in Chapter 4) and is charged with coordinating intelli-
gence community issues and sharing information through the
Counterterrorist Center (CTC) and the Interagency Intelligence
Committee on Terrorism (IICT).
References
http://www.cia.gov
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 created a new
independent body, the Federal Aviation Agency, which had
broader authority to combat aviation hazards and deal with var-
ious aspects of aviation safety. The act gave the agency the sole re-
sponsibility of developing and maintaining a common civil-mili-
tary system of air navigation and air traffic control. In 1966,
Congress authorized the creation of a cabinet department—
Department of Transportation (DOT)—that would combine
224
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

major federal transportation responsibilities. On April l, 1967, the
FAA became one of several model organizations within DOT. 
Mission: "FAA provides a safe, secure, and efficient global
aerospace system that contributes to national security and the
promotion of U.S. aerospace safety. As the leading authority in
the international aerospace community, FAA is responsive to the
dynamic nature of customer needs, economic conditions, and en-
vironmental concerns."
Activities: The Federal Aviation Administration is responsi-
ble for the safety of civil aviation. The agency’s major roles in-
clude: 
•
regulating civil aviation to promote safety; 
•
encouraging and developing civil aeronautics,
including new aviation technology; 
•
developing and operating a system of air traffic control
and navigation for both civil and military aircraft; 
•
researching and developing the National Airspace
System and civil aeronautics;
•
developing and carrying out programs to control
aircraft noise and other environmental effects of civil
aviation; 
•
and regulating U.S. commercial space transportation
References
http://www.faa.gov
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: The FBI was established on July 26, 1908, with
a small group of special agents as an investigative force of the De-
partment of Justice. Today, the FBI is the principal investigative
arm of the U.S. Department of Justice. The FBI has the authority
and responsibility to investigate specific crimes assigned to it.
Furthermore, the FBI is authorized to provide other law enforce-
ment agencies with cooperative services. This includes finger-
print identification, laboratory examinations, and police training.
The FBI is headed by a director who is appointed by the president
and confirmed by the Senate for a term not exceeding ten years.
The current director of the FBI is Robert S. Mueller III.
Government Agencies
225

Mission: The FBI has the main counterterrorism responsibil-
ity within the United States. It is part of a vast national and inter-
national campaign dedicated to defeating terrorism, and it works
closely with other agencies in law enforcement, intelligence, the
military, and diplomacy. Part of its mission is to neutralize terror-
ist cells and operatives within the United States as well as help-
ing dismantle international terrorist networks.
Activities: The FBI has dual functions. It collects domestic in-
telligence and enforces the law. As such, the FBI can pursue in-
vestigations, detect terrorist threats through surveillance, and en-
gage in human source development and careful analysis. The FBI
can also act against those threats through arrest and incarceration.
Over the years, the FBI has developed an international network of
dedicated special agents that liaise with federal, state, local, and
international partners. Using this network, the FBI can react rap-
idly and mobilize to prevent attacks.
The Awareness of National Security Issues and Response
(ANSIR) Program is the FBI’s national security awareness pro-
gram. ANSIR disseminates unclassified national security threat
and warning information to U.S. corporations, law enforcement,
and other government agencies. ANSIR e-mail provides this in-
formation at no charge to any interested person meeting the sub-
scription prerequisites. In addition, to making potential targets of
intelligence and terrorist activities less vulnerable through aware-
ness, the FBI has unique response capability to act when these ac-
tivities are identified. (See also Counterterrorism Division;
Hostage Rescue Unit.)
References
http://www.angelfire.com/weird/flash333/official.html
http://www.fbi.gov
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: Since its creation in 1979, FEMA has faced
many unusual challenges including refugee crises, energy and
nuclear power-plant incidents, disaster relief, and recovery oper-
ations. Al Qaeda’s attacks on September 11, 2001, tested the
agency in unprecedented ways, refocusing FEMA on issues of na-
tional preparedness and homeland security. FEMA coordinated
its activities with the newly formed Office (now Department) of
226
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

Homeland Security, and FEMA’s Office of National Preparedness
was given responsibility for training and equipping the nation’s
first responders to deal with weapons of mass destruction. After
9/11, billions of dollars of new funding were directed to FEMA to
help the United States face the threat of terrorism.
Mission: FEMA has a vision of “A Nation Prepared.” Its mis-
sion is to lead the United States to prepare for, prevent, respond
to, and recover from disasters, natural and man-made, as well as
mitigating against them.
Activities: In March 2003, FEMA was reorganized to fall
under the auspices of the newly created Department of Homeland
Security (see entry). About 2,500 full-time employees of FEMA in
the Emergency Preparedness and Response Directorate are supple-
mented by more than five thousand stand-by disaster reservists.
References
http://www.fema.gov
Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center (FTATC)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: The National Commission on Terrorism (com-
posed of ten members from the House and Senate) urged the cre-
ation of the Foreign Terrorist Tracking Task Force and its atten-
dant tracking center.
Mission/Activities: To blend the expertise of the Department
of Treasury, CIA, FBI, and National Security Agency in tracking
and disrupting the flow of money to terrorist groups. (See Foreign
Terrorist Tracking Task Force.)
References
http://www.webcom.com/hrin/magazine/footdragging.html
Foreign Terrorist Tracking Task Force (FTTTF)
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: As there are a number of U.S. government agen-
cies engaged in fighting terrorism, both at home and abroad, the
U.S. government needed a central body to take the responsibility
for tracking terrorists. The National Commission on Terrorism
urged the creation of the Foreign Terrorist Tracking Task Force and
its attendant tracking center. Both were instituted in 2001.
Government Agencies
227

Mission/Activities: The Foreign Terrorist Tracking Task
Force was empowered by law to coordinate programs to deny
entry into the United States of aliens who are associated with,
suspected of being engaged in, or supporting terrorist activity.
The FTTTF was tasked to coordinate the efforts to locate, detain,
prosecute, or deport any such aliens already present in the United
States. The U.S. attorney general and the DCI are charged with
ensuring, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the effective
function of FTTTF. For instance, all U.S. agencies are mandated to
provide FTTTF with access to all available information necessary
to perform its mission. When appropriate, cooperating countries
are invited to serve as liaisons to FTTTF to expedite investigation
and data sharing. Other federal entities provide FTTTF with any
relevant information they possess concerning aliens suspected of
engaging in or supporting terrorist activity. They include the Mi-
grant Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons Coordination Center
and the Foreign Leads Development Activity.
References
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/10/20011030-2.html
#quicksearch
Hostage Rescue Team (HRT) of the FBI
Headquarters: Quantico, Virginia
Background: The U.S. Justice Department made a key deci-
sion in 1982 to create an elite unit to offer a tactical option for any
extraordinary hostage crisis occurring within the United States.
The attorney general authorized the formation of a specialist
counterterrorist unit within law enforcement known as the
Hostage Rescue Team (HRT). Handpicked, highly motivated, and
experienced FBI agents comprised the HRT. Assigned to the
Washington Metropolitan Field Office, the HRT was originally al-
located fifty agent positions; it has since grown to ninety-one per-
sonnel.
Mission: The HRT mission is to conduct a successful rescue
of U.S. persons and others who may be held illegally by a hostile
force, either terrorist or criminal in nature. Depending upon the
magnitude of a crisis, the HRT is structured to deploy with part
or all of its personnel and resources to any location within four
hours of notification by the director of the FBI or his/her desig-
nated representative.
228
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

Activities: The HRT is part of the Tactical Support Branch of
the FBI’s Critical Incident Response Group (CIRG) and can be
augmented by other CIRG entities with specialists trained in
areas of negotiation, behavioral science, and communications. In
support of FBI field divisions, HRT is deployed to perform a
number of law enforcement tactical functions. It operates in all
environments and under a variety of conditions. In the first two
decades of its activity, the HRT has deployed on over two hun-
dred occasions in support of combating terrorism, violent crimi-
nals, foreign counterintelligence, and other investigations. The
unit has performed missions involving hostage rescue and barri-
caded subjects and has engaged in high-risk arrests and warrant
services, raids, and dive searches. The HRT has also performed
traditional law enforcement roles during hurricane relief opera-
tions, dignitary protection missions, tactical surveys, and pro-
vides support of special events such as the Olympic Games, pres-
idential inaugurations, and political conventions.
When not operationally deployed, the HRT conducts full-
time training at sites across the United States. HRT trains along-
side the 1st Special Forces Detachment-Delta (SFOD-D/Delta
Force) at the $80 million upgraded Range 19 in Fort Bragg, North
Carolina. The HRT also maintains an office at the Joint Special
Operations Command headquarters at Pope Air Force Base adja-
cent to Fort Bragg. HRT personnel train together with the Delta
Force at Quantico, Virginia, where they have exclusive use of a
new airstrip with enlarged C-141 capability. (See Delta Force;
Joint Special Operations Command.)
The HRT trains for a wide variety of scenarios and climates
including hostage rescue and barricaded subjects, high-risk ar-
rest/searches, mobile assaults, manhunt and rural operations,
maritime operations, helicopter operations, weapons of mass de-
struction (WMD), and cold weather operations.
References
http://www.fbi.gov/hq/isd/cirg/tact.htm
Intelligence Community
The term intelligence community describes all of the agencies
with an intelligence role and capability that collectively form a
community of those involved in similar activities, with similar
goals, that complement each other when used collectively. 
Government Agencies
229

Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR)
Background: The INR has the task of assessing and disseminat-
ing intelligence under the State Department.
Mission: Primarily to harness intelligence to serve U.S.
diplomacy.
Activities: Using all-source intelligence, the INR provides
analysis of events to State Department policy makers, ensures
that intelligence activities support foreign policy and national se-
curity purposes, and serves as the focal point in the State Depart-
ment for ensuring policy review of sensitive counterintelligence
and law enforcement activities. The bureau also analyzes geo-
graphical and international boundary issues and developed the
Geographic Learning Site (GLS) for K–12 students.
References
http://www.state.gov/s/inr/
Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC)
Headquarters: Pope Air Force Base, North Carolina, and Fort
Bragg, North Carolina
Background: Established in 1980.
Mission/Activities: A joint headquarters designed to study
special operations requirements and techniques, ensure interop-
erability and equipment standardization, plan and conduct joint
special operations exercises and training, and develop joint spe-
cial operations tactics. Although JSOC’s stated purpose is to pro-
vide a unified command structure for conducting joint special op-
erations and exercises, it is widely reported that JSOC is actually
the command responsible for conducting U.S. counterterrorism
operations. JSOC is reported to command the U.S. military’s Spe-
cial Missions Units (SMUs). These SMUs are tasked with con-
ducting counterterrorism operations, strike operations, recon-
naissance in denied areas, and special intelligence missions.
JSOC units regularly conduct training with similar units
from around the world and provide training to nations that re-
quest U.S. support. JSOC has also provided support to domestic
law enforcement agencies during high-profile or high-risk events
such as the Olympics, the World Cup, political party conventions,
and presidential inaugurations.
The full text of PDD-25 is reported to exempt the JSOC from
the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878 18USC Sec.1385, PL86–70, Sec.
230
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

17[d], which makes it illegal for military and law enforcement to
exercise jointly.
References
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/dod/jsoc
Interagency Intelligence Committee on Terrorism (IICT)
Background: Established under a 1990 DCI directive.
Mission: The IICT assists the DCI in coordinating national
intelligence and promoting the effective use of intelligence com-
munity resources on terrorism issues.
Activities: A senior-level intelligence community officer
manages both the Community Counterterrorism Board (CCB)
and the IICT. IICT membership consists of U.S. intelligence, secu-
rity, law enforcement, regulatory, and defense communities. The
IICT’s seven subcommittees examine a range of issues from intel-
ligence requirements to threat warning. On a need-to-know basis,
the CCB produces coordinated Terrorism Alerts and Advisories
for wide government audiences. The Terrorism Warning Group,
established in 1997, is hosted by the CCB. To senior military and
civilian policy makers, the group provides timely warnings of im-
pending terrorist attacks. The IICT includes more than forty fed-
eral agencies that have counterterrorist intelligence functions ei-
ther as producers or consumers, ranging from the National
Security Agency to the U.S. Capitol Police. It also has subcom-
mittees on intelligence requirements, technical countermeasures,
training, warning, handling of information, CBRN matters, and
research and development.
References
http://www.cia.gov
http://www.intelligence.gov
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press.
National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC)
Mission: To support law enforcement counterterrorism efforts in
the domain of “Critical Infrastructure Protection.”
Activities: The National Infrastructure Protection Center
provides threat assessments, warnings, investigations, and re-
sponse for threats or attacks against critical infrastructures. With
Government Agencies
231

the growing threat to critical infrastructure, NIPC has devised a
Critical Infrastructure Protection Plan for the emergency law en-
forcement sector. The plan provides agencies with guidance and
tools for risk assessment and strategic planning.
References
http://www.counterterrorismtraining.gov/plan/
http://www.nipc.gov
National Intelligence Council (NIC)
Background: The NIC is a critical component of the intelligence
community. Whereas the bulk of the intelligence community fo-
cuses on the immediate term, the NIC’s focus is on mid-term and
long-term strategic thinking.
Mission/Activities: The NIC provides a focal point for policy
makers to task the intelligence community to answer their ques-
tions. As such, it reaches out to nongovernment experts in acade-
mia and the private sector to broaden the intelligence commu-
nity’s perspective, thereby contributing to the intelligence
community’s efforts to allocate its resources in response to policy
makers’ changing needs. The council produces National Intelli-
gence Estimates (NIEs), which are the DCI’s most authoritative
written judgments concerning national security issues. Based on
the common denominator of a number of agencies, they contain
the coordinated judgments of the intelligence community. Re-
gardless of whether analytic judgments conform to U.S. policy or
not, they are intended to forecast the likely course of future
events. The NIC’s goal is to provide policy makers with the best,
unvarnished, and unbiased information.
References
http://www.cia.gov/nic/
National Intelligence Officers (NIO)
Mission/Activities: Members of the National Intelligence Officers
advise the director of Central Intelligence; interact regularly with
senior intelligence consumers and support their current and
longer term needs; produce top-quality estimative intelligence; en-
gage with outside experts to tap their knowledge and insights;
help assess the capabilities and needs of intelligence community
analytic producers; promote collaboration among those producers
232
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

on strategic warning, advanced analytic tools, and methodologies;
and articulate substantive priorities to guide intelligence collec-
tion, evaluation, and procurement.
References
http://www.cia.gov/nic/
National Security Agency (NSA)
Headquarters: Fort Meade, Maryland
Background: President Harry Truman and the National Se-
curity Council issued a revised version of the National Security
Council Intelligence Directive (NSCID) on October 24, 1952,
which resulted in the formation of NSA on November 4, 1952.
Mission: The NSA’s mission of “information assurance” pro-
vides solutions, products, and services, and conducts defensive
information operations for information infrastructures critical to
U.S. national security interests. The NSA is charged with the col-
lection and dissemination of intelligence information from for-
eign electronic signals for national foreign intelligence and coun-
terintelligence purposes and to support military operations. The
foreign signals intelligence (SIGINT) mission allows for an effec-
tive, unified organization and control of all the foreign signals
collection and processing activities of the United States. The NSA
is authorized to produce SIGINT in accordance with objectives,
requirements, and priorities established by the DCI with the ad-
vice of the National Foreign Intelligence Board. The agency also
is tasked with preventing foreign adversaries from gaining access
to classified national security information.
Activities: Provides signals intelligence pertaining to na-
tional security and interests domestically and internationally. The
NSA also conducts one of the U.S. government’s leading research
and development programs. Some of the agency’s R&D projects
have significantly advanced the state of the art in the scientific
and business worlds. The NSA’s early interest in cryptanalytic re-
search led to the first large-scale computer and the first solid-state
computer, predecessors to the modern computer. The NSA pio-
neered efforts in flexible storage capabilities, which led to the de-
velopment of the tape cassette. It also made groundbreaking de-
velopments in semiconductor technology and remains a world
leader in many technological fields. The NSA works closely with
its U.K. equivalent, the Government Communications Head-
Quarters (GCHQ), headquartered in Cheltenham, England.
Government Agencies
233

Reference
http://www.nsa.gov
National Security Council (NSC)
Background: Created under President Truman, the National Se-
curity Council is the president’s principal forum for considering
national security and foreign policy matters with his/her senior
national security advisers and cabinet officials. The NSC is
chaired by the president and attended by the vice president, sec-
retary of state, secretary of the treasury, secretary of defense, and
the assistant to the president for national security affairs. The
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is the statutory military ad-
viser to the council, and the director of Central Intelligence is the
intelligence adviser. The chief of staff to the president, counsel to
the president, and the assistant to the president for economic pol-
icy are invited to attend any NSC meeting. The U.S. attorney gen-
eral and the director of the Office of Management and Budget are
invited to attend meetings pertaining to their responsibilities. The
heads of other executive departments and agencies, as well as
other senior officials, are invited to attend meetings of the NSC
when appropriate.
Mission/Activities: To advise and assist the president on na-
tional security and foreign policies. The council also serves as the
president’s principal arm for coordinating these policies among
various government agencies.
References
http://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/
National Terrorist Asset Tracking Center (NTAC)
Background: In May 2000 the Clinton administration took steps
toward establishing an interagency National Terrorist Asset
Tracking Center (NTAC), to be supervised by the Secret Service
(see entry).
Mission/Activities: To investigate and counter terrorist fi-
nancing activities, as well as to strengthen the Office of Foreign
Assets Control (see entry).
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)
Background: OFAC is the Treasury Department’s equivalent of
the NTAC. OFAC itself was formally created in December 1950,
234
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

following the entry of China into the Korean War, when President
Truman declared a national emergency under the Trading with
the Enemy Act (TWEA) and blocked all Chinese and North Ko-
rean assets subject to U.S. jurisdiction.
Mission/Activities: OFAC acts under presidential wartime
and national emergency powers, as well as authority granted by
specific legislation, to impose controls on transactions and freeze
foreign assets under U.S. jurisdiction. Many of the sanctions are
based on United Nations and other international mandates, are
multilateral in scope, and involve close cooperation with allied
governments. OFAC administers and enforces economic sanc-
tions programs based on U.S. foreign policy and national security
goals against targeted foreign countries, terrorists, international
narcotics traffickers, and those engaged in activities related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The sanctions can
be either comprehensive or selective, using the blocking of assets
and trade restrictions to accomplish foreign policy and national
security goals.
References
http://www.ustreas.gov/offices/enforcement/ofac/faq/index.html
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press.
Naval Special Warfare Development Group (NSWDG)
Headquarters: Dam Neck, Virginia
Background: Founded in 1980, the NSWDG (also known as
Dev Group or DEVGRU, and formerly known as SEAL Team SIX)
comes under the direct command of NAVSPECWARGRU (Naval
Special War Group). It is also a component of the Joint Special Op-
erations Command, along with other counterterrorism units such
as Delta Force and the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regi-
ment (SOAR). (See Delta Force; Joint Special Operations Com-
mand; SOAR.)
Mission: To conduct and oversee U.S. maritime counterter-
rorist operations.
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency on land, sea,
and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment per-
taining to its mission. Activities also include hostage rescue, de-
fense of territories, long-range and close-target reconnaissance
(CTRs), intelligence gathering, crisis response/management, and
covert/clandestine operations. It has been reported that the
Government Agencies
235

NSWDG is one of only a handful of U.S. units authorized to con-
duct preemptive actions against terrorists and terrorist facilities. It
is integrated with the Delta Force but retains the ability to func-
tion as an independent unit. The group takes part in exchanges
with other counterterrorism teams around the world.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
http://www.terrorism.com
Secret Service
Background: The Secret Service Division was formed on July 5,
1865, in Washington, D.C., to suppress counterfeit currency. The
2001 Patriot Act (Public Law 107-56) increased the Secret Service’s
role in investigating fraud and related activity in connections
with computers.
Mission: Mandated by the U.S. Congress to carry out two
missions: protection and criminal investigations.
Activities: The Secret Service is responsible for the protection
of the president and vice president and their families, heads of
state, and other designated individuals; the investigation of
threats against these protectees; protection of the White House
and vice president’s residence, foreign missions, and other build-
ings within Washington, D.C.; and security design, planning, and
implementation at designated national special security events.
The Secret Service is also responsible for the enforcement of laws
relating to counterfeiting of obligations and securities of the
United States, investigation of financial crimes including access
device fraud, financial institution fraud, identity theft, computer
fraud, and telecommunications fraud; and computer-based at-
tacks on U.S. financial, banking, and telecommunications infra-
structure. The Secret Service also runs the National Threat As-
sessment Center (NTAC), which provides law enforcement and
related professionals with timely and effective assistance neces-
sary to develop threat assessment programs and investigate and
prevent targeted violence.
References
http://www.secretservice.gov
http://www.ustreas.gov/usss/index.shtml
236
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

SOAR—160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment
Background: SOAR is also known as the “Nightstalkers.” Their
motto is “Nightstalkers don’t quit!” The regiment was formed
from several different aviation battalions and was officially rec-
ognized as a unit on October 16, 1981. The Nightstalkers have
been actively involved in counterterrorism operations since the
early 1980s.
Mission/Activities: The 160th Special Operations Aviation
Regiment (SOAR) uses specially modified rotary-winged aircraft
and highly trained pilots to get special warfare teams to their mis-
sion through hostile territory or weather. It consists of three bat-
talions, two “white” and one “black” (for classified missions). The
1st and 2nd Battalions are located at Fort Campbell, Kentucky,
while the 3rd is located at Hunter Army Airfield in Georgia.
SOAR operates a group of highly modified aircraft in its missions
that are fitted with special avionics to allow them to fly at low
level at night or in inclement weather. In addition it has increased
weaponry and armor that enables them to survive under enemy
fire.
References
http://www.specwarnet.net/americas/soar.htm
State Department Counterterrorism Finance and Designation Unit
Mission: To target terrorist financial infrastucture: cutting off fi-
nancial support to terrorists—starving terrorists of their access to
money and resources—and helping to bring them to justice.
Activities: The CFD Unit coordinates the delivery of techni-
cal assistance and training to governments around the world that
seek to improve their ability to investigate, identify, and interdict
the flow of money to terrorist groups. It works closely with other
governments to cut off the sources and flows of support to ter-
rorists and coordinates with the U.S. Department of Treasury
and the Department of Justice to designate foreign terrorist or-
ganizations.
References
http://www.state.gov/s/ct/terfin/
Government Agencies
237

Special Mission Units (SMUs)
Background: The U.S. government invested significantly to re-
duce the threat posed by terrorism and proliferation by develop-
ing specialist units even during the Cold War. In 1998, a senior of-
ficial of the U.S. Department of Defense acknowledged the
existence of covert action teams to combat terrorism and to
counter potential terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). These “Special Mission Units” are staffed, equipped, and
trained to deal with a wide variety of transnational threats.
Mission: The closely guarded SMUs are tasked with conduct-
ing counterterrorism operations. This includes strike operations,
reconnaissance in denied areas, and special intelligence missions.
Activities: Much of the hunting for senior Taliban and Al-
Qaeda members in Afghanistan is believed to have been con-
ducted by a unit called Task Force 11, composed mostly of Delta
Force soldiers and SEALs. These units also participated in the
Iraq campaign in the hunt for Saddam Hussein and other regime
leaders. JSOC units have reportedly been involved in a number of
covert military operations during the 1980s and 1990s, including
providing assistance to Italian authorities during their search for
kidnapped U.S. Army General James Dozier; participating in the
U.S. invasion of Grenada (Operation URGENT FURY); planning a
rescue attempt of U.S. hostages being held in Lebanon; rescuing
hostages being held aboard the cruise liner Achille Lauro; partici-
pating in the U.S. intervention in Panama (Operation JUST CAUSE);
directing U.S. Scud-hunting efforts in Iraq during Operation
DESERT STORM (1990); conducting operations in support of UN
mandates in Somalia; and searching for suspected war criminals
in the former Republic of Yugoslavia. (See also Joint Special Op-
erations Command.)
References
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/dod/jsoc.htm
Technical Support Working Group (TSWG)
Background: The U.S. government recognized that countering
terrorism requires close day-to-day coordination among many
executive branch agencies. Part of the growing challenge was to
identify needs, seek common approaches, and coordinate devel-
opment of new technologies. Toward meeting this challenge, the
238
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

government created the interagency Technical Support Working
Group.
Mission: To identify, prioritize, and coordinate interagency
and international research and development (R&D) requirements
for combating terrorism; conduct the national interagency re-
search and development program for combating terrorism
through rapid research, development, and prototyping; identify
requirements, develop solutions, and execute projects; and cus-
tomize technology to specific user needs.
Activities: The TSWG involves more than fifty federal offices
that participate with program direction provided by an executive
committee consisting of representatives from the departments of
State, Defense, and Energy, and the FBI. The TSWG rapidly de-
velops technologies and equipment to meet the high-priority
needs of combating the terrorism community and addresses joint
international operational requirements through cooperative R&D
with major allies. The TSWG also sponsors R&D not addressed
by individual agencies and fulfills an intelligence support role in
the collection and dissemination of terrorism-related information
taken to oppose terrorism throughout the entire threat spectrum
(including terrorist use of chemical, biological, radiological, or
nuclear materials or high-yield explosive devices).
References
http://www.tswg.gov
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press.
International Government Agencies
France
Groupement d’Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale (GIGN) 
Headquarters: Outside Versailles, France
Background: Formed in 1973 to enable a French counterter-
rorism (CT) and hostage rescue (HR) capability. The unit recruits
from the Gendarmerie (French police force).
Mission: To maintain and execute effective rapid response
CT/HR capability and operations.
International Government Agencies
239

Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency on land,
sea, and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment
pertaining to its mission. Also takes part in exchange programs
with other CT units, and some training of other countries’ CT
units.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
Germany
Grenzschutzgruppe 9 (GSG9)
Headquarters: St. Augustin barracks, Bonn, Germany
Background: Formed after the disastrous attempt at hostage
rescue at the 1972 Munich Olympic Games, the unit recruits from
the German federal border police. It has close ties with the United
Kingdom’s Special Air Service (see entry).
Mission: To maintain and execute effective rapid response
CT/HR capability and operations.
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency on land,
sea, and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment
pertaining to its mission. Also takes part in exchange programs
with other CT units, and some training of other countries’ CT
units.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
Kommando Spezialkraefte (KSK)
Background: Formed in 1996 in response to the need to have a
military CT/HR unit capable of deploying and operating inter-
nationally. It predominantly recruits from the German Army air-
borne units.
Mission: Military CT/HR operations outside German borders.
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency on land, sea,
and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment per-
taining to its mission. Activities also include hostage rescue, the
defense of territories, long-range and close-target reconnaissance
(CTRs), intelligence gathering, crisis response/management, and
240
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

covert/clandestine operations. Also takes part in exchange pro-
grams with other CT units, and some training of other countries’
CT units.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
Israel
Mista’Aravim (Hebrew for “To become an Arab”)
Headquarters: undisclosed location in Israel
Background: Origins are unknown; one of the original units,
Duvdevan (West Bank), is still in operation.
Mission: Proactive covert intelligence gathering operations.
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency with a vari-
ety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment pertaining to its mis-
sion. Agents/members are trained in close quarter combat (CQB),
disguise, and surveillance techniques in order to operate covertly
and to conduct the activities of hostage rescue, intelligence gath-
ering, counterterrorism missions, and assassination of leading In-
tifada members.
Reference
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
Mossad (Hebrew for “Institute”)
Headquarters: Tel Aviv, Israel
Background: The Institute for Intelligence and Special Tasks
(ha-Mossad le-Modiin ule-Tafkidim Meyuhadim), formerly
known as the Central Institute for Coordination and the Central
Institute for Intelligence and Security, was formed by Prime Min-
ister David Ben Gurion on April 1, 1951.
Mission: To enhance and aid the defense of Israel through
human intelligence collection, covert action, and counter-
terrorism.
Activities: Mossad’s focus is on Arab nations and organiza-
tions throughout the world. It also is responsible for the clandes-
tine movement of Jewish refugees out of Syria, Iran, and
Ethiopia. Mossad agents are active in the former communist
International Government Agencies
241

countries, in the West, and at the United Nations. Mossad has
eight departments, which include collections (HUMINT, or
human intelligence), liaision, “black” or special operations, psy-
ops, research/analysis, and technological development.
References
http://fas.org/irp/world/israel/mossad/
Sayaret Mat’Kal (“General Staff Recon” or “The Unit”)
Background: Formed in 1957 and based on the United Kingdom’s
SAS.
Mission: To undertake domestic military counterterrorism
within Israel.
Activities: CT/HR operations, as well as surveillance/recon-
naissance. Maintains an operational proficiency with a variety of
weapons, vehicles, and equipment pertaining to its mission. Ac-
tivities also include the defense of territories, long-range and
close-target reconnaissance (CTRs), intelligence gathering, crisis-
response/management, and covert/clandestine operations. Unit
269 is an elite unit within Sayaret Mat’Kal that members can
apply for; it executes counterterrorism operations outside Israeli
territory. Both units have taken part in hostage rescue missions.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
http://www.isayeret.com
Yechida Meyuchedet Le’Milchama Baterror (YA’MA’M; “Special Unit for
War against Terrorism”)
Background: Formed in 1974 in response to high-profile mission
failures of Sayaret Mat’Kal in dealing with terrorist hostage inci-
dents. Another domestic CT unit is “LOTAR Eilat,” which oper-
ates solely in the Eilat city area.
Mission: Domestic military counterterrorism (within Israel).
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency with a vari-
ety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment pertaining to its mis-
sion. Activities also include the defense of territories, long-range
and close-target reconnaissance, intelligence gathering, crisis-re-
sponse/management, and covert/clandestine operations. Sup-
242
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

ports counterterrorism operations using snipers, surveillance,
covert, and clandestine long-range reconnaissance missions.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
http://www.isayeret.com
Russia
Alpha Units
Background: Created in 1974 by the KGB in response to the
sweeping international wave of terrorist acts, and under the con-
trol of the KGB until it sided with Boris Yeltsin in the coup against
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1991 against orders, after which it was
moved to the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
(MVD); now falls under the Federal Security Service. Alpha’s
counterterrorism efforts and capabilities (along with Vega and the
USO) are coordinated by the Anti-Terrorist Center in Russia’s
federal Securtiy Service (FSB) system.
Mission: To conduct military counterterrorism and hostage
rescue operations.
Activities: Maintains an operational proficiency on land, sea,
and air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment per-
taining to its mission. Activities also include VIP protection,
hostage rescue, the defense of territories, long-range and close-
target reconnaissance, intelligence gathering, crisis response/
management, and covert/clandestine special forces operations.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
United Kingdom
Special Air Service (SAS)
Headquarters: Credenhill, Hereford, England
Background: Formed during World War II, the SAS is first
and foremost a special forces unit, and is used as a model for all
other similar units. Its counterterrorism wing (CT-Wing) is
International Government Agencies
243

thought to be the best in the world. The SAS did not form a coun-
terterrorism/hostage rescue capability in response to any event,
but predicted the need for one and so trained and equipped a
team in anticipation. The first SAS counterterrorism team led the
way in developing CT tactics, formation, organization, strategy,
and training. The SAS remains, and is regarded by its peers to be,
at the forefront of counterterrorism operations.
Mission: To provide 24-hour rapid and effective response (in
activities listed below) to any situation anywhere in the world.
Activities: Conducts military counterterrorism operations.
Maintains an operational proficiency on land, sea, and air, with a
variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment pertaining to its
mission. Activities also include VIP protection, hostage rescue,
the defense of territories, long-range and close-target reconnais-
sance, intelligence gathering, crisis response/management, and
covert/clandestine special forces operations. The SAS is trained
to operate in any environment. Also takes part in exchange pro-
grams with other counterterrorism units and trains other coun-
tries’ CT units.
Special Boat Service (SBS) (UK)
Headquarters: Poole, Dorset, UK
Background: Like the SAS, the SBS was formed during
World War II and is first and foremost a Special Forces Unit, but
also the leading maritime CT unit.
Mission: To provide 24-hour rapid and effective response (in
activities listed below) to any situation anywhere in the world.
Activities: Conducts military maritime counterterrorism op-
erations. Maintains an operational proficiency on land, sea, and
air, with a variety of weapons, vehicles, and equipment pertain-
ing to their mission. Activities also include VIP protection,
hostage rescue, the defense of territories, long-range reconnais-
sance and close-target recce’s (CTRs), intelligence gathering, cri-
sis response/management, and covert/clandestine Special Forces
operations. The SBS is capable of operating in any environment.
Also takes part in exchange programs with other CT units and
trains other countries’ CT units.
References
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London: Virgin.
244
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
International Centre for Political Violence and Terrorism Research
(ICPVTR)
Headquarters: Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Background: The Political Violence and Terrorism Pro-
gramme of the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies in Sin-
gapore was upgraded to a center of excellence in 2004. The spe-
cialist center, staffed by personnel from the United States, Europe,
the Middle East, Africa, and Asia, is the largest and the most re-
sourceful terrorism center located outside the West. 
Mission: The ICPVTR aims to reduce the threat of terrorism
by conducting research into terrorist, guerrilla, extremist, and
other organizations of security interest. In addition to advising
government and business leaders, the ICPVTR trains future lead-
ers in countering terrorism.
Activities: The primary activities include the management of
state-of-the-art integrated databases on domestic and interna-
tional terrorist incident, group, and personality profiles and at-
tack profiles; training the specialized branches of governments to
strengthen and enhance their counter- and antiterrorism capabil-
ities and capacities; and imparting informal and formal public ed-
ucation to increase public awareness of the terrorist threat as well
as to build an ethic and norm against the use of violence as a form
of political expression. In addition to offering a module in coun-
terterrorism at the master’s level, the center supervises doctoral
students specializing in counterterrorism.
Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence (CSTPV)
Headquarters: University of St. Andrews, Scotland, UK
Background: The CSTPV was established in 1994 by aca-
demics (Dr. Bruce Hoffman and Professor Paul Wilkinson) who
have been studying terrorism since the late 1960s.
Mission: Aims to investigate the roots of political violence,
to develop a body of theory spanning its various disparate ele-
ments, and to study the impact of violence, and responses to it, at
societal, governmental, and international levels.
Activities: Monitors and predicts trends of terrorism and po-
litical violence worldwide as well as profiling groups’ strengths,
tactics, funding, links, and so on. Conducts research projects such
Nongovernmental Organizations
245

as assessing and planning measures for response to major inci-
dents/attacks and organizes regular seminars with representa-
tives from academia, private and public sectors, policy makers
and politicians, and security practitioners in order to increase un-
derstanding and bridge the gaps between.
References
http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/academic/intrel/research/cstpv/
International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism (ICT)
Headquarters: Herzliya, Israel
Background: Formed in 1996 at the academic Interdiscipli-
nary Center (IDC) in Israel, the ICT is a research institute and
think tank that focuses solely on the subject of counterterrorism,
both domestically and internationally.
Mission: To develop innovative public policy solutions to in-
ternational terrorism. The institute applies an integrated, solu-
tions-oriented approach built on a foundation of real-world and
practical experience.
Activities: Although the ICT provides situational recom-
mendations to the private sector, this is a peripheral activity. The
institute aims to affect policy at the highest levels, in joint coop-
eration with the world community. It conducts applied research
concerning the roots of terrorism, its motivations, and causes—
with the aim of defining more effective ways of combating ter-
rorism as a phenomenon. It formulates and publishes research
papers, situation reports, and informational publications for
worldwide distribution, as well as organizing seminars with rep-
resentatives from academia, policy makers, and security practi-
tioners in order to increase understanding of terrorism.
References
http://www.ict.org.il/
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT)
Headquarters: Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Background: Incorporated on September 23, 1999, as a non-
profit corporation in Oklahoma and recognized as a charitable or-
ganization by the Internal Revenue Service, the MIPT grew out of
the desire of the survivors and families of the Murrah Federal
Building bombing of April 19, 1995, to have a living memorial.
246
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

Mission: Dedicated to research pertaining to the prevention
of terrorism or mitigating its effects.
Activities: Sponsors research to discover equipment, training,
and procedures that might assist “first responders” (police officers,
firefighters, emergency medical technicians, and all of the others
who are first on the scene in the aftermath of terrorist activity) in
preventing terrorism and responding to it. Engages in research and
academic activities that fit its mission. Currently funded by a spe-
cial congressional appropriation that directs it to conduct “research
into the social and political causes and effects of terrorism and the
development of technologies to counter biological, nuclear, and
chemical weapons of mass destruction as well as cyberterrorism.”
References
http://www.mipt.org/
RAND Corporation
Headquarters: Washington, D.C.
Background: RAND (a contraction of the term research and
development) was the first organization to be called a “think tank.”
It was created in 1946 by its original client, the U.S. Air Force.
Mission: To help improve policy and decision making
through research and analysis.
Activities: Developing new knowledge to inform decision-
makers without suggesting any specific course of action, as well
as spelling out the range of available options and by analyzing
their relative advantages and disadvantages. For nearly three
decades, RAND’s work has included investigating the origins,
development, and implications of terrorism; developing a body
of theory; and examining policy options for democratic govern-
ments and the private sector.
References
http://www.rand.org
Intergovernmental Organizations
Most of the effective counterterrorist work is carried out
through and by the national agencies working jointly with
other national agencies and/or bilaterally. Thus, “international
Intergovernmental Organizations
247

counterterrorist agencies” are less effective due to the associated
problems mentioned earlier of proliferation of sensitive informa-
tion and the like. Furthermore, international agencies often do not
have any real powers or opt-out clauses to enforce international
obligations. In addition, they are dependent on all members
agreeing to cooperate. For these reasons we have concentrated
more on U.S. national counterterrorism agencies and made short
reference to international organizations.
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE)
Background: The Second Specialized Conference on Terrorism,
held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, on November 23–24, 1998, con-
cluded with the adoption of the Commitment of Mar del Plata.
That commitment called for establishing within the Organization
of American States an “Inter-American Committee against Ter-
rorism” composed of “competent national authorities” of the
member states. Within the inter-American system, the Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE) serves to coordi-
nate efforts to protect the citizens of the member nations from ter-
rorism. Preeminent leaders, subject matter experts, and decision
makers exchange information and work together to strengthen
hemispheric solidarity and security.
Mission: As set forth in the Commitment of Mar del Plata to
enhance the exchange of information via the competent national
authorities, including the establishment of an inter-American
database on terrorism issues; formulate a proposal to assist mem-
ber states in drafting appropriate counterterrorism legislation in
all states; compile the bilateral, subregional, regional, and multi-
lateral treaties and agreements signed by member states and pro-
mote universal adherence to international counterterrorism con-
ventions; enhance border cooperation and travel documentation
security measures; and develop activities for training and crisis
management.
Activities: At the twenty-third Meeting of Consultation of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs on September 21, 2001, in Washing-
ton, D.C., the CICTE adopted a resolution strengthening cooper-
ation to prevent, combat, and eliminate terrorism. Resolution
RC.23/RES.1/01 called upon CICTE (1) to strengthen coopera-
tion between the member states, at the regional and international
levels, to pursue, capture, prosecute, and punish and, as appro-
priate, to expedite the extradition of the perpetrators, organizers,
and sponsors of these terrorist acts, strengthen mutual legal as-
248
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

sistance, and exchange information in a timely manner; (2) to in-
struct the Permanent Council to convoke, as soon as possible, a
meeting of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism so
that it may identify urgent actions aimed at strengthening inter-
American cooperation to prevent, combat, and eliminate terror-
ism in the hemisphere; (3) to entrust the Permanent Council with
preparing a draft Inter-American Convention against Terrorism
with a view to presenting it to the next session of the OAS Gen-
eral Assembly; (4) to urge the states to study the international
legal repercussions of the conduct of government authorities who
provide financial support to, protect, or harbor terrorist individu-
als or groups.
During 2002, the secretariat designed and deployed the
CICTE On-Line Antiterrorism Database in support of the
2002–2003 work plan. Additionally, CICTE has participated in the
drafting of model regulations for the prevention of terrorist fi-
nancing with OAS-CICAD’s group of experts. CICTE has also
participated in meetings of the Caribbean Financial Action Task
Force (CFATF) and the United Nations Security Council Coun-
terterrorism Committee (CTC).
A key milestone in 2002 was the drafting and signing of the
OAS Convention against Terrorism. This landmark document was
signed by thirty of the organization’s member states at the OAS
General Assembly in Bridgeton, Barbados, on June 3 of that year.
References
http://scm.oas.org/doc_public/ENGLISH/HIST_03/CP10953E04.doc
http://www.cicte.oas.org/history.htm
Interpol (International Criminal Police Investigation)
Headquarters: Lyons, France
Background: Interpol’s involvement in the fight against in-
ternational terrorism materialized during the fifty-fourth General
Assembly in Washington in 1985 when Resolution AGN/54/
RES/1 (Washington, D.C., 1985) was passed, calling for the cre-
ation of a specialized group within the then Police Division and
set out the group’s mission (see below). The same resolution also
called for the preparation of an instruction manual “outlining the
practical possibilities that currently exist for cooperation in deal-
ing with terrorist cases.”
Mission: To coordinate and enhance cooperation in combat-
ing international terrorism.
Intergovernmental Organizations
249

Activities: The Public Safety and Terrorism subdirectorate
(PST) deals with matters relating to terrorism, firearms and ex-
plosives, attacks and threats against civil aviation, maritime
piracy, and weapons of mass destruction. It attempts to encour-
age the widest possible cooperation and exchange of information
and makes maximum use of communication networks and cen-
tral records capabilities to maximize subsequent analyses or re-
sponses to queries from member countries from all information it
receives. Interpol also liaises with a number of international or-
ganizations and organizes various symposia and working groups
for people involved in the fight against terrorism. Interpol has the
authority to address all criminal activity, including terrorism.
References
http://www.interpol.int/Public/Terrorism/default.asp
http://www.interpol.int/Public/Terrorism/financing.asp
http://www.interpol.int/Public/Terrorism/resolutions.asp
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Headquarters: Brussels, Belgium
Background: In the years following the end of World War
Two, many Western European countries and their North Ameri-
can allies had legitimate concerns with the U.S.S.R.’s growing
military presence and threats of international intervention from
the Communist Russian government. NATO was officially cre-
ated as an alliance of twelve Western countries in April 1949 with
the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty (also known as the Wash-
ington Treaty). The alliance evolved during the Cold War years to
include more countries. Presently, twenty-six countries form the
mulinational NATO alliance. On September 12, 2001, NATO
members invoked Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, declaring
the September 11 attack against the United States to be an attack
against all nineteen allies. Each NATO member committed itself
to assisting the United States by taking actions deemed necessary
to do so. In response to requests by the United States, the allies
agreed on October 4, 2001, to take eight measures to expand the
options available in the campaign against terrorism. These initial
measures included enhanced intelligence sharing, blanket over-
flight rights and access to ports and airfields, assistance to states
threatened as a result of their support for coalition efforts, the de-
250
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

ployment of NATO naval forces to the eastern Mediterranean,
and airborne early warning aircraft to patrol U.S. airspace.
At NATO’s Prague Summit in November 2002, heads of state
and government of NATO member countries adopted a package
of measures that will strengthen NATO’s preparedness and abil-
ity to take on the full spectrum of security challenges, including
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
Mission: To play an important role as a platform for political
support and multinational military action. NATO continues to
engage its Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) partners in
its response to terrorism and is working to enhance its dialogue
with seven southern Mediterranean nations. NATO’s new mili-
tary concept for defense against terrorism underlines the al-
liance’s readiness. It includes development of measures to act
against terrorist attacks, or the threat of such attacks, directed
from abroad against their populations, territory, infrastructure,
and forces; to provide assistance to national authorities in dealing
with the consequences of terrorist attacks; to support operations
by the European Union or other international organizations or
coalitions involving allies; and to deploy forces as and where re-
quired to carry out such missions. These activities will be sup-
ported by measures to further improve intelligence sharing
among allies. The activities include: “Active Endeavour,” the con-
tinuing maritime operation of patrolling the eastern Mediter-
ranean, monitoring merchant shipping, and boarding suspicious
vessels. The NATO-Russia Council identifies terrorism as one of
several areas for NATO-Russia consultation and practical cooper-
ation. NATO member forces in the Balkans have acted against ter-
rorist groups with links to the Al Qaeda network by focusing on
the illegal movement of people, arms, and drugs and by working
with the authorities throughout the region on border security is-
sues. Bringing together elite forces from both sides of the Atlantic
has resulted in the formation of the NATO Response Force
(NRF)—a technologically advanced and highly flexible force that
is ready to move quickly to wherever needed, as decided by the
NATO Council. It will have initial operating capability at the lat-
est by October 2004, and full operating capability no later than
October 2006. NATO has five anti-WMD initiatives under way: a
deployable nuclear, chemical, and biological (NBC) analytical lab-
oratory; an NBC event response team; a virtual center of excel-
lence for NBC weapons defense; a NATO biological and chemical
defense stockpile; and a disease surveillance system. Efforts are
Intergovernmental Organizations
251

also under way within the alliance to better protect against and
otherwise prepare for a possible disruption of NATO and na-
tional critical infrastructure assets, including information and
communications systems.
References
http://www.nato.int
http://www.nato.int/terrorism/factsheet.htm
http://www.nato.int/terrorism/five.htm
http://www.nato.int/terrorism/index.htm#c
http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373/nato_contribution.doc
United Nations Terrorism Prevention Branch (UN-TPB)
Headquarters: Vienna, Austria
Background: Commenced operations in April 1999.
Mission: “To promote international cooperation in terrorism
prevention, conduct research activities on terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and engage in technical cooperation
activities in efforts to prevent terrorism.”
Activities: Maintenance and updating of databases of inter-
national terrorist incidents, threat assessments, research projects,
and preparation of technical cooperation manuals.
References
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/terrorism.html
http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373/
http://www.un.org/terrorism/index.html
252
Directory of Counterterrorism Agencies and Organizations

7
Print and Nonprint
Resources
Print
Adams, J. 1989. Secret Armies. London: Pan.
A dated but useful book that details the history, evolution, and
uses of international covert units.
———. 1999. The Next World War. London: Arrow.
Outlines the threats and possible scenarios of asymmetric war-
fare.
Bergen, P. L. 2002. Holy War Inc. London: Phoenix.
A comprehensive account of Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda,
from unprecedented access.
Buzan, B. 1991. People, States, and Fear: An Agenda for Interna-
tional Security Studies in the Post–Cold War Era. London: Har-
vester Wheatsheaf.
Provides a useful debate on redefining security to meet the new
security challenges of a post–Cold War environment.
253

Chalk, P. 1998. “The Response to Terrorism as a Threat to Lib-
eral Democracy.” Australian Journal of Politics and History 4, 3
(September): 373.
Provides guidelines for response.
Claridge, D. 2000. “Exploding the Myths of Superterrorism.” The
Future of Terrorism. London: Frank Cass.
Useful analysis of the reality of the WMD threat.
Collins, E. 1998. Killing Rage. London: Granta.
A personal account of a former terrorist and informer.
Combs, C. C. 1997. Terrorism in the Twenty-first Century. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Examines the nature of terrorist perpetrators from varying per-
spectives and responses.
Combs, C. C., and Slann, M. 2002. Encyclopedia of Terrorism.
New York: Facts on File.
Presents terrorism as a means of surrogate warfare and argues
that a growing number of governments are themselves using ter-
rorist tactics, employing terrorist groups, or exploiting terrorist
incidents.
Crenshaw, M., ed. 1995. Terrorism in Context. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Experts from different disciplines—politics, economics, and so
on—examine terrorism.
Davies, B. 2003. Terrorism: Inside a World Phenomenon. London:
Virgin.
Interesting analysis from the perspective of a former SAS member.
Gunaratna, R. 2002. Inside Al Qaeda. London: Hurst.
Definitive book on Al Qaeda’s organization, networks, ideology,
training, funding, and how to counter it, based on interviews
with Al Qaeda members and intelligence organization members.
254
Print and Nonprint Resources

Gurr, N., and Cole. B. 2000. The New Face of Terrorism. London:
I. B. Tauris.
Examines the threat from WMD terrorism, arguing that a balance
should be found between overexaggeration/hysteria and pre-
paredness/contingency planning. Contains useful database of
WMD-related terrorist events.
Harmon, C. C. 2000. Terrorism Today. London: Frank Cass.
Wide-ranging coverage of groups and trends as well as threat as-
sessment.
Hoffman, B. 1999. Inside Terrorism. London: Indigo.
A leading expert on terrorism outlines the nature, trends, evolu-
tion, and future of terrorism.
Hudson, R. A., and Federal Research Division of the Library of
Congress. 1999. Who Becomes a Terrorist and Why: The 1999
Government Report on Profiling Terrorists. Guilford, CT: Lyons.
Data and findings from attempts to research and formulate “ter-
rorist profiles.”
Jamieson, A. 1989. The Heart Attacked. London: Marion Boyars.
Interesting insight into terrorism in Italy during the 1970s, using
interviews with former terrorist group members.
Jenkins, B. M. 1985. “The U.S. Response to Terrorism: A Policy
Dilemma.” Armed Forces Journal (April): 39, 41, 44–45.
Presents terrorism as a means of surrogate warfare and argues that
a growing number of governments are themselves using terrorist
tactics, employing terrorist groups, or exploiting terrorist incidents.
Kegley, C. W., Jr., ed. 2003. The New Global Terrorism. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Useful collection from a number of expert contributors on the
characteristics, causes, and possible ways to combat terrorism.
McGartland, M. 1998. Fifty Dead Men Walking. London: Blake.
Personal account of a former terrorist and informer.
Print
255

———. 2000. Dead Man Running. London: Mainstream.
Updated personal account of a former terrorist/informer.
O’Callaghan, S. 1999. The Informer. London: Corgi.
Personal account of a former terrorist turned informer.
Pedahzur, Ami, and Ranstorp, Magnus. 2001. “A Tertiary Model
for Countering Terrorism in Liberal Democracies: The Case of
Israel.” Terrorism and Political Violence 13, no. 2 (summer): 1–26.
Provides a theoretical framework to make emergency measures
more accountable and democratic.
Pillar, P. R. 2001. Terrorism and U.S. Foreign Policy. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press.
The U.S. perspective on terrorism and counterterrorism meas-
ured in relation to U.S. foreign policy.
Rapoport, D. 1996. “Editorial: The Media and Terrorism; Impli-
cations of the Unabomber Case.” Terrorism and Political Violence
8, 1 (Spring): viii.
Case study examining U.S. experiences of complexities of rela-
tionship between terrorism and the media.
Reich, W., ed. 1996. Origins of Terrorism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Valuable collection of papers covering psychologies of terrorism,
ideologies, theologies, states of mind of terrorists, and implica-
tions for research and practice.
Schmid, A., and Crelinsten, R. 1993. Western Responses to Terror-
ism. London: Frank Cass.
Valuable collection of contributions from academics and practi-
tioners examining various national experiences of and responses
to terrorism.
Sprinzak, E. 1998. “The Great Superterrorism Scare.” Foreign Pol-
icy 112 (Fall): 110–124.
256
Print and Nonprint Resources

Details the balance between being prepared and making our-
selves more of a target through panic and hysteria.
Taylor, M., and Horgan, J. 2000. The Future of Terrorism. London:
Frank Cass.
Excellent collection of papers from academics and practitioners
covering the most pressing issues concerning terrorism, future
predictions, and response.
Viotti, P., and Kauppi, M. 1993. International Relations Theory.
New York: Macmillan.
A useful dictionary explaining paradigms and theories.
Wilkinson, P. 2001a. Aviation Terrorism and Security. London:
Frank Cass.
Invaluable collection of contributions from academics and practi-
tioners examining threats, vulnerabilities, and recommendations
for revising security.
———. 2001b. Terrorism Versus Democracy. London: Frank Cass.
Examines trends, emergence, and tactics of terrorism before as-
sessing options and problems of liberal democratic response in
countering terrorism.
Nonprint
BBC News: http://news.bbc.co.uk/
Canada’s Counterterrorism Program: http://www.csis-scrs.
gc.ca/eng/operat/ct_e.html
Center for Democracy and Terrorism: http://www.cdt.org/pol-
icy/terrorism/
Commentary published by the Canadian Security Intelligence
Service: http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca/eng/operat/ct_e.html
Counterterrorism home page: http://www.counterterrorism.
com/
Nonprint
257

Counterterrorism bills and proposals: http://www.epic.org/
privacy/terrorism/
Electronic Frontier Foundation: http://www.eff.org/pub/
Privacy/Terrorism_militias/
Emergency Response Guide to Terrorism: http://www.
emergency.com/cntrterr.htm
Federal Emergency Management Agency: http://www.fema.gov
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering: http://
www.fatf-gafi.org/
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (HMG-UK): http://
www.fco.gov.uk
Home Office (HMG-UK): http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/
International Association of Counterterrorism and Security Pro-
fessionals: http://www.securitynet.net
International Center for Counterterrorism Studies: http://www.
potomacinstitute.org/academic/icts.cfm
International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism: http://
www.ict.org.il/
Jane’s Intelligence Review, Terrorism and Security Monitor, etc.
(follow links): http://www.janes.com
National Criminal Intelligence Service, UK: http://www.
ncis.com
North American Treaty Organization: http://www.nato.int
Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, U.S. State
Department: http://www.state.gov/www/global/terrorism/
index.html
Oklahoma City National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of
Terrorism: http://www.mipt.org/
Olivares, S. “Terrorist Leader Profile: A Working Research Proj-
ect.” http://www.iacsp.com/mp.html 2001.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe: http://
www.osce.org
258
Print and Nonprint Resources

Patterns of global terrorism: http://www.hri.org/docs/USSD-
Terror/http://www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/pgtrpt/2000/index.cfm
?docid=2460&clid=2408
Security Service (UK): http://www.mi5.gov.uk
Terrorism group profiles (mainly taken from the U.S. State De-
partment): http://library.nps.navy.mil/home/tgp/tgpmain.htm
The Terrorism Research Center: http://www.terrorism.com/
index.shtml
Terrorist and insurgent organizations: http://www.au.af.mil/
au/aul/bibs/tergps/tg98tc.htm
United Nations: http://www.un.org
U.S. 
Department 
of 
Defense: 
http://www.defenselink.
mil/other_info/terrorism.html
William R. Nelson Institute for Public Affairs: http://www.
jmu.edu/orgs/wrni/
Miscellaneous: http://www.antiterrorism.org
http://www.cdi.org/terrorism/
http://www.counterterrorismtraining.gov/
http://www.cromwell.50megs.com/security/netusers.html#
professionals
http://www.emergency.com/cntrterr.htm
http://www.fas.org/irp/
http://www.iacsp.com/mp.html
http://www.ict.org.il/
http://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/Sociology-Psychology%20of%20
Terrorism.htm
http://www.monitor.bbc.co.uk
http://www.terrorism.com
http://www.terrorismfiles.org/individuals/ramzi_yousef.
html/
Nonprint
259


Appendix
List of Abbreviations
ANM
Arab Nationalist Movement
ASG
Abu Sayaf Group (Philippines)
CBRN
chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear (weapons)
CIA
Central Intelligence Agency
CT
Counterterrorism
FARC
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia)
FBI
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FRU
Force Research Unit
GIA
Groupe Islamique Armée, or the Armed Islamic Group (Algeria)
GIGN
Groupement d’Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale
(French CT Unit)
GSG9
Grenzschutzgruppe 9 (German CT Unit)
HR
Hostage Rescue
JRA
Japanese Red Army
JSOC
Joint Special Operations Command
LTTE
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (Tamil Tigers)
MILF
Moro-Islamic Liberation Front (Philippines)
MRF
Mobile Reaction Force
NIOCTF
Northern Ireland Organised Crime Task Force
NGO
nongovernmental agency
NSA
National Security Agency
261

PFLP
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
PIRA
Provisional Irish Republican Army
PLO
Palestine Liberation Organization
RUC
Royal Ulster Constabulary
SAS
Special Air Service (U.K.)
SBS
Special Boat Service
SMUs
special missions units
TSWG
Technical Support Working Group
WMD
weapons of mass destruction
262
Appendix

Abadan attack (1978), 2
Abdelaziz, Prince Turki ibn
Faisal ibn, 151
Abouhalima, Mahamud, 170,
171
Abu Nidal Organization (ANO),
10, 139, 155
Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), 4, 68,
92, 185
Abu-Sittah, Subhi Abd-al-Aziz.
See Atef, Muhammad
Achille Lauro seizure (1985), 139
Adams, Gerry, 181–183
Adolescents, recruitment of, 16,
18, 23
AEDPA. See Antiterrorism and
Effective Death Penalty
Act
Afghan Jihad Encyclopedia, 47–48,
51, 59, 147
Afghanistan
and bin Laden, 152–153, 155
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 160
Maktab al Khidimat il
mujahidin al Arab (MaK),
152
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
Soviet intervention in, 10, 153
terrorist training centers, 43,
48
U.S. bombing of training
camps, 142
weapons stockpiles, 55
See also Mujahedin
Africa, 3, 17. See also specific
countries
Air France hijacking (1994), 75,
140
Air India bombing (1985), 74,
138
Ajaj, Ahmad, 170
Akhman, Said, 173
Al Ansar Mujahedin, 61, 68, 71
Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, 9, 11,
53
Al Qaeda
and Afghanistan, 152–153,
155
and aviation terrorism, 76, 77
bomb-making capability, 53
and CBRN weapons, 58–59
and dual technologies, 56–57
effects of leadership change,
184
and Egypt, 155–156
financial fraud, 4, 94
goal orientation rather than
rule orientation, 163
263
Index

Al Qaeda (cont.)
and kidnapping, 69
and Kuwait, 160
leaders of, 47, 149–174,
184–185
“losing and learning”
doctrine, 162–163
loss of Muhammed Atef and
Abu Zubaidah, 185
and LTTE, 143
and maritime terrorism,
77–79, 81–82
military experience of
commanders, 47
Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam
embassy bombings (1996),
142
and nuclear technology, 39
operations planned by
Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 161–168
operations planned by Ramzi
Ahmed Yousef, 170–173
and the Philippines, 160–161
as politico-religious group, 10
recruitment techniques, 160
Riyadh suicide attack (2003),
145
and Salafi school of Islam,
158
and Sudan, 154–155
training manuals, 48
training of members, 43
USS Cole attack (2000), 47,
77–79, 143
See also 9/11; World Trade
Center bombing (1993)
Al-Assirat al-Moustaquim, 145
Aleph (Aum Shinrikyo), 9–10.
See also Aum Shinrikyo
Alfred P. Murray Federal
Building bombing (1995).
See Oklahoma City
bombing (1995)
Algeria, 3, 35–36. See also Armed
Islamic Group of Algeria
Alhazmi, Nawaf, 79
Ali, Rifa Taha, 157
Almihdhar, Khalid, 79
Alpha Units (Russia), 144, 243
Ambush, 67
American Nazi Party, 8
Amman, Pottu, 181, 199, 201
Amnesty, 103
Anarchist terrorism, 10
ANC (South Africa), 90
Angola, 3, 90. See also National
Union for the Total
Independence of Angola
(UNITA)
Animal rights groups, 11
ANO. See Abu Nidal
Organization
Anthrax letters (2001), 38, 60
Anthrax, manufactured by Aum
Shinrikyo, 60
Anti-abortion groups, 11
Anti-globalization groups, 11
Antiterrorism and Effective
Death Penalty Act
(AEDPA; 1996), 215
Appeasement, 67–68, 130. See
also Negotiation
Arafat, Yasser, 178, 215
Arenas, Jacobo, 175
Argentina, 125, 140
Arizona Patriots, 8
Armed assault, 66–67
Armed Islamic Group of Algeria
(GIA), 9
Air France hijacking (1994),
75, 140
auto theft, 4
financial fraud, 94
human trafficking, 92
humanitarian dimension of,
20
Armed robbery, 91
264
Index

Arms market, 54–56, 91, 193–194
Aryan Brotherhood, 8
Aryan Liberation Front, 8
Aryan Nations, 8, 61
Asahara, Shoko, 183
ASG. See Abu Sayyaf Group
Ashcroft, John, 119
Asia, as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3. See also specific
countries
Assassination, 4, 64–67
Benazir Bhutto (attempted),
160, 162, 171
Clancy Fernando, 196, 203
Indira Gandhi, 74, 138
Rajiv Gandhi, 180, 196,
200–201
Chandrika Kumaratunga
(attempted), 203
the Pope (planned), 171, 173
Ranasinghe Premadasa, 196,
203
Yitzhak Rabin, 141
responsibility not claimed for,
65
Anwar Sadat, 137
Assault, 66–67
Atef, Muhammad, 47, 157, 168,
185
Atlanta Olympics bombing
(1996), 142
Atta, Mohommad, 165–168
Al-Attash, Tawfig, 166
AUC. See United Self-Defense
Forces of Colombia
Aum Shinrikyo (Aleph), 9–10
and biological weapons, 60,
61
new leadership of, 183
Tokyo subway attack (1995),
38, 57, 59, 141
Australia, and
support/financing for
terrorism, 85–86
Auto theft, 4
Aviation terrorism, 32, 72–77
Air India bombing (1985), 74,
138
chronology of incidents,
135–145
fatalities for bombing vs.
hijacking and accidents,
74
flight training for terrorists,
76
hijacking. See Hijacking
history of, 32–33, 72–73
international conventions on,
211, 213
Lockerbie bombing (1988),
32, 74, 118
security measures, 73, 75
shift from hijacking to
sabotage bombing or
surface-to-air destruction,
36–37, 41–42
shoe bomb on Flight AA63
(2001), 53, 77
surface-to-air missiles, 76–77
Yousef's plans for, 172–173
See also 9/11
Ayyad, Nidal, 171
Ayyash, Yahiya, 185–186
Azhar, Maulana Masood, 185
Azzam, Abdullah, 151–153,
155–156, 184
Babbar Khalsa International, 9,
74, 138
Bahaji, Said, 47, 165, 168
Bakr, Mohammed Abu, 170
Balasingham, Anton, 199
Bali nightclub bombing (2001),
144, 163
Bangladesh, 3, 88
Bank fraud, 93–94
al-Banshiri, Abu-Ubaydah (Al-
Rashidi, Ali), 47, 157
Index
265

Basque Fatherland and Liberty
(ETA), 4, 18, 126
Beirut embassy truck bomb
(1983), 137
Beirut kidnapping of Soviet
diplomats (1985), 139
Beirut Marine barracks bombing
(1983), 138
Bekka Valley, 43
Bell, Bowyer, 38
Bhindranwale, Jarnail Singh, 138
Bhutto, Benazir, 160, 162, 171
bin Baz, Abdul Aziz, 152
bin Khalid, Abdullah, 161
bin Laden family, 150–151
bin Laden, Hamida, 151
bin Laden, Muhammad (son of
Osama), 155
bin Laden, Muhammed (father
of Osama), 150–151
bin Laden, Osama
and Afghanistan, 152–153,
155
and Azzam, 151–153, 155–156
and CBRN weapons, 58
effect of missile strikes
against, 109
as financier, 95
as folk hero, 109
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 160
and maritime terrorism, 78
money laundering, 126
and 9/11, 155, 165
and plans for London
underground Sarin attack
(2001), 143
privileged background of, 19
profile of, 149–158
and Sudan, 154–155
and U.S. troops in Saudi
Arabia, 154
and Yemen, 153–154
and Al-Zawahiri, 156–158
Biological weapons, 60–62
anthrax letters (2001), 38, 60
difficulties of employing, 59
targets for, 39
See also Chemical-biological-
radiological-nuclear
(CBRN) weapons
Bishopsgate bombing (1993),
140
Bjorgo, T., 16, 28
Black, J. Cofer, 187–188
Black September Organization
(BSO), 70, 73, 135. See also
Olympic village massacre
(Munich 1972)
Black Tigers, 47, 199, 200
Blackmail, as recruitment
technique, 23
Blister agents, 61
Blood agents, 62
Bolivia, Muslim population in,
125
Bombing
chronology of incidents,
135–145
improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), 50–54, 71
letter/parcel bombs, 50
statistics on, 66
type of person required for,
52–53
vehicle bombs, 38, 66,
137–145
See also Aviation terrorism;
Explosive devices; Suicide
missions; specific countries
and incidents
Bosnia, 68
Brazil, 125, 126, 161
Brazzaville Congo, 3
Briceño, Germán Suárez,
175–176
Briceño, Jorge Suárez, 175–177,
191, 192
266
Index

“Bridge burning” for terrorist
recruits, 22–24
Brighton bombing (1984), 138
BSO. See Black September
Organization
Bubonic plague, 60, 61
Buenos Aires embassy bombing
(1992), 140
Bureau of Diplomatic Security
(DS), 217–218
Bureau of Intelligence and
Research (INR), 230
Burundi, 3
Bus bombing. See Jerusalem bus
bombing (1996)
Buzan, B., 120
CAG. See Delta Force
Calarca, Marco León, 189–190
Cambodia, 90
Cameroon, 3
Canada, and LTTE, 197–198, 205
Canary Wharf bombing (1996),
141–142
Cano, Alfonso, 192
Capital flight, 34
Caucasus, 3
Causes of terrorism, 8–13, 33–37
Cease-fires, 102–103, 182–183.
See also Negotiation
Central African Republic, 3
Central Bank bombing (Sri
Lanka 1996), 141, 196, 203
Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), 218–219
and Afghan groups, 90
covert support for foreign
groups, 90
Director of Central
Intelligence (DCI), 224
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 161
and 9/11, 166
and Pakistan's ISI, 152
Centre for the Study of
Terrorism and Political
Violence (CSTPV), 5,
245–246
CFD Unit. See State Department
Counterterrorism Finance
and Designation Unit
Chakmas, 88
Charitable dimension of
terrorist organizations. See
Humanitarian/charitable
dimension of terrorist
organizations
Chechen terrorists
and biological weapons, 61
and hijacking, 69
and hostage-taking, 68
Moscow theater seizure
(2001), 144
and radiological weapons, 63
support from Turkey, 90
See also Al Ansar Mujahedin
Chemical-biological-
radiological-nuclear
(CBRN) weapons, 32,
57–63
biological weapons, 38, 39,
60–62
chemical weapons, 39, 59–60,
173–174
dangers of overreacting to
threat of, 38–39
difficulties of employing, 39,
58, 59, 61
ease of acquisition, 39
and fatalities, 63
and negative publicity, 39
nuclear/radiological
weapons, 62–63
targets for, 39
Chemical weapons, 59–60
planned London
underground attack
(2001), 143
Index
267

Chemical weapons (cont.)
and Ramzi Ahmed Yousef,
173–174
targets for, 39
Tokyo subway attack (1995),
10, 38, 59, 141
See also Chemical-biological-
radiological-nuclear
(CBRN) weapons
Children, as suicide bombers,
198. See also Adolescents,
recruitment of
Chile, Muslim population in,
125
Chlorine, 59, 62
Choking agents, 62
Chronology of terrorist
incidents, 135–145, 203–204
Church of Christian Aryan
Nations, 8
CIA. See Central Intelligence
Agency
CICTE. See Inter-American
Committee against
Terrorism
CIRA. See Continuity Irish
Republican Army
Clinton, Bill, 109, 171–172
Cold War, long-term
indoctrination necessary
for Soviet agents in the
West, 21
Collateral damage, 30, 109
Collective punishment, as
counterproductive
strategy, 31
Colombia
conscription by terrorist
organizations, 17
hostage-taking, 68
judicial system, 107
Muslim population in, 125
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
See also National Liberation
Army (ELN);
Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia
(FARC); United Self-
Defense Forces of
Colombia (AUC)
Colombo, Sri Lanka. See Central
Bank bombing (Sri Lanka
1996)
Commanchio, 214
Comprehensive Crime Control
Act (1984), 213
Conflict resolution techniques.
See Appeasement;
Counterpropaganda;
Negotiation
Congo, 3, 33
Conscription, 17
Continuity Irish Republican
Army (CIRA), 9, 182
Contras, 90
Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Maritime
Navigation (1988), 213–214
Convention on the Marking of
Plastic Explosives for the
Purpose of Detection
(1991), 214
Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear
Material (1980), 213
Convention to Prevent and
Punish Acts of Terrorism
Taking the Form of Crimes
against Persons and
Related Extortion That Are
of Significance (1971), 211
Conventions, international (list),
209–216
Copycat acts of terrorism, 63–64,
78, 82–83
Corruption, 124, 128–129
268
Index

Counterpropaganda, 30–31,
88–89, 115–116. See also
Media
Counterterrorism, 101–102, 185
and aviation, 73, 75
counterproductiveness of
collective punishment, 31
counterpropaganda, 30–31,
88–89, 115–116
criteria for judging responses,
101–102, 131
cyclical relation between
terrorism and
counterterrorism, 40–41,
71–73
dangers of appeasement,
67–68
dangers of overreacting to
terrorist acts, 30–31
dangers of overreacting to
threat of terrorism, 38–39
disruption of arms market, 56
disruption of mobility,
113–114
disruption of training
facilities, 46
and hostage
situations/kidnapping,
68–70
intelligence agencies, 111–113
international conventions,
209–216
judicial measures, 105–107
legal issues, 99–102
and legitimate businesses
used to fund terrorism, 92,
95
and maritime terrorism,
83–84
and the media, 116–120
and the military, 107–110
models for response, 100–102
moral issues, 99–102, 112,
130–132
motivating terrorists to
disengage from
organizations, 28–32
need for exit opportunities
for terrorists, 32
need for political reform to
aid marginalized members
of society, 88, 102–104
need for regulation of
procurement and
shipping, 89
need for specialized training
for troops, 49
need for targeting “middle
management”, 184–185
negotiations and cease-fires.
See Cease-fires;
Negotiation
and noncriminal
infrastructures of
organizations, 85
and the police, 114–115
political measures, 102–104
problems with responses,
120–122, 127–129
pros and cons of
targeting/capturing
leaders, 184–185
punitive measures aimed at
supporters, 104–105
role of host and target states,
85
summary of conclusions,
129–133
target-hardening measures,
64
Counterterrorism Division
(CTD) of the FBI, 219
Counterterrorism Security
Group (CSG), 220
Counterterrorist Center (CTC),
220–221
County Sovereignty Movement
(CSM), 182
Index
269

Credit card fraud, 4, 91, 93–94
Crime, common, 4, 12, 91–93
Crime, organized. See
Organized crime
Criminal justice model of
counterterrorism, 100–101
CSG. See Counterterrorism
Security Group
CSM. See County Sovereignty
Movement
CSTPV. See Centre for the Study
of Terrorism and Political
Violence
CTC. See Counterterrorist
Center
CTD. See Counterterrorism
Division (CTD) of the FBI
Cuba, 72, 90
Dalla al Baraka (bank), 152
Dar al Mal al Islami (bank), 152
Dar-es-Salaam embassy
bombing (1998), 142
DCI. See Director of Central
Intelligence
Declaration of Jihad Against the
Country's Tyrants, 48, 148
Decolonization, 33
Defense Intelligence Agency
(DIA), 223–224
Delta Force, 221–222
Department of Defense (DOD),
222–223
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), 186–187,
223
Desclassement, 35
Dhanu, 200, 203
DHKP-C. See Revolutionary
People's Liberation Party
DHS. See Department of
Homeland Security
DIA. See Defense Intelligence
Agency
Diamond smuggling, 4
Diaspora/migrant support
networks, 87–89, 125
Director of Central Intelligence
(DCI), 224
Dirty bomb, 62–63
Dissanayake, Gamini, 203
Djerba bombing (2002), 83
DOD. See Department of
Defense
Domestic terrorism
defined, 5, 6
need for political reform to
aid marginalized members
of society, 88, 102–104
trends in, 37
Dozier, James, 70
DR Congo, 3
Drug trafficking, 91
by FARC, 12, 189–190, 194
groups listed, 92
by Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, 4
in Latin America, 12,
123–124, 126–127, 189–190,
194
and maritime terrorism, 82
DS. See Bureau of Diplomatic
Security
Dual technologies, 56–57, 61
East Timor, hostage-taking in, 68
Eastern Europe, saturated arms
market in, 55
Economics
capital flight, 34
definition of economic
security, 120–121
free trade, 34
impact of globalization,
34–35
sanctions, 105
unemployment, 20, 35
war economies, 19, 28
270
Index

Ecuador, 126, 190
Egypt
and Al Qaeda, 155–156
assassination of Sadat, 137
Egyptian Islamic Group, 80,
153, 156–157, 184
Egyptian Islamic Jihad,
156–157
El Al hijacking (1968), 33, 40, 72,
135
Ellalan Force, 205
ELN. See National Liberation
Army
Embassy bombings
Buenos Aires (1992), 140
Dar-es-Salaam (1998), 142
Nairobi (1998), 142
Encyclopaedia of the Afghan Jihad,
47–48, 51, 59, 147
Environmental security, defined,
120
Erambu, Mathivathani, 179
ETA. See Basque Fatherland and
Liberty
Ethical issues in
counterterrorism, 99–102,
112, 130–132
Ethiopia, 3
Ethnic cleansing, 4
Ethnonationalist terrorism, 9, 87
Eurasia (ferry boat), 69
Europe, 8, 85–86. See also specific
countries
Exit opportunities for terrorists,
22
factors inhibiting exit from
organizations, 26–28
motivating terrorists to
disengage from
organizations, 28–32
Explosive devices, 50–54, 71, 74
assembled from
commercially available
materials, 53
detection of, 77
international conventions on,
214
land mines, 51–52
signatures identifying
terrorist schools, 53
See also Bombing
Extortion, 91
Extradition measures, 105, 124
FAA. See Federal Aviation
Administration
FACT. See Federation of
Associations of Canadian
Tamils
al Fadli, Tariq, 153
FARC. See Revolutionary
Armed Forces of
Colombia
Fatalities, 2
aviation bombing vs.
hijacking, 74
and CBRN weapons, 63
increasing lethality of
terrorist acts, 37–38
statistics on relative numbers
for different types of
groups, 10
FBI. See Federal Bureau of
Investigation
Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA),
224–225
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 225–226
Counterterrorism Division
(CTD), 219
Hostage Rescue Unit (HRT),
228–229
international terrorist
tracking system, 79
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
(FEMA), 226–227
Index
271

Federation of Associations of
Canadian Tamils (FACT),
205
FEMA. See Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Fernando, Clancy, 196, 203
Finances, 84–97, 205
and conditions in Latin
America, 124
diaspora/migrant networks,
87–89
domestic support, 87
and FARC, 189, 193
financial crime, 93–94
international conventions on,
216
legitimate businesses, 92, 95
liberal democracies as hosts
for support infrastructure,
86–87
and lobbying, 96–97
low-level crime, 91–93
and LTTE, 204–205
money laundering, 92, 126
and organized crime, 85, 91–93
and Pakistan's ISI, 152
punitive measures aimed at
supporters, 104–105
state-sponsored terrorism,
89–90
support from co-ethnic and
co-religious groups, 89
support from community
organizations, 96
support from Europe, North
America, and Australasia,
85–86
support from individual
financiers, 95
support from NGOs, 95
support from public and
private donors and other
benevolent organizations,
96
See also Drug trafficking;
Kidnapping
Firearms. See Arms market
FLCS. See Front de la Côte des
Somalis
Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking
Center (FTATC), 227
Foreign Terrorist Tracking Task
Force (FTTTF), 227–228
Fouda, Yosri, 162
FP-25, 80
France
Air France hijacking (1994),
75, 140
Al Qaeda's plans for
bombing in, 53
attempts to extradite drug
traffickers, 124
Groupement d'Intervention
de la Gendarmerie
Nationale (GIGN), 75, 136,
140, 239–240
and LTTE, 197, 205
Fraud, 91–92, 93–94
Free Aceh Movement (GAM), 4
Free trade, and conditions for
terrorism, 34
“Freedom fighters”, 7
FRELIMO (Mozambique), 90
Front de la Côte des Somalis
(FLCS), 136
FTATC. See Foreign Terrorist
Asset Tracking Center
FTTTF. See Foreign Terrorist
Tracking Task Force
Fundamentalism, and
globalization, 34
G-7 Declaration of Terrorism
(1996), 216
G8 Summit, 142
Gaddafi (Gadhafi), Colonel
Muammar, 74
GAM. See Free Aceh Movement
272
Index

Gandhi, Indira, 74, 138
Gandhi, Rajiv, 180, 196, 200–201
GAULA, 194
Genocide, 4
Germany
Grenzschutzgruppe 9
(GSG9), 70, 136, 240
Kommando Spezialkraefte
(KSK), 240–241
Munich Olympics (1972), 40,
70, 118, 135–136
West Berlin nightclub
bombing (1986), 139
GIA. See Armed Islamic Group
of Algeria
GIGN. See Groupement
d'Intervention de la
Gendarmerie Nationale
Globalization
and conditions for terrorism,
34
and lack of economic
security, 121
and mobility of terrorists, 113
and refugees, 87
and training of terrorists, 44
Golden Temple seizure (1984),
138
Goldstein, Baruch, 140
Grand Mosque hostage-taking
(1979), 137
Greece, left-wing groups in, 8
Grenades, 52
Grenzschutzgruppe 9 (GSG9),
70, 136, 240
Groupement d'Intervention de
la Gendarmerie Nationale
(GIGN), 75, 136, 140,
239–240
GSG9. See Grenzschutzgruppe 9
Guerrilla warfare, 4, 46, 67
Gulf War (1991), 62, 154
Guzman, Abimael, 183
Guzmán, Efraín, 192
Hadayet, Hesham Mohamed, 76
Hague Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful
Seizure of Aircraft (1970),
211
Halima, Mahmud Abu, 171
Hamas
aided by Hezbollah, 50, 140
explosive devices, 53
first suicide bombing (1993),
140
humanitarian/charitable
dimension of, 178
Jerusalem bus bombing
(1996), 142
leadership of, 177–179
loss of Yahiya Ayyash,
185–186
maritime terrorism, 78, 82
nationalist dimension of, 11
as politico-religious group, 9
and suicide attacks, 140, 141,
178
violence relative to other
Palestinian groups, 10
Hambali, 79, 163
Hanjor, Hani, 165–166
Harakat-ul Mujahedin, 185
Hawallah system, 104
Al-Hazemi, Nawaf, 165–166
Hebron mosque massacre
(1994), 140
Hekmatyar, Gulbuddin, 90
Hezb-e-Islami, 90
Hezbollah
Beirut bombings (1983), 137,
138
Buenos Aires embassy
bombing (1992), 140
and dual technologies, 57
and Hamas, 50, 140
hostage-taking, 68
links to other groups, 50, 140,
191
Index
273

Hezbollah (cont.)
and maritime terrorism, 79
as politico-religious group,
10
Spanish restaurant bombing
(1984), 138
training of members, 44
Hijacking, 68–69, 72–73
Air France hijacking (1994),
75, 140
chronology of incidents,
135–145
El Al hijacking (1968), 33, 40,
72, 135
Indian airliner hijacked to
obtain release of Harakat-
ul Mujahedin leaders
(1999), 185
SABENA airlines Flight 517
hijacking, 73
TWA hijacking (1969), 135
See also Aviation terrorism;
specific incidents
Hindawi, Nizar, 73
History of terrorism, 32–41
chronology of incidents,
135–145
chronology of international
conventions, 211–216
chronology of LTTE
incidents, 203–204
shift from secular to
religious/ethnic conflicts,
36
trends in international and
domestic terrorism, 37
Hoffman, Bruce, 2, 118, 129
Holland, 136
Holst, Johan Jorgen, 215
“Holy Tuesday”, 162
Homeland Security, 132,
186–187, 223
Hostage Rescue Team (HRT) of
the FBI, 228–229
Hostage-taking
chronology of incidents,
135–145
dangers of appeasement,
67–68
international conventions on,
212
as response to capture of
organization leaders,
184–185
as a tactic, 67–68
U.S. hostages in Iran (1979),
10, 67, 137
See also Kidnapping
Human trafficking, 82, 91, 92
Humanitarian/charitable
dimension of terrorist
organizations, 20, 97, 178
Hume, John, 182
Hunger strikes, 106–107
Hussein, Saddam, nerve gas
used against Kurds, 62
ICPVTR. See International
Centre for Political
Violence and Terrorism
Research
ICT. See International Policy
Institute for Counter-
Terrorism
Ideological terrorism, 8–9, 36
difficulties of negotiation/
compromise with, 129
IEDs. See Improvised explosive
devices
IICT. See Interagency Intelligence
Committee on Terrorism
IIRO. See International Islamic
Relief Organization
Improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), 50–54, 71, 74
India
Air India bombing (1985), 74,
138
274
Index

assassination of Indira
Gandhi, 74, 138
assassination of Rajiv
Gandhi, 180, 196, 200–201
ethnonationalist groups in, 9
Golden Temple seizure
(1984), 138
Indo-Bangladesh
cooperation, 88
politico-religious groups in, 9
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
state-sponsored terrorism, 90
See also Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE);
Peoples War Group (PWG)
Indoctrination, 13–14, 20–24, 44
Indonesia, 3. See also Free Aceh
Movement (GAM)
INR. See Bureau of Intelligence
and Research
Intelligence
intelligence agencies, 111–113
and maritime terrorism,
83–84
See also specific agencies
Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism (CICTE),
248–249
Inter-Services-Intelligence (ISI),
90, 152
Interagency Intelligence
Committee on Terrorism
(IICT), 231
International Centre for Political
Violence and Terrorism
Research (ICPVTR), 5, 245
International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings (1997), 216
International conventions (list),
209–216
International Criminal Police
Investigation. See Interpol
International Islamic Relief
Organization (IIRO), 152
International Policy Institute for
Counter-Terrorism (ICT),
246
International terrorism
defined, 5, 6
early incidents of, 33, 39–40
liberal democracies as hosts
for support infrastructure,
86–87
trends in, 37
International UN Convention
against the Taking of
Hostages (1979), 212
International waters, and arms
trafficking, 56
Internet, 38, 40, 50, 167
Interpol (International Criminal
Police Investigation), 113,
249–250
Iran
Abadan attack (1978), 2
and FARC, 191
Islamic Revolution (1979), 10
as region of low-intensity
conflict, 3
terrorism supported by, 11
training provided to
Hezbollah, 44
U.S. hostages in (1979), 10,
67, 137
Iranian Embassy. See Princes
Gate siege (1980)
Iraq
Kuwait invasion, 170
motives for invading, 109
and nuclear technology, 62
as region of low-intensity
conflict, 3
Ireland. See Northern Ireland
Irredentism, 9
ISI. See Inter-Services-
Intelligence
Index
275

Islam
Salafi school of, 44–45, 158
Wahabi school of, 158
See also Islamists
Islamic Group of Egypt, 80, 153,
156–157, 184
Islamic Jihad, 141
Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, 4, 67
Islamic Resistance Movement.
See Hamas
Islamists
events leading to increase in
followers, 10
ideological training, 44–45
objections to neocolonialism,
35–36
and suicide attacks, 72
support from co-ethnic and
co-religious groups, 89
violence of, 10, 36
Ismail, Eyyad, 171
Israel
airline security measures, 73
assassination of Yitzhak
Rabin, 141
cell-phone bomb (1996), 141
chronology of incidents,
135–145
counterproductiveness of
collective punishment, 31
El Al hijacking (1968), 33, 40,
72, 135
ethnonationalist groups in,
9
first Hamas bombing (1993),
140
Hebron mosque massacre
(1994), 140
Jerusalem bus bombing
(1996), 142
judicial system, 107
Mista'Aravim, 241
Mossad, 70, 241–242
Olympic village massacre
(Munich 1972), 40, 49, 70,
118, 135–136
Oslo Accords, 214–215
politico-religious groups in,
9–10
prisoners in, 106
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
Sayaret Mat'Kal, 242
utilitarian approach to
counterterrorism, 100
Yechida Meyuchedet
Le'Milchama Baterror
(YA'MA'M), 242–243
See also Black September
Organization (BSO);
Hamas; Palestinian
Authority (PA);
Palestinian Islamic Jihad
(PIJ); Palestinian
Liberation Organization
(PLO); Popular Front for
the Liberation of Palestine
(PFLP)
Italy
intelligence agencies, 112
judicial system, 107
Moro kidnapping, 70, 137
Ivory Coast, 3
Izzedine al-Quassam, 178
Jabara, Mohommad Mansour,
163
Jabril, Ahmad, 47
Jamahiriya Security
Organization, 74
Jammu and Kashmiri
Liberation Front (JKLF),
9
Janjalani, Abdurajak Abubakar,
170
Japan
kidnapped geologists, 68
276
Index

politico-religious groups in,
9–10
Tokyo subway attack (1995),
10, 38, 57, 59, 141
See also Aum Shinrikyo
(Aleph)
Japanese ambassador's residence
seizure (Peru 1996), 142
Japanese Red Army, 183
Jarrah, Ziad, 165–166
Jayash-e-Mohomad, 162
Jemaah Islamiyah, 144
Jerusalem bus bombing (1996),
142
Jimenez, Timoleón, 192
JKLF. See Jammu and Kashmiri
Liberation Front
Jobrony, Alah, 171
John Paul II, Pope, 171, 173
Johnson, L.K., 112
Joint Special Operations
Command (JSOC),
230–231
Jojoy, Mono, 175–177, 191
Joyu, Fumihiro, 183
JSOC. See Joint Special
Operations Command
Judicial measures, 105–107
Jus ad bellum, 109
Jus in bello, 109
Kach (Israel), 9
Kahne Chai (Israel), 9
Kansi, Mir Aimal, 162
Karim, Abdul Basit Mahamoud
Addul. See Yousef, Ramzi
Ahmed
Karuna, Colonel, 206
Kasmiri terrorists, 74, 138
Keenan, Brian, 182
Kenya, 3, 142, 144
Khalid bin Waleed camp, 48
Khalid Shaikh Mohommad, 99,
158–168
and Daniel Pearl, 162
and 9/11, 165–168
security measures taken by,
163–164
summary of operations,
161–168
and World Trade Center
bombing (1993), 161–162
Khalifa, Mohommad Jamal,
160
Khattab, Ibn-ul, 61
Khmer Rouge, 90
Khobar Towers truck bomb
(1996), 142
Khrushchev, Nikita, 111
Kidnapping, 69–70
by ASG in the Philippines, 4
chronology of incidents,
135–145
dangers of appeasement,
67–68
by FARC, 193
as fundraising technique, 91,
193
international conventions on,
212
of Italian prime minister
(1978), 70, 137
prevention of ransom
payments, 105
as response to capture of
organization leaders,
184–185
See also Hostage-taking;
Olympic village massacre
(Munich 1972)
KLA. See Kosovo Liberation
Army
Klinghoffer, Leon, 139
Kobbekaduwa, Denzil, 203
Kommando Spezialkraefte
(KSK), 240–241
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA),
53–54, 90
Index
277

KSK. See Kommando
Spezialkraefte
Ku Klux Klan, 8
Kumaratunga, Chandrika, 203
Kurds, 9, 62. See also PKK
Kurkish Workers Party, 183
Kuwait, 160, 170
Land mines, 51–52, 67
Latin America
areas of conflict, 3
drug trafficking, 123–124,
126–127
lack of cooperation between
countries, 127
lack of security, 121
money laundering, 126
Muslim population in, 125
terrorism facilitated by
conditions in, 123–127
terrorist organizations based
on ideology in, 8
See also specific countries
Leaders of terrorist
organizations, 147–183
Al Qaeda, 149–174
effects of capture, 184–185
effects of leadership change,
183–184
general profile, 148–149
Hamas, 177–179
and international courts, 185
Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE), 179–181,
199
martyrdom of, 185
Provisional Irish Republican
Army (PIRA), 181–183
Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia (FARC),
174–177
Lebanon
Beirut embassy truck bomb
(1983), 137
Beirut Marine barracks
bombing (1983), 138
kidnapping of Soviet
diplomats (1985), 139
as region of low-intensity
conflict, 3
terrorism supported by, 11
terrorist training centers, 43
See also Hezbollah
Left-wing ideologies, 8, 11, 36.
See also Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC)
Legal issues in counterterrorism,
99–102
Letter bombs, 50
Liberal democracies, role in
support for terrorism,
86–87
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE), 196
aid from Ukraine, 54
and Al Qaeda, 143
anti-aircraft missiles, 76
assassination of Indira
Gandhi, 74, 138
assassination of Rajiv
Gandhi, 196, 200–201
assassination of Ranasignhe
Premadasa, 196, 203
Central Bank bombing (1996),
141, 196
chemical weapons, 39, 59
chronology of incidents,
203–204
drug trafficking, 92
and dual technologies, 57
ethnic cleansing by, 4
as ethnonationalist group, 9
financing of, 94, 204–205
leadership of, 179–181
links to other groups, 143,
205
maritime terrorism, 78, 81, 82
278
Index

and marriage, 198
profile of, 195–206
recruitment techniques, 198
sophisticated technology of,
15
suicide attacks, 47, 196,
198–199, 200
tactics of, 196–199
training of members, 43, 47
See also Sea Tigers
Libya
aid to PIRA, 54
hostages, 68
Lockerbie bombing (1988),
32, 74, 118, 139
retaliation for U.S. bombing
of, 74
terrorism supported by, 11
West Berlin nightclub
bombing (1986), 139
Lloyds Maritime Intelligence
Group, 84
Lobbying by organizations,
96–97
Lockerbie bombing (1988), 32,
74, 118, 139
London
Bishopsgate bombing (1993),
140
Canary Wharf bombing
(1996), 141–142
planned Sarin attack on
underground (2001), 143
Princes Gate siege (1980), 137
LTTE. See Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam
Lufthansa Flight LH181
hijacking, 136
MAI. See Multilateral
Agreement on Investment
Maktab al Khidimat il
mujahidin al Arab (MaK),
152–153
Malaysia, and maritime
terrorism, 78
Manchester City bombing
(1996), 142
Marin, Pedro Antonio
(Marulanda Vélez,
Manuel), 174–176, 184, 191
Marine barracks bombing
(Beirut 1983), 138
Maritime Intelligence Group, 84
Maritime terrorism, 77–84
Achille Lauro seizure (1985),
139
hijacking, 69
international conventions on,
213–214
training for, 47
USS Cole attack (2000), 47,
77–79, 143
See also Sea Tigers
Marquez, Iván, 192
Marriage, 155, 198
Martyrdom, 106, 112, 178, 185
Marulanda Vélez, Manuel,
174–176, 184, 191
Marxist-Leninist ideology. See
Left-wing ideologies
Master, Moorthy, 201–202
Maududi, Sayed Abdul A'la, 45
McGuinness, Martin, 182
McKevitt, Mickey, 182
McVeigh, Timothy, 119, 141
Mecca. See Grand Mosque
hostage-taking (1979)
Media
and counterterrorism,
116–120
and government
overreaction, 30
and hostage situations, 68
and Olympic village
massacre (Munich 1972),
136
Mendoza, Rodolfo, 163
Index
279

Mercenaries, 43
Mexico, 3, 68, 189, 193
Middle East, areas of conflict, 3.
See also specific countries
Al-Mihdar, Khalid, 165–166
Military, 107–110
dangers of military response,
109–110
definition of military security,
120
types of military responses,
107–109
and war model of
counterterrorism, 101,
107–110
See also specific countries
Mines, 51–52
MIPT. See National Memorial
Institute for the
Prevention of Terrorism
Mista'Aravim, 241
Mobility of terrorists, 91,
113–114, 125–127
Model training, 47
Models for counterterrorism
responses, 100–102
Mohommad, Ali (Al Qaeda
military instructor), 43
Money laundering, 92, 124, 126
Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation (1971), 211
Moorthy, Major, 201–202
Moral issues in
counterterrorism, 99–102,
112, 130–132
Moro, Aldo, 70, 137
Morocco, 145
Moscow theater seizure (2001),
144
Mossad, 70, 241–242
Moussaoui, Zacarias, 21–22, 44,
58
Mozambique, 90
MPLA (Angola), 90
MRTA. See Tupac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement
Mubarak, Nasir, 160
al Muhajir, Abullah, 59
Mujahedin
U.S. sponsorship of, 43, 76, 90
use of explosives, 51
Multilateral Agreement on
Investment (MAI), 34
Munich Olympics (1972), 40, 49,
70, 118, 135
Murad, Abdul Hakim, 75, 160,
170
Muralitharan, Vinayagamoorthi,
206
Myanmar, 3
Nairobi embassy bombing
(1998), 142
Nambia, 90
Naouar, Nizar, 168
National Infrastructure Protection
Center (NIPC), 231–232
National Intelligence Council
(NIC), 232
National Intelligence Officers
(NIO), 232–233
National Islamic Front, 90
National Liberation Army
(ELN), 194
drug trafficking, 92
hostage-taking, 68
links to other groups, 126
sabotage by, 4
National Memorial Institute for
the Prevention of
Terrorism (MIPT), 246–247
National Security Agency
(NSA), 168, 233
National Security Council
(NSC), 234
National Socialist Party, 8
280
Index

National Terrorist Asset Tracking
Center (NTAC), 234
National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola
(UNITA), 76, 90, 184
Nationalist terrorism, 9
NATO. See North Atlantic
Treaty Organization
Naval Special Warfare
Development Group
(NSWDG), 235–236
NBC weapons. See Chemical-
biological-radiological-
nuclear (CBRN) weapons
Negotiation, 102–103
and counterpropaganda, 115
difficulties with
extremist/religious
groups, 129
effectiveness with different
types of groups, 129–130
as stalling tactic, 103, 176,
182–183
Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage of
Capitalism (Nkrumah), 35
Neo-Nazi groups, 8–9
Neocolonialism, 35–36
Nepal Maoists, 8, 184
Nerve agents, 61
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 141
New Peoples Army (NPA), 8
New York City
and maritime terrorism, 80
uranium-235 in water supply
(1981), 63
See also 9/11; World Trade
Center bombing (1993)
NIC. See National Intelligence
Council
Nicaragua, 90
Nichols, Terry, 141
Nightstalkers. See SOAR (160th
Special Operations
Aviation Regiment)
9/11, 143–144
bin Laden's intentions, 165
and cyclical relation between
terrorism and
counterterrorism, 40–41
as “Holy Tuesday”, 162
and Internet, 167
long-term indoctrination for
9/11 recruits, 21, 44
planning of, 155, 165–168
NIO. See National Intelligence
Officers
NIPC. See National
Infrastructure Protection
Center
Nkrumah, Kwame, 35
Nongovernmental
organizations, 95
North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO),
250–252
Northern Ireland
amnesties, 103
and cyclical relation between
terrorism and
counterterrorism, 41
ethnonationalist groups in, 9
intelligence agencies, 112
judicial system, 107
and legitimate businesses
used to fund terrorism, 95
military, 108, 110
Omagh bombing (1998), 105,
143
prisoners in, 106
reasons for joining a terrorist
group in, 17
Remembrance Day bombing
(1987), 139
See also Continuity Irish
Republican Army (CIRA);
Provisional Irish
Republican Army (PIRA);
Real IRA (RIRA)
Index
281

Nosair, Sayeed, 43
NPA. See New Peoples Army
NSA. See National Security
Agency
NSC. See National Security
Council
NSWDG. See Naval Special
Warfare Development
Group
NTAC. See National Terrorist
Asset Tracking Center
Nuclear weapons, 62–63. See also
Chemical-biological-
radiological-nuclear
(CBRN) weapons
O'Bradaigh, Ruairi, 182
Ocalan, Abdullah, 184
O'Callaghan, Sean, 26
Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC), 234–235
Oil industry, 35, 214
Oklahoma City bombing (1995),
9, 119, 141
Olympic bombing (Atlanta
1996), 142
Olympic village massacre
(Munich 1972), 40, 49, 70,
118, 135–136
Omagh bombing (1998), 105,
143
Omar Sheikh, Ahmed Saeed,
48–49, 68
Omnibus Diplomatic Security
and Antiterrorism Act
(1986), 213
160th Special Operations
Aviation Regiment
(SOAR), 237
Oplan Bojinka, 162, 171–172
Organized crime, 85, 91–93,
121–122, 193. See also Drug
trafficking; Fraud; Human
trafficking
Origins of Terrorism (Post), 14
Oslo Accords, 214–215
Overreaction, dangers of, 30–31
PA. See Palestinian Authority
Pakistan
Americans killed in, 162
assassination attempt on
Prime Minister Bhutto,
160, 162, 171
and decolonization, 33
Inter-Services-Intelligence
(ISI), 152
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 159–160
and MaK, 152
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
Special Services Group (SSG),
49
state-sponsored terrorism, 90
weapons stockpiles, 55
Palestinian Authority (PA), 82
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ), 9
aided by Hezbollah, 50
effects of leadership change,
184
explosive devices, 53
nationalist dimension of, 11
violence relative to other
Palestinian groups, 10
Palestinian Liberation Front
(PLF). See Achille Lauro
seizure (1985)
Palestinian Liberation
Organization (PLO), 10, 90
Palestinian organizations (not
listed above). See Black
September Organization
(BSO); Hamas; Popular
Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PFLP)
Pan Am Flight 73 hijacking
(1986), 139
282
Index

Pan Am Lockerbie bombing. See
Lockerbie bombing (1988)
Panama, 126
Paraguay
drug trafficking, 123–124, 190
and FARC, 126, 190
Muslim population in, 125
Paris Aid Group, 96
Pastrana, Andres, 192, 194
Patriot Act (2001), 216
Peace process
in Colombia, 195
as stalling tactic, 103, 176,
182–183
See also Negotiation
Pearl, Daniel, 48, 68, 162
Peoples War Group (PWG), 8
Peramuna, Janatha Virmukthi,
183
Perdilla, Jose, 59
Peres, Shimon, 141
Peru
and FARC, 126, 190
Japanese ambassador's
residence seizure (1996),
142
military, 110
Muslim population in, 125
as region of low-intensity
conflict, 3
PFLP. See Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine
PGP. See Pretty good privacy
Philippines
and Al Qaeda, 160–161
and bin Laden, 154
hostage-taking, 68
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 160
and maritime terrorism, 78
and Ramzi Ahmed Yousef,
171–172
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
See also Abu Sayyaf Group
(ASG); New Peoples Army
(NPA)
PIJ. See Palestinian Islamic
Jihad
PIRA. See Provisional Irish
Republican Army
Pirated software, CDs, etc., 205
PKK (Kurdish group), 9, 11
capture of leader, 184
financial fraud, 94
human trafficking, 92
Soviet support for, 90
Plague, 60, 61
PLF. See Achille Lauro seizure
(1985)
PLO. See Palestinian Liberation
Organization
Police, 70, 114–115. See also
specific countries
POLISARIO (Western Sahara),
80, 90
Political security, defined,
120–121
Politico-religious terrorism,
9–10, 36–37
Pope, plot against, 171, 173
Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine
(PFLP), 10, 47
El Al hijacking (1968), 33, 40,
72, 135
hijacking of 1976, 136
hijackings of 1970, 135
TWA hijacking (1969), 135
Portugal, and maritime
terrorism, 80
Prabhakaran, Velupillai,
179–181, 199–201,
205–206
Premadasa, Ranasinghe, 196
Pretty good privacy (PGP), 57
Princes Gate siege (1980), 137
Prison, 106
Index
283

Profiles of terrorists
different profiles for different
terrorist roles, 147–148
leader profiles, 148–149. See
also Leaders of terrorist
organizations
Propaganda, 112
and recruitment to terrorist
organizations, 16–18, 23
See also Counterpropaganda;
Media
Prosecution of terrorists, 106
Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Fixed Platforms
Located on the
Continental Shelf (1988),
214
Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts of Violence
at Airports Serving
International Civil
Aviation (1988), 213
Provisional Irish Republican
Army (PIRA)
aid from Libya, 54
Belfast bombing (1972), 135
Bishopsgate bombing (1993),
140
Brighton bombing (1984), 138
Canary Wharf bombing
(1996), 141–142
and intelligence agencies, 112
leadership of, 149, 181–183
links to other groups, 126
Manchester City bombing
(1996), 142
Omagh bombing (1998), 105,
143
payment for full-time
members, 23
Remembrance Day bombing
(1987), 139
weakened by U.S-UK
security cooperation,
87–88
Psychology of terrorists, 14–15
Publicity. See
Counterpropaganda;
Media; Propaganda
Punitive measures aimed at
supporters, 104–105
PWG. See Peoples War Group
Qatar, 161
Qutb, Sayed, 45
Rabin, Yitzhak, 141, 215
Racketeering, 91
Radiological weapons, 62–63.
See also Chemical-
biological-radiological-
nuclear (CBRN) weapons
Rahman, Omar Abdel (the Blind
Sheikh), 153, 157, 185
Ramos, Fidel V., 172
RAND Corporation, 5, 247
Ransom, payment of, 68, 69
Rapoport, David, 117
Al-Rashidi, Ali, 47, 157
Rational Choice Theory, 15–16
Real IRA (RIRA), 9, 182
Recruitment of terrorists, 16–24,
198
helped by government
overreaction, 30–31
Red Brigades, 25, 70, 137
Reid, Richard, 53, 77, 162
Reinares, Fernando, 111
Religious terrorism, 9–10, 36–37
Remembrance Day bombing
(1987), 139
Retaliatory responses, 107–109
Revenge, 17, 161
Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC)
drug trafficking, 12, 92,
189–190, 194
284
Index

extortion by, 4
finances of, 189, 193
hostage-taking, 68
ideology of, 8
leadership of, 174–177, 184,
191–192
links to other groups, 126,
191, 193–194
operations throughout Latin
America, 126
profile of, 189–195
tactics of, 193, 194
Revolutionary Guards, 43–44
Revolutionary Nuclei, 8
Revolutionary Organization 17
November, 8
Revolutionary People's
Liberation Party (DHKP-
C), 8, 71
Revolutionary United Force of
Sierra Leone (RUF), 4
Reyes, Raúl, 192
Ridge, Tom, 186–187
Al-Ridi, Essam, 58
Right-wing groups, 8–9, 39
Riots, sticks and stones used
during, 30
RIRA. See Real IRA
Riyadh suicide attack (2003),
145
Robbery, armed, 91
RUF. See Revolutionary United
Force of Sierra Leone
Russia
Alpha Units, 144, 243
and arms trafficking, 193–194
cesium-137 device in Moscow
park, 63
Moscow theater seizure
(2001), 144
use of biological weapons, 61
See also Al Ansar Mujahedin;
Chechen terrorists
Rwanda, 3
SABENA airlines Flight 517
hijacking, 73
Sabotage, 4, 36, 41–42
Sadat, Anwar, 137
Salafi school of Islam, 44–45, 158
Salafia Jihadia, 145
Salameh, Muhammad, 171
Salman Farsi camp, 48
Salmonella, 60
SAMs, 76–77
Sands, Bobby, 106
Sangillan Force, 205
Santiago, Carol, 173
Sarin gas, 60
plans for London
underground attack
(2001), 143
Tokyo subway attack (1995),
10, 38, 57, 141
SAS. See Special Air Service
Saudi Arabia
bin Laden expelled from, 155
and bin Laden's intentions
during 9/11, 165
Grand Mosque hostage-
taking (1979), 137
Khobar Towers truck bomb
(1996), 142
Riyadh suicide attack (2003),
145
U.S. troops based in, 154
Savimbi, Jonas, 184
Sayaret Mat'Kal, 242
SBS. See Special Boat Service
Schengen agreement, 113
Scotland
Centre for the Study of
Terrorism and Political
Violence (CSTPV), 5
Lockerbie bombing (1988),
32, 74, 118, 139
Sea Tigers, 15, 47, 81, 198,
201–202, 204
Secret Service, 236
Index
285

Security companies, and
mercenaries, 43
Security, types of, 120–122
Selvam, Tamil, 199
Sendero Luminoso. See Shining
Path
Sentencing of terrorists, 106
September 11, 2001. See 9/11
Servizio Informazioni Difesa
(SID), 112
Sex trade. See Human trafficking
Shah, Wali Khan Amin, 170
al-Shaikh, Zahid, 169
Shakur, Abdul, 160, 171
Shallah, Ramadan, 184
Shanthi Bahini rebels, 88
al Shehhi, Marwan, 165–166
Sheikh, Ahmed Saeed Omar, 185
Al Shibh, Ramzi Bin, 163–168
Shigenobu, Fusako, 183
Shining Path, 8, 183, 190
Shiqaqi, Fathi, 184
Shoe bomb on Flight AA63
(2001), 53, 77
SID. See Servizio Informazioni
Difensa
Sierra Leone, 3, 68. See also
Revolutionary United
Force of Sierra Leone
(RUF)
Sikh separatists, 138
Singapore, 5, 78
Single-issue terrorism, 10–11
Sinn Fein, 106, 149. See also
Adams, Gerry
Sipah-e-Sahaba, 170
Skinheads, 9
Sky marshals, 73
Slavery. See Human trafficking
Smallpox, 60
Smuggling, 82, 91. See also
Diamond smuggling;
Drug trafficking; Human
trafficking
SOAR (160th Special
Operations Aviation
Regiment), 237
Socialization of terrorists, 22–24.
See also Indoctrination
Societal security, defined,
120–121
Somalia, 3, 118, 154
South Africa, 3, 90
Soviet Union
and Afghanistan, 10, 153
diplomats kidnapped in
Beirut (1985), 139
state-sponsored terrorism, 90
Soviet Union, former states of, 3,
55. See also Russia
Spain, 112, 138. See also Basque
Fatherland and Liberty
(ETA)
Special Air Service (SAS), 108,
137, 243–244
Special Boat Service (SBS), 244
Special Services Group (SSG),
49
SPLA. See Sudanese Peoples
Liberation Army
Sri Lanka
assassination attempt on
President Kumaratunga,
203
assassination of President
Premadasa, 196, 203
Central Bank bombing (1996),
141, 196, 203
and decolonization, 33
ethnonationalist groups in, 9
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
Temple of the Tooth bombing
(1998), 196
See also Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
SSG. See Special Services
Group
286
Index

State Department
Counterterrorism Finance
and Designation (CFD)
Unit, 237
State Department
Counterterrorism Office,
187–188
State-sponsored terrorism,
10–11, 37
decline in, 90
and financing, 85, 89–90
and Libya, 74
and maritime terrorism,
82–83
training provided to foreign
terrorist groups, 43–44
Statistics on fatalities, 2, 10
Sudan
and bin Laden, 154–155
missile strikes against
pharmaceutical company,
109, 142
as region of high-intensity
conflict, 3
terrorism supported by, 11
Sudanese Peoples Liberation
Army (SPLA), 90
Sufaat, Yazid, 79
Suicide, committed by terrorists
with no way to exit
organizations, 25
Suicide missions, 70–72
assassinations, 65
chronology of incidents,
137–145
equipment for, 71
and Hamas, 140, 178
indoctrination for, 13–14
and LTTE, 47, 196, 198–199,
200
training for, 45
SWAPO (Nambia), 90
Synagogue bombing in Djerba
(2002), 83
Syria, terrorism supported by,
11
Tactics. See Terrorist tactics
Takfir Wal-Hajira Sect, 137
Tambi. See Prabhakaran,
Velupillai
Tamil Co-coordinating
Committee (TCC), 199
Tamil Eelam Society of Canada
(TES), 205
Tamil Refugee Housing
Association (TRHA), 205
Tamil Rehabilitation
Organization (TRO), 205
Tamil Tigers. See Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE)
Tanzania, 3, 142
Target-hardening measures, 64
TATP explosive, 53
TCC. See Tamil Co-coordinating
Committee
TCHA, 205
Technical Support Working
Group (TSWG), 238–239
Technology
dual technologies, 56–57, 61
and increasing lethality of
terrorist acts, 38
R&D wings of terrorist
groups, 15
Temple of the Tooth bombing
(1998), 196
Terrorism, 10–11
cyclical relation between
terrorism and
counterterrorism, 40–41,
71–73
definitions of, 4–9
domestic vs. international, 5,
6
ethnonationalist terrorism, 9
history, 32–41
Index
287

Terrorism (cont.)
ideological terrorism, 8–9
politico-religious terrorism,
9–10
state-sponsored terrorism,
10–11, 37
trends in international and
domestic terrorism, 37
types and causes of, 8–13,
33–37
Terrorism (Clark), 18
Terrorist acts
chronology of incidents,
135–145, 203–204
copycat acts, 63–64, 78, 82–83
current threat, 2–3
geographical distribution of,
3
increasing lethality of, 37–38
statistics on fatalities, 2, 10
tendency of certain acts to
become fashionable, 63–64
See also Armed assault;
Assassination; Aviation
terrorism; Bombing;
Hostage-taking;
Kidnapping; Maritime
terrorism; Suicide
missions; specific countries
and groups
The Terrorist Handbook, 48, 50,
147–148
Terrorist organizations, 18
anarchist groups, 10
“back-stabbing” atmosphere
of, 25, 180
conscription by, 17
diaspora/migrant networks,
87–89
effects of leadership change,
183–184
ethnonationalist groups, 9
factors inhibiting exit from,
26–28
financing of, 84–97
humanitarian/charitable
dimension of, 20, 97, 178
ideological groups, 8–9
and Internet, 40
liberal democracies as hosts
for support infrastructure,
86–87
links to other groups,
125–126, 126, 191, 193–194,
205
lobbying by, 96–97
and the media, 116–120
motives for wanting to leave,
24–26
noncriminal infrastructures,
85
and “ordinary” crime, 4
politico-religious groups,
9–10
and porosity of borders, 91.
See also Mobility of
terrorists
propaganda by, 16–18
recruitment techniques,
16–24
single-issue groups, 10–11
state-sponsored groups,
10–11
training manuals, 147–148
violence of Islamist groups,
10
See also Terrorist acts;
Terrorist tactics; Terrorists;
Weapons
Terrorist tactics, 63–84
ambush, 67
armed assault, 66–67
assassinations, 64–67
aviation terrorism, 72–77
cease-fires used for
regrouping/rearming, 103,
176, 182–183
FARC tactics, 193, 194
288
Index

goals of, 63–64
hostage-taking, 67–68
kidnapping, 69–70
LTTE tactics, 196–199
maritime terrorism, 77–84
suicide missions, 70–72
tendency of certain acts to
become fashionable,
63–64
use of threats, 64
Terrorists
amnesty for, 103
“bridge burning”, 22–24
commitment tested, 23–24
conscription of, 17
different profiles for different
terrorist roles, 147–148
extradition of, 105
factors inhibiting exit from
organizations, 22, 26–28
“freedom fighters”, 7
inclusion and socialization of,
22–24
indoctrination of recruits,
13–14, 20–24, 44–45
misconceptions about, 1–2
motives for joining a terrorist
group, 13–19
motives for wanting to leave
a terrorist group, 24–26
prosecution of, 106
psychological theories, 14–15
recruitment of, 16–24
sentencing of, 106
suicide by, 25
training of, 42–49
See also Leaders of terrorist
organizations
TES. See Tamil Eelam Society of
Canada
Thatcher, Margaret, 117, 119,
138
Tirofijo (“Sure Shot”), 191. See
also Marin, Pedro Antonio
Tokcan, Muhammad, 69
Tokyo Convention on Offenses
and Certain Other Acts
Committed on Board
Aircraft (1970), 211
Tokyo subway attack (1995), 10,
38, 57, 141
Torture, 99–100
Training for terrorists, 42–49
different levels of, 45–47
factors facilitating training,
43–44
flight training, 76
military/police experience of
recruits, 47
model training, 47
training centers, 43, 48
Training manuals for terrorists,
43, 147–148
Afghan Jihad Encyclopedia,
47–48, 51, 59, 147
availability of U.S. military
field manuals, 43
Declaration of Jihad Against the
Country's Tyrants, 48, 148
Mujahideen ki Lalkaar, 79
The Terrorist Handbook, 48, 50,
147–148
Trains, hijacking of, 136
TRHA. See Tamil Refugee
Housing Association
TRO. See Tamil Rehabilitation
Organization
TSWG. See Technical Support
Working Group
Tunisia, Djerba bombing (2002),
83
Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
Movement (MRTA), 8, 142
Al-Turabi, Hasan, 90
Turkey
ethnonationalist groups in, 9
left-wing groups in, 8
suicide attacks, 71
Index
289

Turkey (cont.)
support for Chechen groups,
90
See also PKK (Kurdish group)
TWA hijacking (1969), 135
Uganda, 3, 136
U.K. Terrorism Act 2000, 6
Ukraine, and aid to LTTE, 54
ULFA. See United Liberation
Front of Assam
UN Convention on the
Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes
against Internationally
Protected Persons,
Including Diplomatic
Agents (1973), 212
UN conventions, 93, 211–216
UN International Convention
for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism
(1999), 216
UN Resolution 1373, 211
UN Terrorism Prevention
Branch, 5
UN-TPB. See United Nations
Terrorism Prevention
Branch
Unabomber, 141
Unemployment, 20, 35
UNITA. See National Union for
the Total Independence of
Angola
United Kingdom
asylum laws, 143
Bishopsgate bombing (1993),
140
Brighton bombing (1984), 138
Canary Wharf bombing
(1996), 141–142
Commanchio, 214
Lockerbie bombing (1988),
32, 74, 118, 139
and LTTE, 197, 199, 205
Manchester City bombing
(1996), 142
planned London
underground attack
(2001), 143
police, 114
Princes Gate siege (1980),
137
Special Air Service (SAS),
108, 137, 243–244
Special Boat Service (SBS),
244
and support/financing for
terrorism, 89
U.K. Terrorism Act 2000, 6
See also Northern Ireland
United Liberation Front of
Assam (ULFA), 205
United Nations, credibility of,
109
United Nations Terrorism
Prevention Branch (UN-
TPB), 252
United Racist Front, 8
United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia (AUC), 8–9, 68
United States
Atlanta Olympics bombing
(1996), 142
availability of U.S. military
field manuals, 43
hostages in Iran (1979), 10,
67, 137
kidnapping in, 70
and maritime terrorism, 80
Oklahoma City bombing
(1995), 9, 119, 141
politico-religious groups in,
9
Rajneeshee Sect, 60
right-wing groups in, 8–9
state-sponsored terrorism, 43,
76, 90
290
Index

and support/financing for
terrorism, 85–86, 89
U.S.-U.K. cooperation, 87–88
USS Cole attack (2000), 47,
77–79, 143
See also Hijacking; 9/11;
World Trade Center
bombing (1993)
Universalist approach to
counterterrorism, 100, 101
University of St. Andrews, 5
Uribe, Alvaro, 194
U.S. Antiterrorism and Effective
Death Penalty Act
(AEDPA; 1996), 215
U.S. Coast Guard, 84
USS Cole attack (2000), 47,
77–79, 143
USS The Sullivans, 47, 78
Utilitarian approach to
counterterrorism, 99–100,
101
Uzbekistan. See Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan
Vehicle bombing, 66
chronology of incidents,
137–145
shift from small car to large
truck bombs, 38
Venezuela
and FARC, 126, 192–193
Muslim population in, 125
VX (nerve agent), 61, 62
Wahabi school of Islam, 158
War economies, 19, 28
War model of counterterrorism,
101–102, 107–110
Water supply, attacks on, 63
Weapons
dual technologies, 56–57
explosive devices, 50–54
firearms, 54–56
weapons of mass destruction.
See Chemical-biological-
radiological-nuclear
(CBRN) weapons
widespread availability of,
54–55
West
and arms market, 55
liberal democracies as hosts
for terrorist support
infrastructure, 86–87
and neocolonialism, 35–36
See also specific countries
West Berlin nightclub bombing
(1986), 139
Whitelaw, William, 181
Wijeweera, Rohan, 183, 184
Wilkinson, Paul, 77, 101, 107,
113, 117, 119–120
Women, as suicide bombers,
200, 203
World Islamic League, 152
World Tamil Association (WTA),
205
World Tamil Co-coordinating
Committee (WTCC),
199–200
World Tamil Movement (WTM),
205
World Trade Center bombing
(1993), 52, 140
original plan for, 66, 161–162
and Ramzi Ahmed Yousef,
168, 170–171
WTA. See World Tamil
Association
WTCC. See World Tamil Co-
coordinating Committee
WTM. See World Tamil
Movement
YA'MA'M. See Yechida
Meyuchedet Le'Milchama
Baterror
Index
291

Yasin, Abdul Rahman, 170
Yasin, Musab, 170
Yassin, Sheikh Ahmed, 177–179
Yechida Meyuchedet
Le'Milchama Baterror
(YA'MA'M), 242–243
Yemen
and bin Laden, 153–154
hostage-taking, 68
USS Cole attack (2000), 47,
77–79, 143
Yousef, Ramzi Ahmed, 168–174
arrest of, 173–174
injuries, 52, 171
and Khalid Shaikh
Mohommad, 160, 161
kidnappings in response to
capture of, 185
plans for aviation terrorism,
74–75
and World Trade Center
bombing (1993), 66,
161–162, 168, 170–171
Youth. See Adolescents,
recruitment of; Children,
as suicide bombers
Zaire, 61
Al-Zawahiri, Ayman
Muhammad, 19–20, 151,
156–158
Al-Zayyat, Muntasir, 157
Zubeidah, Abu, 163, 185
292
Index

About the Authors
Graeme C. S. Steven has both practical and theoretical expe-
rience with counterterrorism in the private and public sector. He
is a research associate at the Centre for the Study of Terrorism and
Political Violence at the University of St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland,
specializing in counterterrorism, tri-border areas, the role of in-
telligence in counterterrorism, threat assessment, suicide-
bombers, terrorist financing, and profiling terrorist groups. He is
currently writing his Ph.D. on the motivations behind joining,
supporting, and leaving terrorist groups and the implications for
security policy and practice.
Dr. Rohan Gunaratna has twenty years of policy, opera-
tional, and academic experience in counterterrorism. He is head,
International Centre for Political Violence and Terrorism Re-
search at the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies in Singa-
pore; senior fellow, Combating Terrorism Center at the United
States Military Academy at West Point; and honorary fellow, In-
ternational Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism in Israel. At
the invitation of the UN Monitoring Group, he led the specialist
team that designed and built the UN database on the mobility, fi-
nance, and weapons of Al Qaeda, Taliban, and their entities. He
is author of eight books including Inside Al Qaeda: Global Network
of Terror (2002), an international bestseller. He chairs the NATO-
Partnership for Peace Working Group on Counter Terrorism.
293

