Denise Sutherland
Syndicated puzzle author
Mark E. Koltko-Rivera, PhD
MM, 32°, KT
Foreword by Christopher Hodapp 32°
Author, Freemasons For Dummies
•  Expose conspiracies like the 
characters do in Dan Brown’s The 
Lost Symbol 
•  Decipher cryptic puzzles
•  Understand the role coded 
messages play in secret societies
•  Use encrypted alphabets to 
unveil secrets of the past
Learn to:
Cracking Codes
 & Cryptograms
Making Everything Easier!™

Start with FREE Cheat Sheets
Cheat Sheets include
 
• Checklists
 
• Charts
 
• Common Instructions
 
• And Other Good Stuff!
Get Smart at Dummies.com 
Dummies.com makes your life easier with 1,000s 
of answers on everything from removing 
wallpaper to using the latest version of 
Windows. 
Check out our
 
• Videos
 
• Illustrated Articles
 
• Step-by-Step Instructions
Plus, each month you can win valuable prizes 
by entering our Dummies.com sweepstakes. *
Want a weekly dose of Dummies? Sign up for 
Newsletters on
 
• Digital Photography
 
• Microsoft Windows & Office
 
• Personal Finance & Investing
 
• Health & Wellness
 
• Computing, iPods & Cell Phones
 
• eBay
 
• Internet
 
• Food, Home & Garden
Find out “HOW” at Dummies.com
*Sweepstakes not currently available in all countries; 
visit Dummies.com for official rules.
Get More and Do More at Dummies.com®
To access the Cheat Sheet created specifically for this book, 
go to www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/crackingcodescryptograms 

Cracking Codes & 
Cryptograms
FOR
DUMmIES
‰
by Denise Sutherland 
Syndicated puzzle author
by Mark E. Koltko-Rivera, PhD
MM, 32°, KT
Foreword by Chris Hodapp
Author and coauthor of
Freemasons For Dummies
The Templar Code For Dummies
Conspiracy Theories & Secret Societies For Dummies

Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies®
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2010 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, 
except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without 
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appro-
priate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to 
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-
6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference 
for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com, 
Making Everything Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries, and may not be used 
without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley 
Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE 
NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETE-
NESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. 
THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITU-
ATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT 
ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PRO-
FESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL 
PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE 
FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS 
REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER 
INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE 
INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT 
MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN 
THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRIT-
TEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care 
Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009937275 
ISBN: 978-0-470-59100-0
Manufactured in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

About the Authors
Denise Sutherland is an Australian puzzle writer. She has stud-
ied science, music, art, and graphic design, which helps no end 
when it comes to writing puzzles of all kinds. She is the author 
of Word Searches For Dummies, amongst other books, and is 
syndicated through Auspac Media. She lives in Canberra, the 
Australian capital, with her husband and kids.  
When not puzzling, Denise can be found knitting obsessively 
and reading murder mysteries.
Mark E. Koltko-Rivera, PhD, is a writer who lives with his wife 
Kathleen in New York City. Mark is a 32° Scottish Rite 
Freemason, and a Knight Templar in the York Rite of 
Freemasonry. He wrote Discovering the Lost Symbol: The Mind 
of Dan Brown, the Truth About the Freemasons, and the Idea that 
We Can Become Gods, as well as Freemasonry: An Introduction, 
and the chapter on Freemasonry in Dan Burstein’s book, 
Secrets of The Lost Symbol. Mark thanks Christopher Hodapp 
for recommending him for this project.


Dedication
Denise dedicates the book to the memory of Tony Newell, 
1943–2009.
Av znkx, deiirnkx, mih askx oscrib eiqon, xmpni zndsgn lrk 
xran zv onepmnarm. Ksgnov arkknh.
Mark dedicates the book to Brittany, who likes to figure 
things out.
68.40.27.55.66.37  29.91.99.68.98  68.27.46  40.27.05.34.37  3
0.68.03.99  34.91.60.37  29.03.66.55.55.68.27.98  60.37.03.98  
30.40.05.41

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments at http://dummies.
custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our Customer Care Department 
within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Acquisitions and Editorial
Project Editor: Sarah Faulkner
Acquisitions Editor: Tracy Boggier
Assistant Editor: Erin Calligan Mooney
Editorial Program Coordinator: 
Joe Niesen
Editorial Manager: Christine Meloy Beck
Editorial Assistants: Jennette ElNaggar, 
David Lutton
Cartoons: Rich Tennant 
(www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Kristie Rees
Layout and Graphics: Carrie A. Cesavice, 
Joyce Haughey, Erin Zeltner
Proofreader: Melissa D. Buddendeck
 
Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher, Consumer Dummies
Kristin Ferguson-Wagstaffe, Product Development Director, Consumer Dummies
Ensley Eikenburg, Associate Publisher, Travel
Kelly Regan, Editorial Director, Travel
Publishing for Technology Dummies
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher, Dummies Technology/General User
Composition Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

Contents at a Glance
Foreword ..........................................................ix
Introduction ...................................................... 1
Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies .............. 7
Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms .................. 9
Chapter 2: Cracking the Codes .............................................................. 21
Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, 
and Cryptogram Puzzles .................................. 47
Chapter 3: Solving Three Conspiracies ................................................ 49
Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms ....................................... 95
Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms .................................. 123
Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms ................................... 155
Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers ........................................................ 177
Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers ................................................................. 197
Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers.............................................................. 219
Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes ............................................................... 235
Chapter 11: Assorted Ciphers ............................................................. 251
Chapter 12: Anagrams and Cryptic Clues .......................................... 261
Chapter 13: Double Level Puzzles ....................................................... 269
Part III: Hints and Answers 
to the Cryptos and Codes ............................... 277
Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles...... 279
Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles ..................... 295
Appendix: Historical Background to the Conspiracy Stories .......... 323


Foreword
I
 believe it was Sherlock Holmes who once said, “Why, look, 
Watson! It’s a simple English schoolboy’s code! Quick, get 
me a simple English schoolboy!” Okay, maybe he didn’t actu-
ally say that.
Puzzles frustrate me. They always have. I have a tendency to 
stare at puzzles, cryptograms, and coded writing until beads 
of blood form on my forehead. I would have made a lousy 
Batman — I would have let the Riddler flood Gotham City or 
rob Fort Knox of its gold, because there was no way I was 
about to decipher one of his riddled clues. There I would have 
sat in the Bat Cave, with beads of blood forming on my cowl.
Cryptograms and secret codes have existed for centuries — 
there is evidence of coded writing dating back to the ancient 
Egyptians. Everyone, from kings and generals to criminal 
masterminds and 8th-grade study-hall cheaters, have sought 
ways to secretly communicate with each other while preventing 
spies, eavesdroppers, and biology teachers from discovering 
their plans. Wars and civilizations have turned on whether codes 
and ciphers were cracked or remained hidden. The outcome of 
World War II hinged on the ability of the British intelligence 
service to decipher messages sent by Nazi Germany’s famed 
“Enigma” machine. The U.S. military used Navajo, Cherokee, 
Choctaw, and Comanche “code talkers” during the war to 
transmit coded messages that were not based on commonly 
known languages and were, therefore, unbreakable.
I hadn’t thought much about coded writing until I became a 
Freemason. Because Masons are forbidden to write down their 
rituals, frustrated members over the last 300 years have sought 
ways to create study guides so they might learn the words with-
out actually breaking the rules. Some have simply written single-
letter ciphers (“AYAM?” would stand for “Are you a Mason?”). 
Others got more complex, using symbols and abbreviations 
cribbed from old-fashioned shorthand (which is its own kind of 
coded writing once known by the most powerful people on 
Earth, secretaries and stenographers, and is today mostly a lost 
art). Still others came up with a whole series of coded alphabets 
that look like an indecipherable collection of right-angle stick 

figures and dots, devised from what is known in code-writing 
world as a Pigpen Cipher. In fact, this type of cipher is the cen-
terpiece of a Masonic degree ritual called the Royal Arch Degree.
This kind of thing would have remained in the realm of a small 
corner of the population if it hadn’t been for Dan Brown and 
his novels. His fictional “symbologist” Robert Langdon took 
the subject out of the realm of tweedy MENSA meetings and 
made it both entertaining and exciting. From his “ambigrams” 
in Angels & Demons and the “cryptex” of The Da Vinci Code to 
the lost symbols of, well, The Lost Symbol, it’s not often that 
arcane, dusty, and obscure knowledge gets to collide head-first 
with mind-exercising fun in one package. It’s like two mutually 
exclusive brains shot out of opposite sides of a particle accel-
erator and squashed into one terrific pile of pages, if your 
stomach can pardon the potentially icky metaphor.
Out of two such colliding brains comes the book you now hold. 
My friend Mark Koltko-Rivera is well-versed in the history, phi-
losophy, symbolism, and methods of secret (and secretive) 
societies. He was hot on the trail of Dan Brown’s clues from 
The Lost Symbol since the day they first appeared on the 
Internet in the summer of 2009, and his online blog entries 
about them were endlessly fascinating, exploring subjects far 
deeper than just the surface answers to the puzzles. Mark has 
a PhD in psychology and has specialized over the years in 
“worldviews,” which are ways in which people make assump-
tions about reality and the effects of those assumptions. That 
makes him uniquely qualified to look at a code or cipher and 
see it differently than others do.
Denise Sutherland is a puzzle designer extraordinaire. Her puz-
zles, word searches, and designs have literally appeared all over 
the world, and she has an endless fascination with words. She is 
able to think differently about the way words can be jumbled 
together. Of course, she lives upside down in Australia and is 
married to an astrophysicist, which can only help when it 
comes to standing complex word combinations on their heads.
The result is a book with which I think you’ll spend many happy 
hours engaged in frustration and surprise. As for me, I have 
every intention of taking this one to the beach. I’ll be easy to 
spot. I’ll be the one in a Batman suit, staring into the book with 
beads of blood forming on my cowl.
Chris Hodapp
Indianapolis
September 2, 2009
Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies 
x

Introduction
You may have picked up this book for any number of rea-
sons. Perhaps you really like trying to crack the codes 
in Dan Brown’s novels. Maybe you liked playing with secret 
decoder rings pulled from boxes of cereal as a kid. Perhaps 
you were the kind of person who as a youngster liked to share 
secret, coded messages with your friends. Then again, you 
may be one of the many adults who likes to exercise your 
brain with the challenge of making and breaking encrypted 
messages. Or maybe you’re just a professional espionage 
agent who’s looking for tips and some recreation. (Hey, it’s a 
tough life. Spies need fun, too.)
In Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies you can find 
fun, recreation, challenges for your brain, and information for 
your mind. The puzzles in this book immerse you in a world 
like the one in Dan Brown’s The Lost Symbol (published by 
Doubleday Books), where conspirators in the United States 
have labored for centuries to keep some secrets hidden dark 
and deep. (But can anything stay secret . . . ?)
About This Book
Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies offers you the 
chance to use cryptography, cipher keys, symbols, and 
codes to reveal the narrative of three conspiracy stories, 
piece by piece and puzzle by puzzle. In this book, you’re the 
symbologist; we give you everything you need to uncover 
the mysteries we set up in Chapter 3, and along the way we 
tell you about the use of codes and cryptograms in the world 
of secret societies.
The great thing is that you can solve the puzzles in this book 
in any order. Do them just for fun at your leisure. Tackle only 
the Easy puzzles (or only the Treacherous puzzles if you 

Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies 
2
dare!). Or work well into the night to decipher all the puzzles 
relating to The Conspiracy of West Point (see Chapter 3 for 
more about this conspiracy). If you get stuck at any point, 
check out the hints in Chapter 14. And don’t forget to check 
your answers against Chapter 15.
Conventions Used in This Book
To make working through this book a little easier for you, we 
set some conventions early on. (We thought about creating a 
secret society and ensuring you were initiated into it before 
we let you in on those conventions, but then we realized that 
hanging you from the ceiling by your ankles as you held burn-
ing candles in each hand could get a little messy, what with 
the drippy wax and all. Just kidding!) Everything you need to 
know is right here:
 
✓ In Chapter 3, we present you with three conspiracy sto-
ries that just happen to have large chunks of text miss-
ing. At the end of each chunk of missing text, we include 
a puzzle number in parentheses. Find that puzzle in 
Part II, solve it, and write the answer into the blanks 
in Chapter 3.
 
✓ All puzzles in this book have a difficulty rating of Easy, 
Tricky, or Treacherous. Use that rating to select your 
preferred level of difficulty, and don’t be afraid to chal-
lenge yourself from time to time!
 
✓ If you get stuck on any puzzle, regardless of difficulty 
level, flip to Chapter 14. There we give you a hint to help 
you solve each puzzle. And don’t worry, the answers are 
in Chapter 15, so you won’t accidentally see the solution 
when you’re looking up the hint. (We would never ruin 
your fun like that!)
 
✓ Although some of the shorter puzzles in this book look 
like they’re easy to solve (and some of the long puzzles 
look downright impossible), remember that length can 
be deceiving! If you don’t have enough room to decipher 
a puzzle on any given page, we recommend using scrap 
paper.

 Introduction
3
What You’re Not to Read
You don’t have to read every single part of this book. (But if 
you’re like us, being told by the powers-that-be that you don’t 
have to read something just ensures that you’ll read it.)
If you’re interested only in solving some fun cryptograms, 
feel free to ignore the fascinating bits of secret society lore in 
Chapter 1. If you already know how to solve all the different 
puzzle varieties in this book, you can skip Chapter 2. And as 
with all books in the For Dummies series, this one includes 
gray-shaded boxes of text (called sidebars) that are filled with 
fun information that’s ultimately inessential to understanding 
the topic at hand.
Foolish Assumptions
As we were writing this book, we made some assumptions 
about you, the reader:
 
✓ The conspiracy stories involve the fraternal group known 
as the Freemasons, but you don’t really need to know 
anything about Freemasonry to enjoy the book and its 
puzzles. If you’re curious about Freemasonry, you may 
want to read some of the books we suggest at the end 
of Chapter 1. While you’re at it, check out Conspiracy 
Theories & Secret Societies For Dummies by Christopher 
Hodapp and Alice Von Kannon (Wiley).
 
✓ We assume you know the most basic concepts involv-
ing the American Revolutionary War and the American 
War between the States (the Civil War). However, if you 
want to discover more about these subjects — well, big 
surprise, we have For Dummies books for that! Consider 
reading U.S. History For Dummies, 2nd Edition, by Steve 
Wiegand, U. S. Military History For Dummies by John C. 
McManus, and The Civil War For Dummies by Keith D. 
Dickson (all published by Wiley).
 
✓ On the puzzle-solving front, we assume only that you’re 
prepared to persevere with these ciphers. Many of them 
are easy to solve, but you may need a few tries to get 
some of them right. 

Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies 
4
 
✓ If you want to discover more about letter frequency 
analysis — a basic skill for solving cryptograms — you 
can delve into coauthor Denise’s book Word Searches 
For Dummies (Wiley). For an academic treatise, try 
Cryptanalysis: A Study of Ciphers and Their Solution by 
Helen Fouché Gaines (Dover).
How This Book Is Organized
This book is divided into three parts. Read on for more 
information about each.
Part I: Code and Cryptogram 
Strategies
We start off by giving you some background information on 
codes and cryptograms, both from an historical perspective 
and from a practical perspective. If you want to know what 
sorts of secret codes were used during World War II, or if 
you want to know how to solve a Caesar Box Cipher, head to 
this part.
Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, 
and Cryptogram Puzzles
This part makes up the majority of the book and includes the 
super-secret conspiracy stories as well as all the puzzles you 
need to solve the stories! Decipher some of the additional 
puzzles to discover some entertaining quotations.
Part III: Hints and Answers 
to the Cryptos and Codes
This part is exactly what it sounds like. Here we give you hints 
and answers for all the puzzles in the book.

 Introduction
5
Icons Used in This Book
We included little pictures in the margins of this book. 
They aren’t a secret code but a way of highlighting certain 
information.
 
The Tip icon clues you in on how to solve a puzzle or other-
wise work more efficiently.
 
The Remember icon highlights the text you may want to refer 
to again and again.
 
The Warning icon shows you potential pitfalls to stay away 
from as you work through the puzzles in this book.
Where to Go from Here
You’re free to read this book in any order — flip at random 
and see what sort of fun puzzle you land on first! You can 
always work backward or forward from there or continue to 
jump around.
If you’re the logical sort who simply must start at the begin-
ning, turn the page and discover the world of codes and 
cryptograms. If you want to know how to solve the specific 
puzzle types in this book, start with Chapter 2. And if you’re 
looking for fun and easy letter-substitution cryptograms, go to 
Chapter 4 first. Finally, if conspiracy stories draw you in every 
time, we suggest you head immediately to Chapter 3.

Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies 
6

Part I
Code and 
Cryptogram 
Strategies

In this part . . .
W
e introduce you to the world of cryptography, 
 telling you about its history as well as its modern 
uses. Chapter 1 specifi cally highlights Masonic codes 
and ciphers.
In Chapter 2 we introduce you to many classic and 
modern types of ciphers, including some rare Masonic 
Ciphers that date back one or more centuries, and some 
new ciphers that are based on computer keyboards and 
cellphone keypads. Chapter 2 also contains all the instruc-
tions on how to solve the puzzles in this book.

Chapter 1
Clueing You In about Codes 
and Cryptograms
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering cryptography through the ages
▶ Finding out about Masonic codes and ciphers
▶ Investigating additional resources
I
n this book, we offer you the challenge of breaking several 
types of real ciphers and cryptograms, all devised by noted 
Australian puzzlemaster Denise Sutherland (author of Word 
Searches For Dummies [Wiley]).
In this chapter, we offer a few things to orient you to the 
secrets of codes and cryptograms, including the world of the 
cryptogram, the history of ciphers and codes, and the ways in 
which the time-honored fraternity of the Freemasons has used 
codes over the centuries. We also tell you about the contem-
porary world of codes and follow up by giving you some sug-
gestions for further reading.
Introducing the Cryptographic 
World
The word cryptographic comes from elements that mean 
“hidden” (crypto) and “writing” (graph). The cryptographic 
world encompasses codes and ciphers (which we distinguish 
between in Chapter 2), which are used to create cryptograms 
(secret messages).

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
10
Ciphers. Codes. Cryptograms. What do you think about when 
you hear these words?
You may get an image of dark nights with fog-filled streets. In 
an attic in wartime London, a nervous man, constantly check-
ing the door with anxious looks over his shoulder, is bent 
over a static-filled radio, writing down strings of numbers as 
they come over one particular frequency on the dial. In the 
street below, people in trench coats trade identical briefcases 
on street corners after an exchange of passwords. Such is the 
popular image — and, to some extent, the truth — of espio-
nage, a world where ciphers, codes, and cryptograms are part 
of everyday reality.
Perhaps you prefer a more ancient or historical slant. Maybe 
you’re thinking of Julius Caesar sending messages to his 
troops in the hostile wilds of Western Europe, in the years 
before he ruled the Roman Empire. Perhaps you wonder 
about the secrets encoded on parchment in the Middle Ages 
and during the Renaissance by people who had quite a lot 
to lose — like their lives: political plotters, alchemists, and 
even — gasp! — practitioners of magic and sorcery. And then 
there are the secret societies of history, some political (the 
Black Hand of Serbia, the Holy Vehm, the Bavarian Illuminati), 
some criminal (the Black Hand of Sicily, La Cosa Nostra), some 
religious (the Rosicrucians), some fraternal (the Freemasons 
and their affiliated organizations, the York and Scottish Rites).
Then again, you may prefer a more modern and military 
approach. Military and diplomatic ciphers can make or 
break a nation in wartime. Just in the relatively short period 
of American history, ciphers and codes have played promi-
nent roles in the American Revolutionary War and the War 
Between the States, and afterward. In the world at large, 
codes and ciphers — which ones were broken and which 
ones endured — had much to do with determining the 
outcomes of World Wars I and II, thus affecting the lives of 
billions of people. Your life may have been very different if 
the brave geniuses of Britain’s Bletchley Park group hadn’t 
broken the German Enigma ciphers.
Of course, today cryptography has gone corporate. You 
probably send or receive multiple encrypted messages every 
business day without even knowing it, as you transfer funds 

 Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms 11
from an ATM to your pocket, as you order merchandise over 
the Internet, even as you communicate through telephone 
or e-mail. Keeping these communications secure is big 
business — and big trouble when it fails.
Considering the History 
of Codes and Ciphers
The origins of codes and ciphers — like the beginnings of lan-
guage and writing, and my entire Beatles LP collection — are 
lost in the sands of time. David Kahn, the master historian of 
codes and ciphers, wrote that the development of secret writ-
ing was inevitable in any literate human culture because of 
“the multiple human needs and desires that demand privacy 
among two or more people.”
Then again, legends tell of another source of secret writing. In 
Jewish tradition, the most ancient book was written by God and 
delivered to Adam in the Garden of Eden by the angel Raziel (a 
name that means “secrets of God”). The first published edition 
of the Book of Raziel the Angel appeared in Amsterdam in 1701. 
One part of that book illustrates divine alphabets that could be 
used to encode secrets — divine or otherwise.
Parts of the Jewish Talmud (second century AD) reflect the 
belief that secret messages were encoded within the text of 
the Bible. These messages could be decoded according to 
specific rules, such as gematria (the use of the numerical 
equivalents of the Hebrew letters, where the first letter has 
the numerical value “1,” and so on). The use of gematria and 
other methods to detect secret messages in the Bible appears 
today in the study of Kabbalah, one approach to Jewish 
mysticism. (If you’re interested in discovering more about 
this topic, check out Kabbalah For Dummies by Arthur 
Kurzweil [Wiley].)
Whether you accept a human or a divine origin of codes and 
ciphers — or both! — the following sections offer you some 
tantalizing references to what could be codes and ciphers in 
ancient literature of a very early date.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
12
Early ciphers
Homer’s Iliad — thought to date between the sixth and eighth 
centuries BC — has exactly one reference to writing. It comes 
up in the story-within-a-story of Bellerophon, who was sent 
off by an angry monarch with folded and sealed “tablets on 
which he [the monarch] had traced a number of devices with 
a deadly meaning,” tablets that Bellerophon was to give to 
another king, who was supposed to kill Bellerophon after 
reading the message. To this day, a message that instructs 
the recipient to kill the messenger is called a “bellerophontic” 
message. Is Homer’s wording a fancy way to talk about normal 
writing — or does it indicate the use of a code or cipher? We 
don’t know.
The earliest use of a cipher for military purposes involved 
the fifth century BC Spartans of Greece. They used the 
device called the scytale, a baton. A strip of paper or leather 
was wrapped around the baton, and the message was writ-
ten straight across the different “columns” of the paper or 
leather. The recipient of the message would wrap the leather 
or paper around a baton of the same dimensions and then 
read the message off the material wound about the baton.
The second century BC Greek historian Polybius devised a 
ciphering system that has been used for centuries. Polybius 
put the letters of the alphabet in a 5 x 5 array like a short 
checkerboard. In Polybius’s system, each letter is described 
in terms of the column and row in which it appears. Thus, “A” 
is ciphered as “1-1,” “B” as “1-2,” all the way to “Z” as “5-5.” (In 
this scheme, “I” and “J” are given the same code.)
Julius Caesar, the first century BC Roman statesman, used at 
least two ciphering systems during the years when he was a 
general of the Roman armies. These systems are the Caesar 
Shift and the Caesar Box Codes (we describe both in Chapter 2, 
and you can try your hand at them in Chapters 7 and 11). After 
the fall of the Roman Empire in the West (about 476 AD), we 
know little of the making of codes and ciphers in the West for 
many centuries.
However, in other parts of the world, cryptography thrived. 
The rise of Islamic civilization, from the seventh century AD 
onward, saw the first books written on cryptanalysis, that is, 
the organized effort to break codes and ciphers.

 Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms 13
In Eastern Asia, the use of idiograms (picture writing) in such 
languages as Chinese made it impractical to use ciphers (sub-
stitutes for letters). However, real codes were sometimes 
used. For example, in 11th century AD China, one military 
code was based on the 30 words of a particular poem. Each 
word corresponded to a brief message, like “need more bows 
and arrows.” A single word of the poem would be sent as the 
message from one commander to his superior.
The rebirth of learning during the Renaissance, which continued 
in the Enlightenment, saw a great increase in the use of codes 
and ciphers in the Western world. The emergence of the central 
text of Kabbalah, the Zohar, in about 1300, led many Christian 
scholars to look into the use of gematria to detect secret mean-
ings in sacred writ. The publication of Agrippa’s Three Books of 
Occult Philosophy in 1531 did a great deal to spread the use of 
special alphabets to conceal secret religious writings because 
Agrippa was the first to publish together in tabular form the 
magical alphabets called “Celestial,” “Malachim” (Hebrew for 
“angels”), and the enigmatically named “Passing the River.” 
These magical alphabets were republished centuries later in 
Francis Barrett’s popular work, The Magus (1801), through which 
these alphabets became a permanent part of the landscape of 
esoteric and magical studies. (You can try some of these magical 
alphabets in Chapters 6 and 8.)
But it is the worlds of politics and military actions that have seen 
an explosion of activity in the area of secret writing over the last 
600 years. The destinies of nations have hung on the making and 
breaking of codes. For example, the attempt by Mary Queen of 
Scots to take the British throne from Elizabeth I of England in 
1585 collapsed when the cipher used by her conspirators, led by 
Anthony Babington, was broken by Elizabeth’s agents.
As cryptography made and unmade nations in Europe, it did 
the same in the New World. For example, in the American 
Revolutionary War, a wide variety of cryptographic techniques 
(including ciphers, code books, and invisible inks) was used on 
both sides. The same is true of the use of cryptography during 
the American War Between the States, or Civil War.
Cryptography and the Great Wars
During the wars of the 20th century, cryptography came to 
determine the destiny, not just of nations, but of the globe. 

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
14
We offer you three examples, one from the First World War 
and two from the Second. Both wars began in Europe, with 
the entry of the United States following sometime afterward.
The Zimmerman telegram
By early 1917, the First World War had been raging on the 
continent of Europe for two and a half years, but the U.S. 
was officially neutral. The question on everyone’s mind was 
whether the U.S. would enter the war, and if so, when. On 
January 16, 1917, the German Foreign Secretary (equivalent 
to the American Secretary of State), Arthur Zimmerman, sent 
a ciphered telegram to the German ambassador to Mexico. 
The British intelligence services intercepted the telegram, 
which consisted of hundreds of groups of digits, each group 
up to 5 digits long (“13042 13401 8501 115” and so forth). The 
British had captured some German code books that described 
an earlier version of the cipher and so were able to decode 
the message.
The Zimmerman telegram described a plot in which the 
Germans would begin “unrestricted submarine warfare” on 
February 1. If America entered the war, Germany proposed to 
help Mexico reconquer territories in Texas, New Mexico, and 
Arizona from the U.S.! A way was found to leak this telegram 
to the U.S. government without revealing that the British 
had broken the German cipher. The telegram’s message was 
printed in American newspapers on March 1, 1917, and the 
U.S. entered the war just over a month later. The entry of the 
U.S. decisively tipped the balance of power in the war away 
from Germany. The deciphering of the Zimmerman telegram 
thus changed the course of history.
The Enigma code
In the Second World War, German U-boats were destroying a 
large fraction of the Allied shipping in the Atlantic Ocean. The 
Germans used a coding machine, code-named the Enigma, 
which used a collection of cipher wheels and switches to 
apply a different cipher to every single letter of a message. The 
British applied an immense amount of effort to breaking this 
code, which they finally did. The breaking of the Enigma code 
turned the tide of the war in the Atlantic and made the D-Day 
invasion that much more possible.

 Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms 15
The Navajo code talkers
In the Pacific theatre of the Second World War, the American 
armed forces used Native American speakers of the Navajo 
language. The Navajo code talkers used words from the natu-
ral world to represent military objects: different types of birds 
were different types of aircraft, different types of fish were 
different types of ships, and so on. The Navajo code talkers 
were used to communicate among different American mili-
tary units, with great success. After the war, it was revealed 
that the Japanese had broken several American codes but 
had made no progress with breaking Navajo. Much of the 
American success in the Pacific theatre can be attributed to 
the contribution of the Navajo code talkers.
Uncovering Masonic Codes 
and Ciphers
Not everyone who uses codes and ciphers is involved in mili-
tary or political activity. Groups with a spiritual orientation 
have long used ciphers and codes to conceal their teachings. 
This isn’t so much for fear of their being discovered (although 
sometimes this has been a concern, when persecution is an 
issue). Rather, the issue is to keep certain types of spiritual 
knowledge or teachings from those who aren’t ready or aren’t 
qualified to receive them.
The future of cryptography
Beginning in the 1960s, cryptogra-
phers used higher mathematics to 
make more and more complicated 
ciphers. These ciphers involve the 
use of enormously long prime num-
bers to create ciphers of such com-
plexity that they can only be broken, 
if at all, with immensely powerful 
computers. We don’t use those 
ciphers in this book. However, if 
you’re interested in cryptography, 
you should know that this is where a 
large part of the future of cryptogra-
phy is headed. If you’re still in school 
and interested in cryptography, work 
hard at those math courses!

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
16
The Freemasons (or Masons), a fraternal organization that 
has been public about its existence since 1717, has long used 
codes of different sorts. The primary purpose of using codes 
has been to keep the Masonic ceremonies of initiation secure. 
These ceremonies are complex and must be performed from 
memory. Masons put hours of study into the effort to learn 
their ceremonies. In some areas, Masons possess small books 
with the text of these ceremonies. To keep the ceremonies 
confidential even if the books fall into the wrong hands, the 
books are written in an initial-letter cipher, that is, a code in 
which each word of the text is represented by its initial letter. 
This code allows someone who already knows the ceremony 
to use the cipher to practice the ceremony until the person 
memorizes it to perfection.
In earlier generations, Freemasons sometimes used symbols 
instead of letters to encipher their ceremonies. Coauthor 
Mark has in his possession a couple of book lover’s treasures, 
small old ritual books with ceremonies enciphered by symbol, 
a sort of American hieroglyphic extravaganza. If you come 
upon any of these books in an old bookstore or yard sale, 
treasure them — they become rarer every year.
Masons have also made great use of the Pigpen Cipher, so 
called because, to people of an earlier age, its tic-tac-toe-
board structure resembled the layout of pigpens. The Pigpen 
Cipher has many versions and has come to be known as 
the Freemasons’ Cipher. The version in this book isn’t “the” 
correct one because a single correct version doesn’t exist. 
Masons in different areas learned different versions. However, 
the version we present in Chapter 8 shows the exotic, mysteri-
ous character of the cipher, where letters are represented by 
a few angular symbols and dots.
On the continent of Europe, where Freemasonry developed 
in ways that were a bit different from English Masonry, there 
was more of an interest in exotic ciphers. You can find some 
of those ciphers in Chapter 8, as well. They’re elaborate sym-
bolic inventions dating from the 18th and 19th centuries. In 
that era, all ciphers had to be written out by hand, so it didn’t 
matter that the ciphers used unique symbols that can’t easily 
be represented in computer-readable form.
 
Enjoy these ciphers as a glimpse into a different age, when the 
creation of cryptograms was a bit more leisurely than it is today.

 Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms 17
Continuing Your Crypto 
Education
In this section, we include some reading suggestions for 
those of you who are hooked on codes, cryptograms, and 
conspiracies! 
Consider these additional resources if you seek to solve more 
puzzles:
 
✓ Word Searches For Dummies by Denise Sutherland 
(Wiley): This book, by one of the authors of the book 
you hold in your hands, shows you how to approach 
word search puzzles of different types and levels of 
difficulty. The book includes 250 puzzles to solve, with 
hints and answers.
 
✓ The Mammoth Book of Secret Codes and Cryptograms 
by Elonka Dunin (Running Press): This book includes a 
huge collection of codes and ciphers, as well as real-life 
unsolved codes and undeciphered scripts.
If you want to gain additional knowledge about codes, ciphers, 
and cryptography, give these books a try:
 
✓ Codebreaker: The History of Codes and Ciphers by Stephen 
Pinnock (Walker & Company): This brief and lavishly 
illustrated book may be the best place to go next if you 
want to dive further into the subject, especially from a 
historical point of view.
 
✓ The Code Book: The Evolution of Secrecy from Mary, 
Queen of Scots to Quantum Cryptography by Simon Singh 
(Doubleday): As the subtitle indicates, the focus in this 
book is on the last four centuries or so. You can find 
extensive examples of different ciphers in this fascinating 
book.
 
✓ The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing by David 
Kahn (Macmillan): This is the big daddy of all books 
on cryptography, a highly readable yet comprehensive 
description of the entire history of the field. It gives a 
great deal of emphasis to the period of World War II and 
the Cold War, but it also includes much about codemak-
ing and codebreaking during earlier periods of history.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
18
 
✓ Kahn on Codes: Secrets of the New Cryptology by David 
Kahn (Macmillan): For the true crypto fan, this is a col-
lection of essays, largely focused on the World War II 
period and thereafter.
If you want more information about codes in the Kabbalah, we 
suggest Kabbalah by Gershom Scholem (Meridian/Penguin). 
For cryptographers, the chapter on gematria is particularly 
interesting!
If you want information on cryptography and its use in the 
American Revolutionary War and the Civil War, turn to these 
texts:
 
✓ George Washington, Spymaster: How the Americans 
Outspied the British and Won the Revolutionary War by 
Thomas B. Allen (National Geographic): This book for 
young adults has a great deal about true codes and other 
secret writing techniques used during the Revolutionary 
War. For example, the book reproduces the nine-page 
codebook created by Major Benjamin Tallmadge, who was 
General Washington’s spy chief — and who appears as a 
character in our first conspiracy story (see Chapter 3).
 
✓ Washington’s Spies: The Story of America’s First Spy Ring by 
Alexander Rose (Bantam): This groundbreaking history of 
the subject has a lot to say about ciphers and codes.
 
✓ Secret Missions of the Civil War: First-Hand Accounts by 
Men and Women Who Risked Their Lives in Underground 
Activities for the North and the South by Philip Van Doren 
Stern (Bonanza Books): The final chapter of this book 
includes info on codes and ciphers in the Civil War.
And if you’re looking for information about Freemasonry and 
its ciphers, consider the following:
 
✓ Freemasons For Dummies by Christopher Hodapp (Wiley): 
This book is an excellent introduction to the general subject 
of Freemasonry. It tells you how Freemasonry operates, 
what the Masonic “degrees” or rituals of initiation are like, 
and how to tell the difference between truth and fantasy 
in the many stories you can read about Freemasonry in 
literature and on the Internet.

 Chapter 1: Clueing You In about Codes and Cryptograms 19
 
✓ Freemasonry: An Introduction, by Mark Koltko-Rivera (LVX 
Publishing): This book, by one of the authors of the book 
you hold in your hands, describes the ideals and values 
of Freemasonry, its relationship to ancient systems of 
initiation, and why men choose to become Freemasons in 
the first place.
 
✓ Scottish Rite Ritual Monitor and Guide, 2nd Edition, by 
Arturo de Hoyos (Washington, DC: The Supreme Council 
of the Scottish Rite, 33°, Southern Jurisdiction): If you’re 
a real fan of Masonic ciphers, this book gives you tradi-
tional Scottish Rite alphabets and ciphers, including the 
Cypher of the Rose Croix devised by Albert Pike, and 
several other cryptographic treats. (This is the source of 
the 19th century Masonic Ciphers we use in this book.)
For more info, check out www.scottishrite.org.
 
✓ Committed to the Flames: The History and Rituals of a 
Secret Masonic Rite by Arturo de Hoyos and S. Brent 
Morris (Lewis Masonic): This book describes the effort 
that successfully deciphered a custom Masonic Cipher 
that resisted all efforts to break it for over a century. 
The result revealed a secret set of ceremonies that were 
used by a small Masonic group in New York.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
20

Chapter 2
Simplifying Codes and 
Cryptograms
In This Chapter
▶ Finding out how to solve the puzzles in this book
▶ Investigating letter frequency analysis
P
eople have been hiding their messages from prying eyes 
for millennia. Their methods became more complex as 
time went on, and encryption is still a vital part of modern life. 
You can read more about the history of codes and ciphers in 
Chapter 1.
Ingenious people have devised many ciphers over the years, 
and no doubt there are more ciphers to come! In this book we 
include several different types of ciphers and several variations 
on these types. We hope you enjoy this selection!
The ciphers in this book are
 
✓ Cryptograms with Letter Substitutions (Chapter 4)
 
✓ Cryptograms with Number Substitutions (Chapter 5)
 
✓ Cryptograms with Symbol Substitutions (Chapter 6)
 
✓ Caesar / Shift Ciphers (Chapter 7)
 
✓ Masonic Ciphers (Chapter 8)
 
✓ Rail Fence Ciphers (Chapter 9)
 
✓ Keyboard Ciphers (Chapter 10)
 
✓ Assorted Ciphers (Chapter 11)
 
✓ Anagrams and Other Cryptic Riddles (Chapter 12)
 
✓ Double Level Puzzles (Chapter 13)

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
22
We also include a very handy collection of hints in Chapter 14. 
If you’re really stuck, look there before giving in to the allure 
of the answers (Chapter 15).
This book is a bit unusual, too, because in Chapter 3 we pres-
ent you with three conspiracy stories, set in different times in 
American history. These stories have been heavily censored 
by the government — your task is to decipher the puzzles 
in the book in order to gain access to these secret files. All 
the puzzles are numbered carefully so you can easily see 
which puzzle goes where.
 
If you prefer to do puzzles for fun without worrying about 
solving the conspiracy stories, that’s perfectly fine too, of 
course! We include a lot of cryptograms that aren’t related to 
the Chapter 3 stories, and the story-related ciphers are enjoy-
able to crack even if you don’t solve the conspiracy.
Considering Cryptography Terms
Although they’re often used to mean the same thing, strictly 
speaking a code is quite different from a cipher. Consider 
these definitions:
 
✓ A code is a whole new language. Entire words are 
encoded by a number, symbol, or another word. For 
example, CONSPIRACY may be encoded as 32, u, or 
falcon. A code book is required to crack a code, and it 
basically functions as a dictionary of the code’s language.
 
 Codes are very hard to crack, but the need for code books 
is their weakness — if a code book falls into the wrong 
hands, your code is useless and your plans are discovered!
 
✓ A cipher is a way of rearranging or replacing the letters 
in a message. In substitution ciphers, each letter of the 
alphabet (and sometimes the numbers and punctuation) 
are replaced by another letter, number, or symbol. The 
letter D may be enciphered as R, 9, or ✲, for example.
 
 Ciphers can be easier to crack than a code, but they’re 
also more secure. You can often memorize the key to 
a cipher, so you don’t need written instructions. That 
eliminates the major security failing of codes. Ciphers 

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 23
are also easy to change regularly, which is an important 
strategy if you really rely on encryption (as opposed to 
those of us who just enjoy the mental workout for fun).
 
Although we use the words code, decode, and encode in this 
book interchangeably with cipher, decipher, and encipher, rest 
assured that all the puzzles in this book are ciphers.
Before you dive into the puzzles, familiarize yourself with a 
few terms for this book:
 
✓ Plaintext is the secret message that you need to discover; 
the English is written out plain so anyone can read it. 
You typically see plaintext written in lowercase letters, 
especially within encryption keys.
 
✓ Ciphertext is the encrypted message. You usually see 
ciphertext written in UPPERCASE letters.
 
✓ A keyword is a vital, or key, word or phrase that’s used to 
further complicate a cipher and helps to decode a cipher.
 
✓ In a substitution cipher, the letters of the alphabet are sub-
stituted with other letters, numbers, or symbols.
 
✓ In a transposition cipher, the letters of the message are 
rearranged into a new order according to a set pattern 
instead of being changed into other symbols.
 
✓ A pattern word is any word with repeated letters and is 
invaluable for cracking ciphers. PEOPLE and THAT are 
two pattern words, having the pattern 1 2 - 1 - 2, and 
1 - - 1, respectively. 1 and 2 refer to the repeating code 
letters in an encrypted word.
Figure 2-1 gives you an example of plaintext (lowercase) and 
ciphertext (uppercase) encryption, with a keyword of NEW 
YORK. The rest of the alphabet, minus the letters in NEW 
YORK, is filled in after the keyword.
Figure 2-1: An example of plaintext and ciphertext encryption.
In this particular cipher, the message LEAVE TOWN would be 
enciphered as FONTO QIUH.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
24
Solving the Ciphers in This Book
In this section we take you through each puzzle type in this 
book and give you a few handy strategies for solving them.
Cryptograms with Letter, Number, 
and Symbol Substitutions
In any substitution cipher, each letter of the alphabet is sub-
stituted for other symbols. These symbols may be letters, 
numbers, or symbols.
You can work with other complex variations (in which one 
message has multiple encodings, for example), but in this book 
we concentrate on simple substitution ciphers. Chapter 4 con-
tains letter substitutions, Chapter 5 has number substitutions, 
and Chapter 6 has symbol substitution ciphers.
When approaching a substitution cipher, here are some 
basics to keep in mind:
 
✓ Use a pencil and eraser!
 
✓ Look for single-letter words. They’re almost always A or I.
 
✓ Count how many times each symbol appears in the cipher, 
and write it down. The most frequent letter is likely to be 
E — but T, O, and A are also good contenders.
 
✓ A letter is never encoded as itself: D = D for example. 
(Caesar Ciphers with keywords are a rare exception to 
this rule.)
 
✓ Two-letter words almost always have one vowel and one 
consonant.
 
✓ Look for the two most common three-letter words: AND 
and THE.
 
✓ Look for pattern words, especially THAT, which is the 
most common four-letter word. (See the previous section 
for a definition of pattern words.)
 
✓ Pencil in your guesses, and look for clashing letter com-
binations (for example, you can be sure that KVC isn’t the 
start of any English word).

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 25
 
✓ After writing a decrypted letter above its cipher, read 
through the whole encrypted message and write that 
letter wherever the cipher letter appears in the message. 
For example, if you find that K = A, go through the cipher-
text and write an A over every K.
 
Seeing all the instances of one letter in a ciphertext is sur-
prisingly difficult to do. That’s probably because you read 
by seeing the whole shape of a word; most people don’t read 
by looking at each individual letter in succession. So read 
through the ciphertext several times, and be prepared to 
keep finding instances popping out at you!
For more hints on how to crack substitution ciphers, read the 
later section about letter frequency analysis.
Caesar / Shift Ciphers
A Caesar / Shift Cipher was widely used by the Roman 
emperor Julius Caesar. Chapter 7 is the place to go for 
these puzzles.
With a Caesar / Shift Cipher, all the letters in the alphabet are 
shifted by a set amount (such as +5, or –2). To create a 
Caesar / Shift Cipher, you write the cipher alphabet in order 
under the plain alphabet, wrapping it around from Z to A until 
all letters are assigned. Figure 2-2 shows you an example of a 
Caesar / Shift Cipher.
Figure 2-2: An example of a Caesar / Shift Cipher with a +4 shift.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
26
Caesar / Shift Ciphers often use a keyword. In this case, you 
write a word at the start of the cipher, and then you write the 
remainder of the alphabet in order. Figure 2-3 shows you an 
example; the keyword here is SPHINX.
Figure 2-3: A Caesar / Shift Cipher with SPHINX as the keyword.
 
If the keyword has repeating letters, only the first instance of 
each letter is used (so LONDON TOWN would be written as 
LONDTW).
A Caesar / Shift Cipher with a keyword often ends up coding 
letters as themselves by the end of the alphabet, so it’s 
common for X = X, Y = Y, and Z = Z, unless these letters appear 
in the keyword. This coding is an unusual feature of these par-
ticular ciphers.
Masonic Ciphers
Chapter 8 contains a bevy of ciphers used by Freemasons 
over the centuries. One is the Masonic Cipher, which is also 
known as the Pigpen Cipher (because the grid looks like 
a pigpen — you be the judge!). We also present you with 
the Cypher of the Rose Croix, and other special substitution 
ciphers made with Masonic symbols and alphabets, such as 
Malachim and Celestial.
The Masonic Cipher is a variety of substitution cipher — each 
letter is substituted by a symbol. If you use this cipher to 
send and receive messages, you can create the code symbols 
in a way that makes it very easy to remember how to con-
struct and re-create the key. See Figure 2-4 for an example of a 
Masonic Cipher.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 27
Figure 2-4: An example of the Masonic Cipher.
You can also use keywords within a Masonic Cipher to further 
complicate matters. In this format, pairs of letters are written 
into each location, as in Figure 2-5. First write the keyword (in 
this case, LODGE) and then write the remainder of the alpha-
bet into the grids in letter pairs. The second letter in each pair 
is enciphered with a dot.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
28
Figure 2-5: A Masonic Cipher with the keyword LODGE.
Some 19th century Masons used magical writing systems, such 
as Celestial and Malachim. These symbol systems are based on 
Hebrew, and they generally represent sounds rather than fixed 
letters. Figure 2-6 includes a table of the English letters and 
sounds that most closely correspond to the Malachim symbols.
Figure 2-6: The phonetic Malachim alphabet.
To solve a Malachim or other special font Masonic Cipher, you 
occasionally have to choose between two or more sounds for 
a single symbol. Generally the two letters are closely related in 
pronunciation, such as v and w. The encryption is a phonetic 
encryption rather than a straight symbol substitution. (The 
Malachim letter we mark as x should technically be ts or tz. 
We use x for the sake of utility — in English you simply need x 
more than tz.)

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 29
Rail Fence Ciphers
A Rail Fence Cipher is a transposition cipher. The letters in 
the message aren’t changed, but their positions are altered. 
Unless you know the encryption method, these ciphers can be 
very difficult to crack. You can find them in Chapter 9.
To decipher these codes, you need to know the number of 
rails. With a two-rail cipher, you simply divide your ciphertext 
into halves, and then write the second half underneath the 
first half, slightly offset. Then you can read off the plaintext 
by alternating between the top and bottom rails of your 
letter fence. Figure 2-7 shows you an example of a two-rail 
cipher.
For ciphers with more than two rails, the process is more 
complicated because you have to figure out how many letters 
to have in each rail to crack the code. The number of “points” 
of the zigzag in the top row is the most important thing to 
figure out.
 
To solve these ciphers, try drawing a zigzag onto a lined piece 
of paper with a colored pencil or highlighter pen. Then write 
the ciphertext from left to right and top to bottom in order, 
following the zigzag path. The horizontal lines on your page 
will help you keep everything lined up (so if you aren’t using 
lined paper, draw some horizontal lines!). These lines are 
the rails.
A three-rail cipher is drawn over three lines, a four-rail cipher 
is drawn over four lines, and so on. Figure 2-7 shows two 
examples of Rail Fence Ciphers.
 
If a message has too few letters to fit into the chosen rail pat-
tern (a fairly common occurrence) dummy letters are added 
to the end of the message to pad it out. So don’t be put off if 
an X or other random letter or two appears at the end of your 
message.
 
Draw the zigzag so the last section is just coming up to — 
but stops just short of — another point. Refer to the way the 
zigzags are drawn in Figure 2-7.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
30
Figure 2-7:  Two- and three-rail Fence Ciphers of the message 
START PLAN ALPHA AT DAWN.
The following sets of steps show you the way to crack the 
bigger, and harder, Rail Fence Ciphers.
For a three-rail cipher:
 
1. Count the letters in the cipher.
 
2. Divide the letters into four equal parts.
 
3. Draw your zigzag with a number of points on the top 
rail equal to 1⁄4 of the total letters.
 
4. Place your letters across the grid. One quarter go on 
the top rail, half fit on the middle rail, and the final 
quarter fit along the bottom rail.
For a four-rail cipher:
 
1. Count the letters in the cipher.
 
2. Divide the letters into six equal parts.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 31
 
3. Draw your zigzag with a number of points on the top 
rail equal to 1⁄6 of the total letters.
 
4. Place your letters across the grid. One sixth go on the 
top rail, a third fit on the second rail, the next third 
fit on the third rail, and the final sixth fit along the 
bottom rail.
For a five-rail cipher:
 
1. Count the letters in the cipher.
 
2. Divide the letters into eight equal parts.
 
3. Draw your zigzag with a number of points on the top 
rail equal to 1⁄8 of the total letters.
 
4. Place your letters across the grid. One eighth go on 
the top rail; a quarter fit on each of the second, third, 
and fourth rails; and the final eighth fit along the 
bottom rail.
 
The Rail Fence Ciphers in this book have all been designed to 
fit neatly into the two-, three-, four- and five-rail patterns, with 
no pesky extra letters. If you try to apply this solving method 
on Rail Fence Ciphers elsewhere, you may be out by one. You 
can normally sort it out by trial and error.
Rail Fence Ciphers sometimes include the spaces between 
words as blank characters in the cipher. We don’t have 
this variety in this book, but you may come across them 
elsewhere.
Keyboard Ciphers
Keyboard Ciphers are created with some of our favorite bits 
of technology — our cellphones and computer keyboards! 
These puzzles are in Chapter 10.
Text Message Ciphers
Text Message (or SMS) Ciphers make use of your phone. 
Multiple letters occupy each number key on a phone; the 
2 key has the letters ABC written on it, for example.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
32
These letters have long been used to create memorable 
phone numbers. You know the sort of thing: “Call 1-800-MORE-
COFFEE now for more coffee!” This is a simple letter-to-number 
encryption of the phone number 1-800-6673-263333.
In this book, however, we go in the opposite direction, from 
number to letter.
You’re probably already all too familiar with using your cell-
phone keypad to type text messages. Most phones use predic-
tive text now, in which the phone’s software guesses at what 
you mean when you input a certain number sequence. This 
guess is based on common words used in English.
For example, to type HOME, you press 4663. However, this 
combination of number keys also encodes the words GOOD, 
GONE, HOOD, HOOF, and several less-common words.
The fiendish Text Message Ciphers in this book take advan-
tage of this ambiguity. They’re simply a collection of numbers, 
made to type a secret message. Your job is to figure out what 
the intended words are!
 
Look for common patterns, such as 843 (THE), 263 (AND), and 
8438 (THAT) within these ciphers.
 
Because each number can represent three or four different 
letters (unlike in a substitution cipher, where each symbol 
represents a single letter), you have to try several letter 
options for each word.
The context of the message helps you decipher these puzzles. 
For example, with the message 7323 8447 2665, the first two 
words are pretty easy to pin down: READ THIS. However, 
2665 is more problematic; it can be COOL, COOK, or BOOK. 
Obviously, the first two words indicate that the correct mes-
sage is READ THIS BOOK, because READ THIS COOL doesn’t 
make sense. (Or does it? Maybe we can start a new fad here!)
 
Use your cellphone to help crack these codes. Start a new 
text message (that you won’t send to anyone), and type in the 
numbers to see which words are options.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 33
 
Be careful, though — the phone’s dictionary is very limited. 
Foreign words, unusual words, and proper nouns generally 
aren’t included.
Typewriter Ciphers
Humans have a long history of using “code machines” to physi-
cally create a cipher. Strips of paper wrapped around rods 
(scytales) and pivoting cardboard circles for offsetting alphabets 
are just a couple of these devices, and you can go right up to the 
incredibly complex Enigma machine used during World War II, 
not to mention modern computer encryption methods.
In this book, some ciphers use a typewriter or computer 
keyboard as the method of encryption. The concept is quite 
simple — you simply shift which key you press by a set 
movement.
For example, you may type your message by using the keys 
one up and to the left of your intended letters. Or perhaps you 
move one key down and to the right. Check out Figure 2-8 for 
examples of these Typewriter Ciphers.
 
Punctuation is often found as one of the encrypted characters 
in these ciphers, and uppercase letters can be encoded differ-
ently from lowercase letters. So if you see a message that has 
an odd mix of numbers, letters, and punctuation, you may be 
looking at a keyboard code.
Figure 2-8:  An “up and left” shift encodes R into 4, and a “down and right” 
shift encodes P into the character ;.
Assorted Ciphers
You can find a ton of different codes and ciphers out in the 
world; we only scratch the surface in this book! Chapter 11 is 

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
34
our chance to broaden the field and show you a range of codes 
and ciphers that aren’t anywhere else in the book. We include 
the Atbash Cipher, Caesar Box Cipher, Twisted Path Box 
Cipher, Newspaper Codes, and a few Columnar Transpositions  
(described in the later section on Double Level Puzzles).
Atbash Ciphers
The Atbash Cipher is one of the oldest and simplest ciphers. 
It was originally used with the Hebrew alphabet. You simply 
wrap the alphabet around on itself, so A = Z and Z = A, B = Y 
and Y = B, and so on. Figure 2-9 shows you what it looks like.
Figure 2-9: Atbash Ciphers wrap the alphabet around on itself.
Caesar Box Ciphers
The Caesar Box Cipher is another cipher used by Julius 
Caesar. It’s a transcription cipher rather than a substitution 
cipher, which means the letters in the message aren’t altered, 
but their positions are muddled up.
The Caesar Box Cipher works best for messages with a square 
number of letters (for example, 3 x 3 = 9, 4 x 4 = 16, 5 x 5 = 25, 
and so on). You can add null letters to the end of a message 
to pad it to the correct length, or the grid can be a rectangle 
rather than a square.
The plaintext is written down the columns of the grid, and 
then read off in rows. This forms the ciphertext. Figure 2-10 
shows the message JENNY GOT THE EMAIL.
Then the letter groups are read off in rows, resulting in an 
encoded message of JYTM EGHA NOEI NTEL.
To crack a Caesar Box Cipher, first figure out the number of 
letters.
Box ciphers are sometimes presented with letters in groups, 
which is also a hint as to the grid size. For example, if you see 
seven groups of seven letters in the ciphertext, you need to 
draw up a 7 x 7 grid.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 35
Figure 2-10: A Caesar Box Cipher with a 4 x 4 grid.
If the letters haven’t been presented in groups, you may need 
to count them to get the total.
If you end up with 25 letters, draw up a 5 x 5 box. Write the 
cipher in, row by row, and then read down the columns to dis-
cover the message.
Some box ciphers are laid out in rectangles, so if you have 24 
letters, for example, you may be looking at a 6 x 4 grid.
Twisted Path Ciphers
Twisted Path Ciphers are transcription ciphers that are a 
variation on the Caesar Box Ciphers. Instead of reading off the 
message in columns from top to bottom, the message is writ-
ten in a path inside the box. The path may be a spiral (clock-
wise or counterclockwise), or up and down the columns, or in 
a reverse order. Figure 2-11 shows you a few examples. Note 
how each cipher reads quite differently, although they all 
encode the same message.
Newspaper Codes
In distant days in England, sending a letter was quite expen-
sive, but posting a newspaper was free! Clever people soon 
figured out a way to send news to friends and family, free of 
charge. They used a pin to poke a tiny hole above or below 
letters on a newspaper page. By holding the newspaper up to 
the light, it was easy to see the pin-pricked letters and read 
the hidden message.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
36
Figure 2-11:  Some Twisted Path Ciphers, all encrypting the 16-letter 
message THE HAWK HAS LANDED.
In Chapters 11 and 13, we present a few of this type of letter-
marking code, in which tiny dots are added to mark the letters. 
Detect the dots and write down the letters to reveal all!
Anagrams and other cryptic riddles
Anagrams, cryptic clues, and riddles have been around as long 
as cryptology. Each is a great way of hiding a few words. People 
even use anagrams of their names to create new personas and 
pseudonyms. In Chapter 12, we present you with a delectable 
assortment to try. And who knows, maybe you’ll venture into 
the world of cryptic crosswords and enjoy it!

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 37
Anagrams
Anagrams simply rearrange the letters of a word, or words, to 
create new words. Short words are generally easy to decipher 
(TEACH = CHEAT), but long anagrams can be challenging to 
figure out because of the many possible solutions. THE MORSE 
CODE turns very nicely into HERE COME DOTS, but it could 
also be SMOOTH DECREE, or one of several hundred other 
combinations.
Some of the anagrams in this book are just jumbled collec-
tions of letters, and others spell out new words — we know 
you can spot which is which!
 
When you’re faced with an unruly collection of letters, try 
some of the following tricks to help you tame them:
 
✓ Write the anagram backward or in a circle. The idea is to 
mix up the letters even more to help break up the strong 
patterns you’re seeing in the starting words.
 
✓ Divide the letters into vowels and consonants. This tip is 
particularly helpful for long anagrams.
 
✓ Write the scrambled letters in alphabetical order.
 
✓ Look for common patterns that you can make with the 
group of letters you have: SH, CH, TH, HE, AN, RE, IE, LL, 
EE, and so on.
 
In this book, we make sure that the message’s letter count 
pattern is given in the anagram. So if the words in the final 
message are PICK UP ANDREWS AT TWO, the anagram has 
the numbers (4, 2, 7, 2, 3) at the end.
Cryptic Clues
We include a few of the simpler varieties of Cryptic Clues in 
this book. For a more complete discussion of these tricky puz-
zles, coauthor Denise recommends Cryptic Crosswords & How 
to Solve Them by Fred Piscop (Sterling) and Solving Cryptic 
Crosswords by B. J. Holmes (A & C Black).
The basic construction of any cryptic clue is that it must 
contain the base clue (which is a straight definition for the 
answer, like a regular crossword clue) as well as some sort of 
word play. The base clue almost always occurs either at the 
start or end of the clue (not in the middle).

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
38
A well-constructed cryptic clue is self-checking — when you 
get it, you get confirmation and a wonderful “ah-ha!” moment.
Anagrams
Anagrams are a popular feature in cryptic clues. The letters 
from a word in the clue are jumbled up to reveal the answer.
Here’s an example:
Confused tale for a duck (4)
In this clue, confused is an anagram indicator. It tells you that 
some letters in the clue need to be “confused” or muddled up 
to find the answer. You’ll come across tons of anagram indica-
tors, but some of the main ones include the following:
 
✓ Agitated
 
✓ Badly
 
✓ Broken
 
✓ Confused
 
✓ Cooked
 
✓ Damaged
 
✓ In pieces
 
✓ Mangled
 
✓ Mistaken
 
✓ Muddled
 
✓ Shaken
 
✓ Silly
 
✓ Stirred
 
✓ Twisted
 
✓ Unruly
 
✓ Upset
The letter count is also very helpful. You can see that the 
answer to this clue has four letters. Generally, this means you 
can search through the clue for a four-letter word (or a few 
words that exactly add up to four letters) that can be jumbled 
to give the answer.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 39
This example includes a few options: TALE, FOR + A, and DUCK. 
Jumbling the letters of DUCK doesn’t bring any joy, nor does 
FOR with A. TALE, however, can be rearranged to TEAL — 
which is a type of duck.
The clue can be read as the following instruction: “If you mix 
up the letters from the word TALE, you get the name of a 
duck, which has four letters.”
Double Definitions
Double Definition clues may look very confusing, but they’re 
simply two definitions for the same word, strung together.
Here’s an example:
Gaze at the timepiece (5)
These clues become clearer if you mentally add a comma 
between the two definitions:
Gaze at, the timepiece (5) = WATCH
Hidden Words
Hidden Words are words that are literally hidden within a 
clue. Here’s an example:
Wasps almost carry a sacred song (5)
The word carry is an indicator, giving you a hint to what sort of 
cryptic clue this is. Hidden Word clues are indicated by words 
like carry, hold, hidden, part of, in, found in, and so on. In this 
case, carry means the answer is carried within the letters of 
Wasps almost.
Wasps almost carry a sacred song (5) = PSALM
Here’s another one to try:
Glimpse a gleaming hidden raptor (5)
With Hidden Word clues, you know the number of letters (five 
in this case), so you can simply move through the sequence 
of letters in the clue, looking for the group of five consecutive 
letters that spell out the answer. Did you find it? Of course 
you did. EAGLE.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
40
Double Level Puzzles
The Double Level Puzzles in Chapter 13 are the hardest in 
the book, and each puzzle consists of two ciphers. The first 
cipher produces a keyword. Then you use this keyword to 
unlock the second cipher. Each puzzle in this chapter has 
individual instructions with it because each has some 
particular quirks.
Keywords
The keywords in Double Level Puzzles are used in different 
ways. They may reveal which path to take in a Twisted Path 
Box Cipher, or how many rails to use in a Rail Fence Cipher.
Sometimes a keyword can encode a number sequence (as in a 
Columnar Transposition Cipher, which we feature in Chapter 
13). All you need to do is find the alphabetical order of the 
letters in your keyword, and then use that order to generate a 
number sequence.
For example, if the keyword is BRAZIL, it equates to 251634. 
A comes first in this set of letters alphabetically, B is second, 
I comes next in the alphabet, so it’s third. L and R come next, 
and finally Z is in sixth place. The alphabetical position of each 
letter is written above the word; see Figure 2-12 for an example.
Figure 2-12: The keyword and its numerical counterpart.
You then use this sequence (251634) to put columns of 
encrypted text in the correct order. (Read on to discover 
everything else you need to know to solve Columnar 
Transposition Ciphers!)
Columnar Transposition Ciphers
It’s rumored that a Columnar Transportation Cipher is fea-
tured on the Krytpos sculpture by James Sanborn, which 
stands in front of the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. 
These ciphers are similar to box ciphers, but they’re much 
more complicated transposition ciphers because the columns 
of letters are mixed up!

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 41
You need to know the order of the columns in order to crack 
these ciphers. This is where a keyword comes in, with the 
alphabetic rank of its letters determining the number sequence 
(see the previous section on keywords for more info).
 
Don’t include any repeated letters in your keyword.
The alphabetic order of the letters in the keyword determines 
the order of the columns in the cipher, and the number of 
columns too. In the example here, WAGON gives you five col-
umns, one for each letter, and a number sequence of 51243.
Count the number of letters in the cipher, and divide that 
count by the number of keyword letters to get the number 
of rows. In the example in Figure 2-13, there are 20 letters, 
divided by 5 (the number of letters in WAGON), which gives 
you 4 rows of letters.
 
Null letters, like X, J, Z, and Q, often fill any spaces left at the 
bottom of the grid.
Now you’re ready to start writing the cipher in columns. Number 
the columns in order (1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in this example), and write 
the letters of the cipher down the columns, one after the other. 
Follow the path of the arrow for the first grid in Figure 2-13.
Figure 2-13: A short Columnar Transposition Cipher.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
42
 
If you’re right-handed, write this first grid of the cipher letters 
on the left side of your paper. If you’re left-handed, write this 
first grid of the cipher on the right side of your paper. Trust 
us, it makes it easier.
Now, you’ve done all this work — and the message still 
doesn’t make sense! But don’t give up — you’re very close 
now. Here’s where the keyword comes into its own.
Draw a second grid with the same number of columns, and 
this time write the keyword’s number sequence above the 
columns. That sequence was 51243 in our example.
Now transcribe the columns from your first grid into the 
second grid, writing them in the order dictated by the key-
word. So the first column, numbered 1 from the first grid gets 
put into the column numbered 1 in the second grid, which 
happens to be in the second position in this instance.
You can now read the message, starting at the top left corner, 
reading across the rows (following the path of the arrow on 
the second grid in Figure 2-13). You just need to add spaces 
between the words, but you’ve come this far, so that part 
will be a cinch! Ignore any null letters that were added to the 
end of the message (unless they’re a special code from your 
partner in crime, too!).
Looking at Letter Frequency 
Analysis
Letter frequency analysis is the way to crack substitution 
ciphers. It means pretty much what it says: You break down 
a cipher into its components and analyze how often each 
one occurs. With an understanding of the letter frequencies 
that occur in English, you can get a handle on cracking the 
cipher.
When you use letter frequency analysis to crack a code, you 
simply count how many times each symbol appears in a 
section of encoded text. If it’s English, you can be fairly 

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 43
certain that the four most commonly occurring symbols will 
be E, T, O, and A. E is almost always the most frequently used 
letter.
We can’t give you a definitive list of the frequency of letters 
in English (or any language) because it changes depending on 
which texts have been analyzed. We chose one for you, but 
if you’re interested in finding out more, check online or in a 
cryptography book.
Letter frequency lists read from left to right, from the most 
frequently used letters to the least.
We broke this list into five letter groups (and six at the end) 
just to make it a bit easier for you to read.
ETAON RISHD LFCMU GYPWB VKXJQZ
 
Short ciphertexts with fewer than 100 characters may not 
fit well with the standard letter-frequency patterns. The 
frequencies can still help you make educated guesses, though. 
And ciphers of less than 20 letters may have more than one 
solution!
Letter and word patterns
If you keep the following pointers in mind, you’ll be well on 
your way to becoming an expert cryptographer!
 
✓ The 12 most common letters at the beginning of words in 
English are TAI SOW CMB PHD.
 
 This doesn’t mean that more words in the dictionary 
start with T than all the others. Instead, it refers to how 
often words starting with T are seen in a piece of writing. 
The prize position of T is linked to how often words like 
THE, THAT, THIS, THAN, THERE, and so on are used in 
writing.
 
✓ The 12 most common ending letters in English are EST 
NDR YOL AFG.
 
✓ Q is always followed by U.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
44
 
✓ If you have a vowel, the consonant that most often fol-
lows it is N: AN, EN, IN, ON, UN — they’re all popular!
 
✓ The most common three-letter words in English are AND 
and THE (see, each appears twice in this sentence!).
 
✓ The most common four-letter word in English is THAT.
 
✓ The most frequently seen double letters in English are 
LL, followed by EE, SS, OO, TT, FF, RR, NN, PP, and CC.
 
✓ Two-letter words always have at least one vowel, and are 
almost always one consonant and one vowel.
 
✓ Letters that appear fairly evenly throughout a ciphertext 
are more likely to be vowels.
 
✓ Forty percent of any English message is vowels, give or 
take just 1 percent either way.
 
✓ Letters that appear less often and are linked with a few 
repeating characters are more likely to be consonants. 
For example, K appears after C, L, N, R, and S, and the 
vowels, but rarely with other letters.
 
If you’re interested in discovering a bigger list of letter fre-
quencies, common letter patterns, and further discussion on 
this fascinating topic, check out Word Searches For Dummies 
by Denise Sutherland (Wiley).
Pattern words
Pattern words are a crucial part of cracking any cipher. 
They’re simply any word that has repeated letters in it (not 
just double letters, although those are good, too). The pattern 
these repeated letters create makes it possible to hunt for the 
words in an encrypted text.
THAT is the most common pattern word. Any cipher word 
that’s in the pattern 1 - - 1 is almost definitely THAT (see, the 
T appears twice).
 
Check out dictionaries of pattern words (The Cryptogram 
Dictionary by Lloyd MacCallum is one you may like). These 
useful books can tell you all the words that fit the 1 2 2 1 - 
pattern, for example (ASSAY, DEEDS, KOOKY, TEETH, and 
TOOTH, just in case you were wondering). The numbers rep-
resent the repeating letters.

 Chapter 2: Simplifying Codes and Cryptograms 45
With practice you’ll pick up some of the more common pat-
tern words, like PEOPLE (1 2 - 1 - 2), SELLS (1 - 2 2 1), ELEVEN 
(1 - 1 - 1 -), and ILLEGALLY (- 1 1 - - - 1 1 -).
Adding some space
In particularly difficult ciphertexts, the spaces between words 
are removed. Would we be that mean? Yes, yes we would . . . 
but we also give you a clever trick to help you crack this par-
ticular problem.
The letter H often occurs before E (THE, THEN, THERE, THEY, 
and so on) but very rarely after E.
Start by using a letter frequency analysis of your ciphertext to 
pinpoint the code letter for E (it’s probably the most common 
letter).
Then look at the ciphertext for which letters appear before 
and after the encrypted E. The one that almost always appears 
before the encrypted E, and not often after it, is probably the 
letter H.
Now, as long as the secret message doesn’t talk a lot about 
how to behave on behalf of bareheaded racehorses who 
somehow have preheated beehives, you’ll be fine.
It’s all Greek to me!
Some ciphers use straight substitutions with established 
alphabets, such as Cyrillic, Greek, or Korean. So it’s not writ-
ten in a particular language, and you don’t need a language 
class — you just use the symbols and their rough equivalents 
in English. In this book we use Greek.
 
The Greek code letters in this book do not necessarily corre-
spond with their actual English equivalents. We just use them 
as cipher symbols.
The world uses many notation systems to communicate: 
shorthand, semaphore, Braille, maritime signal flags, Morse 
code, and musical notation are just a few examples. In this 
book we use Morse code, that darling of the radio waves.

Part I: Code and Cryptogram Strategies 
46
Figure 2-14 lists the basic lowercase Greek and Morse code 
alphabets. You can find these encryptions in Chapters 6 and 13.
Figure 2-14: The Greek and Morse code alphabets.

Part II
Secret Stories, 
Codes, and 
Cryptogram Puzzles

In this part . . .
You’re confronted with three tales of conspiracy, com-
posed by Freemason and writer Mark E. Koltko-Rivera. 
One conspiracy dates to the days of the Revolutionary War; 
another takes place over the course of 70 years before and 
after the Civil War; and the third takes place — well, yester-
day, today, and tomorrow. Ah, but important phrases and 
portions of each story are in code! How will you ever dis-
cover the truth of these conspiracies?
By solving the many puzzles we include in this part. The 
solutions give you the coded pieces of the story to plug 
into Chapter 3 so you can read our conspiracy stories.
If you’re more interested in the puzzles than the stories, 
you can work through Chapters 4 through 13 for fun, with-
out ever deciphering Chapter 3. Plus you can fi nd plenty 
of cryptograms in this part that aren’t related to the sto-
ries at all. No matter what you prefer, this part is fi lled 
with enough codes and cryptograms to keep you busy for 
quite some time!

Chapter 3
Solving Stories
In This Chapter
▶ Diving into an American Revolutionary War conspiracy
▶ Following a Civil War–era conspiracy
▶ Uncovering a modern-day conspiracy
T
his book contains a wealth of ciphers for you to crack. 
Some of them are quotations or apt sayings. But most of 
our messages offer you something more — not just one con-
spiracy story, but three!
We tried to write the full stories for you in this chapter, but 
the government censor discovered the letters and docu-
ments, and now large sections of each story are missing and 
encrypted. Your mission, if you choose to accept it, is to deci-
pher the missing portions from each story and unearth the 
real story of what happened!
To solve these conspiracy stories, simply find the puzzle number 
next to each gap, and solve that cipher in Part II to fill in the gap!
 
If you don’t want to follow the stories in this chapter, that’s 
perfectly fine too. You can solve all the ciphers in this book 
just for the fun of it, without putting them into the story.
The Conspiracy of West Point: 
1779–1780
This conspiracy takes place during the days of the American 
Revolutionary War.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
50
___________________________________________________(271).
In the spring of 1779, at the height of the American Revolution, 
an unexpected message is passed to Major John André, who 
has recently been _______________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________(3).
May 1, 1779
To Major John André, of British Secret Intelligence
Dearest Sir,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (113).
We have known each other as ____________________ (277) on 
the field of combat. However, _____________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (60).
Please consider this offer and let me know how we might pro-
ceed to pursue this opportunity.
Very truly yours,
General Benedict Arnold
Continental Army
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (236).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 51
He has to establish ______________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (126).
He replies:
May 12, 1779
To General Benedict Arnold, Continental Army
Greetings. Well did you say that your message would come to 
me as a surprise. You will no doubt pardon my need to
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (19).
As you are well aware, ___________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (70).
May I ask you to ask her: _________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (208),
when we stood __________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (248)?
Major John André
His Majesty’s Army
The _______________________________________________ (178)
responds to Major André’s challenge:
May 23, 1779
To Major John André, His Majesty’s Army

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
52
My ________________________________________________ (297)
informs me that _________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________ (147), at
which you ______________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (95).
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (199)?
General Benedict Arnold
Continental Army
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (112).
May 31, 1779
Dear General Arnold,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (2).
Major John André
His Majesty’s Army
Major André seeks authority from his own _________________
__________________________________________________ (275).
June 15, 1779

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 53
To General Sir Henry Clinton
Dear General Sir Clinton,
I have recently been contacted by none other than General
Benedict Arnold of the Continental Army. __________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________ (4). For these reasons
he _____________________________________________________
_______________________________________________ (237) and
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
(177). I seek your authority to ___________________________
___________________________________________________ (146).
By your leave,
Major John André
His Majesty’s Army
By July 1779, General Benedict Arnold is ___________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (43).
Arnold dickered with ____________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________ (84). Negotiations are 
halted in October 1779, when the progress of the war makes 
communications difficult. In April 1780, General Arnold is 
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________(210)
for not _________________________________________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
54
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (59).
[_______________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (239)]
________________________________________________________
_________________________________ (249). He sends a packet 
of information to Major André, with the following cover letter.
June 17, 1780
Dear Major André,
I am pleased to resume our correspondence.
As we long ago discussed, I have pursued a commission as 
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (179).
Yesterday ______________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (82).
I include my specific observations in the attached packet.
I look forward to your judgment of the value of this informa-
tion, and _______________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (114).
General Benedict Arnold
Continental Army
August 3, 1780
Dear Major André,

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 55
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (209).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (18).
Of course, we must set ___________________________________
________________________________ (145) in advance. Looking 
forward to your response, I remain,
Very truly yours,
General Benedict Arnold
Continental Army
August 15, 1780
Dear General Arnold,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (211).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (45).
Major John André
His Majesty’s Army
August 30, 1780
Dear Major André,
___________________________________________________ (180).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (238).

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
56
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (1).
General Benedict Arnold
Continental Army
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (111).
September 7, 1780
General Washington,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_______________________________ (44). Someone high up in
our military is working as ________________________________
______________________________ (268). However, I have not yet
been able to learn _______________________________________
___________________________________________________ (250).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________ (46). I shall keep
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (148).
Major Benjamin Tallmadge
Commanding, Continental Army Intelligence

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 57
September 10, 1780
Major Tallmadge,
___________________ (302). _______________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (17).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (81).
George Washington, General
Commander-in-Chief
Continental Army
September 12, 1780
General Washington,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (125).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (83),
he _____________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (220).
I send this to you with all speed. Please ____________________
___________________________________________________ (190).
___________________________________________________ (188)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
58
September 17, 1780
Major Tallmadge,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (61).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (221).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (93).
This mission is of the highest importance and ______________
___________________________________________________ (305).
George Washington, General
Commander-in-Chief
Continental Army
September 23, 1780
________________________________,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
______________ (29). He was carrying on him a _____________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (189).
Some of this was in _______________________ (326). However, 
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 59
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (127).
Major Benjamin Tallmadge
Commanding, Continental Army Intelligence
September 24, 1780
General Washington,
________________________________________________________
_________________________ (260). _________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (94).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________(31).
________________________________ (222).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (200).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (160).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (136)?
Benedict Arnold
formerly General, Continental Army

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
60
September 28, 1780
Mr. Arnold,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (71).
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (105).  You did nothing 
for your country; you betrayed your country, the country to 
which you made an oath of loyalty. _______________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (158).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (72).
Finally,
George Washington, General
Commander-in-Chief
Continental Army
September 28, 1780
Major Tallmadge,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 61
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (135).
George Washington, General
October 2, 1780
General Washington,
I regret to inform you that ________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (159).
Having been informed that he was in residence ____________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (170).
We found out his new location _______________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (232).
Major Benjamin Tallmadge
October 10, 1780
General Washington,
Greetings. I have in hand your proposal to __________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (204).
___________________________________________________ (333).
However, _______________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (258).

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
62
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (104).
Sir Henry Clinton, General
His Majesty’s Army
October 17, 1780
General Clinton,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (137).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (230).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (32).
George Washington, General
Continental Army
October 22, 1780
Your Excellency, General Washington,
At the request of Major Benjamin Tallmadge, I make a full 
report of the events of the evening of September 12, in which I 
had myself some exceedingly small part.

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 63
I serve as _______________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (103).
________________________________________________________
_________________________________ (201); I, in turn, collect no 
intelligence myself. Thus, __________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (169), 
until that night of September 12.
One of Major Tallmadge’s agents, _________________________
___________________________________________________ (231),
had an urgent message to convey to Major Tallmadge. 
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (340).
Arriving at my residence, and not finding me there, she 
made a difficult decision. Sending her boy back home with 
a kiss and a prayer, ______________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (341).
You must understand that ________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (171).
This young woman ______________________________________
________________________________________________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
64
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (261).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (338).
Arriving home hours later and hearing from my housekeeper 
of your agent’s departure, I took off at a gallop to intercept 
her before the British sentries discovered her message. I was 
stopped and searched by sentries twice before finding her. 
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (339).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (342).
I myself then was stopped a third time, and searched at 
length while she made her departure. _____________________
___________________________________________________ (259).
The sentries, sensing some agitation in me, refused me passage; 
your agent made her journey alone. I had no rest until I learned, 
four days later, of her safe return to ___________________ (331).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (343).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 65
Most sincerely yours,
the agent known as
___________________________________________________ (320)
The following commendation, in cipher, was placed in the 
archives of the Continental Congress, passing into the hands of 
the Central Intelligence Agency, shortly after its founding in 1947.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (30).
The Conspiracy of the Golden 
Circle: 1805–1875
This conspiracy begins in the years of Thomas Jefferson’s 
presidency, not long after the Revolutionary War. It continues 
in the decades leading to the Civil War (1860–1864) and sur-
vives into the decade following the war.
January 4, 1805
General James Wilkinson
Governor Appointee, Louisiana Territory
Dear General and Governor Appointee Wilkinson,
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the little 
arrangement that we have established._____________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
66
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (8).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (47). 
All of this is of no consequence to me, of course. It merely 
proves to me that you have the ___________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (214).
We can make a part of this continent _________________ (291).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (183).
I would rather __________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (86),
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (115).
What say you? __________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (6).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 67
Sincerely,
Aaron Burr
Vice President of the United States of America
June 17, 1805
The Man of Green
Lexington, Kentucky
Dear Green,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (241).
On the larger question: I agree that our arrangement must 
become _________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (149).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (62).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (243).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (213).
We carry on.
As always,
Aaron Burr

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
68
August 5, 1807
__________________ (336):
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (96).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (49).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (22).
Burr
Burr was acquitted from his federal ________________________
________ (182) because of lack of verifiable evidence.
July 3, 1826
Green:
___________________________________________________ (215).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (151).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (118).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 69
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (252).
You have been my agent, and my friend, for lo these many 
years. __________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (85).
My only advice to you: __________________________________
___________________________________________________ (184).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (7),
and we should not be having this correspondence.
We shall not communicate again.
Burr
Aaron Burr died in 1836.
December 13, 1853
To Burgundy:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (161).
You are instructed to establish a public group, that you 
may call (as we discussed earlier) the Knights of the 
________________________________ (281). You will establish
________________________________________________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
70
___________________________________________________ (20),
with the stated agenda of ________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (212).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (129).
As much as possible, ____________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (50).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (240).
And now it begins.
Emerald
December 29, 1860
To Burgundy:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (21).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (150).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (181).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 71
The signs of _____________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (223)
are unmistakable. I am sure you will have heard by now of
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (116).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (5).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (97).
We shall weather this conflict and ________________________
___________________________________________________ (285).
Emerald
May 12, 1863
Burgundy:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (48).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (152).
Better to identify more clearly with our own continent. 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
72
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (193).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (263).
Emerald
July 2, 1864
To Emerald,
It is good to be in touch with you.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (87).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (117).
___________________________________ (242), of course, has us 
in a stranglehold. ________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (225).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (88).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (64).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 73
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (128) :
_______________________ (287). ___________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (162),
I hope in the near future. In the very worst of circumstances, 
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (191).
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (224)!
________________________________
__________________
____________________________________________________ (34)
July 4, 1864
Burgundy:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (98).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (74).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (140).
Emerald

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
74
September 5, 1864
Dear Emerald,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (251).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (172).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (130).
No doubt this will be our last interchange.
___________________________________________________ (313).
Jefferson Davis
President
Confederate States of America
October 28, 1864
__________________ (309),
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (33).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 75
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (163).
Emerald
From the Peabody Hotel
Memphis, Tennessee
________________________________ (233)
My dear Emerald,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (192).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (138).
(________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________(63)!
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (262))
I am glad that you took the initiative to contact me.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
76
I wish I could make you glad in return, but I cannot.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (139). 
However, I present with two insurmountable difficulties 
in attempting to aid you. First, I have no means or organiza-
tion myself that could render any assistance.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (173).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (107).
I enclose a journal with a recent speech of his. ____________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (202).
Most sincerely yours,
Jefferson Davis
President, Carolina Life Insurance Company
formerly President, Confederate States of America

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 77
To the Honorable Albert Pike, 33rd Degree
Sovereign Grand Commander
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
Southern Jurisdiction, U.S.A.
August 31, 1875
Dear Commander Pike,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (75).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (35).
I shall identify myself as I sign myself,
Emerald

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
78
September 1, 1875
Mr. Emerald,
In your earlier written communication to me, you assured me 
that your intentions were most honorable. Given the nature 
of our discussion on Tuesday night, I have some reason to 
dispute that.
I can understand why former President Davis had you contact 
me. ____________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (73),
mostly outside the domain of the old Union, south of the 
Mason-Dixon line, and west of the Mississippi. _____________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (264).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (174).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 79
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (106). 
In a few words: No, I shall not help you.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (36).
Most determinedly,
A. Pike

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
80
The most prominent sculptress in the Capital communicates 
with Pike. 
September 1, 1875
Albert, my dear one,
I will ask you not to be cross about a temporary deception on 
my part. ________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (141). 
As I came down the stairs, I noticed you enter with a man I had 
never seen before. Not having anything pressing, I decided to sit 
on the mezzanine above the tavern floor, off the private office, 
just gazing upon your face. __________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (76).
Not long after your departure, when your companion stayed 
at the table, I realized that he was awaiting someone else.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (344).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 81
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (345).
Lavinia Ellen “Vinnie” Ream
September 2, 1875
__________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (253).
Burgundy
September 10, 1875
Burgundy,
I am glad that you successfully made it to Arlington, and 
thence home. I myself took a different route.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
82
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (346).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (347).
I’ll tell you more at our next scheduled meeting.
Remember: No cause is ever really lost.
Emerald
The Conspiracy of the Organization: 
1978–2010
This conspiracy begins in the late 1970s, and continues into 
the second decade of the 21st century.
28 September 1978
Jade:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (245). __________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (217).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (226).
J. Halligan

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 83
October 3, 1978
Special Agent Burton Mannheim
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The United States Department of Justice
Mr. Mannheim,
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (185).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (25),
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (91).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________ (119). _______________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_________________________________ (51). __________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (10).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (37).

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
84
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (194).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (154).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (54).
___________________________________________________ (317), 
and, when it has served its purpose, _______________________
___________________________________________________ (186).
Your compliance with these requests will demonstrate to me 
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (89).
J.
October 27, 1978
Jade:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (131).
Later that day, __________________________________________

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 85
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (53).
I understand that Mannheim is set to receive quite the 
commendation.
Tan
September 10, 1983
Special Agent Mannheim,
Congratulations on your marriage to the lovely Ms. Loretta 
Heron. May you have many happy years together.
Now, my young family man, the time has come to consider a 
change of venue for your career.
You have done a magnificent job at the National Security 
Division of the FBI. ______________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (24),
as well as Justice, within the FBI itself, in Washington and else-
where. It is time now to hunt for bigger game.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (244)
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (65).

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
86
Yes, it would be more analysis than fieldwork, but you would 
be _____________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (218).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (195). __________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_________________________________ (120), I would expect that 
you would do very well in this position. As always, I shall be 
glad to feed you the information that I can.
Do let me know through our usual channels what you will do 
about this recommendation. ______________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (108).
Jade
January 10, 1992
Mr. Burton Mannheim
Directorate of Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Mr. Mannheim,
I welcome the questions that you sent in your recent 
communication. _________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (227).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 87
As you have guessed, no, I am not affiliated with any agency of 
the United States government. Nor am I an agent with a 
foreign power. __________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (265).
However, as you can guess from the number of foreign agents 
I have thrown your way over the last dozen years and more, 
my organization has the interests of America close to heart.
No, Jade is not my real name.______________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (12).
I hope that this satisfies your inquiries for the moment. To 
deal with other matters, I agree heartily that this is the time 
for you to transfer back to Operations, where some interest-
ing challenges await you.
It is good that you have kept your word ____________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (66).
As per usual, ____________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (196).
Jade

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
88
August 27, 2010
Mr. Burton Mannheim
Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency
Mr. Mannheim,
I am glad to hear that your youngest has successfully 
departed for college. When the time comes, I do have a sug-
gestion for a fraternity with which I have an association. Just a 
thought. My best regards to Loretta.
Something has come up regarding one of my organization’s 
projects. We are in search of _____________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ (9).
What I would like you to do is to __________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (234).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (90).

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 89
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (52).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (11).
Ten seconds to the disappearance of this message.
Jade
September 12, 2010
Mr. Brandon Grave, 33rd Degree
Cryptographic Archivist
The Scottish Rite
Dear Mr. Grave,
I am sure that receiving an enciphered message like this will 
be something of a shock. ________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (155).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
90
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
_________________________________ (165). In addition, he had 
some books of yours on old Masonic ciphers. I thought you 
were the best person to receive a message enciphered with an 
antique Masonic cipher. I remember my grandfather speaking 
warmly of his Masonic and Scottish Rite associations. _______
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (156).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (23).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (175).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (164).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (254).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 91
________________________________________________________
__________________________ (176). ________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (166).
I ask your help in this matter. _____________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (203). If you would please 
supply this person with a decrypted copy of this message  
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (153).
I know that this sounds crazy. Perhaps you can look up my 
grandfather’s name in some Scottish Rite directory, which will 
verify that part of the story. ______________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (216).
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________ (99).
With hope,
Allison Carroll
Mannheim:
There is little time.
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________ (77). ___________________

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
92
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________(348).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________(38).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (349).
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (109).
___________________________________________________ (350).
J.
September 23, 2010
Special Agent Georgette Grenfell
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The United States Department of Justice
Ms. Grenfell,
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________ (351)

 Chapter 3: Solving Stories 93
The text of a plaque placed in a classified trophy room within 
the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, 
Virginia.
__________________
____________
__________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ (39)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
94

Chapter 4
Letter Substitution 
Cryptograms
Puzzle 1
Difficulty Level: Easy
B JFUJUCA NRYN SA HAAN 
JAFCUEYDDZ NU YDDUS HA NU 
PUEOAZ NU ZUW HZ JDYEC, HYJC, 
YEM CU QUFNR.    
Puzzle 2
Difficulty Level: Easy
DR UZKR XHGRRG RFPZJWXFURG 
MVCQ NQRGRHPXZWF. EWRZFR PRWW 
IR IVQR ZJVCP DUZP MVC DXFU PV 
VBBRQ PV PUR FRQKXNR VB PUR 
ZQIM VB UXF IZLRFPM PUR AXHO.     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
96
Puzzle 3
Difficulty Level: Easy
… SUUGTVYJF YKJ KJSF GI DJLXJY 
TVYJMMTPJVLJ IGX YKJ HXTYTDK 
WTMTYSXO IGXLJD ZKG SXJ ITPKYTVP 
SPSTVDY YKJ LGMGVTSM USYXTGYD.  
Puzzle 4
Difficulty Level: Easy
HJPJZNX NZPBXM SNE FJJP 
EXKHSYJM OBZ LZBIBYKBP, NAADEJM 
BO MKGJZYKPH IKXKYNZR ODPME OBZ 
LJZEBPNX DEJ, NPM BYSJZQKEJ 
KPEDXYJM FR SKE NEEBAKNYJE 
NIBPH YSJ ZJFJX ABXBPKEYE    

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 97
Puzzle 5
Difficulty Level: Easy
GUAW AWY KBLYEA TZ GKJ, AWY 
KIYEBK TZ AWY NEUIWAC DQCA 
FWKEIY. AWYUJ XQOSUF KFAULUAH 
CWTQSB ZTFQC TE “XYKFY,” TE 
ZKEEUEI AWY ZSKDYC TZ CHDXKAWH 
ZTJ AWY CTQAW KEB UAC FKQCY, TE 
XJTDTAUEI AWY ITTB CYECY TZ 
CSKLYJH.   
Puzzle 6
Difficulty Level: Easy
CHA RNG LCIKLWKAZ DKIO C IKIVA 
VKXA SNEAHTNH–NH DNGVZ 
LNPAIOKTS VKXA “ZGXA” LGKI RNG 
JAIIAH? DCLOKTSINT DNGVZ TNI 
CUUAFI IOA IKIVA NW XKTS; K ZN TNI 
OCEA OKL FHAQGZKUA CSCKTLI IKIVAL
NW TNJKVKIR–CTZ TAKIOAH, K IOKTX, 
ZN RNG.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
98
Puzzle 7
Difficulty Level: Easy
LXW Z DYYV TFPY HYYV, URHB X 
HOZKLB DZB TFPY MZHZDOY, XTFVK 
BLFHY QLF QYPY KXBLYPZVK XPTH 
GFP TN SXRHY, BLYV BLXB SFRPB 
QFROW LXMY SFVMZSBYW TY, XOO 
BLFHY NYXPH XKF    
Puzzle 8
Difficulty Level: Easy
T AZSD ZQFZEI CDDR TRMDVDIMDW 
MH ADZV HG EHKV BTQTMZVE 
DPJQHTMI, ZRW DIJDXTZQQE MH ADZV 
HG EHKV BKXA QDII FDQQ-YRHFR 
ZXMTSTMTDI TRSHQSTRO 
YDRMKXYE-ZRW MAD YTRO HG IJZTR.  

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 99
Puzzle 9
Difficulty Level: Easy
I LQVLDITDOIG LPD NW ILLPDL DJID 
MIDPL VIFA DN DJP FOSOG YIH, 
OTSNGSOTZ FIFJPL NW UHPFONQL 
KPDIGL, UIHDOFQGIHGE ZNGM. YP 
JISP I ZPTPHIG OMPI NW DJP 
GNFIDONTL NW DJP KPDIGL 
OTSNGSPM, ITM FIT UOT MNYT I FIFJP 
DN YODJOT I DPT KOGP HIMOQL, 
NWDPT GPLL-VQD DJID OL TND KQFJ 
VPDDPH DJIT ATNYOTZ TNDJOTZ.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
100
Puzzle 10
Difficulty Level: Easy
YMGPKMPBFI FIP SPQRTDP DBF 
TYFZHGP WTYK BXBKFDPMF GTTK, 
WTY SHQQ CHMG B DBMHQB 
PMAPQTXP SHFI B CHQP 
HMGHRBFHME SIPKP WTY RBM 
GHZRTAPK PAHGPMRP TC DK. 
IBQQHEBM'Z BRFHAHFHPZ.    
Puzzle 11
Difficulty Level: Easy
EV EFCEBV, LYTHT CAFF WT E 
VKWVLEOLAEF WTOTQAL LI BIK 
NTHVIOEFFB EV CT HTMIJTH LYT 
MEMYTV. NFTEVT RI LEUT SIHT LYEO 
LYT KVKEF NHTMEKLAIOV LYEL BIKH 
VLEQQ VKVNTMLV OILYAOD. LYIVT CYI 
RI, A ES VIHHB LI VEB, SKVL WT 
YEORFTR CALY TPLHTST NHTZKRAMT.  

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 101
Puzzle 12
Difficulty Level: Easy
SPBU, SPBU UIPZX PLD, PX P 
XITWZYAU VZITPWAYDB, XIEIZPG DC 
AJI DVIZPAYEIX DC AJYX 
DZLPBYNPAYDB PQDVAIQ TDGDZ 
BPSIX PX TZUVADBUSX  VIZJPVX DBI 
QPU UDW XJPGG FI VPZA DC DWZ 
DZLPBYNPAYDB, PBQ JPEI XWTJ P 
TZUVADBUS UDWZXIGC.  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
102
Puzzle 13
Difficulty Level: Easy
AO HXW NXWCE NAQ S JSQ MX HXWI 
USWYP, OAIYM UXQGAQUP FAJ MFSM 
HXW SIP FAY YAQUPIP OIAPQE. 
MFPIPAQ AY S EIXB XO FXQPH MFSM 
USMUFPY FAY FPSIM, NFAUF, YSH 
NFSM FP NACC, AY MFP TIPSM 
FATFIXSE MX FAY IPSYXQ, SQE NFAUF, 
XQUP TSAQPE, HXW NACC OAQE RWM 
CAMMCP MIXWRCP AQ UXQGAQUAQT 
FAJ XO MFP VWYMAUP XO HXWI 
USWYP, AO AQEPPE MFSM USWYP AY 
IPSCCH S TXXE XQP.  SRISFSJ 
CAQUXCQ    

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 103
Puzzle 14
Difficulty Level: Easy
EKREISPJIRN AVBNBRD JSG NSZI S 
UKMN KQ QKVJM. FIVUSFM BNM 
KPHIMN ZRKAR SFFPBESNBKR BM 
QKYRH BR NUI SREBIRN HIWBEI KQ 
AVBNBRD S MIEVIN JIMMSDI KR NUI 
UISH KQ S MPSWI SRH HBMFSNEUBRD 
NUI MPSWI ABNU UBM 
EKJJYRBESNBKR SQNIV UBM 
DVKABRD USBV USH EKWIVIH NUI 
AVBNBRD. UIPIR QKYEUI DSBRIM  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
104
Puzzle 15
Difficulty Level: Easy
JARVYVP LVPSVBJ SLDSVLJU. JAVU 
IVLVNU ORPA JAV SLDSVLJU JD 
XVBDIV JAVRL SLDSVLJU JAEJ JAVU 
IEU IDLV SVLHVBJNU LVPSVBJ RJ. K W 
BAVPJVLJDG   
Puzzle 16
Difficulty Level: Easy
K RID FKD ID IBOLTJDG MD IDA 
GMZKR, IOIKDNG IDA MZZMDJDG. 
ZJMZVJ YDMF GXKN, IDQ NGJJB RVJIB 
ME TJ IG ZIBGKJN. MEGJD, IN I NKOD 
ME GXJKB OBJIG BJNZJRG, GXJA 
QMD'G JUJD KDUKGJ TJ. QIUJ WIBBA   

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 105
Puzzle 17
Difficulty Level: Tricky
G FQXM QHWIFMV CQT GHIW 
RKGHIWH'D IMHI, CFGRF G FQXM 
LMMH JMXMKWBGHS AWV DWNM 
IGNM.   
Puzzle 18
Difficulty Level: Tricky
PU ENGMQ YK YKBU UN ZLNJKKQ 
EPUDNGU QKMRW EPUD FW ZMRS UN 
UGLS UDPB BULNSXDNMQ NTKL UN 
DPB FRCKBUW. 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
106
Puzzle 19
Difficulty Level: Tricky
… ANQZYKI LSVL LSB DKYLBK NZ LSVL 
IBGGVCB YG YQFBBF LSB BGLBBIBF 
CBQBKVX VKQNXF, MYALNK NZ LSB 
HVLLXB NZ GVKVLNCV. 
Puzzle 20
Difficulty Level: Tricky
NY. VSJYVS U. O. MKTIOSX PJ ZSYBS 
WZ PCS OSWNSY WEN EJGKEWO 
LJAENSY JL PCWP VYJAR     

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 107
Puzzle 21
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher has a keyword that’s also the blank word in the 
message.
IPXZPT ESXQACG'B “SLDMBSPL” PO 
_ _ _ _ _ _  UMB WLTCASCDCIAG 
ISBMBZTPWB. TCHAMXC NSR MB NCMI 
PO ZNC QLSKNZB PO ZNC KPAICL 
XSTXAC.  
Puzzle 22
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher has a keyword that’s also the blank word in the 
message.
QTIY XKAPIOW, TYG TE WM 
OUUTJYGML, LITVFN RG PYTXY UT 
MTV OL “_ _ _ _ _ _”; LITVFN K YTU RG 
ORFG UT GLAOCG WM AVJJGYU 
CJGNKAOWGYU, MTV LIOFF JGCTJU 
UT IKW.     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
108
Puzzle 23
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher has a keyword that’s also the blank word in the 
message.
J BF BL OFVHIMOO JL SYO 
TJEORSIEBSO IN IVOEBSJILW JL SYO 
ROLSEBH JLSOHHJAOLRO BAOLRM. 
FM WXVOEQJWIE JW ILO  _ _ _ _ _ _  
FBLLYOJF. FM INNJRO YBLTHOW SYO 
IVOEBSJILW IN NJOHT IVOEBSJQOW - 
UBWJRBHHM, WVJOW - JL ROESBJL 
HIRBSJILW BEIXLT SYO PIEHT.  
Puzzle 24
Difficulty Level: Tricky
KHD XSQI ZOIFRZLZIO THQZIR SFO 
HRXIM YHVVDFZTR SWIFRT SR RXI 
OIGSMRVIFRT HL TRSRI, OILIFTI, 
ZFRIMZHM, SFO RMSFTGHMRSRZHF  

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 109
Puzzle 25
Difficulty Level: Tricky
J CIPT JI QZOGJWFYZO GBZG APF 
BZHV Z DGOPIX LVDJOV GP DVOHV 
APFO WPFIGOA, GP QOPGVWG APFO 
WPFIGOA NOPR VIVRA ZXVIGD, JI 
QZOGJWFYZO GP QOPGVWG APFO 
WPFIGOA NOPR LPFUYV ZXVIGD,    
Puzzle 26
Difficulty Level: Tricky
JCS PMKHJ UDBMZRJMUF UP JCS 
GSVUFHJKRJUK MH JU DS BSZMDBS. 
VMHH VRFFSKH IRFFUJ HXVLRJCMYS 
QMJC R IRWHS QCUHS HMZFH HCS 
IRFFUJ VRTS UWJ SOSF QMJC CSK 
ZBRHHSH UF. NWGMJC VRKJMF   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
110
Puzzle 27
Difficulty Level: Tricky
KUV NTZBH PX HPIPHVH PDKT FVTFBV 
NUT HT KUPDWX EDH FVTFBV NUT 
WVK KUV OZVHPK. KZR, PY RTJ OED, 
KT GVBTDW KT KUV YPZXK OBEXX. 
KUVZV'X YEZ BVXX OTSFVKPKPTD. 
HNPWUK STZZTN   

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 111
Puzzle 28
Difficulty Level: Tricky
OLHUFWL USLBH DZIP HLJLZBS ID RFH 
BFOLH, FEGSMOFEY RBPFSWIE WRBW 
BEOZL NL LALGMWLO NX DFZFEY 
HVMBO BH NLDFWH B HISOFLZ, 
CBHRFEYWIE IZOLZLO WRBW RL NL 
RBEYLO BH B HUX. RL CBH EIW FE B 
HLEWFPLEWBS IZ YLELZIMH PIIO. 
(TIHLUR T. LSSFH, RFH LAGLSSLEGX: 
YLIZYL CBHRFEYWIE, 2008, U. 129)     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
112
Puzzle 29
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword. See whether you can discover it! 
IPRPQWD KWGNFRIHJR, KP NWZP FR 
JBQ SBGHJTA XWCJQ CJNR WRTQP, 
JBH JO BRFOJQX, KNJ KWG 
FRHPQSPYHPT RPWQ HWQQAHJKR 
HJTWA JR HNP KWA HJ EQFHFGN 
DFRPG.   

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 113
Puzzle 30
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
We removed all the spaces and punctuation in this cipher. 
Use letter frequency analysis to crack the code.
YBEUU QDJYI GEDSG MQDAD JQPIF 
QFYDJ EOSQE PSQHY KFGDS IEDBE 
UUYDJ QPGDB FGQOI FQBED IGDQD 
IYXYP UVXQI YXXUQ DTDEH ZVIFQ 
KQRPQ KQDIK IFYIU PKYX GBQBY 
PPEXX JGJPG KTFQP XGOQO EPIFQ 
BYAKQ EOOPQ QJEUG DIFQK QPMGB 
QEOFQ PBEAD IPVIF QADGI QJKIY 
IQKEO YUQPG BYHFG BFGKQ IQPDY 
XXVSP YIQOA XIFEA SFIFQ KQIFY 
DTKUA KIZQT QRIKQ BPQIE APSPY 
IGIAJ QKFYX XXYKI YKXED SYKEA 
POPQQ JEU

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
114
Puzzle 31
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Z NEX QPB OP WZAT ENJT CNEENWT 
OP LQ KZJT CTWWQ NSI LQ MYZRIUTS, 
OP CTWWQ'E JNLZRQ ZS 
CYZRNITRCYZN.    
Puzzle 32
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This puzzle has a keyword. See whether you can discover it!
VHZQ GOXHQ OWEQA - DOZUBY, JKPA 
BOJA, KW DKMKJKOW DJHYBAI 
RABKWE AWAGV JKWAI - YBA GOQP HL 
O ITV - IBOJJ GAAY YBA IOGA LOYA, RV 
YBA QZJAI HL SOQ.    

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 115
Puzzle 33
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
We removed all the spaces and punctuation in this cipher. 
Use letter frequency analysis to crack the code.
EQQSL LKJMB SOTTQE VOKQS LMETO 
TQSLK MYEJB MCJTS OTQLK QEKJY 
MULTE XEVQS LREGE UEKJO TEZZL 
EGTBG MYTON SQFAQ RMKQO KALTO 
QTWMA GKLVO KTOCL KRL
Puzzle 34
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
TIUUILHKE SVXRH
OLIHRSIEB
BCI PKEUISILVBI HBVBIH KU VDILRPV   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
116
Puzzle 35
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword that’s also the blank word in the 
message.
S CTPR YCR ABRQQSLF DN T NDGWRG 
VDWWTLESLF DNNSVRG DN KDJGQ YD 
VDWWJLSVTYR YD KDJ T GRMJRQY 
NDG TQQSQYTLVR. SN KDJ VTL QHTGR 
TL CDJG DG YZD NDG VDLPRGQTYSDL 
DL T WTYYRG DN WJYJTB SLYRGRQY, 
S TQO KDJG SLEJBFRLVR YD WRRY 
WR YDWDGGDZ LSFCY TY CRGDL'Q 
_ _ _ _ _ _ , LDY NTG NGDW KDJG 
BDEFSLFQ, ARFSLLSLF TY RSFCY H.W.     

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 117
Puzzle 36
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword that’s also the blank word in the 
message.
BTZCNDBTHDMVA, J LHTTCD JFKMEM 
ACB, MJDYMN. J YHWM TC KNCCZ CZ 
CBN LCTWMNXHDJCT. DYJX TCDM 
SJVV OM VMZD JT H OCDDVM JT H 
_ _ _ _ JT H DNMM; J YHWM TC SHA DC 
EJNMLD DYM HBDYCNJDJMX DC ACB. 
XC, HVV J LHT EC JX NMZBXM ACB, 
HTE DYHD J EC JNNMWCLHOVA.  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
118
Puzzle 37
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
TN TJ EAFETSZ NVSN YK APZG TL 
NVTJ TRGLNTQTESNTPL LPN MG 
YGLNTPLGR NP KPFA EPZZGSIFGJ PA 
JFWGATPAJ. T SY TL SL GONAGYGZK 
JGLJTNTHG WPJTNTPL NVSN YFJN LPN
MG EPYWAPYTJGR.     
Puzzle 38
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
EWKYK OTD ANKTYNZ EGG LPAW GS T 
EYTFN NKSE RZ EWK DTEKNNFEK 
YKBGDFEFGQFQH EG WTMK SPNNZ 
AGMKYKC ZGPY EYTAXD.  

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 119
Puzzle 39
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
120
Puzzle 40
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
B EFZFWBSH KAMSBWFKV FVQKZQML 
JMGMAWFKV. MQMV WPKYOP HKY BSM 
GKEAMWMVW, BAAMBS WK NM 
FVGKEAMWMVW. WPKYOP 
MDDMGWFQM, BAAMBS WK NM 
FVMDDMGWFQM. LYV WXY (~400 NG) 
Puzzle 41
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This puzzle has a keyword. See whether you can discover it!
Y EQTJCS XJ Y WYT FVC UTCFJ WCSQ 
OVYT VQ OVXTUJ LCG CGMVO OC. 
PYGSQTEQ N DQOQS    

 Chapter 4: Letter Substitution Cryptograms 121
Puzzle 42
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
VP VW K JKVG WMZZKGA RJ OVWPRGA 
PR WKA POKP POI WKJIQMKGBW RJ 
EVSIGPA OKLI SIID JRGQIB VD 
XRDPGRLIGWVIW VDLRELVDQ DRP 
LIGA DVXI NIRNEI. JIEVY 
JGKDHJMGPIG   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
122

Chapter 5
Number Substitution 
Cryptograms
Puzzle 43
Difficulty Level: Easy
... 23.26.13.25.17.06.17.22.01  16.11.10  
05.26.17.16.17.12.11  03.17.16.11  
09.17.02.17.16.07.26.24 
17.22.14.13.26.09.07.16.17.13.22  
07.05.13.18.16  16.11.10  
07.09.10.26.17.08.07.22  
23.07.16.26.17.13.16.12’  
08.13.22.16.17.22.10.22.16.07.02  
07.26.09.24,  12.18.08.11  07.12  
16.11.10  12.17.19.10  07.22.06  
02.13.08.07.16.17.13.22  13.14  
01.26.13.18.23.12  13.14  
08.13.22.16.17.22.10.22.16.07.02  
07.26.09.24  16.26.13.13.23.12.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
124
Puzzle 44
Difficulty Level: Easy
XX.VIII.V  XXIII.XV.XVIII.IV  XX.VIII.I.XX 
XXIII.V  VIII.I.XXII.V  VI.XVIII.XV.XIII 
XIII.XXI.XII.XX.IX.XVI.XII.V  
I.VII.V.XIV.XX.XIX XVI.XII.I.III.V.IV  
IX.XIV  XX.VIII.V  III.I.XIII.XVI XV.VI  
XX.VIII.V  II.XVIII.IX.XX.IX.XIX.VIII, 
XXIII.XV.XVIII.XI.IX.XIV.VII 
IX.XIV.IV.V.XVI.V.XIV.IV.V.XIV.XX.XII.XXV  
XV.VI XV.XIV.V  I.XIV.XV.XX.VIII.V.XVIII,  
I.XII.XII XVI.XV.IX.XIV.XX.XIX  XX.XV  
XX.VIII.V  XIX.I.XIII.V  
III.XV.XIV.III.XII.XXI.XIX.IX.XV.XIV.  

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 125
Puzzle 45
Difficulty Level: Easy
20.18.04.26.22.04  22.04.01.17  02.22  
01.16.19.14.11.04  26.22  19.16  
09.12.04.19.12.04.10  19.12.14.22  
16.24.24.04.10  14.22  
26.11.11.04.20.19.26.25.18.04  19.16  
23.16.02,  26.18.16.01.21  09.14.19.12  
23.16.02.10  20.18.26.01.22  19.16  
19.02.10.01  16.06.04.10  09.04.22.19  
20.16.14.01.19.  
Puzzle 46
Difficulty Level: Easy
15.24.14.18 14.18 16 
23.05.19.18.21.05.04 
25.13.16.03.09.21.09 18.21.23.03.21.15 
12.14.15.24.14.17 15.24.21 
14.17.17.21.03 23.14.03.23.05.21 19.11 
25.21.17.21.03.16.05 18.14.03 
24.21.17.03.04 23.05.14.17.15.19.17, 16 
25.03.19.13.06 15.24.16.15 26.04 
16.25.21.17.15.18 23.16.17.17.19.15 
06.21.17.21.15.03.16.15.21.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
126
Puzzle 47
Difficulty Level: Easy
08.01, 05.04.09, 20 25.18.08.06 08.07 13.01.04 
10.17.26.18.09 13.01.26.13 05.08.11 01.26.23 13.08 
23.04.17.20.19.04.22 25.04.18.13.11.24.25.05 13.08 
09.10.26.20.18. 20 25.18.08.06 26 15.22.04.26.13 
02.26.18.05 13.01.20.18.15.09 13.01.26.13 26.22.04 
18.08.13 06.20.23.04.17.05 25.18.08.06.18, 
20.18.24.17.11.23.20.18.15 05.08.11.22 
09.04.24.22.04.13 
22.04.18.11.18.24.20.26.13.20.08.18 08.07 
26.02.04.22.20.24.26.18 
24.20.13.20.12.04.18.09.01.20.10, 13.01.04 
08.26.13.01 08.07 26.17.17.04.15.20.26.18.24.04 
13.01.26.13 05.08.11 02.26.23.04 13.08 13.01.04 
09.10.26.18.20.09.01 13.01.22.08.18.04, 26.18.23 
13.01.04 26.18.18.11.26.17 10.04.18.09.20.08.18 
13.01.26.13 05.08.11 22.04.24.04.20.19.04 
07.22.08.02 02.26.23.22.20.23.   

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 127
Puzzle 48
Difficulty Level: Easy
05.19.11.24 11.24.09 
12.03.15.13.19.12.11.19.03.15 03.26 
13.10.22.22.10.15.18.19.16.24.10.04 
11.24.19.25 05.09.09.01 26.03.06 
“20.11.11.09.06.19.15.16 
18.19.25.22.03.17.10.22 
25.09.15.11.19.04.09.15.11.25", 05.09 
15.09.09.18 11.03 12.24.10.15.16.09 
11.10.12.11.19.12.25 10.15.18 
25.11.06.10.11.09.16.19.08.09 26.03.06 
11.24.09 22.10.06.16.09.06 
07.19.12.11.20.06.09.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
128
Puzzle 49
Difficulty Level: Easy
49 42.02 67.49.36.60.15.91.33.57.33.67, 
42.50.67 62.63.42.62 
73.49.88.83.49.50.36.15.50 49.36 
36.33.62 62.15 62.33.36.62.49.35.64 
42.46.42.49.50.36.62 02.33. 50.15.50.33 
15.35 62.63.33 57.33.36.62 15.35 
64.15.96 42.57.33 83.50.15.73.50, 
42.50.67 36.15 49.62 36.63.42.88.88 
57.33.02.42.49.50.   
Puzzle 50
Difficulty Level: Easy
21.02.22.04.05.24.18 06.14.12.13 
13.01.02.07.04 13.01.20.13 13.01.24 
24.12.13.20.21.05.02.12.01.06.24.07.13 
08.25 13.01.24 04.07.02.26.01.13.12 
08.25 13.01.24 26.08.05.23.24.07 
22.02.11.22.05.24 02.12 01.02.12 
08.16.07 21.11.20.02.07.22.01.02.05.23.  

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 129
Puzzle 51
Difficulty Level: Easy
13.18. 08.01.12.12.09.07.01.14 08.01.19 
02.05.05.14 19.05.18.22.09.14.07 01.19 
01 04.15.21.02.12.05 01.07.05.14.20 
06.15.18 20.08.05 19.15.22.09.05.20 
21.14.09.15.14 06.15.18 13.01.14.25 
25.05.01.18.19, 09.14 23.08.09.03.08 
16.15.19.09.20.09.15.14 08.05 08.01.19 
03.15.13.16.18.15.13.09.19.05.04 
13.01.14.25 04.05.12.09.03.01.20.05 
04.09.16.12.15.13.01.20.09.03 
14.05.07.15.20.09.01.20.09.15.14.19.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
130
Puzzle 52
Difficulty Level: Easy
15  12.07.09.08  21.25.06.21  
02.19.21.06.17.12.15.07.20  
15.07.21.19.14.14.15.20.19.07.24.19  
17.06.21.19.14.14.15.21.19.17  09.18.19.02  
06.10.19.02.15.24.06.07  17.09.15.14  15.17  06  
17.19.07.17.15.21.15.18.19  15.17.17.16.19.  15  
17.16.20.20.19.17.21  21.25.06.21  11.09.16  
02.19.21.06.17.12  21.25.19  
17.06.21.19.14.14.15.21.19.17  15.07  
17.16.24.25  06  08.06.11  21.25.06.21  
21.25.19.11  25.06.18.19  21.09  26.14.11  
09.18.19.02  06.10.19.02.15.24.06.07  
21.19.02.02.15.21.09.02.11  21.09  09.21.25.19.02 
14.09.24.06.21.15.09.07.17;  21.25.19  
17.24.06.07.17  24.06.07  21.25.19.07  01.19  
23.19.02.26.09.02.10.19.05  15.07  
23.06.17.17.15.07.20,  06.17  15.21  08.19.02.19.  

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 131
Puzzle 53
Difficulty Level: Easy
... 97.39.34.13 37.91.41.06.08.71.34.65.34.37 
97.39.34 56.34.77 34.71.91.37.34.56.06.34 
97.39.92.97 91 78.83.92.56.97.34.37 91.56 
39.92.83.83.91.87.92.56'41 39.08.53.34 92.56.37 
08.80.80.91.06.34, 92.41 97.39.34.13 39.92.37 
37.91.41.06.08.71.34.65.34.37 77.39.92.97 91 
78.83.92.56.97.34.37 34.92.65.83.91.34.65 91.56 
97.39.34 53.08.56.97.39.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
132
Puzzle 54
Difficulty Level: Easy
XXVI-III-VIII VI-XX-XXII-XXII IV-XI-X 
XVII-XXV-VI-VII-VIII-XIX X-XVII 
XXVI-III-XXV-XIII 
XX-XXI-XXVI-VIII-XII-XVIII-XI-XI-XVIII, 
II-III-VIII-XVIII XIII-XI-IX-VIII-XI-XVIII-VIII 
XX-XIII-VII-VIII-XIX XXI-XI-XII XX 
XVIII-XI-XVIII-VIII-XV-XXV-XIII-XXVI-VIII-
XVIII-XXVI XI-XXI-XXI-XXV-VI-VIII, 
II-XX-XIII XVII-XXII-XX-VI-VIII-XIX XIV-IV 
XI-XVIII-VIII XI-XXI IX-IV 
XX-XIII-XIII-XI-VI-XXV-XX-XXVI-VIII-XIII; 
XXVI-III-VIII XII-VIII-VI-XI-XII-XIX XI-XXI 
XXVI-III-XX-XXVI VI-XX-XXII-XXII 
II-XXV-XXII-XXII 
XIII-X-XIV-XIII-XXVI-XX-XVIII-XXVI-XXV-
XX-XXVI-VIII IV-XI-X-XII 
XIII-XXVI-XI-XII-IV XX-XIV-XI-X-XXVI 
XX-XVIII XX-XVIII-XI-XVIII-IV-IX-XI-X-XIII 
XXVI-VIII-XXII-VIII-XVII-III-XI-XVIII-VIII 
XXVI-XXV-XVII.    

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 133
Puzzle 55
Difficulty Level: Easy
26.11 11.18.02.22.10 16.06.12.09 
22.05.22.04.16 18.05.21 16.06.12.09 
23.09.26.22.05.21, 14.06.09.02.26.05.24 
11.06.24.22.11.25.22.09, 11.06 
25.12.09.11 16.06.12 11.06 11.25.22 
25.22.18.09.11: 11.25.22 06.05.22 11.06 
10.03.18.05.21.22.09 16.06.12 18.05.21 
11.25.22 06.11.25.22.09 11.06 24.22.11 
11.25.22 05.22.14.10 11.06 16.06.12. 
04.18.09.02 11.14.18.26.05   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
134
Puzzle 56
Difficulty Level: Easy
IX-VI  I  XIX-V-III-XVIII-V-XX 
XVI-IX-V-III-V  XV-VI  XIV-V-XXIII-XIX  
IX-XIX  IV-IX-XXII-XXI-XII-VII-V-IV  
II-XXV  I  XIX-XVI-XXV  
II-V-VI-XV-XVIII-V  XX-VIII-V  
XX-IX-XIII-V  IX-XIX  XVIII-IX-XVI-V , 
VIII-V  XIII-XXI-XIX-XX  II-V  XVI-XXI-XX 
XX-XV  IV-V-I-XX-VIII  
XX-XV-VII-V-XX-VIII-V-XVIII  
XXIII-IX-XX-VIII  XX-VIII-V  XIII-I-XIV  
XX-XV  XXIII-VIII-XV-XIII  XX-VIII-V  
XIX-V-III-XVIII-V-XX  XXIII-I-XIX  
XX-XV-XII-IV . XIX-XXI-XIV  XX-XXVI-XXI

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 135
Puzzle 57
Difficulty Level: Easy
98.41.66.98.70.28.70.61.37.70 : 
12.14.70.12  53.41.70.61.13.14 66.73 
12.14.27 70.41.12 66.73 65.93.68.61.28 
18.14.68.13.14 13.66.61.47.68.47.12.47 
68.61 46.27.41.93 61.27.70.41.65.93 
37.27.13.27.68.46.68.61.28 93.66.35.41 
73.41.68.27.61.37.47 18.68.12.14.66.35.12 
56.35.68.12.27 37.27.13.27.68.46.68.61.28 
93.66.35.41 27.61.27.67.68.27.47. 
73.41.70.61.13.68.47 67 
13.66.41.61.73.66.41.37     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
136
Puzzle 58
Difficulty Level: Easy
19.73.22 26.27.48.02.32.64 41.28.18 
19.73.22.18 28.23.22 
03.22.19.19.32.91.03 
64.18.91.32.64.28.02 28.48.42.27.19 
26.42.02.32.19.32.64.32.28.91.41; 
19.73.22.18 41.73.42.27.02.87 
73.22.28.23 73.42.35 
26.42.02.32.19.32.64.32.28.91.41 
19.28.02.65 28.48.42.27.19 19.73.22.86. 
03.22.42.23.03.22 35.22.02.87.42.91   
Puzzle 59
Difficulty Level: Tricky
... 88.77.08.88.67.77.30.82  
02.53.53.08.16.85.32.36.85.91  56.08.77  
04.36.70  67.24.88.67.85.70.67.70  
33.04.36.30.67  56.36.91.04.32.36.85.91  
36.85  53.02.85.02.25.02,  67.80.67.85  
32.04.08.16.91.04  02.77.85.08.30.25’70  
77.67.53.67.36.88.32.70  33.67.77.67  
30.08.70.32  36.85  27.02.32.32.30.67   

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 137
Puzzle 60
Difficulty Level: Tricky
...19.25.13.19.10.21.02.14.16.03.19.15.02  
16.13.15  02.10.19.23  16.02  14.22  
19.22.21.11.15.17  21.15  14.22  
13.15.19.22.03.02.25.07.15.13  21.05  
11.22.02.25.14.25.22.03.  25  03.22.09  
09.25.02.23  14.22  06.13.22.16.19.23  
14.23.15  11.22.02.02.25.06.25.17.25.14.05  
22.18  19.23.16.03.12.25.03.12  21.05   
16.17.17.15.12.25.16.03.19.15  14.22  
14.23.15  02.25.07.15  22.18  23.25.02  
21.16.08.15.02.14.05  14.23.15  
04.25.03.12. 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
138
Puzzle 61
Difficulty Level: Tricky
61.76.98 52.21.63.63 
21.97.97.79.04.21.51.68.79.63.61 
58.79.22.04 70.51.68.43.76.63.58 68.76 
58.79.51.43.67.59 52.21.68.59.76.98.68 
43.51.21.58.21.22.91 51.63.51.43.97 
68.59.79 51.43.79.51 11.43.76.97 
52.79.58.68 70.76.21.22.68, 
58.76.98.68.59 70.51.58.68 
68.51.43.43.61.68.76.52.22, 11.43.76.97 
58.79.70.68.79.97.16.79.43 
68.52.79.22.68.61-11.21.43.58.68 
68.59.43.76.98.91.59 68.59.79 
68.52.79.22.68.61-22.21.22.68.59.   

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 139
Puzzle 62
Difficulty Level: Tricky
02.12.06, 26.13.23 07.19.22 09.22.08.07 
12.21 07.19.22 08.11.22.24.07.09.06.14 
26.20.22.13.07.08–09.22.23, 
02.22.15.15.12.04, 25.15.06.22, 
12.09.26.13.20.22, 26.13.23 26.15.15 
07.19.22 09.22.08.07–26.08 04.22.15.15 
26.08 14.02.08.22.15.21 26.09.22 
07.19.22 18.13.13.22.09 
24.18.09.24.15.22.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
140
Puzzle 63
Difficulty Level: Tricky
27.60.01.14 01 47.32.01.50.01.14.73.74 
47.84.01.14.60! 01.64 01.48 
01.14.14.41.32.48.84.99 80.41.32 14.60.84 
47.84.80.84.48.64.84 73.48 01 50.89.32.47.84.32 
74.01.64.84, 74.67.84.50.84.48.14 14.32.73.84.64 
14.41 32.84-84.48.01.74.14 14.60.84 
64.60.41.41.14.73.48.09 73.48 01.48 
01.14.14.84.50.05.14 14.41 64.60.41.27 60.41.27 
14.60.84 90.73.74.14.73.50 60.01.47 
01.74.14.89.01.67.67.99 64.60.41.14 
60.73.50.64.84.67.80 45.99 
01.74.74.73.47.84.48.14-01.48.47 
74.67.84.50.84.48.14 05.32.41.74.84.84.47.64 
14.41 64.60.41.41.14 60.73.50.64.84.67.80 45.99 
01.74.74.73.47.84.48.14!  

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 141
Puzzle 64
Difficulty Level: Tricky
94.92.73 10.45.99 78.76 53.92.63.10 69 
85.73.99.27 94.92.69.85 
10.73.85.85.45.34.73 85.92.45.67.67 
78.73 76.63.75.54 67.69.45.69.85.63.99 
53.69.94.92 10.73.      

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
142
Puzzle 65
Difficulty Level: Tricky
III-VIII-XVIII-XXIV-XVII III VIII-XXIV-XIX 
XXIII-XXIV-III-XVII-XVI XXI-VIII VIII-X-XXIV-XXII-II 
XXIV-XV-VII-XXIV-XVII-X-XXIV-IV-XIV-XXIV, 
XIX-X-XVIII-XI XXIII-XXI-I-XVII VIII-XII-X 
XVII-XXIV-XIV-XXI-XVII-II XXI-VIII 
XIV-III-XVIII-XIV-XI-X-IV-XXVI II-XXI-I-XII-XXII-XXIV 
III-XXVI-XXIV-IV-XVIII-XVI, XXIII-XXI-I XIX-XXI-I-XXII-II 
XII-XXIV III IV-III-XVIII-I-XVII-III-XXII VIII-XXI-XVII III 
XVIII-XVII-III-IV-XVI-VIII-XXIV-XVII XVIII-XXI XVIII-XI-XXIV 
XXI-VIII-VIII-X-XIV-XXIV XXI-VIII XVIII-XI-XXIV 
II-X-XVII-XXIV-XIV-XVIII-XXI-XVII-III-XVIII-XXIV XXI-VIII 
X-IV-XVIII-XXIV-XXII-XXII-X-XXVI-XXIV-IV-XIV-XXIV 
XVIII-XI-III-XVIII VIII-XXI-XIV-I-XVI-XXIV-XVI XXI-IV 
XIV-XXI-I-IV-XVIII-XXIV-XVII-X-IV-XVIII-XXIV-XXII-XXII-X-
XXVI-XXIV-IV-XIV-XXIV.   

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 143
Puzzle 66
Difficulty Level: Tricky
... 21.11.15 15.11 24.13.17.21.15 11.03.03 
15.06.23 05.11.18.24.25.15.23.13 
20.05.13.23.23.21 11.21 14.06.17.05.06 
18.26 18.23.20.20.02.12.23.20 
02.24.24.23.02.13. 26.11.25.13 
05.02.13.23.03.25.22 
02.15.15.23.21.15.17.11.21 15.11 
03.11.22.22.11.14 
01.23.15.02.17.22.23.01 
17.21.20.15.13.25.05.15.17.11.21.20 
02.20 01.17.05.15.02.15.23.01 15.11 
26.11.25 18.02.09.23.20 26.11.25 02 
04.23.13.26 04.02.22.25.02.10.22.23 
02.20.20.23.15 17.21 02.21.26 
11.13.12.02.21.17.08.02.15.17.11.21.    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
144
Puzzle 67
Difficulty Level: Tricky
00.50.57  17.49.58.99.00  
37.49.45.57.58.80.33.57.80.00  81.99  
49.22.00.57.80  00.50.57  33.49.99.00  
33.49.58.28.39.  49.80.57  
62.49.33.95.49.99.57.91  49.22  
62.11.80.81.62.99  81.99  49.22.00.57.80  
45.57.58.11  00.49.39.57.58.28.80.00  
28.80.91  50.66.33.28.80.57.  09.66.00  
17.50.57.80  22.28.80.28.00.81.62.99  
28.58.57  49.80  00.49.95  
00.50.57.58.57  81.99  80.49  
39.81.33.81.00  00.49  
49.95.95.58.57.99.99.81.49.80.  
50  39  33.57.80.62.86.57.80  

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 145
Puzzle 68
Difficulty Level: Tricky
12.15.83.34.45.68.25  
34.29.14.03.12.29.83  21.83  34.12.14.34  
53.29.01  14.01.52  01.14.34.15.45.01.83  
50.29.12.14.35.29  49.15.83.29.51.25  
45.01.03.29  34.12.29.25  12.14.35.29  
29.37.12.14.21.83.34.29.52  14.51.51  
45.34.12.29.68  
14.51.34.29.68.01.14.34.15.35.29.83.  
14.50.50.14  29.50.14.01    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
146
Puzzle 69
Difficulty Level: Tricky
02.23.18.17.18  09.17.18  09  
02.18.17.17.21.16.22.18  22.05.02  05.13  
22.21.18.03  14.05.21.24.14  
09.17.05.19.24.11  02.23.18  
26.05.17.22.11,  09.24.11  02.23.18  
26.05.17.03.02  05.13  21.02  21.03  
23.09.22.13  05.13  02.23.18.25  
09.17.18  02.17.19.18.  
26.21.24.03.02.05.24  
12.23.19.17.12.23.21.22.22   

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 147
Puzzle 70
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
34  97.65.45.20.15.67.90  65.96.67  
56.34.01.01  50.67.81.81.28  
01.40.34.50.50.67.96  32.40.34.51.67  34  
32.99.01  01.15.99.15.34.65.96.67.90  
34.96  50.40.34.51.99.90.67.51.50.40.34.99.  
15.40.34.01  32.65.45.51.90  09.67  
15.40.67  01.99.56.67  50.67.81.81.28  
01.40.34.50.50.67.96  32.40.65  34.01  
28.65.45.20  32.34.33.67.    
Puzzle 71
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
VI-XVI  VI  VIII-XXII-XXVI-IX-XII-XXII-XVII-VI-XXVI  
XVII-XX-XVI-XXII-XII-XIX,  XXI-XIX  
X-XXI-IV-XV-XVI-XXII  XXV  VIII-XXV-XIII-XXII  
XVI-VI-XIX-XXII  II-VI-XVI-XVI-VI-VIII-XXII  IX-XXI  
XX-XXI-IV-XV  VII-XXV-XIX-XXII  VI-XXVI-XIV  
XIX-VI-XVII-XXV-XII-XX.        

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
148
Puzzle 72
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
77.32.88 46.91.97.99 26.32 
31.99.16.88.59.91.59.45.32.26 59.32 
48.99.89.99.26.48. 77.32.88.31 
89.91.61.45.90.77 50.45.90.90 
25.88.89.89.99.31 59.46.99 
45.86.26.32.61.45.26.77 77.32.88 
46.91.97.99 04.31.32.88.86.46.59 
88.16.32.26 77.32.88.31 26.91.61.99, 
89.32.31 26.32.50, 91.26.48 89.32.31 
91.90.50.91.77.25.    

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 149
Puzzle 73
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
All the spaces and punctuation have been removed. Use letter 
frequency analysis to crack the code.
73 42 57 37 59 42 57 10 34 37 59 42 11 
32 01 34 11 97 57 24 97 29 37 97 10 32 
10 56 37 59 42 57 29 10 37 37 97 57 59 
11 97 37 42 59 04 57 56 04 29 97 25 97 
37 97 42 57 59 42 11 42 04 32 24 37 59 
42 11 42 37 59 11 10 34 92 59 10 34 37 
13 04 32 73 57 37 04 37 42 57 04 32 24 
37 42 11 11 97 37 10 11 97 42 57 10 56 
37 59 42 29 10 34 32 37 11 73     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
150
Puzzle 74
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
XI-XIII-VIII-XXI-XIII-III-XXIV-II-X-XI, 
XI-XXV-XVIII-XIII X-XI-XIII 
XVII-XXVI-V-XIX-I-XXI 
XXIV-II-VI-XXV-VIII-I-XX-XXV-X-I-XXIV-VIII 
XXII-VIII-XXIV-XV-VIII XXV-XIV X-XI-XIII 
“XXIV-II-VII-XIII-II XXIV-III X-XI-XIII 
XIV-XXIV-VIII-XIV XXIV-III 
XIX-I-V-XIII-II-X-XXIII”.

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 151
Puzzle 75
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
XXIII-V  XVII-V-II-VIII-VI  XXIV-V-II  XIII-III-XX-XX  
XI-III-XXIII-XVII  III-VI  
I-II-XXVI-XV-XXVI-III-I-III-XXIII-XXI  VI-V  I-XII-XII  
XXII-XII  XIV-V-XXII-XXII-II-XXIII-III-XIV-XVI-VI-XII  
XIII-III-VI-IX  XXIV-V-II  III-XXIII  
XIV-III-XV-IX-XII-XXVI.  III  XVI-I-I-II-XXVI-XII  
XXIV-V-II  VI-IX-XVI-VI  XXII-XXIV  
III-XXIII-VI-XII-XXIII-VI-III-V-XXIII-I  XVI-XXVI-XII  
XXII-V-I-VI  IX-V-XXIII-V-XXVI-XVI-VIII-XX-XII.  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
152
Puzzle 76
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
All the spaces and punctuation have been removed, and the 
numbers have been broken into sets of five. Use letter fre-
quency analysis to crack the code.
09-65-81-92-33  31-40-65-92-68 
92-88-88-78-54  92-01-05-09-33 
92-81-09-33-92  81-78-40-93-64 
01-40-93-31-65  05-31-92-31-01 
05-51-64-40-81  43-92-64-73-05 
64-92-31-43-43  92-64-73-05-64 
65-68-40-93-51  68-78-40-93-33 
92-09-43-49-05  64-78-53-09-65 
65-53-05-81-68  05-31-78-40-93 
53-05-54-65-09  33-92-81-65-68 
92-65-78-40-93  64-01-40-59-88 
92-31-09-40-31  81-92-33-33-40 
59-05-81-68-92  65-43-09-33-88 
53-05-92-33-05  43-92-33-81-05
53-53

 Chapter 5: Number Substitution Cryptograms 153
Puzzle 77
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
XIII-III-VII-II  II-III-XI-XII  XIX-XXIV  
XX-XII-VI-VI-XIX-XXIV-XX  
VII-XXIV-XXI-VII-VI-XXII-III-II-XIX-XXIII-XII-I  
XIX-XXIV-VI-XII-XI-XI-XIX-XX-XII-XXIV-XVIII-XII  VI-III  
XXV-XII  XXII-XXI-XVI  VIII-XII-XII-XXIV  
XII-XIV-XXVI-III-XVI-XII-I – XIX  I-III-XXIV'VI  
V-XXIV-III-XV  VIII-XIII  XV-XXII-III-XXV.                          
Puzzle 78
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
09.24.20.24.03 11.20.18 18.12.01.14 
11.03.15 01.09.15 
13.24.04.15-10.01.11.03.10 24.16 11 
26.11.10.24.20 … 08.14 20.15.07.15.03 
04.24.10.17.20.21 10.17.21.09.01 24.16 
05.09.17.06.09 09.15 26.11.14 
11.07.24.17.18 
18.17.10.11.10.01.03.24.12.10 
10.09.17.13.05.03.15.06.23. 
11.04.08.15.03.01 13.17.23.15, 
26.24.03.11.04.10 11.20.18 
18.24.21.26.11   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
154
Puzzle 79
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
58.70.54.11.82.11.18.54 58.70 
05.82.02.21.54.57.38.82.56.21.93.02 
58.18 70.57.54 
82.11.18.54.82.58.05.54.11.06 54.57 
38.57.23.11.82.70.91.11.70.54.18 
56.70.06 
21.82.57.25.11.18.18.58.57.70.56.20 
18.21.58.11.18. 
11.23.11.82.02.52.57.06.02 
11.70.14.57.02.18 56 18.11.05.82.11.54. 
91.56.82.54.58.70 38.56.82.06.70.11.82  
Puzzle 80
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
09.20.16.18.15.13.07.16.11,  
09.20.16.18.15.13.07.16.11.02,  16.  
20.16.02  02.16.11.21.26.22.11.02.13  
03.10  07  05.15.11.04  11.04.02  
22.02.09.21.02.11.22  20.18  03,  
09.20.16.18.15.13.02.13  03.10  04.15.25  
11.20  09.  07.25.03.21.20.22.02  
03.15.02.21.09.02  

Chapter 6
Symbol Substitution 
Cryptograms
Puzzle 81
Difficulty Level: Easy

156 Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
Puzzle 82
Difficulty Level: Easy

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 157
Puzzle 83
Difficulty Level: Easy
Τονιγητ ατ διννερ, υνδερ τηε 
ινφλυενχε οφ σομε σπιριτυουσ 
λιθυορσ    
Puzzle 84
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
158
Puzzle 85
Difficulty Level: Easy

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 159
Puzzle 86
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
160
Puzzle 87
Difficulty Level: Easy
 
Check out the chart of the Morse code alphabet in Chapter 2.

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 161
Puzzle 88
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is a Passing River cipher. In this cipher some letters 
share the same symbol, specifically I and Y, O and U, and V 
and W.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
162
Puzzle 89
Difficulty Level: Easy

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 163
Puzzle 90
Difficulty Level: Easy
Puzzle 91
Difficulty Level: Easy
 
Use the Greek alphabet chart in Chapter 2 for your reference.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
164
Puzzle 92
Difficulty Level: Easy
This cipher is written in the Nug-Soth alphabet. C and K, and 
U and V, share the same symbol.

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 165
Puzzle 93
Difficulty Level: Tricky
✦  ✴✧✧✮  ✦✲ 
✶★✢✺✦✩✹✳★✢  ★ 
✤✢✦✺✦✴✥  ✸✰✰✦✩✧✢, 
✸✲✧  ✣★✱✸✢  ✱✸✥✲ 
★✲✬✢✧.   
Puzzle 94
Difficulty Level: Tricky

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
166
Puzzle 95
Difficulty Level: Tricky

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 167
Puzzle 96
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This puzzle uses an Illuminati Cipher and has different sym-
bols for uppercase and lowercase letters.
Puzzle 97
Difficulty Level: Tricky

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
168
Puzzle 98
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Puzzle 99
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Passing River cipher. Some letters share the same 
symbol, specifically I and Y, O and U, and V and W.

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 169
Puzzle 100
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Puzzle 101
Difficulty Level: Tricky

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
170
Puzzle 102
Difficulty Level: Tricky

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 171
Puzzle 103
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Puzzle 104
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
172
Puzzle 105
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 173
Puzzle 106
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This message uses Morse code punctuation as well as letters.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
174
Puzzle 107
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

 Chapter 6: Symbol Substitution Cryptograms 175
Puzzle 108
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This puzzle uses an Illuminati Cipher and has different sym-
bols for uppercase and lowercase letters.
Puzzle 109
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
We removed all punctuation and spaces between words in 
this cipher. The letters are grouped in sets of five. Good luck!

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
176
Puzzle 110
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Passing River cipher. Some letters share the same 
symbol, specifically I and Y, O and U, and V and W.

Chapter 7
Caesar / Shift Ciphers
Puzzle 111
Difficulty Level: Easy
UIF CSJUJTI BSF OPU UIF POMZ POFT 
XJUI TQJFT PO UIF HSPVOE.  
Puzzle 112
Difficulty Level: Easy
PDMRU DQGUH LV QRZ FRQYLQFHG 
WKDW WKH ZRXOG-EH WUDLWRU LV 
ZKR KH VDBV KH LV.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
178
Puzzle 113
Difficulty Level: Easy
MN CNTAS SGHR LDRRZFD VHKK BNLD 
SN XNT ZR RNLDSGHMF NE Z 
RTQOQHRD.     
Puzzle 114
Difficulty Level: Easy
... TJPM YZXDNDJI VWJPO HT 
XJHKZINVODJI.   

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 179
Puzzle 115
Difficulty Level: Easy
... SRI TYPPIH EAEC JVSQ XLI YRMXIH 
WXEXIW EPXSKIXLIV MRXS E 
FIRIZSPIRX OMRKHSQ SJ MXW SAR. 
CSY ERH M GER EGGSQTPMWL KVIEX 
XLMRKW.    
Puzzle 116
Difficulty Level: Easy
PLRQE ZXOLIFKX'P SLQB CLO 
PBZBPPFLK. LMBK TXOCXOB FP LKIV 
JLKQEP XTXV.  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
180
Puzzle 117
Difficulty Level: Easy
YMJ SJB HTRRFSIJW TK YMJ ZSNTS 
KTWHJX, YMFY LJSJWFQ LWFSY, MFX 
F KNWR LWFXU TK YMJ HTSHJUY TK 
YTYFQ BFW, FSI MJ NX UZWXZNSL 
YMFY UTQNHD RTXY ANLTWTZXQD, 
STY TSQD IJKJFYNSL ZX TS YMJ KNJQI 
TK GFYYQJ, GZY IJXYWTDNSL TZW 
HFUFHNYD YT UWTIZHJ JAJS KTTI, 
BMJWJAJW MJ HFS.    
Puzzle 118
Difficulty Level: Easy
JKP OK. ARAJ ZQNEJC PDA UAWNO KB 
PNWRAH PDWP E PKKG EJ AQNKLA, E 
GJAS PDWP E SWO BKHHKSAZ, 
OKIAKJA BAZANWH JK ZKQXP 
OQOLAYPEJC PDWP E DWRA 
WYYKILHEYAO, WJZ OAAGEJC PK BEJZ 
PDAI.   

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 181
Puzzle 119
Difficulty Level: Easy
L FDQ WHOO BRX DERXW RQH VXFK 
DJHQW. KLV QDPH LV MDVSHU 
KDOOLJDQ, DQ DWWRUQHB ZLWK 
WKH XQLWHG VWDWHV 
GHSDUWPHQW RI VWDWH.   
Puzzle 120
Difficulty Level: Easy
COZN ZNK YOTMRK-SOTJKJ 
JKJOIGZOUT ZU EUAX VXULKYYOUT 
LUX CNOIN EUA NGBK HKIUSK QTUCT 
GZ ZNK LHO ... 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
182
Puzzle 121
Difficulty Level: Easy
OQTG VJCP CPA QVJGT VKOG KP 
JKUVQTA, OCPMKPF HCEGU C 
ETQUUTQCFU. QPG RCVJ NGCFU VQ 
FGURCKT CPF WVVGT 
JQRGNGUUPGUU. VJG QVJGT, VQ 
VQVCN GZVKPEVKQP. NGV WU RTCA 
YG JCXG VJG YKUFQO VQ EJQQUG 
EQTTGEVNA. YQQFA CNNGP   
Puzzle 122
Difficulty Level: Easy
CNGZ OY KYVOUTGMK HAZ ZNK BKXE 
ZNOTM CK KDKXIOYK JGORE OT UAX 
ROBKY?  PUNT RK IGXXK, 
GZZXOHAZKJ   

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 183
Puzzle 123
Difficulty Level: Easy
WMS ILMU UFYR AFYPK GQ : Y UYW 
MD ECRRGLE RFC YLQUCP WCQ 
UGRFMSR FYTGLE YQICB YLW AJCYP 
OSCQRGML. YJZCPR AYKSQ     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
184
Puzzle 124
Difficulty Level: Easy
GXWB LV WKH PRUDO PDJQHWLVP 
ZKLFK FRQWUROV DQG JXLGHV WKH 
WUXH PDVRQ'V FRXUVH RYHU WKH 
WXPXOWXRXV VHDV RI OLIH. ZKHWKHU 
WKH VWDUV RI KRQRU, UHSXWDWLRQ, 
DQG UHZDUG GR RU GR QRW VKLQH, … 
WKDW XQHUULQJ PDJQHW VWLOO 
VKRZV KLP WKH WUXH FRXUVH WR 
VWHHU ... WR SHUIRUP WKDW GXWB, 
ZKHWKHU WKH SHUIRUPDQFH EH 
UHZDUGHG RU XQUHZDUGHG, LV KLV 
VROH FDUH. DQG LW GRWK QRW 
PDWWHU, WKRXJK RI WKLV 
SHUIRUPDQFH WKHUH PDB EH QR 
ZLWQHVVHV, DQG WKRXJK ZKDW KH 
GRHV ZLOO EH IRUHYHU XQNQRZQ WR 
DOO PDQNLQG. DOEHUW SLNH     

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 185
Puzzle 125
Difficulty Level: Tricky
LD TYDECFNEPO, T SLGP AWLNPO 
XJDPWQ FYOPC L QLWDP YLXP LD L 
DPCGTYR XLTO EZ ESP ZQQTNPCD 
HTESTY ESP NTCNWP ZQ RPYPCLW 
NWTYEZY   
Puzzle 126
Difficulty Level: Tricky
... OCVO OCDN JAAZM DN OMPGT 
AMJH OCZ KZMNJI RCJNZ IVHZ RVN 
NDBIZY VO OCZ WJOOJH JA OCVO 
HZNNVBZ.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
186
Puzzle 127
Difficulty Level: Tricky
... KYV DRGJ TRIIP KYV GCRZE 
JZXERKLIV FW XVEVIRC SVEVUZTK 
RIEFCU. GCVRJV RUMZJV LJ 
IVXRIUZEX SFKY DRAFI REUIV REU 
XVEVIRC RIEFCU   
Puzzle 128
Difficulty Level: Tricky
RO CRKVV WKUO KBBKXQOWOXDC DY 
ZED K QBOKD NOKV YP DRO 
WKDOBSKV KCCODC YP DRO 
MYXPONOBKMI SX IYEB RKXNC.   

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 187
Puzzle 129
Difficulty Level: Tricky
UBVDEXR FNLM FTDX BM TIITKXGM MH 
TEE MATM MAX AXTOBER 
TZKBVNEMNKTE BGMXKXLML BG MABL 
TKXT – BGVENWBGZ VNUT, ATBMB, 
FXQBVH TGW TEE HY VXGMKTE 
TFXKBVT – KXJNBKXL MAX XGMKR HY 
MAXLX MXKKBMHKBXL BGMH MAX 
NGBMXW LMTMXL TL LETOX 
MXKKBMHKBXL. HY HNK ETMXK 
TFUBMBHGL YHK MATM KXZBHG, RHN 
LATEE LTR GHMABGZ MH UBVDEXR.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
188
Puzzle 130
Difficulty Level: Tricky
RD NSYJWRJINFWD XMFQQ XJJ YT NY 
YMFY DTZ YFPJ UTXXJXXNTS TK YMJ 
QFXY TK YMJ LTQI NRRJINFYJQD.    
Puzzle 131
Difficulty Level: Tricky
UKQN UKQJC LNKOLAYP, OLAYEWH 
WCAJP IWJJDAEI, SWO LANIEPPAZ PK 
HAWZ PDA PAWI PK WNNAOP PDEO 
DWHHECWJ BAHHKS WP OPWPA. PDAU 
BKQJZ DWHHECWJ ZAWZ, DWREJC 
PWGAJ DEO YUWJEZA LEHH.    

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 189
Puzzle 132
Difficulty Level: Tricky
MBLMIB TEL JXHB EFPQLOV HKLT 
KLQEFKD XYLRQ EFPQLOV. VLR ZXK 
PBB QEXQ FK QEB PLOQ LC EFPQLOV 
QEBV JXHB. D H ZEBPQBOQLK    
Puzzle 133
Difficulty Level: Tricky
MABL VHGMKTVM BL LH HGX-LBWXW 
MATM B TF LNKIKBLXW MH YBGW BM 
PKBMMXG HG UHMA LBWXL HY MAX 
ITIXK. EHKW XOXKLAXW 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
190
Puzzle 134
Difficulty Level: Tricky
DBEDR SC CEZZBOCCON, XYD DY 
ZBYDOMD DRO MYEXDBI PBYW OXOWI 
KQOXDC LED DY ZBYDOMD DRO 
QYFOBXWOXD YP DRO NKI KQKSXCD 
DRO ZOYZVO. BYI RKDDOBCVOI    
Puzzle 135
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
NDJ LXAA LXIW PAA SJT WPHIT WPKT 
NDJG PVTCIH XC CTL NDGZ RXIN, 
QTWXCS QGXIXHW AXCTH, IPZT 
UDGBTG VTCTGPA QTCTSXRI PGCDAS 
XCID RJHIDSN QN UDGRT, PCS GTIJGC 
WXB ID BN RPBE.    

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 191
Puzzle 136
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
SBE GUR FNXR BS ZL ERCHGNGVBA 
NAQ ZL VAABPRAG SNZVYL, PNA JR 
ABG XRRC GUVF ORGJRRA 
BHEFRYIRF?    
Puzzle 137
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
B LATEE FTDX GH XQVATGZX YHK 
FTCHK TGWKX NGEXLL BM UX YHK 
UXGXWBVM TKGHEW.   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
192
Puzzle 138
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
We removed all the spaces and punctuation from this cipher, 
so you need to use letter frequency analysis.
INBMZ BPMLM IBPWN KTMUM VBDIT 
TIVLQ OPIUB PQAXI ABRCV MQTWA 
BUGTI ABBMV CWCAT QVSBW GWCZW 
ZOIVQ HIBQWV
Puzzle 139
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This Caesar Cipher has a keyword that will fill in the gap in 
the message.
B SITUMPQFIT QAU QUMMBOGU 
KMUTBRFHUIQ YJS FMU BI: ESFMTBFI 
JN F VFPQ  _ _ _ _ _ _ _  BI EJGT, 
PRFQQUMUT FOJSQ QAU RJSIQMY, 
YUQ OUBIE WBQAJSQ QAU HUFIP QJ 
PFNUESFMT BQ FTULSFQUGY.    

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 193
Puzzle 140
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
AOPZ DPSS HSZV OLSW JVCLY AOL 
MHJA AOHA CHSSHUKPNOHT YBUZ 
HSS VM AOPZ MYVT JHUHKH. THRL 
ZBYL OL AOPURZ PA PZ OPZ PKLH.    
Puzzle 141
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
As an added twist to this Caesar Cipher, we put all the letters 
into groups of five.
CRJKE ZXYKZ YRGGV EVUKF SVZEY 
VIFEJ KRMVI EZEKY VLGJK RZIJI 
FFDNF IBZEX FEDPJ TLCGK LIVFW 
KYVYV RUFWK YVTYR DSVIF WTFDD 
VITV     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
194
Puzzle 142
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
As an added twist to this Caesar Cipher, we removed the 
spaces between words and all punctuation, and we grouped 
the letters in sets of five.
KYVVE VDPJJ GZVJN YFYRM VTFDV 
KFJGP FELJD LJKSV JFLXY KFLKK 
VDGKV UNZKY SIZSV JCVUR NRPRE 
UTFDW FIKRS CPYFL JVUKY LJKYV 
PNZCC SVTFD VTFEM VIKVU JGZVJ 
REURM RZCRS CVWFI FLIJV IMZTV 
JLEKQ L    
Puzzle 143
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
IE BEDW QI CUD MEHIXYF JXU 
SQUIQHI QDT DQFEBUEDI, SQUIQHI 
QDT DQFEBUEDI MYBB TKBO QHYIU 
QDT CQAU JXUC CYIUHQRBU. QBTEKI 
XKNBUO  

 Chapter 7: Caesar / Shift Ciphers 195
Puzzle 144
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
As an added twist to this Caesar Cipher, we put all the letters 
into groups of five.
JRRGP DQQHU VDUHD FROOH FWLRQ 
RILQW HOOLJ HQFHH GXFDW LRQWD 
VWHDQ GVWBO HPLAH GWRJH WKHUV 
RWKDW BRXGR QWQHH GDQBR IWKHV 
HWKLQ JVSMR URXUN H

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
196

Chapter 8
Masonic Ciphers
Puzzle 145
Difficulty Level: Easy
Puzzle 146
Difficulty Level: Easy

198 Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
Puzzle 147
Difficulty Level: Easy
Puzzle 148
Difficulty Level: Easy
This cipher is written in Malachim, a Hebrew-based phonetic 
alphabet. Some symbols can stand for more than one letter, 
relating to a phonetic sound rather than a specific letter. For 
example, the square symbol can be E or O. See Chapter 2 for 
the full list.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 199
Puzzle 149
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
200
Puzzle 150
Difficulty Level: Easy
This puzzle is written in a 19th century French Masonic cipher 
once used by those who held the 31st degree of initiation 
in the Scottish Rite, a degree known as “Grand Inquisitor 
Commander.” V and W are encrypted with the same symbol.
Puzzle 151
Difficulty Level: Easy
This cipher is written in Malachim, a Hebrew-based phonetic 
alphabet.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 201
Puzzle 152
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
202
Puzzle 153
Difficulty Level: Easy
This cipher is drawn in Celestial, a phonetic alphabet based 
on Hebrew. O and U have the same symbol, as do V and W.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 203
Puzzle 154
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
204
Puzzle 155
Difficulty Level: Easy
Puzzle 156
Difficulty Level: Easy
This puzzle is written in a 19th century French Masonic cipher 
once used in some chapters of Rose Croix within the Scottish 
Rite. As is standard in these ciphers based on Hebrew, some 
letters are encrypted with the same cipher symbol. See 
Chapter 2 for more detail.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 205
Puzzle 157
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
206
Puzzle 158
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is written in Malachim, a Hebrew-based phonetic 
alphabet.
Puzzle 159
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This message is written in the Cypher of the Rose Croix, a spe-
cial Masonic cipher.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 207
Puzzle 160
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Puzzle 161
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is in the Cypher of the Rose Croix.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
208
Puzzle 162
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is written in Malachim, a Hebrew-based phonetic 
alphabet.
Puzzle 163
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is drawn in Enochian, a phonetic alphabet based 
on Hebrew. The following letters are encoded as each other: C 
and K; I and J; U, V, and W.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 209
Puzzle 164
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This puzzle is written in a 19th century French Masonic cipher 
once used by those who held the 31st degree of initiation in 
the Scottish Rite, “Grand Inquisitor Commander.”
Puzzle 165
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is in the Cypher of the Rose Croix.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
210
Puzzle 166
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher has a keyword that’s a girl’s name. See whether 
you can find it!

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 211
Puzzle 167
Difficulty Level: Tricky

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
212
Puzzle 168
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This cipher is written in Malachim, a phonetic alphabet.

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 213
Puzzle 169
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword. See whether you can discover it!

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
214
Puzzle 170
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword. See whether you can crack the 
code!

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 215
Puzzle 171
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Puzzle 172
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher is drawn in Enochian, a phonetic alphabet based 
on Hebrew. The following letters are encoded as each other: C 
and K; I and J; U, V, and W.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
216
Puzzle 173
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher has a keyword. See whether you can discover it!

 Chapter 8: Masonic Ciphers 217
Puzzle 174
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher is drawn in Celestial, a phonetic alphabet based 
on Hebrew. O and U have the same symbol, as do V and W.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
218
Puzzle 175
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This puzzle is written in a 19th century French Masonic Scottish 
Rite cipher used by the Rose Croix chapter of “Macon,” possibly 
a chapter in Mâcon, France. U, V, and W are encoded with the 
one symbol.
Puzzle 176
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This cipher is drawn in Celestial, a phonetic alphabet based 
on Hebrew.

Chapter 9
Rail Fence Ciphers
Puzzle 177
Difficulty Level: Easy
GVSPO TOIMJ SYAMI EUPRT HSAET 
SRY    
Puzzle 178
Difficulty Level: Easy
AEIAW UDERI OMRCN OLBTA TR    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
220
Puzzle 179
Difficulty Level: Easy
CMADR FHCNI ETLRY OCSTE TONOM 
NEOTE OTNNA AMFRE AWSPI T   
Puzzle 180
Difficulty Level: Easy
YUTRS RACPA LOREM AECET BE    

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 221
Puzzle 181
Difficulty Level: Easy
TXEOE ERMRI VBOHE ITNEF HINRI 
CEUTE ANNII LTHME SCTNC LSMIS EI   
Puzzle 182
Difficulty Level: Easy
CGFAH REOTE SNASR O   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
222
Puzzle 183
Difficulty Level: Easy
LTHNR HATAE TSOLN IISNI SATRE 
ETEOT ESHVI SWLEC TEADT FCOIS     
Puzzle 184
Difficulty Level: Easy
BEDAO ELAEH HDEHN NTHPB IFCXT 
INDTU CE    

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 223
Puzzle 185
Difficulty Level: Easy
YUOOK OMIOE EKOAA RMUTB UYUOD 
NTNWE HWVRN WFIAO NAOTO X     
Puzzle 186
Difficulty Level: Easy
TEAIA NEOEN ISOTN SHMNL EVLPA 
DTCNE TZ    

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
224
Puzzle 187
Difficulty Level: Easy
DPOAY YNISA ELVRE FRILM CLIGN 
TTOIE HROD 
Puzzle 188
Difficulty Level: Tricky
AER LC CRO LIAL 

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 225
Puzzle 189
Difficulty Level: Tricky
VEFND SAGEO AITOP ASNMP RLTNT 
WSPIT RYLAA EIOTN  
Puzzle 190
Difficulty Level: Tricky
GVMLV TMCUI CALSI EYOEO YOSNH 
REX 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
226
Puzzle 191
Difficulty Level: Tricky
TSLNN NHSEA LACEE OFTIA THFNE 
HXCLC SSITT I   
Puzzle 192
Difficulty Level: Tricky
HWODF OIITC NATEF EALHS YASOG 
OOYUT SOOTC MATRL TEEER X   

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 227
Puzzle 193
Difficulty Level: Tricky
CTEEE CGRHV DSHEH MTDRH AIAIH 
OKTRH ANIMA SAGEA OROTM RNNTW 
IGOGL AGAIE NNOFE KSNUL HD   
Puzzle 194
Difficulty Level: Tricky
DTSTO NFMLV PYACE OOPEE THCNE 
TOTEA IANEO EOORS OITSX NRNET 
SHNEL TUSAX   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
228
Puzzle 195
Difficulty Level: Tricky
YUABA SRDHT ORPLC TOFRH CAILE 
IEEPD TOSRA MNOMY ESUET AYUAP 
IAINO TEIWL BGVNX EIIUT ETET   
Puzzle 196
Difficulty Level: Tricky
TMAII PFYSE TTEDY RHTAI HSESG 
WLDSP ERRMO RCENI HNESC NSFOR 
ECIGH LSLNX ISELA AOURW INOOU 
ANETE   

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 229
Puzzle 197
Difficulty Level: Tricky
GLNOA CHMHY METEE DNTED AHTES 
ALERS ISNNM OREOR INTO   
Puzzle 198
Difficulty Level: Tricky
AIGWH CEGBD NHSAA THTEI EBAUE 
EERSX ACMSM AIHPL CNTOO GRAHW 
RIECO AYRNA   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
230
Puzzle 199
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
HEIYN AESLS MCETS VWTBH DRDIL 
EAEEA    
Puzzle 200
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
IEOAR ESAPA TYUSB OHRAO XPLOA 
TMN   

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 231
Puzzle 201
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
TSEHH TNETT EMENE MEORI AEVRA 
HOHGE CR 
Puzzle 202
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
AWETE RTDLH EMTCT RMTUF HEEXT 
GNRIE HEAAE OEFRX HUEEE PAHIS 
SNCNA YOVXT NOOC

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
232
Puzzle 203
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
SSENO RTEFE TUYON WITCT HINHR 
AFITD HHARL MOIHH STSTI IAIAL 
AWTEI EETEI ESSII C   
Puzzle 204
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
EMOFA CXEYJ HEORL ITDCG MRNRR 
EBDAL HNAOA DGNEE ROAJN ENN 

 Chapter 9: Rail Fence Ciphers 233
Puzzle 205
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
AELWE ONAEL LRLIO AHNGO IGMSF 
RXITE EONNT IADHT OJFSN TBNDS 
THEO (4-rail)   
Puzzle 206
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
IPOAN TAHSR MRHTA OIHMN RAOEU 
SWECN WTADA TTARB TLEEO HMAEE 
DUSDE L (5-rail).     

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
234
Puzzle 207
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
SILTI NEULR SOHNP ENIMN EMRAO 
SELTU IRIMT GNAAS OGHEA NITTT 
ETDAL EUSCW NXOHH E (4-rail)   

Chapter 10
Keyboard Codes
Puzzle 208
Difficulty Level: Easy
86 9428 343 
4 2667273 
437 232889 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
236
Puzzle 209
Difficulty Level: Easy
4 4283 8447 
329 73234833 
69 2666477466 
27 266626337 
63 9378 76468 
Puzzle 210
Difficulty Level: Easy
43g7i3e g6 g95y D9ht43ww qhe T3h34qo 
@qwy8ht59h  

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 237
Puzzle 211
Difficulty Level: Easy
O s, siyjptoxrf yp ,slr upi s goms; pggrt 
pg 3-.--- [pimfd/   
Puzzle 212
Difficulty Level: Easy
shoysyomh gpt S,rtovsm rc[smdopm 
omyp yjr Hp;frm Votv;r pg s 2.--- ,o;r 
tsfoid. vrmyrtrf pm Jsbsms/  

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
238
Puzzle 213
Difficulty Level: Easy
69 63384647 
9484 843 
2748474 
737737368284
837 46 9355, 
25846844 938 
9484688 
37848. 
Puzzle 214
Difficulty Level: Easy
y3q45 59 w33 5y3 9009457h8583w 5yq5 
5y8w d9h58h3h5 9rr34w 59 j3h 9r f8w89h 
qhe w543ht5y 9r 28ool
 

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 239
Puzzle 215
Difficulty Level: Easy
8447 74255 
23 69 5278 
6377243 86 
968 
Puzzle 216
Difficulty Level: Easy

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
240
Puzzle 217
Difficulty Level: Easy
4693837, 4'83 
73236859 
232663 29273 
63 843 9675 63 
7663663 9466 
968 64448 
3463 63 
46837378. 
Puzzle 218
Difficulty Level: Easy

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 241
Puzzle 219
Difficulty Level: Easy
)J4 T9JWP 69- 60 54H4PE{  WP3W7E 
UWG4 W E4F0JR 
-50T4EE90J 9J 54E45G4. J9Y4P 
J9F0PE0J
  
Puzzle 220
Difficulty Level: Tricky
;ry  d;o[  yjsy  jod  vjorg  pg  d[ord. <skpt 
Kpjm Smftr. epi;f nr ,rryomh eoyj s 
er;;=[;svrf ytsoypt kidy dpiyj pg Erdy 
{pomy. pm Dr[yr,nrt 32dy/

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
242
Puzzle 221
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Puzzle 222
Difficulty Level: Tricky

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 243
Puzzle 223
Difficulty Level: Tricky
46646368 
927 
2389336 
66784 263 
76884 
Puzzle 224
Difficulty Level: Tricky
I[o fkd’’ kdnt [oy houoyt p, i[oy kd,gf/ 
jodyg pu rt’’#   

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
244
Puzzle 225
Difficulty Level: Tricky
4 6878 5665 
24323 86 843 
8379 7325 
76774245489 
8428 93 74255 
668 7738245 - 
668 8447 8463, 
28 53278. 
Puzzle 226
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Fojjtfu i[o b[,fpgty Moyi[, >d,,ktp./ 
boyyt,u’i du HMP <dup[,d’ Ftboypui 
Gpnpfp[, _kpytg 37 Lo,t 3-99+/ .di mt [oy 
;p,g [h []tydupnt

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 245
Puzzle 227
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Puzzle 228
Difficulty Level: Tricky

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
246
Puzzle 229
Difficulty Level: Tricky
4478679 
7373287 
487353; 
4478674267 
737328 663 
2668437. 
787378 276653
Puzzle 230
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
&08 kw7 54fwpp u03 w k454 h07 3we u8jy 
we w e-7 9j 7085 fwk- e0k4 69k4 wy0;
^u4 k4k057 0t Jw6uwj Uwp4 9e e69pp 
h59yu6 wk0jy k7 k4j;

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 247
Puzzle 231
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Puzzle 232
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
248
Puzzle 233
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Aworwnvwe 29m `76`  
Puzzle 234
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Look out, the keyboard shift changes from one system to 
another somewhere within this code!
trfotrvy pmr pt ,ptr pg yjr LHJ=26 
dsyr;;oyrd imfrt upit vpmytp; yp fp dp,r 
wiovl dvsmd pg yjr strsd votv;rf pm yjr 
syysvjrf ,s[/ Yjr htsboyp,rytov 
vs[sno;oyord pg yjr LHJ=26d djpi;f s;;pe 
upi yp e353d5 e8w574gqhd3w 8h 5y3 
#q45y[w t4qf85q589hqo r83oe 5yq5 
d97oe g3 qww9d8q53e 285y oq4t3 
qj97h5w 9r q y3qf6 j35qok o8i3 43r8h3e 
t9oel Qhe 63wk 5y343 8w 5yq5 j7dyl  

 Chapter 10: Keyboard Codes 249
Puzzle 235
Difficulty Level: Treacherous

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
250

Chapter 11
Assorted Ciphers
I
n this chapter we include the following ciphers for you to 
solve:
 
✓ Atbash Ciphers
 
✓ Caesar Box Ciphers
 
✓ Columnar Transposition Ciphers
 
✓ Newspaper Codes
 
✓ Twisted Path Box Ciphers
Chapter 2 tells you how to solve each of these puzzle types.
 
Grab a notebook or scrap paper before you start working on 
the puzzles in this chapter! You’ll need the space to sketch 
out boxes, columns, coded alphabets, and so on. 
Puzzle 236
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
NZQLI ZMWIV RH HSLXPVW. GSRH RH ZM LUUVI LU 
GIVZHLM UILN Z NZQLI URTFIV DRGSRM GSV ZINB LU GSV 
XLOLMRHGH, URTSGRMT ZTZRMHG GSV YIRGRHS XILDM! 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
252
Puzzle 237
Difficulty Level: Easy
It is impossible to give any full account of 
Machiavelli's official duties. He wrote many  
thousands of despatches and official letters, which 
are still preserved. He was on constant errands of 
State through the Florentine dominions. But his 
diplomatic missions and what he learned by them 
make the main interest of his office ...  the 
opportunities to the Secretary of learning men and 
things, intrigue and policy, the Court and the 
gutter were invaluable.
At the camp of Caesar Borgia, in 1502, he found 
in his host that fantastic hero whom he incarnated 
in The Prince, and he was practically an 
eye-witness of the amazing masterpiece, the 
Massacre of Sinigaglia.
Introduction by Henry Cust
to Machiavelli’s The Art of War and The Prince

 Chapter 11: Assorted Ciphers 253
Puzzle 238
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
MAXEIIM YRTTNPE PEEOEHS LTNOIES AOSUNRA NOITAEG 
SEVLCDE  
Puzzle 239
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
OVHHLM GL GSV NLWVIM VCVXFGREV : ZODZBH SZMT LM 
GL BLFI IVXVRKGH! 
Puzzle 240
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
OTEEKON FURHNLO TACEOUT HLIMWTH EIRUAEI ANCSBLN 
CNLTSYG
Puzzle 241
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
R ZTIVV DRGS BLF: DZGXS DROPRMHLM. SV RH MLG 
VMGRIVOB GL YV GIFHGVW. SLDVEVI, SRH LMTLRMT 
ZHHLXRZGRLMH RM NZWIRW ZMW NVCRXL XRGB NZB YV 
FHVUFO GL FH.

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
254
Puzzle 242
Difficulty Level: Easy
Puzzle 243
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
WKCHEPORC INOEREUET LOUMECHCI KWRUVTATO 
ISSSETVCN NMETNHEOT SEBNSAANO OOUEUTDNM 
NFTVSYIEE

 Chapter 11: Assorted Ciphers 255
Puzzle 244
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
R HGILMTOB IVXLNNVMW GSZG BLF ZKKOB ULI Z 
KLHRGRLM DRGSRM GSV XVMGIZO RMGVOORTVMXV 
ZTVMXB, DRGSRM GSV WRIVXGLIZGV LU LKVIZGRLMH. 
(GSZG DLFOW YV GSV HKRVH.) 
Puzzle 245
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
HLIIB GL YV LFG LU GLFXS ULI HL OLMT. ZH R ZKKILZXS 
IVGRIVNVMG, GSV LKKLIGFMRGB GL HSZIV RMULINZGRLM 
DRGS BLF SZH YVVM WRNRMRHSRMT ULI HLNV GRNV. 
Puzzle 246
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is a Caesar Box Cipher drawn in a rectangle.
IKAAOMOABE FCPNUTNTLR YRHSRHTYEN OYYWPEKOME 
UPIERNNUIU TTSROYORSM HOTTBOWPPA IGHOLUWREN 
NREYEDHOTN
Puzzle 247
Difficulty Level: Easy
This is an Atbash Cipher.
RM XBYVIHKZXV VEVIBLMV DROO YV ZMLMBNLFH ULI 
URUGVVM NRMFGVH. TIZSZN TIVVMOVZU

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
256
Puzzle 248
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
OHRHHHNS UAMOIIEE TTEULASV SQESAOUE IUTEDNMN 
DAIIEEMI EKNNLFEN TEGPPIRG
Puzzle 249
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher drawn in a rectangle.
GAOCTNDR  ELLIOGES  NADDCESU ERDEHSFR RNESAIOE
Puzzle 250
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
TEYET HNOTO ETFRR IITAX DTHIY
Puzzle 251
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher drawn in a rectangle.
TRUNONE HKTTTFS EEUAHOT DNSFERE ASAEUCR YATLNED 
DBLLISA AOATOYY
Puzzle 252
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a down-and-up path.
TDEIMFOGRX HLNSPERRON  AOCSLBAEUO TGIIYTNHPI 
DARENSOTOS RECROUTOFI ENLITMHNMV AIEPTTEAEH 
MMOMOIRENT OFFEBEAGWI

 Chapter 11: Assorted Ciphers 257
Puzzle 253
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a clockwise spiral 
path.
OARLINGTONNOW TSAREONTHESTR KEHTMYSELFLOE 
CVGEDPIKESMOE AIUVTINGNEEKT BTAEIDPOLASSS 
LCCIALEMIRSLL LEYRWARECTAIO ATLTEREWEHGKO 
FEREREERTEEEK EDAENSAWTUBPI WSEHTOLCNIALN 
TSEGGUSEMROFG
Puzzle 254
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with an up-and-down path.
ATTCECOTMR TSDESNRSAM EDALAAEANY SETLTLDRNL 
ITAOELIAHT TIOCLIRFEN SNVDLEEOIE EUENIVCSMC 
LERATRTTWE FHTSEUSNER
Puzzle 255
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher drawn in a rectangle.
FEENTTYHDN EMDYHHCEBT WOTIAEORRH FRHNNYUTEE 
AEETTOLHAC LFMEHNDAKO SIILELITDD ERNLOYNNAE 
IMDINTVOVB DLSGEREOIR EYOETINNDE AGFNHETEKA 
SRSTADACAK HIOMTTCOHE APMEIHIUNR VPANFEPLIS
Puzzle 256
Difficulty Level: Tricky
This is a Caesar Box Cipher of a quote by Jerome K. Jerome.
ISOLHCAPG  TTLLUORTO IHITNUEIO SECHLRAOD  
ABYEESNNL  LETTSEEAI WSORSYXLA  ATTUOOCLR  
YPETFUEYX

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
258
Puzzle 257
Difficulty Level: Tricky
Can you discover what work Tu Mu is commenting on here?
Your … spy must be a man of keen 
intellect, though in outward appearance a 
fool; of shabby exterior, but with a will of 
iron. He must be active, robust, endowed 
with physical strength and courage: 
thoroughly accustomed to all sorts of 
dirty work, able to endure hunger and 
cold, and to put up with shame and 
ignominy. Tu Mu
  
Puzzle 258
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a counterclockwise 
spiral path.
NARRAOT GFEGNAH EODNAHS ARRERCI NMAJOXW OTHEREI
Puzzle 259
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with an up-and-down path.
MOISEF ETGOSO ANNNSR TOOEIP AIFVOE LTRANU LIEGAR 
XNCELT YGOHSA

 Chapter 11: Assorted Ciphers 259
Puzzle 260
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a down-and-up path.
ISFDHYSUL WIRRITSVT RHOASSHEU ITMOMEIHR TEABAJPTE
Puzzle 261
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Columnar Transposition Cipher. The keyword is 
WILDCAT. (Chapter 2 has instructions on how to solve this 
cipher.)
YLPIMSS WTUTOAE DGNKIOL REHNTOW APODTTA ILTIONR 
HTISWAE TEKASOB TIUFRUF HWRDEIN CEHHSAC HDERIER 
EHPCIRR SSEDMAE OYOETUG
Puzzle 262
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a down-and-up path.
DILWEEHHTI CNOHLRTEDM  BHTOPIENEU AISPOTHARS 
DSIUEWWNET NUPTPAYDDC ANDTRSAWNO HKEHUODOON 
GNDAONONWF NOATYETDIE IWOLFORESS
Puzzle 263
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a counterclockwise 
path.
RERUTCIP EAAPERPR LSRREMDE AWEGEBEG TETOSUSR 
IDISCUSA VETOTHEL

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
260
Puzzle 264
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Columnar Transposition Cipher. The keyword is 
ZIRCON. (Chapter 2 has instructions on how to solve this 
cipher.)
HNOETI EYISYR UWDLOT OESSPB EBOFLI ETCSHR ITHSTO 
EIJSTR AOEFST RUTDAG SEESAH FSHTOT DOOCLE DFREEN 
HCWOYA RVHTEE ISLLWI HOPATN FERONP RWAEOT SOYXNS
Puzzle 265
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a diagonal path.
AAMOFESENG SARFREDTOE TEAPNNOTTA TCETERLHSN 
TRAPGAEEDN INEANRCIIT IDNOWINSEN NIIIFTTROA 
ZTTFESNILZ AHOREATLYY
Puzzle 266
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Caesar Box Cipher.
HEEEAOLHNG  EIMCNOADDW TTAODRCICO RHSUHSKSOD 
UEFLEPITNE SRADWINATH TORSATGNRO EFAPSTBCOU 
DTSIAEOELS NHHTPRTAPE
Puzzle 267
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Box Cipher, with a diagonal path.
PTAREAS ULUGBKT LOGEEHH YSNTCAT IOATTEM NNABKTI 
DWASWAN

Chapter 12
Anagrams and Cryptic 
Clues
Easy
Puzzle 268
Anagram: FEATHERBRAIN TIN GHOST (2, 5, 3, 3, 7)
Puzzle 269
Anagram: I’m not interested in preserving the status quo; 
I want to THRIVE TO ROW (9, 2). —Niccolo Machiavelli
Puzzle 270
Cryptic Clue: Countenance an unruly café (4)
Puzzle 271
Anagram: CHANCY PRESTIGE BISON (3, 10, 6)
Puzzle 272
Anagram: Freedom of the press is guaranteed only to 
SOOTHE NEON WHOW (5, 3, 3, 3). —A. J. Liebling
Puzzle 273
Cryptic Clue: Palm tree rendezvous (4)
Puzzle 274
Anagram: Get your facts first, and then you can SMOTHER 
DITT (7, 4) as much as you please. —Mark Twain
Puzzle 275
Cryptic clue: Higher great lake (8)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
262
Puzzle 276
Anagram: Immorality: the morality of those who are 
ATTENTIVE HERB MAGI (6, 1, 6, 4). —Henry Lewis Mencken
Puzzle 277
Anagram: SAD SEA RIVER (11)
Puzzle 278
Cryptic Clue: Chickens can be found in Athens (4)
Puzzle 279
Cryptic Clue: It’s untrue fleas get confused (5)
Puzzle 280
Anagram: A + B + C = Success if, A = Hard Work, B = Hard Play, 
C = KEY IMPETUOUS HUG NORTH (7, 4, 5, 4). —Albert Einstein
Puzzle 281
Anagram: CLERIC LENGOD (6, 6)
Puzzle 282
Cryptic Clue: Exercise the locomotive (5)
Puzzle 283
Anagram: And Joseph . . . said unto them, SOUP ER ISAEY (3, 
3, 5); you have come to observe the ESSAEKNEWS (10) of the 
country. —Genesis 42:9, modern translation
Puzzle 284
Cryptic Clue: Lure held by a bonafide coyote (5)
Puzzle 285
Anagram: HERITAGE TRUMP MEN (6, 10)
Puzzle 286
Anagram: TROPHY GYP CAR (12)
Puzzle 287
Anagram: GET HOLD (3, 4)

 Chapter 12: Anagrams and Cryptic Clues 263
Puzzle 288
Cryptic Clue: Cooked yam for a month? (3)
Puzzle 289
Cryptic Clue: Fish in fortunate places (4)
Puzzle 290
Anagram: Be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting BALD 
HATE RAT (1, 4, 6). —Plato
Puzzle 291
Anagram: UNWORO (3, 3)
Puzzle 292
Cryptic Clue: Gable mangled a bread roll (5)
Puzzle 293
Anagram: Friends come and go, but enemies CULMAUCETA 
(10). —Henry David Thoreau
Puzzle 294
Anagram: BUDGET ALONE (6, 5)
Puzzle 295
Cryptic Clue: Nocturnal mammal hit the ball (3)
Tricky
Puzzle 296
Cryptic Clue: Annoyed crucifix (5)
Puzzle 297
Anagram: EDIBLE DOVE WAFER (4, 7, 4)
Puzzle 298
Cryptic Clue: Ceremonies among the broken tiers (5)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
264
Puzzle 299
Anagram: When cryptography TULIOSA DEW (2, 8), bayl bhg-
ynjf jvyy unir cevinpl. —Anonymous
Puzzle 300
Anagram: Do not regret growing old; many are IDLE 
EIGHTEEN PRIVED (6, 3, 9). —Ogden Nash
Puzzle 301
Anagram: Scratch a lover, and OFFENDIA (4, 1, 3). —Dorothy 
Parker
Puzzle 302
Cryptic clue: Don’t be scared by an unruly oat fern (4, 3)
Puzzle 303
Anagram: The only way to make a man trustworthy MUST 
RIOT THIS (2, 2, 5, 3). —Henry L. Stimson
Puzzle 304
Cryptic Clue: Drink can be a part of acid erosion (5)
Puzzle 305
Anagram: UTMOST FINAL (4, 3, 4)
Puzzle 306
Cryptic Clue: Pairs jostling to get to the French capital (5)
Puzzle 307
Cryptic Clue: Long gun in humus ketchup (6)
Puzzle 308
Anagram: SPECTRA EEKE (4, 1, 6)
Puzzle 309
Cryptic Clue: Found in Hamburg undying? A nice red! (8)

 Chapter 12: Anagrams and Cryptic Clues 265
Puzzle 310
Anagram: In 1765, Parliament passed the Stamp Act, which, 
as any American high school student can tell you, was an act 
that apparently HASN’T ADMITTED HOG SWIM PHOTO (3, 9, 
2, 2, 4, 6). —Dave Barry
Puzzle 311
Cryptic Clue: Upright newspaper article (6)
Puzzle 312
Anagram: Good advice is always certain to be ignored, but 
START NOVITIATE SONG HEN TOO (5, 2, 6, 3, 2, 4, 2). —
Agatha Christie
Puzzle 313
Anagram: OKLUG LOUTDLACOS (4, 4, 2, 2, 3)
Puzzle 314
Anagram: The hottest places in hell are reserved for those 
who, in time of great moral crisis, ANNIHILATE TERRY 
TITANIUM (8, 5, 10). —Dante
Puzzle 315
Cryptic Clue: Widespread army commander (7)
Puzzle 316
Cryptic Clue: Agitated magnate turns red (7)
Puzzle 317
Anagram: SETTLE STRATOSPHERE YIELD (6, 7, 4, 6)
Treacherous
Puzzle 318
Cryptic Clue: Citrus pies reveal agents (5)
Puzzle 319
Cryptic Clue: Reside in a Masonic group (5)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
266
Puzzle 320
Anagram: NIGHT SMOKE LOON (7, 3, 4)
Puzzle 321
Anagram: I think it will be a clash between the political will 
and the MAIDSERVANT TWITION (14, 4). —Lynn and Jay, “Yes 
Minister”
Puzzle 322
Cryptic Clue: A broken tablet leads to armed conflict! (6)
Puzzle 323
Cryptic Clue: Damaged ragged blade (6)
Puzzle 324
Anagram: We’d all like to vote for the best man but SAD EVE 
HAD NECTARINE (3, 5, 1, 9). —Kin Hubbard
Puzzle 325
Anagram: Absolute Power, once in fear for the safety of its 
tenure, TUB CUT REBEL CANON (6, 3, 2, 5). —Albert Pike, 
Morals and Dogma
Puzzle 326
Cryptic Clue: Some da Vinci pheromones hold a code (6)
Puzzle 327
Anagram: When I heard the words ROMANTIC VIGILANTE IS 
IN (8, 13) my mindset changed considerably. —Oliver North
Puzzle 328
Cryptic Clue: Grated Edam cheese makes a good drink! (4)
Puzzle 329
Cryptic Clue: Elite sports group alliance (6)
Puzzle 330
Anagram: I’m proud of the fact that I never DETEST OLIVINE 
PLAN KNOW (8, 7, 2, 4). —Thomas A. Edison

 Chapter 12: Anagrams and Cryptic Clues 267
Puzzle 331
Cryptic Clue: Broken, worn key to the big city (3,4)
Puzzle 332
Anagram: Knowledge of the enemy’s dispositions can only 
be obtained MRFETHER MOON (4, 5, 3). —Sun Tzu, “The Art 
of War”
Puzzle 333
Anagram: SECLUDE HIS TIN MIT (4, 1, 4, 7)
Puzzle 334
Cryptic Clue: Shelter can be found by upsetting Hades (5)
Puzzle 335
Anagram: It is double pleasure COERCIVE DEED TEETHIVE 
(2, 7, 3, 8). —Niccolo Machiavelli
Puzzle 336
Cryptic Clue: Environmentally friendly emerald (5)
Puzzle 337
Cryptic Clue: Overcome the overlord (6)

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
268

Chapter 13
Double Level Puzzles
Puzzle 338
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Solve this cipher to reveal the keyword for Puzzle 339.
FGW HGJKRVDHPG IW IOHDHJS 
JRGDOHRJ DSFD EHJVPTRORE DSHJ 
URJJFLR ZPCNE SFTR ORJCNDRE HG 
SRO IRHGL SFGLRE FJ F JKW ZHDSHG 
F ARZ EFWJ, NRFTHGL SRO IPWJ 
POKSFGJ.  
Puzzle 339
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
The keyword from Puzzle 338 will help you crack this Rail 
Fence Cipher!
INOYI EYIWH SOLTE AECOM RLLAR TNBLC SNTOS SEWEN 
GARAH FHTFR MAPRR LRTBI ILEOR GHBIE IHRLO DAKTR 
TSFEE MUSAN ATESL IHNEW TRTNR OEYOT PEFUT HODHE 
CEHHT VIITW TOOIET

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
270
Puzzle 340
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this encrypted message and 
unlock Puzzle 341.
Puzzle 341
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Use the keyword revealed in Puzzle 340 to determine 
the correct order of columns of letters in this Columnar 
Transposition Cipher. (Check out the instructions on how to 
solve these ciphers in Chapter 2.)
 
Any repeated letters in the keyword are ignored (so CARNATION 
would be written as CARNTIO, without the second A and N).
SEHED TIERM NOEDT GROHE STELF HGROU HMENE YELIN 
SETOG TSTHI UNRGE TSMES AOGET MRAJO TMALL AXDGE

 Chapter 13: Double Level Puzzles 271
Puzzle 342
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this encrypted message and 
unlock Puzzle 343.
GVPABJA RDEN OLI FBTI ER LID 
WCFYIO CJP OLI UECP BO OLIJ 
SCDDBIP, B ZEVUP AVIFF OLCO FLI 
LCP ABHIJ CZCM CWEVO LCUR OLI 
WCFYIO CF ABROF OE FIJODBIF CO 
HCDBEVF SLISYQEBJOF.     
Puzzle 343
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Cipher. The keyword from Puzzle 
342 helps you solve it. We broke the message into five-letter 
pieces, just to increase the challenge!
ANRIS KEDHE RLMIN GTOGE TTHIO ETOYO UIAMF WBEBR 
AVERI SESLG RYXKJ YNCAI LAEHF OEWAR NHESS EMLAI 
CUDTW SYLIM AFREH

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
272
Puzzle 344
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this encrypted message (it’s also 
the blank word). It will unlock Puzzle 345.
NKVUBRZ JS JUA OBJDUAR, B QXJ SR 
JUA KQCSR SP K VACHBRZ ZBCT, KRN 
KCCKRZAN JS JKOA JUA QTKDA SP 
JUA VACHAC PSC UBV JKITA. VXCA 
ARSXZU, JUACA EKV KRSJUAC LKR 
EUS UKN FSBRAN GSXC DSLQKRBSR. 
B JSSO JUABC SCNAC, KRN JUAR UBN 
BR JUA RAWJ ISSJU JS TBVJAR. B 
UAKCN SRTG K PAE ESCNV: 
“_ _ _ _ _ _” EKV QCSLBRARJ KLSRZ 
JUAL, KV EKV JUA ESCN “CAQTKDA.”    
Puzzle 345
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Use the keyword revealed in Puzzle 344 to determine 
the correct order of columns of letters in this Columnar 
Transposition Cipher.
OODINT WONKWH HSTACE HSEMTE NMESEH NEVAIT 
NLEHOG UNURBT ETNIHS TROHTH AMYEEN AUOYHR 
EEBMVR EACYRF ADLUER OENOXX

 Chapter 13: Double Level Puzzles 273
Puzzle 346
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this encrypted message and 
unlock Puzzle 347.
UCAFVCH JDGA QDCC OA PN SACJ MN 
ZY. QA YSFCC SFTA MN XFGA RN QDMS 
NZV NQP RATDUAY DP YFIALZFVRDPL 
MSA LNCR. QA SFTA MSA XAFPY MN 
OZVH DM RAAJ QDMSDP MSA SDCC 
UNZPMVH DP MSA YNZMS, NZM DP 
MSA QAYM, NZM QSAVA MSA 
JNJZCFMDNP DP YUFVUA FPR 
YHXJFMSH INV MSA UFZYA DY SDLS. 
FPR MSAP QA'CC QFDM.  
Puzzle 347
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
The keyword from Puzzle 346 helps you crack this Rail Fence 
Cipher!
IOTES OMBEH OCRCT ATUIH NCNIR POAAL HLTBL GIATA 
IASAX MNCWC NTONU EHYEE OPIOH ITNST GSINE IHOIE 
WBTWT SDESC

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
274
Puzzle 348
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this encrypted message and 
unlock Puzzle 349.
ATD DHG NIT YOECRHHOW DEO 
ARSTHL ZR VRME RNNTAO DZ ZBTC 
XOEV SRSOHZ. VRM PTWW 
GONTHTZOWV IO DEEOCZOG. T DS 
HRZ CMEO, IMZ TN ZBOV BDXO 
OHRMLB ZR DEEOCZ VRM, ZBOV 
YERIDIWV BDXO OHRMLB ZR ARHXTAZ 
VRM.   
Puzzle 349
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
This is a Twisted Path Cipher. The keyword from Puzzle 348 
helps you solve it.
ISOSAIMMEVEI MROYTEOEATTE RTTEHSXHHANM 
YHHARTUEHTOE ATSOROCTRSYI TCFEYYLUUEWS 
OEMSALSOAOTT MEPNITYRNHEO SEIPEOSOEMUI 
TDEDTAGTISET

 Chapter 13: Double Level Puzzles 275
Puzzle 350
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Find the keyword hidden in this Caesar Cipher, and then use it 
to unlock Puzzle 351.
IO IPVUO. YLT CVUO JDKTSOQ, JVYIO 
ETQS QORLKGQ.     
Puzzle 351
Difficulty Level: Treacherous
Use the keyword revealed in Puzzle 350 to determine 
the correct order of columns of letters in this Columnar 
Transposition Cipher.
FOEFI PMEYR NSAOR NCGOL UALTR OTNIA YOONS ARPCU 
EUORT ETTHF TAOIR NMNAR MEYIH OUNDO NTOKO IMHEW 
VWEEO OKWNR IFRAA UMNOA OAUBT UYJOT 

Part II: Secret Stories, Codes, and Cryptogram Puzzles 
276

Part III
Hints and Answers 
to the Cryptos 
and Codes

In this part . . .
I
f you get stuck when trying to solve the puzzles, check 
out the hints in Chapter 14. And, of course, after (ahem) 
you solve the puzzles, you can check your solutions 
against the answers in Chapter 15.

Chapter 14
Hints to Help Crack the 
Cryptograms and Puzzles
In This Chapter
▶ Find a hint for every puzzle in the book
▶ Use the hints when you get stuck
 
When you have a hint like A = B, for example, the letter on the 
left is the ciphertext letter, and the letter on the right is the 
plaintext letter. (See Chapter 2 for details about these terms.)
Chapter 4
Puzzle 1: U = O
Puzzle 2: D = W
Puzzle 3: L = C
Puzzle 4: F = B
Puzzle 5: I = G
Puzzle 6: X = K
Puzzle 7: V = N
Puzzle 8: E = Y
Puzzle 9: Y = W
Puzzle 10: Q = L

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
280
Puzzle 11: N = P
Puzzle 12: T = C
Puzzle 13: F = H
Puzzle 14: E = C
Puzzle 15: L = R
Puzzle 16: E = F
Puzzle 17: X = V
Puzzle 18: N = O
Puzzle 19: F = D
Puzzle 20: E = N
Puzzle 21: D = V
Puzzle 22: M = Y
Puzzle 23: N = F
Puzzle 24: Q = V
Puzzle 25: O = R
Puzzle 26: Z = G
Puzzle 27: N = W
Puzzle 28: V = Q
Puzzle 29: B = U
Puzzle 30: X = L
Puzzle 31: X = K
Puzzle 32: Q = R
Puzzle 33: S = H
Puzzle 34: H = S

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 281
Puzzle 35: E = D
Puzzle 36: A = Y
Puzzle 37: I = G
Puzzle 38: P = U
Puzzle 39: X = G
Puzzle 40: N = B
Puzzle 41: E = C
Puzzle 42: E = L
Chapter 5
Puzzle 43: 07 = A
Puzzle 44: XIV = N
Puzzle 45: 11 = C
Puzzle 46: 25 = G
Puzzle 47: 23 = D
Puzzle 48: 05 = W
Puzzle 49: 50 = N
Puzzle 50: 12 = S
Puzzle 51: 16 = P
Puzzle 52: 12 = K
Puzzle 53: 56 = N
Puzzle 54: XX = A
Puzzle 55: 16 = Y
Puzzle 56: IV = D

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
282
Puzzle 57: 98 = P
Puzzle 58: 64 = C
Puzzle 59: 36 = I
Puzzle 60: 19 = C
Puzzle 61: 61 = Y
Puzzle 62: 15 = L
Puzzle 63: 74 = C
Puzzle 64: 10 = M
Puzzle 65: VIII = F
Puzzle 66: 21 = N
Puzzle 67: 17 = W
Puzzle 68: 35 = V
Puzzle 69: 14 = G
Puzzle 70: 20 = R
Puzzle 71: XII = L
Puzzle 72: 89 = F
Puzzle 73: 73 = Y
Puzzle 74: XIV = S
Puzzle 75: XXIII = N
Puzzle 76: 92 = A
Puzzle 77: XI = L
Puzzle 78: 24 = O
Puzzle 79: 58 = I
Puzzle 80: 09 = C

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 283
Chapter 6
Puzzle 81: The second word is HOPE
Puzzle 82: The third word starts with W
Puzzle 83: The first letter is T
Puzzle 84: The black pen = H
Puzzle 85: The first letter is Y
Puzzle 86: The last word starts with C
Puzzle 87: The last word starts with B
Puzzle 88: The first word is AND
Puzzle 89: The last letter is N
Puzzle 90: The first word starts with B
Puzzle 91: The third word starts with Y
Puzzle 92: The first letter is B
Puzzle 93: The last word starts with A
Puzzle 94: The final letter is T
Puzzle 95: The first letter is C
Puzzle 96: The second word starts with H
Puzzle 97: The second letter in the first word is H
Puzzle 98: The second word starts with T
Puzzle 99: The last word starts with M
Puzzle 100: The last letter is N
Puzzle 101: The second word starts with K
Puzzle 102: .-.-.- = period
Puzzle 103: The last letter is F

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
284
Puzzle 104: One of the leaf symbols = L
Puzzle 105: The last letter is F
Puzzle 106: .-.-.- = period, --..-- = comma, -….- = dash
Puzzle 107: The last word starts with N
Puzzle 108: The first letter is I
Puzzle 109: The last word is five letters long, and the black 
 dot = D
Puzzle 110: Four words start with S
Chapter 7
Puzzle 111: C = B
Puzzle 112: R = O
Puzzle 113: C = D
Puzzle 114: D = I
Puzzle 115: O = K
Puzzle 116: T = W
Puzzle 117: L = G
Puzzle 118: Q = U
Puzzle 119: M = J
Puzzle 120: L = F
Puzzle 121: P = N
Puzzle 122: M = G
Puzzle 123: F = H
Puzzle 124: K = H
Puzzle 125: Q = F

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 285
Puzzle 126: M = R
Puzzle 127: S = B
Puzzle 128: W = M
Puzzle 129: D = K
Puzzle 130: R = M
Puzzle 131: Z = D
Puzzle 132: T = W
Puzzle 133: V = C
Puzzle 134: Q = G
Puzzle 135: L = W
Puzzle 136: S = F
Puzzle 137: K = R
Puzzle 138: Z = R
Puzzle 139: G = L
Puzzle 140: U = N
Puzzle 141: G = P
Puzzle 142: P = Y
Puzzle 143: W = G
Puzzle 144: Q = N
Chapter 8
Puzzle 145: The first word starts with T
Puzzle 146: The second word starts with W
Puzzle 147: D is the last letter

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
286
Puzzle 148: The second letter is O
Puzzle 149: R is the final letter
Puzzle 150: One of the double letters is L
Puzzle 151: The third word starts with D
Puzzle 152: The second word starts with N
Puzzle 153: The first letter is W
Puzzle 154: The first letter is R
Puzzle 155: The last word ends with Y
Puzzle 156: The final letter is R
Puzzle 157: The second word starts with F
Puzzle 158: The first letter is H
Puzzle 159: The second word starts with G
Puzzle 160: The last word starts with F
Puzzle 161: The last word starts with P
Puzzle 162: The longest word starts with C
Puzzle 163: The first word starts with H
Puzzle 164: The letter Z appears twice
Puzzle 165: The second word starts with L
Puzzle 166: Part of the keyword is E _ WI _ _
Puzzle 167: The word NO appears
Puzzle 168: The first letter is D
Puzzle 169: The keyword starts with WA
Puzzle 170: Part of the keyword is A _ SC _ _ D
Puzzle 171: The first letter is M

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 287
Puzzle 172: The last word starts with G
Puzzle 173: The first word starts with S
Puzzle 174: The final letter is S
Puzzle 175: The second word starts with L
Puzzle 176: The last word starts with W
Chapter 9
Puzzle 177: 2-rail
Puzzle 178: 2-rail
Puzzle 179: 2-rail
Puzzle 180: 2-rail
Puzzle 181: 3-rail
Puzzle 182: 3-rail
Puzzle 183: 2-rail
Puzzle 184: 3-rail
Puzzle 185: 2-rail
Puzzle 186: 2-rail
Puzzle 187: 2-rail
Puzzle 188: 3-rail
Puzzle 189: 3-rail
Puzzle 190: 2-rail
Puzzle 191: 4-rail
Puzzle 192: 2-rail
Puzzle 193: 4-rail

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
288
Puzzle 194: 3-rail
Puzzle 195: 2-rail
Puzzle 196: 3-rail
Puzzle 197: 3-rail
Puzzle 198: 4-rail
Puzzle 199: 4-rail
Puzzle 200: 3-rail
Puzzle 201: 5-rail
Puzzle 202: 5-rail
Puzzle 203: 4-rail
Puzzle 204: 5-rail
Puzzle 205: There are nine points in the top row
Puzzle 206: There are seven points in the top row
Puzzle 207: There are 11 points in the top row
Chapter 10
Puzzle 208: The last word starts with B
Puzzle 209: The second word starts with H
Puzzle 210: 6 = Y
Puzzle 211: , = m
Puzzle 212: L = :
Puzzle 213: The last word starts with F
Puzzle 214: U = &
Puzzle 215: There are two Ys in the message

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 289
Puzzle 216: The last word starts with R
Puzzle 217: The last word starts with I
Puzzle 218: The third word has Z in it
Puzzle 219: { = :
Puzzle 220: E = W
Puzzle 221: The third word starts with R
Puzzle 222: The second word starts with H
Puzzle 223: The first word starts with I
Puzzle 224: F = S
Puzzle 225: The last word starts with L
Puzzle 226: ^ = *
Puzzle 227: Q appears once in the message
Puzzle 228: The second-to-last word starts with W
Puzzle 229: The last word starts with B
Puzzle 230: & = Y
Puzzle 231: The second-to-last word starts with A
Puzzle 232: The second word starts with C
Puzzle 233: { = P
Puzzle 234: F = D and & = U
Puzzle 235: The first word starts with L
Chapter 11
Puzzle 236: T = G
Puzzle 237: The answer has four words

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
290
Puzzle 238: 7 x 7 grid
Puzzle 239: V = E
Puzzle 240: 7 x 7 grid
Puzzle 241: S = H
Puzzle 242: The answer has four words
Puzzle 243: 9 x 9 grid
Puzzle 244: W = D
Puzzle 245: K = P
Puzzle 246: 10 wide x 9 high grid
Puzzle 247: B = Y
Puzzle 248: 8 x 8 grid
Puzzle 249: 8 wide x 5 high grid
Puzzle 250: 5 x 5 box cipher
Puzzle 251: 7 wide x 8 high grid
Puzzle 252: 10 x 10 grid, start at top-left corner
Puzzle 253: 13 x 13 grid, start in the center square
Puzzle 254: 10 x 10 grid, start from the lower-right corner
Puzzle 255: 10 wide x 16 high grid
Puzzle 256: 9 x 9 grid
Puzzle 257: The answer has 11 letters
Puzzle 258: 7 wide x 6 high grid, start in lower-left corner
Puzzle 259: 6 wide x 9 high grid, start in lower-right corner
Puzzle 260: 9 wide x 5 high grid, start in the top-left corner
Puzzle 261: 7 wide x 15 high grid; the first word is SIMPLY

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 291
Puzzle 262: 10 wide x 11 high grid, start in the top-right corner
Puzzle 263: 8 wide x 7 high grid, start in the top-left corner
Puzzle 264: 6 wide x 21 high grid; the keyword = 625143
Puzzle 265: 10 x 10 grid, start at top-left corner
Puzzle 266: 10 x 10 grid
Puzzle 267: 7 x 7 grid, start from the top-right corner
Chapter 12
Puzzle 268: The initial letters are A, A, F, T, and B
Puzzle 269: The words start with O and I
Puzzle 270: Unruly is an anagram indicator
Puzzle 271: The three words start with T, C, and B
Puzzle 272: Two words start with O
Puzzle 273: Add a comma after tree
Puzzle 274: The second word starts with TH
Puzzle 275: This is a double definition clue
Puzzle 276: The third word starts with B
Puzzle 277: The third letter is V
Puzzle 278: Chickens is the base clue
Puzzle 279: The answer starts with F
Puzzle 280: The words start with K, Y, M, S
Puzzle 281: The two words start with G and C
Puzzle 282: Put a comma after exercise
Puzzle 283: The last word starts with W

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
292
Puzzle 284: Held indicates a hidden word
Puzzle 285: The two words start with E and T
Puzzle 286: The answer starts with C and ends with Y
Puzzle 287: The second word ends with D
Puzzle 288: Cooked is an anagram indicator
Puzzle 289: Fish is the base clue, and it’s a noun
Puzzle 290: The third word starts with B
Puzzle 291: Both words start with O
Puzzle 292: Mangled indicates an anagram
Puzzle 293: A is the first letter, E is the last
Puzzle 294: The words start with D and A
Puzzle 295: Put a comma after mammal
Puzzle 296: Put a comma between the two words
Puzzle 297: The words start with D, B, W
Puzzle 298: Broken indicates an anagram
Puzzle 299: The second word starts with O
Puzzle 300: The words start with D, T, P
Puzzle 301: Two of the words start with F
Puzzle 302: Don’t be scared is the base clue
Puzzle 303: The third word starts and ends with T
Puzzle 304: Part of indicates a hidden word
Puzzle 305: The words start with M, N, F
Puzzle 306: Jostled is an anagram indicator
Puzzle 307: This is a hidden word clue

 Chapter 14: Hints to Help Crack the Cryptograms and Puzzles 293
Puzzle 308: The first word ends with P
Puzzle 309: A hidden word clue; ignore the punctuation!
Puzzle 310: The second and sixth words start with S
Puzzle 311: Add a comma after upright
Puzzle 312: The third word starts with R and ends with N
Puzzle 313: The first two words start with G and L
Puzzle 314: The words start with M, T, N
Puzzle 315: Add a comma after widespread
Puzzle 316: Agitated indicates an anagram
Puzzle 317: The initial letters are P, D, T, L
Puzzle 318: Reveal indicates a hidden word
Puzzle 319: Put a comma after in
Puzzle 320: The words start with S, T, K
Puzzle 321: The words start with A, W
Puzzle 322: Armed conflict is the base clue
Puzzle 323: Damaged indicates an anagram
Puzzle 324: The last word starts with C and ends with E
Puzzle 325: Two words start with C
Puzzle 326: Some and hold are hidden word indicators
Puzzle 327: The words start with C and I
Puzzle 328: Grated indicates an anagram
Puzzle 329: Put a comma after group
Puzzle 330: The words start with I, W, T, K
Puzzle 331: Broken refers to an anagram

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
294
Puzzle 332: The words start with F, O, M
Puzzle 333: The first word starts with T
Puzzle 334: Upsetting indicates an anagram
Puzzle 335: Two words are almost identical
Puzzle 336: Put a comma after friendly
Puzzle 337: Put a comma after overcome
Chapter 13
Puzzle 338: A = F
Puzzle 339: Seventeen points are in the top row
Puzzle 340: The answer has six letters
Puzzle 341: The grid of letters is 5 columns x 16 rows
Puzzle 342: A = G
Puzzle 343: 12 wide x 8 high grid
Puzzle 344: C = R
Puzzle 345: 6 wide x 16 high grid
Puzzle 346: U = C
Puzzle 347: Fifteen points
Puzzle 348: S = M
Puzzle 349: 12 wide x 10 high grid
Puzzle 350: I = B
Puzzle 351: 5 wide x 22 high grid

Chapter 15
Answers to All 
Cryptograms and Puzzles
In This Chapter
▶ Look up the answers to every puzzle in the book
▶ Check your work against these answers
Chapter 4
Puzzle 1: I propose that we meet personally to allow me to 
convey to you my plans, maps, and so forth.
Puzzle 2: We have indeed established your credentials. Please 
tell me more about what you wish to offer to the service of the 
army of His Majesty the King.
Puzzle 3: . . . appointed the head of Secret Intelligence for the 
British military forces who are fighting against the Colonial 
patriots.
Puzzle 4: General Arnold has been slighted for promotion, 
accused of diverting military funds for personal use, and oth-
erwise insulted by his associates among the rebel colonists.
Puzzle 5: With the advent of war, the agenda of the Knights 
must change. Their public activity should focus on “peace,” 
on fanning the flames of sympathy for the South and its cause, 
on promoting the good sense of slavery.
Puzzle 6: Are you satisfied with a title like Governor — or 
would something like “Duke” suit you better? Washington 
would not accept the title of King; I do not have his prejudice 
against titles of nobility — and neither, I think, do you.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
296
Puzzle 7: Had I been more seen, just a slight bit more visible, 
among those who were gathering arms for my cause, then that 
court would have convicted me, all those years ago . . .
Puzzle 8: I have always been interested to hear of your mili-
tary exploits, and especially to hear of your much less well-
known activities involving Kentucky — and the king of Spain.
Puzzle 9: . . . a substantial set of assets that dates back to the 
Civil War, involving caches of precious metals, particularly 
gold. We have a general idea of the locations of the metals 
involved, and can pin down a cache to within a ten mile 
radius, often less — but that is not much better than knowing 
nothing.
Puzzle 10: Underneath the welcome mat outside your apart-
ment door, you will find a manila envelope with a file indi-
cating where you can discover evidence of Mr. Halligan’s 
activities.
Puzzle 11: As always, there will be a substantial benefit to you 
personally as we recover the caches. Please do take more 
than the usual precautions that your staff suspects noth-
ing. Those who do, I am sorry to say, must be handled with 
extreme prejudice.
Puzzle 12: Many, many years ago, as a security precaution, 
several of the operatives of this organization adopted color 
names as cryptonyms. Perhaps one day you shall be part of 
our organization, and have such a cryptonym yourself.
Puzzle 13: If you would win a man to your cause, first con-
vince him that you are his sincere friend. Therein is a drop of 
honey that catches his heart, which, say what he will, is the 
great highroad to his reason, and which, once gained, you 
will find but little trouble in convincing him of the justice of 
your cause, if indeed that cause is really a good one. Abraham 
Lincoln
Puzzle 14: Concealment writing may take a host of forms. 
Perhaps its oldest known application is found in the ancient 
device of writing a secret message on the head of a slave and 
dispatching the slave with his communication after his grow-
ing hair had covered the writing. Helen Fouché Gaines

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 297
Puzzle 15: Thieves respect property. They merely wish the 
property to become their property that they may more per-
fectly respect it. G. K. Chesterton
Puzzle 16: I can win an argument on any topic, against any 
opponent. People know this, and steer clear of me at parties. 
Often, as a sign of their great respect, they don’t even invite 
me. Dave Barry
Puzzle 17: I have another way into Clinton’s tent, which I have 
been developing for some time.
Puzzle 18: It would be best to proceed without delay with my 
plan to turn this stronghold over to His Majesty.
Puzzle 19: . . . confirm that the writer of that message is 
indeed the esteemed General Arnold, victor of the Battle of 
Saratoga.
Puzzle 20: . . . Dr. George W. L. Bickley to serve as the leader 
and nominal founder of that group . . .
Puzzle 21: Doctor Bickley’s “invasion” of Mexico was unreliev-
edly disastrous. Replace him as head of the Knights of the 
Golden Circle. (Keyword = MEXICO)
Puzzle 22: John Wickham, one of my attorneys, should be 
known to you as “Orange”; should I not be able to escape my 
current predicament, you shall report to him. (Keyword = 
ORANGE)
Puzzle 23: I am an employee in the Directorate of Operations 
in the Central Intelligence Agency. My supervisor is one 
Burton Mannheim. My office handles the operations of field 
operatives  — basically, spies — in certain locations around 
the world. (Keyword = BURTON)
Puzzle 24: You have identified Soviet and other Communist 
agents at the Departments of State, Defense, Interior, and 
Transportation . . .
Puzzle 25: I know in particular that you have a strong desire 
to serve your country, to protect your country from enemy 
agents, in particular to protect your country from double 
agents . . .

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
298
Puzzle 26: The first obligation of the demonstrator is to be legi-
ble. Miss Manners cannot sympathize with a cause whose signs 
she cannot make out even with her glasses on. Judith Martin
Puzzle 27: The world is divided into people who do things and 
people who get the credit. Try, if you can, to belong to the 
first class. There’s far less competition. Dwight Morrow
Puzzle 28: Despite pleas from several of his aides, including 
Hamilton that André be executed by firing squad as befits a 
soldier, Washington ordered that he be hanged as a spy. He 
was not in a sentimental or generous mood. (Joseph J. Ellis, 
His Excellency: George Washington, 2008, p. 129)
Puzzle 29: General Washington, we have in our custody Major 
John André, out of uniform, who was intercepted near Tarrytown 
today on the way to British lines. (Keyword = WEST POIN[T])
Puzzle 30: A Commendation Given Under the Hand of George 
Washington, Commander-in-Chief, The Continental Army. Let 
all men know by these presents that Mrs. Alice Carroll did risk 
her life for the cause of freedom in the service of her coun-
try The United States of America which is eternally grateful. 
Though these thanks must be kept secret, our gratitude shall 
last as long as our freedom.
Puzzle 31: I ask you to give safe passage to my wife Peggy and 
my children, to Peggy’s family in Philadelphia.
Puzzle 32: Your Major André — caught, like Hale, in civilian 
clothes behind enemy lines — the mark of a spy — shall meet 
the same fate, by the rules of war. (Keyword = ORDEAL)
Puzzle 33: At the end of his stay in the oasis, the nomad folds 
his tent and moves away; the caravan disappears from sight, 
but continues its journey in silence.
Puzzle 34: Jefferson Davis, President, The Confederate States 
of America
Puzzle 35: I have the blessing of a former commanding officer 
of yours to communicate to you a request for assistance. If 
you can spare an hour or two for conversation on a matter of 
mutual interest, I ask your indulgence to meet me tomorrow 
night at Heron’s Tavern, not far from your lodgings, beginning 
at eight p.m. (Keyword = TAVERN)

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 299
Puzzle 36: Unfortunately, I cannot impede you, either. I have 
no proof of our conversation. This note will be left in a bottle 
in a hole in a tree; I have no way to direct the authorities to 
you. So, all I can do is refuse you, and that I do irrevocably. 
(Keyword = HOLE)
Puzzle 37: It is crucial that my role in this identification not 
be mentioned to your colleagues or superiors. I am in an 
extremely sensitive position that must not be compromised.
Puzzle 38: There was clearly too much of a trail left by the 
satellite repositioning to have fully covered your tracks. 
(Keyword = TRACKS)
Puzzle 39: Commendation to Allison Carroll, Whose courage 
and ingenuity in the face of adversity upheld the finest tradi-
tions of both the American intelligence community and her 
own family. Though this nation’s thanks must be kept secret, 
our gratitude shall last as long as our freedom.
Puzzle 40: A military operation involves deception. Even 
though you are competent, appear to be incompetent. Though 
effective, appear to be ineffective. Sun Tzu (~ 400 BC)
Puzzle 41: A censor is a man who knows more than he thinks 
you ought to. Laurence J Peter
Puzzle 42: It is a fair summary of history to say that the safe-
guards of liberty have been forged in controversies involving 
not very nice people. Felix Frankfurter
Chapter 5
Puzzle 43: . . . providing the British with military information 
about the American patriots’ Continental Army, such as the 
size and location of groups of Continental Army troops.
Puzzle 44: The word that we have from multiple agents placed 
in the camp of the British, working independently of one 
another, all points to the same conclusion.
Puzzle 45: Please send us notice as to whether this offer is 
acceptable to you, along with your plans to turn over West 
Point.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
300
Puzzle 46: This is a closely guarded secret within the inner 
circle of General Sir Henry Clinton, a group that my agents 
cannot penetrate.
Puzzle 47: Oh, yes, I know of the plans that you had to deliver 
Kentucky to Spain. I know a great many things that are not 
widely known, including your secret renunciation of American 
citizenship, the oath of allegiance that you made to the Spanish 
throne, and the annual pension that you receive from Madrid.
Puzzle 48: With the conviction of Vallandigham this week for 
“uttering disloyal sentiments”, we need to change tactics and 
strategize for the larger picture.
Puzzle 49: I am discovered, and that Wilkinson is set to testify 
against me. None of the rest of you are known, and so it shall 
remain.
Puzzle 50: . . . Bickley must think that the establishment of the 
Knights of the Golden Circle is his own brainchild.
Puzzle 51: Mr. Halligan has been serving as a double agent 
for the Soviet Union for many years, in which position he has 
compromised many delicate diplomatic negotiations.
Puzzle 52: I know that retasking intelligence satellites over 
American soil is a sensitive issue. I suggest that you retask the 
satellites in such a way that they have to fly over American 
territory to other locations; the scans can then be performed 
in passing, as it were.
Puzzle 53: . . . they discovered the new evidence that I planted 
in Halligan’s home and office, as they had discovered what I 
planted earlier in the month.
Puzzle 54: The call you picked up this afternoon, when some-
one asked for a nonexistent office, was placed by one of my 
associates; the record of that call will substantiate your story 
about an anonymous telephone tip.
Puzzle 55: It takes your enemy and your friend, working 
together, to hurt you to the heart: the one to slander you and 
the other to get the news to you. Mark Twain

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 301
Puzzle 56: If a secret piece of news is divulged by a spy before 
the time is ripe, he must be put to death together with the 
man to whom the secret was told. Sun Tzu
Puzzle 57: Propaganda: that branch of the art of lying which 
consists in very nearly deceiving your friends without quite 
deceiving your enemies. Francis M Cornford
Puzzle 58: The public say they are getting cynical about poli-
ticians; they should hear how politicians talk about them. 
George Weldon
Puzzle 59: . . . properly accounting for his expenses while fighting 
in Canada, even though Arnold’s receipts were lost in battle.
Puzzle 60: . . . circumstances are such as to compel me to 
reconsider my position. I now wish to broach the possibility 
of changing my allegiance to the side of His Majesty the King.
Puzzle 61: You will immediately send patrols to search without 
raising alarm the area from West Point, south past Tarrytown, 
from September twenty-first through the twenty-ninth.
Puzzle 62: You, and the rest of the Spectrum agents — Red, 
Yellow, Blue, Orange, and all the rest — as well as myself are 
the Inner Circle.
Puzzle 63: What a dramatic death! As an attorney for the 
defense in a murder case, Clement tries to re-enact the shoot-
ing in an attempt to show how the victim had actually shot 
himself by accident — and Clement proceeds to shoot himself 
by accident!
Puzzle 64: The man by whom I send this message shall be 
your liaison with me.
Puzzle 65: After a few years of field experience, with your FBI 
record of catching double agents, you would be a natural for 
a transfer to the office of the Directorate of Intelligence that 
focuses on counterintelligence.
Puzzle 66: . . . not to print off the computer screen on which 
my messages appear. Your careful attention to follow detailed 
instructions as dictated to you makes you a very valuable 
asset in any organization.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
302
Puzzle 67: The worst government is often the most moral. One 
composed of cynics is often very tolerant and humane. But 
when fanatics are on top there is no limit to oppression. H L 
Mencken
Puzzle 68: History teaches us that men and nations behave 
wisely once they have exhausted all other alternatives. 
Abba Eban
Puzzle 69: There are a terrible lot of lies going around the 
world, and the worst of it is half of them are true. Winston 
Churchill
Puzzle 70: I courted one Miss Peggy Shippen while I was sta-
tioned in Philadelphia. This would be the same Peggy Shippen 
who is your wife.
Puzzle 71: As a gentleman myself, of course I give safe passage 
to your wife and family.
Puzzle 72: You have no reputation to defend. Your family will 
suffer the ignominy you have brought upon your name, for 
now, and for always.
Puzzle 73: Yes, the Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish Rite 
has facilities here and there throughout many states and ter-
ritories of the country . . .
Puzzle 74: Henceforth, have the public organization known as 
the “Order of the Sons of Liberty”.
Puzzle 75: No doubt you will find it surprising to see me com-
municate with you in cipher. I assure you that my intentions 
are most honorable.
Puzzle 76: It was not a happy face I saw. I saw your counte-
nance grow darker and darker, though you said very little. 
When you left, I saw that your companion was somewhat dis-
pleased, as well.
Puzzle 77: Your role in getting unauthorized intelligence to me 
has been exposed — I don’t know by whom.
Puzzle 78: Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason . . . 
by never losing sight of which he may avoid disastrous ship-
wreck. Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 303
Puzzle 79: Interest in cryptography is not restricted to gov-
ernments and professional spies. Everybody enjoys a secret. 
Martin Gardner
Puzzle 80: Confidant, Confidante, n. One entrusted by A with 
the secrets of B, confided by him to C. Ambrose Bierce
Chapter 6
Puzzle 81: I hope to hear from this source soon.
Puzzle 82: . . . I visited West Point, and I took careful note of 
several ways in which the defenses of this fortification can be 
weakened to allow His Majesty’s Army to take this stronghold 
without loss.
Puzzle 83: Tonight at dinner, under the influence of some 
spirituous liquors . . . 
Puzzle 84: . . . the British over the financial compensation he 
would receive.
Puzzle 85: You have access to some of the assets that we 
accumulated so many years ago, and many contacts. I shall 
leave it to you to bring about what dreams you can.
Puzzle 86: . . . found a new land, one in the south and the south-
west, one built on cotton and sugar, on tobacco and coffee . . . 
Puzzle 87: Despite the brave face that I put on events in 
public, as I mentioned briefly during our conversation, the 
war goes badly.
Puzzle 88: And, having accepted that unhappy possibility, we 
must do what can be done to prepare for the next conflict — 
for a next conflict there must be.
Puzzle 89: . . . whether you are the kind of man whom I can 
trust with this kind of information. If so, I will have more such 
information to share. If not, I shall never communicate with 
you again.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
304
Puzzle 90: Because the caches themselves are in lightly popu-
lated hill country or outright wilderness areas, there should 
be relatively little interference to obscure the gravitometric 
signal.
Puzzle 91: . . . who serve your enemies while serving in posi-
tions of trust in American intelligence and law enforcement.
Puzzle 92: Be faithful . . . to the promises you make, to the 
pledges you give, and to the vows that you assume, since 
to break either is base and dishonorable. . . . Be faithful to 
your country, and prefer its dignity and honor to any degree 
of popularity and honor for yourself; consulting its interest 
rather than your own . . . Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma
Puzzle 93: I seek in particular a British officer, one Major John 
André.
Puzzle 94: You have clearly learned of my plans. I can only 
say that I did what I did for my country — although it may not 
seem so at the moment.
Puzzle 95: . . . compared her beauty to that of the silver moon 
at the full, for clarity, for brilliance, and for her beauty’s abil-
ity to stir the very soul of man.
Puzzle 96: I have entrusted this to you as the walls collapse 
around me.
Puzzle 97: Their private activity should focus on giving aid to 
the South, to discouraging enlistment in the Northern Army, 
even to sabotage in the North.
Puzzle 98: Let’s take the name change a bit further, and iden-
tify with the original American Revolution.
Puzzle 99: For the good of the country, I beg you, do not 
ignore this message.
Puzzle 100: Money couldn’t buy friends but you got a better 
class of enemy. Spike Milligan
Puzzle 101: I know that’s a secret, for it’s whispered every-
where. William Congreve

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 305
Puzzle 102: Defectors are like grapes. The first pressings from 
them are the best. The third and fourth lack body. Maurice 
Oldfield
Puzzle 103: . . . an intermediary between several of Major 
Tallmadge’s agents in Manhattan and Major Tallmadge himself.
Puzzle 104: He is, after all, an officer in His Majesty’s Army, 
and no common spy.
Puzzle 105: You cannot claim the status of gentleman yourself.
Puzzle 106: Second, I disagree with your means. You wish 
me to safeguard the Confederate gold to provide for another 
war. In essence, you have asked me to betray the oath of loy-
alty that I took to the Union upon the cessation of hostilities 
in the War Between the States. You clearly have no notion of 
the importance of an oath to a man such as me. An oath once 
taken must be fulfilled. Honor and duty are the pole stars 
of life. I would no more countenance breaking my oath than 
I would hanging myself — indeed, the latter would be the 
more honorable course.
Puzzle 107: But I know of a man who might be able to help 
you — formerly one of our generals, now in the nation’s 
capital. Although by vocation an attorney, he has a power-
ful position as the head of a large fraternal organization with 
branches throughout the country outside the Northeast.
Puzzle 108: Incidentally, my internal telephone directory for 
the FBI in Washington is out of date. Please pass me a current 
directory at your convenience.
Puzzle 109: Don’t worry about Loretta or the children. We’ll 
take care of them. Spare them the agony of a trial. Now is the 
time to do the expedient thing.
Puzzle 110: Be subtle! Be subtle! And use your spies for every 
kind of business. Sun Tzu
Chapter 7
Puzzle 111: The British are not the only ones with spies on the 
ground.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
306
Puzzle 112: Major André is now convinced that the would-be 
traitor is who he says he is.
Puzzle 113: No doubt this message will come to you as some-
thing of a surprise.
Puzzle 114: . . . your decision about my compensation.
Puzzle 115: . . . one pulled away from the United States alto-
gether into a benevolent kingdom of its own. You and I can 
accomplish great things.
Puzzle 116: . . . South Carolina’s vote for secession. Open 
warfare is only months away.
Puzzle 117: The new commander of the Union forces, that 
General Grant, has a firm grasp of the concept of total war, 
and he is pursuing that policy most vigorously, not only 
defeating us on the field of battle, but destroying our capacity 
to produce even food, wherever he can.
Puzzle 118: Not so. Even during the years of travel that I took 
in Europe, I knew that I was followed, someone Federal no 
doubt suspecting that I have accomplices, and seeking to find 
them.
Puzzle 119: I can tell you about one such agent. His name 
is Jasper Halligan, an attorney with the United States 
Department of State.
Puzzle 120: With the single-minded dedication to your profes-
sion for which you have become known at the FBI . . .
Puzzle 121: More than any other time in history, mankind 
faces a crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter hope-
lessness. The other, to total extinction. Let us pray we have 
the wisdom to choose correctly. Woody Allen
Puzzle 122: What is espionage but the very thing we exercise 
daily in our lives? John Le Carré, attributed
Puzzle 123: You know what charm is: a way of getting 
the answer yes without having asked any clear question. 
Albert Camus

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 307
Puzzle 124: Duty is the moral magnetism which controls and 
guides the true Mason’s course over the tumultuous seas of 
life. Whether the stars of honor, reputation, and reward do or 
do not shine, . . . that unerring magnet still shows him the true 
course to steer . . . To perform that duty, whether the perfor-
mance be rewarded or unrewarded, is his sole care. And it 
doth not matter, though of this performance there may be no 
witnesses, and though what he does will be forever unknown 
to all mankind. Albert Pike (Morals and Dogma)
Puzzle 125: As instructed, I have placed myself under a false 
name as a serving maid to the officers within the circle of 
General Clinton.
Puzzle 126: . . . that this offer is truly from the person whose 
name was signed at the bottom of that message.
Puzzle 127: . . . the maps carry the plain signature of General 
Benedict Arnold. Please advise us regarding both Major André 
and General Arnold.
Puzzle 128: He shall make arrangements to put a great deal of 
the material assets of the Confederacy in your hands.
Puzzle 129: Bickley must make it apparent to all that the heav-
ily agricultural interests in this area — including Cuba, Haiti, 
Mexico and all of Central America — requires the entry of 
these territories into the United States as slave territories. Of 
our later ambitions for that region, you shall say nothing to 
Bickley.
Puzzle 130: My intermediary shall see to it that you take pos-
session of the last of the gold immediately.
Puzzle 131: Your young prospect, Special Agent Mannheim, 
was permitted to lead the team to arrest this Halligan fellow at 
State. They found Halligan dead, having taken his cyanide pill.
Puzzle 132: People who make history know nothing about 
 history. You can see that in the sort of history they make. 
G K Chesterton
Puzzle 133: This contract is so one-sided that I am surprised 
to find it written on both sides of the paper. Lord Evershed

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
308
Puzzle 134: Truth is suppressed, not to protect the country 
from enemy agents but to protect the Government of the day 
against the people. Roy Hattersley
Puzzle 135: You will with all due haste have your agents in 
New York City, behind British lines, take former General 
Benedict Arnold into custody by force, and return him to my 
camp.
Puzzle 136: For the sake of my reputation and my innocent 
family, can we not keep this between ourselves?
Puzzle 137: I shall make no exchange for Major André unless it 
be for Benedict Arnold.
Puzzle 138: After the death of Clement Vallandigham this past 
June, I lost my last tenuous link to your organization.
Puzzle 139: I understand the terrible predicament you are in: 
guardian of a vast fortune in gold, scattered about the coun-
try, yet being without the means to safeguard it adequately. 
(Keyword = FORTUNE)
Puzzle 140: This will also help cover the fact that 
Vallandigham runs all of this from Canada. Make sure he 
thinks it is his idea.
Puzzle 141: Last night, I happened to be in Heron’s Tavern, in 
the upstairs room, working on my sculpture of the head of the 
Chamber of Commerce.
Puzzle 142: The enemy’s spies who have come to spy on us 
must be sought out, tempted with bribes, led away and com-
fortably housed. Thus they will become converted spies and 
available for our service. Sun Tzu
Puzzle 143: So long as men worship the Caesars and 
Napoleons, Caesars and Napoleons will duly arise and make 
them miserable. Aldous Huxley
Puzzle 144: Good manners are a collection of intelligence, edu-
cation, taste, and style mixed together so that you don’t need 
any of these things. P. J. O’Rourke

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 309
Chapter 8
Puzzle 145: . . . terms of compensation . . .
Puzzle 146: . . . proceed with the suitable arrangements.
Puzzle 147: . . . it was an autumn evening, in the churchyard of 
St. Andrew’s Church, of the Church of England.
Puzzle 148: . . . working with diligence to infiltrate this group.
Puzzle 149: . . . more formally an organization with an inner 
circle, on the one hand, and an outer circle that knows next to 
nothing about that inner circle, on the other.
Puzzle 150: I suggest that you consider Clement Vallandigham, 
soon or in the near future; his political connections will be 
valuable.
Puzzle 151: With the death of Wilkinson in Mexico City last 
year, I had hoped that the pressure would have lifted from me.
Puzzle 152: The name of our public organization, “Knights of 
the Golden Circle”, smacks too much of the British orders of 
nobility.
Puzzle 153: . . . which I am slipping out with a renewal notice 
to the Scottish Rite magazine in the name of my deceased 
grandfather — then they can bring it to the attention of the 
right people.
Puzzle 154: Rather, use the contents to develop your own 
investigation and your own evidence. If necessary, you may 
say that you received an anonymous but untraceable tip by 
telephone.
Puzzle 155: My message will be much more shocking. I am in 
desperate straits and I look to you to help, not just me, but 
your country.
Puzzle 156: I have every reason to believe that your code of 
honor encourages you to help me, a stranger in need, in this 
dark hour.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
310
Puzzle 157: A Freemason, therefore, should be a man of honor 
and of conscience, preferring his duty to everything beside, 
even to his life; independent in his opinions, and of good 
morals; submissive to the laws, devoted to humanity, to his 
country, to his family; kind and indulgent to his brethren, 
friend of all virtuous men, and ready to assist his fellows by 
all means in his power. Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma
Puzzle 158: Having violated that oath, you are no longer my 
brother, as a Mason or otherwise.
Puzzle 159: . . . former General Arnold evaded my agents, 
apparently by accident.
Puzzle 160: As we are both members of a society of gentle-
men, perhaps this incident can be forgotten.
Puzzle 161: The time for us to establish a public face has 
come. You will establish that face as soon as possible.
Puzzle 162: In the best of circumstances, we shall simply 
repossess that . . .
Puzzle 163: Have Vallandigham disband the Order of the Sons 
of Liberty. We shall now be completely submerged.
Puzzle 164: We have long suspected that he has ordered unau-
thorized “side operations,” small jobs that piggy-backed on 
authorized operations. However, such suspicions are hard to 
prove.
Puzzle 165: My late grandfather, Wilford Carroll, was a 
Freemason, and a member of the Scottish Rite. Upon his death 
last year, I inherited some of his effects, including some books 
that gave details of some old ciphers used in the Scottish Rite 
over a century ago — one of which I am using here.
Puzzle 166: I strongly suspect that my electronic and tele-
phone communications are being monitored. I cannot directly 
contact the personnel within CIA who could help me with this 
matter. (Keyword = EDWINA)
Puzzle 167: The chief distinction of a diplomat is that he can 
say no in such a way that it sounds like yes. Lester Bowles 
Pearson

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 311
Puzzle 168: Democracy is the recurrent suspicion that more 
than half of the people are right more than half of the time. 
E. B. White
Puzzle 169: . . . the agents cannot betray one another, and I am 
unlikely ever to be caught and hanged as a spy. The system 
generally worked well . . . (Keyword = WASHINGTO[N])
Puzzle 170: . . . on Great Jones Street, my agents converged 
there, only to find that but a few hours earlier he had removed 
himself suddenly to another location. (Keyword = ABSCOND)
Puzzle 171: . . . Mrs. Carroll is not trained as a courier. 
Although a widow, she is not much older than a girl herself.
Puzzle 172: The end is now just a matter of time. The time has 
come to activate our preparations, to protect our assets for 
some future generation.
Puzzle 173: Second, I feel myself watched as if by hawks, by 
Union agents who would soon detect any attempt to set up an 
organization. (Keyword = PIKE)
Puzzle 174: First, I disagree with your aims, most vigorously. 
The empire that you propose be built on slavery would be a 
cancerous tumor on a continental scale. Slavery is a disease, 
an evil, bred from concern that values profit over humanity. 
Like all diseases, and all evils, slavery comes with conse-
quences. Those who wrote their tolerance of slavery into the 
Constitution ensured the bloodbath of the War Between the 
States as readily as if they had staged that war themselves.
Puzzle 175: As long as I have known him, Mr. Mannheim has 
occasionally made unusual requests of his staff, both here 
and abroad.
Puzzle 176: Two of my colleagues who were bold enough to 
voice suspicions about this have been suddenly ‘transferred’, 
although no one seems to know where.
Chapter 9
Puzzle 177: . . . give support to His Majesty’s Army.
Puzzle 178: . . . American would-be traitor

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
312
Puzzle 179: . . . commander of the Continental Army forces at 
West Point.
Puzzle 180: Your terms are acceptable.
Puzzle 181: The existence of the Inner Circle must remain 
invisible to him.
Puzzle 182: . . . charges of treason . . .
Puzzle 183: Let the Northeast have its swollen cities and its 
factories.
Puzzle 184: . . . be the hidden hand, not the public face.
Puzzle 185: You do not know me. I, however, know a fair 
amount about you.
Puzzle 186: . . . the manila envelope and its contents.
Puzzle 187: Diplomacy — lying in state. Oliver Herford
Puzzle 188: Alice Carroll
Puzzle 189: . . . variety of plans and maps relating to West Point.
Puzzle 190: . . . give my love to my cousin Charles.
Puzzle 191: . . . this asset shall finance the next conflict.
Puzzle 192: How good of you it is to contact me after all these 
years.
Puzzle 193: Change the name to “Order of the American 
Knights,” working through Vallandigham’s aides.
Puzzle 194: Do not present the contents of the manila enve-
lope to your associates.
Puzzle 195: You may be assured that your application for the 
CIA will be given expeditious treatment.
Puzzle 196: . . . this message will disappear from your screen 
within ten seconds of your reaching the last line.

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 313
Puzzle 197: Gentlemen do not read each other’s mail. Henry 
Stimson
Puzzle 198: Anarchism is a game at which the police can beat 
you. George Bernard Shaw
Puzzle 199: Have we established my credentials?
Puzzle 200: I appeal to you as a brother Mason.
Puzzle 201: The agents never meet each other or him.
Puzzle 202: Although we never met, I expect that he remains a 
true son of the Confederacy.
Puzzle 203: Surely someone within the Scottish Rite in this 
area is affiliated with the CIA.
Puzzle 204: . . . exchange my Major John André for General 
Benedict Arnold.
Puzzle 205: A little rebellion now and then is a good thing. 
Thomas Jefferson
Puzzle 206: I hate to spread rumors, but what else can one do 
with them? Amanda Lear
Puzzle 207: Something unpleasant is coming when men are 
anxious to tell the truth. [Benjamin] Disraeli
Chapter 10
Puzzle 208: . . . to what did I compare her beauty?
Puzzle 209: I have this day received my commission as com-
mander of West Point.
Puzzle 210: . . . rebuked by both Congress and General 
Washington . . .
Puzzle 211: I am authorized to make you a final offer of 20,000 
pounds.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
314
Puzzle 212: . . . agitating for American expansion into the 
Golden Circle of a 1,000 mile radius, centered on Havana.
Puzzle 213: My meetings with the British representatives go 
well, although yet without fruit.
Puzzle 214: . . . heart to see the opportunities that this conti-
nent offers to men of vision and strength of will.
Puzzle 215: This shall be my last message to you.
Puzzle 216: If you simply get this message to someone at the 
CIA, they will take care of verifying the rest.
Puzzle 217: However, I’ve recently become aware of the work 
of someone whom you might find of interest.
Puzzle 218: . . . focusing on neutralizing the efforts of the 
enemies of the nation to spy on America.
Puzzle 219: One final tip to rebels: always have a second pro-
fession in reserve. Nigel Nicolson
Puzzle 220: . . . let slip that his chief of spies, Major John 
André, would be meeting with a well-placed traitor just south 
of West Point, on September 21st.
Puzzle 221: Anyone who raises the slightest suspicion is to be 
detained and searched.
Puzzle 222: She had no part in any of this.
Puzzle 223: . . . imminent war between North and South . . .
Puzzle 224: You shall have our future in your hands, guard it 
well!
Puzzle 225: I must look ahead to the very real possibility that 
we shall not prevail — not this time, at least.
Puzzle 226: Suggest you consider Burton Mannheim, currently 
at FBI National Security Division (hired 15 June 1977), may be 
our kind of operative

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 315
Puzzle 227: Your inquiries are the mark of an independent, 
searching mind.
Puzzle 228: Truth is beautiful, without doubt; but so are lies. 
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Puzzle 229: History repeats itself; historians repeat one 
another. Rupert Brooke
Puzzle 230: You may recall how a mere boy was hung as a spy 
in your camp some time ago. The memory of Nathan Hale is 
still bright among my men.
Puzzle 231: . . . a woman whose true name is Alice Carroll . . .
Puzzle 232: . . . on Chrystie Street too late to mount another 
attempt on him, before he was brought into the British camp.
Puzzle 233: September 30, 1871
Puzzle 234: . . . redirect one or more of the KGH-15 satellites 
under your control to do some quick scans of the areas 
circled on the attached map. The gravitometric capabilities 
of the KGH-15s should allow you to detect disturbances in the 
Earth’s gravitational field that could be associated with large 
amounts of a heavy metal, like refined gold. And yes, there 
is that much. [The shift between the different encryptions 
happens at detect.]
Puzzle 235: Lies are like children: They’re hard work, but it’s 
worth it because the future depends on them. Pam Davis
Chapter 11
Puzzle 236: Major André is shocked. This is an offer of treason 
from a major figure within the Army of the colonists, fighting 
against the British crown!
Puzzle 237: . . . proposes to change sides . . .
Puzzle 238: My plans are too extensive to outline in a ciphered 
message.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
316
Puzzle 239: Lesson to the modern executive: Always hang on 
to your receipts!
Puzzle 240: Of the actual inner circle, he must know absolutely 
nothing.
Puzzle 241: I agree with you: Watch Wilkinson. He is not 
entirely to be trusted. However, his ongoing associations in 
Madrid and Mexico City may be useful to us.
Puzzle 242: The Union naval blockade . . .
Puzzle 243: Wilkinson knows me, of course, but he must never 
even suspect that you have a direct connection to me.
Puzzle 244: I strongly recommend that you apply for a 
position within the Central Intelligence Agency, within the 
Directorate of Operations. (That would be the spies.)
Puzzle 245: Sorry to be out of touch for so long. As I approach 
retirement, the opportunity to share information with you has 
been diminishing for some time.
Puzzle 246: If you think cryptography is the answer to your 
problem, then you don’t know what your problem is. Peter 
Neumann [quoted in The New York Times, February 20, 2001]
Puzzle 247: In cyberspace everyone will be anonymous for fif-
teen minutes. Graham Greenleaf
Puzzle 248: . . . outside that Quaker meetinghouse in 
Philadelphia, one fine summer’s evening?
Puzzle 249: General Arnold decides to change sides for sure.
Puzzle 250: . . . the identity of the traitor.
Puzzle 251: The day darkens about us. Atlanta fell to the Union 
forces yesterday.
Puzzle 252: That dream of mine, a golden circle of empire, is 
simply not to be. It must be for another age, another group of 
men with vision.

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 317
Puzzle 253: Emerald: Police were waiting near the tree. 
Retrieved Pike’s message but was nearly caught myself. 
Looks like plainclothes detectives are on the streets looking 
for me. Suggest we fall back to Arlington now.
Puzzle 254: Recently, Mr. Mannheim went so far as to redirect 
surveillance satellites and collect data over the United States 
itself.
Puzzle 255: Few false ideas have more firmly gripped the 
minds of so many intelligent men than the one that, if they 
just tried, they could invent a cipher that no one could break. 
David Kahn, The Codebreakers
Puzzle 256: It is always the best policy to tell the truth — 
unless, of course, you are an exceptionally good liar. [Jerome 
K. Jerome]
Puzzle 257: The Art of War [by Sun Tzu]
Puzzle 258: I wish to arrange another exchange for Major 
André.
Puzzle 259: A true professional, she gave no sign of recogni-
tion to me at all.
Puzzle 260: I write this from aboard His Majesty’s Ship, the 
Vulture.
Puzzle 261: . . . simply set out walking down the road to 
Patriot lines with a basket of fruit, under which she carried 
her ciphered message to you.
Puzzle 262: I must confess, I wondered then, and wonder 
today, whether it was one of your people who put that loaded 
pistol in his unknowing hand.
Puzzle 263: Relative to the larger picture, as we discussed: 
Prepare to submerge.
Puzzle 264: In theory, yes, it would be possible for the Scottish 
Rite, SJ, to safeguard the assets of the old Confederacy. 
However, this will not happen, for two reasons.

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
318
Puzzle 265: As a matter of fact, I represent an indepen-
dent organization altogether, with offices and interests 
 internationally.
Puzzle 266: He trusted neither of them as far as he could spit, 
and he was a poor spitter, lacking both distance and control. 
P. G. Wodehouse
Puzzle 267: Put all your eggs in one basket and WATCH THAT 
BASKET. M Twain
Chapter 12
Puzzle 268: AN AGENT FOR THE BRITISH
Puzzle 269: OVERTHROW IT
Puzzle 270: FACE (anagram of CAFÉ)
Puzzle 271: THE CONSPIRACY BEGINS
Puzzle 272: THOSE WHO OWN ONE
Puzzle 273: DATE (double definition)
Puzzle 274: DISTORT THEM
Puzzle 275: SUPERIOR (double definition)
Puzzle 276: HAVING A BETTER TIME
Puzzle 277: ADVERSARIES
Puzzle 278: HENS (hidden word)
Puzzle 279: FALSE (anagram of FLEAS)
Puzzle 280: KEEPING YOUR MOUTH SHUT
Puzzle 281: GOLDEN CIRCLE
Puzzle 282: TRAIN (double definition)
Puzzle 283: YOU ARE SPIES; WEAKNESSES

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 319
Puzzle 284: DECOY (hidden word)
Puzzle 285: EMERGE TRIUMPHANT
Puzzle 286: CRYPTOGRAPHY
Puzzle 287: THE GOLD
Puzzle 288: MAY (anagram of YAM)
Puzzle 289: TUNA (hidden word)
Puzzle 290: A HARD BATTLE
Puzzle 291: OUR OWN
Puzzle 292: BAGEL (anagram of GABLE)
Puzzle 293: ACCUMULATE
Puzzle 294: DOUBLE AGENT
Puzzle 295: BAT (double definition)
Puzzle 296: CROSS (double definition)
Puzzle 297: DEAR BELOVED WIFE
Puzzle 298: RITES (anagram of TIERS)
Puzzle 299: IS OUTLAWED
Puzzle 300: DENIED THE PRIVILEGE
Puzzle 301: FIND A FOE
Puzzle 302: FEAR NOT (anagram of OAT FERN)
Puzzle 303: IS TO TRUST HIM
Puzzle 304: CIDER (hidden word)
Puzzle 305: MUST NOT FAIL
Puzzle 306: PARIS (anagram of PAIRS)

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
320
Puzzle 307: MUSKET (hidden word)
Puzzle 308: KEEP A SECRET
Puzzle 309: BURGUNDY
Puzzle 310: HAD SOMETHING TO DO WITH STAMPS
Puzzle 311: COLUMN (double definition)
Puzzle 312: THAT’S NO REASON NOT TO GIVE IT
Puzzle 313: GOOD LUCK TO US ALL
Puzzle 314: MAINTAIN THEIR NEUTRALITY
Puzzle 315: GENERAL (double definition)
Puzzle 316: MAGENTA (anagram of MAGNATE)
Puzzle 317: PLEASE DESTROY THIS LETTER
Puzzle 318: SPIES (hidden word)
Puzzle 319: LODGE (double definition)
Puzzle 320: SOLOMON THE KING
Puzzle 321: ADMINISTRATIVE WON’T
Puzzle 322: BATTLE (anagram of TABLET)
Puzzle 323: DAGGER (anagram of RAGGED)
Puzzle 324: HE’S NEVER A CANDIDATE
Puzzle 325: CANNOT BUT BE CRUEL
Puzzle 326: CIPHER (hidden word)
Puzzle 327: CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
Puzzle 328: MEAD (anagram of EDAM)
Puzzle 329: LEAGUE (double definition)

 Chapter 15: Answers to All Cryptograms and Puzzles 321
Puzzle 330: INVENTED WEAPONS TO KILL
Puzzle 331: NEW YORK (anagram of WORN KEY)
Puzzle 332: FROM OTHER MEN
Puzzle 333: THIS I MUST DECLINE
Puzzle 334: SHADE (anagram of HADES)
Puzzle 335: TO DECEIVE THE DECEIVER
Puzzle 336: GREEN (double definition)
Puzzle 337: MASTER (double definition)
Chapter 13
Puzzle 338: Any inspection by British sentries that discovered 
this message would have resulted in her being hanged as a 
spy within a few days, leaving her boys orphans. (Keyword = 
FIVE RALS [FIVE RAILS])
Puzzle 339: I came upon Mrs. Carroll nearly at the British line, 
blithely conversing with two British sentries who were only 
too glad to partake of the fruit that she offered them.
Puzzle 340: She had sent one of her own young boys up ahead 
of her at great speed to find me and alert me to the need for 
immediate departure. However, her child could not find me, 
as I was meeting another agent by appointment. (Keyword = 
BOSTON [remove the second O when using this as a keyword 
in Puzzle 341; that is BOSTN]).
Puzzle 341: . . . she determined to go herself through enemy 
lines to get this urgent message to Major Tallmadge. (BOSTN 
= 13452 order for the columns)
Puzzle 342: Judging from the size of her basket and the load 
it then carried, I would guess that she had given away about 
half the basket as gifts to sentries at various checkpoints. 
(Keyword = CW SPIRAL [Clockwise Spiral])

Part III: Hints and Answers to the Cryptos and Codes 
322
Puzzle 343: This woman risked her life and her family’s well-
being to get this crucial message to you. I am in awe of her 
bravery.
Puzzle 344: Dashing to the kitchen, I put on the apron of a 
serving girl, and arranged to take the place of the server for 
his table. Sure enough, there was another man who had joined 
your companion. I took their order, and then hid in the next 
booth to listen. I heard only a few words: “Kidnap” was promi-
nent among them, as was the word “replace.” (Keyword = 
KIDNAP = 432516 order for the columns in Puzzle 345)
Puzzle 345: I do not know what schemes these men have in 
the long run, but in the short they mean you harm. Be very 
careful, dear one.
Puzzle 346: Clearly Pike will be no help to us. We shall have to 
make do with our own devices in safeguarding the gold. We 
have the means to bury it deep within the hill country in the 
South, out in the west, out where the population in scarce and 
sympathy for the Cause is high. And then we’ll wait. (Keyword 
= FOUR [R]AILS)
Puzzle 347: I am in touch with connections in Europe, who may 
be able to help with both logistic and strategic assistance.
Puzzle 348: CIA and FBI personnel are coming to your office 
at this very moment. You will definitely be arrested. I am not 
sure, but if they have enough to arrest you, they probably 
have enough to convict you. (Keyword = DIAGON[A]L)
Puzzle 349: I’m sorry to say that the time has come for some 
extreme steps. You have the cyanide pill that I entrusted to 
you some years ago. Now is the time to use it.
Puzzle 350: Be brave. You have minutes, maybe just seconds. 
(Keyword = VIRGO)
Puzzle 351: I offer my personal congratulations on your cap-
ture of the traitor Mannheim. You do not know me. I, however, 
know a fair amount about you . . . (Keyword = VIRGO = 52413 
order for the columns)

Appendix
Historical Background to 
the Conspiracy Stories
Y
ou may be interested in knowing what’s real and what’s 
fantasy in each of the conspiracy stories in Chapter 3.
American General Benedict Arnold really did attempt to turn 
over West Point to the British. His main contact, British spy-
master John André, had actually dated Miss Peggy Shippen 
before Arnold married her, and Peggy was part of the chain 
of go-betweens between Arnold and André. Alice Carroll and 
“the agent known as Solomon the King” are inventions. One of 
the more famous signers of the Declaration of Independence 
was named Charles Carroll, however, and Solomon the King is 
an important character in Masonic mythology.
Not long after the Revolution, Aaron Burr really did conspire, 
while serving as Vice President of the United States under 
Thomas Jefferson, to carve out an empire of his own in the 
American Southwest. Years later, in the decade before the 
Civil War, the Knights of the Golden Circle did, in fact, conspire 
to create an agrarian empire based on slavery in a “Golden 
Circle” centered on Havana. During the Civil War, the Knights 
actually worked to help the Confederacy. Although some have 
speculated that they had the assistance of Albert Pike after 
the Civil War, Pike’s actual feelings about slavery and the duty 
to fulfill an oath fit what is in the story in Chapter 3. Pike did 
know the sculptress Vinnie Ream, who was working on a bust 
of Abraham Lincoln at the time of the President’s assassination. 
“Emerald” and his encounter with Pike are inventions.
All the characters and incidents in the “Conspiracy of the 
Organization” story are made up.
(Or are they? We’ll never tell.)

Cracking Codes & Cryptograms For Dummies 
324

Available wherever books are sold. For more information or to order direct: U.S. customers visit www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974.
U.K. customers visit www.wileyeurope.com or call (0) 1243 843291. Canadian customers visit www.wiley.ca or call 1-800-567-4797.
Business/Accounting  
& Bookkeeping
Bookkeeping For Dummies
978-0-7645-9848-7
eBay Business  
All-in-One For Dummies,  
2nd Edition 
978-0-470-38536-4
Job Interviews  
For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-470-17748-8
Resumes For Dummies,  
5th Edition
978-0-470-08037-5
Stock Investing  
For Dummies,  
3rd Edition 
978-0-470-40114-9
Successful Time 
Management  
For Dummies   
978-0-470-29034-7
Computer Hardware
BlackBerry For Dummies,  
3rd Edition 
978-0-470-45762-7
Computers For Seniors  
For Dummies  
978-0-470-24055-7
iPhone For Dummies,  
2nd Edition 
978-0-470-42342-4 
Laptops For Dummies,  
3rd Edition  
978-0-470-27759-1
Macs For Dummies,  
10th Edition  
978-0-470-27817-8 
 
 
Cooking & Entertaining 
Cooking Basics  
For Dummies,  
3rd Edition 
978-0-7645-7206-7
Wine For Dummies,  
4th Edition 
978-0-470-04579-4
Diet & Nutrition
Dieting For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-4149-0
Nutrition For Dummies,  
4th Edition
978-0-471-79868-2
Weight Training  
For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-471-76845-6 
 
 
Digital Photography
Digital Photography  
For Dummies,  
6th Edition
978-0-470-25074-7 
Photoshop Elements 7  
For Dummies
978-0-470-39700-8
Gardening
Gardening Basics  
For Dummies
978-0-470-03749-2
Organic Gardening  
For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-470-43067-5
 
Green/Sustainable
Green Building  
& Remodeling  
For Dummies
978-0-4710-17559-0
Green Cleaning  
For Dummies
978-0-470-39106-8
Green IT For Dummies
978-0-470-38688-0
 
Health
Diabetes For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-470-27086-8
Food Allergies  
For Dummies
978-0-470-09584-3
Living Gluten-Free 
For Dummies
978-0-471-77383-2
 
Hobbies/General
Chess For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-8404-6
Drawing For Dummies
978-0-7645-5476-6
Knitting For Dummies,  
2nd Edition 
978-0-470-28747-7
Organizing For Dummies
978-0-7645-5300-4
SuDoku For Dummies
978-0-470-01892-7 
Home Improvement
Energy Efficient Homes  
For Dummies
978-0-470-37602-7
Home Theater  
For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-470-41189-6
Living the Country 
Lifestyle  
All-in-One For Dummies
978-0-470-43061-3
Solar Power Your Home  
For Dummies
978-0-470-17569-9

Internet
Blogging For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-470-23017-6
eBay For Dummies,  
6th Edition
978-0-470-49741-8
Facebook For Dummies
978-0-470-26273-3
Google Blogger  
For Dummies
978-0-470-40742-4
Web Marketing  
For Dummies,  
2nd Edition 
978-0-470-37181-7
WordPress For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-470-40296-2
Language & Foreign 
Language
French For Dummies
978-0-7645-5193-2
Italian Phrases  
For Dummies
978-0-7645-7203-6
Spanish For Dummies
978-0-7645-5194-9
Spanish For Dummies,  
Audio Set
978-0-470-09585-0
Macintosh
Mac OS X Snow Leopard  
For Dummies
978-0-470-43543-4 
Math & Science
Algebra I For Dummies
978-0-7645-5325-7
Biology For Dummies
978-0-7645-5326-4
Calculus For Dummies
978-0-7645-2498-1
Chemistry For Dummies
978-0-7645-5430-8
 
Microsoft Office
Excel 2007 For Dummies
978-0-470-03737-9
Office 2007 All-in-One  
Desk Reference  
For Dummies
978-0-471-78279-7
 
Music
Guitar For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-9904-0
iPod & iTunes  
For Dummies,  
6th Edition
978-0-470-39062-7
Piano Exercises  
For Dummies
978-0-470-38765-8
Parenting & Education
Parenting For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-5418-6
Type 1 Diabetes  
For Dummies
978-0-470-17811-9
 
Pets
Cats For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-5275-5
Dog Training For Dummies, 
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-8418-3
Puppies For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-470-03717-1
 
Religion & Inspiration
The Bible For Dummies
978-0-7645-5296-0
Catholicism For Dummies
978-0-7645-5391-2
Women in the Bible  
For Dummies
978-0-7645-8475-6
 
 
Self-Help & Relationship
Anger Management  
For Dummies
978-0-470-03715-7
Overcoming Anxiety  
For Dummies
978-0-7645-5447-6 
 
Sports
Baseball For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-7645-7537-2
Basketball For Dummies,  
2nd Edition
978-0-7645-5248-9
Golf For Dummies,  
3rd Edition
978-0-471-76871-5
 
Web Development
Web Design All-in-One  
For Dummies
978-0-470-41796-6
 
Windows Vista
Windows Vista  
For Dummies
978-0-471-75421-3
Available wherever books are sold. For more information or to order direct: U.S. customers visit www.dummies.com or call 1-877-762-2974.
U.K. customers visit www.wileyeurope.com or call (0) 1243 843291. Canadian customers visit www.wiley.ca or call 1-800-567-4797.

         Open the book and find:
•  Over 350 handcrafted 
cryptograms and ciphers of 
varying types
•  Tips and tricks for cracking even 
the toughest code 
•  An  introduction to the history 
and relevance of using code
•  Puzzle strategies and hints to 
help nudge you in the right 
direction
•  Fun and intriguing anagrams and 
story wordplay puzzles 
•  Fascinating number ciphers that 
reference the keypad letters on 
your cellphone
•  Puzzles of all levels:  Easy, Tricky, 
and Treacherous
Denise Sutherland is a syndicated puzzle author. 
Her puzzles appear in a range of publications, 
including the Reader’s Digest Mind Stretchers 
series, and she is the author of Word Searches For 
Dummies. Mark E. Koltko-Rivera, PhD, is a 32° 
Freemason and expert on the major symbols and 
ceremonies of Freemasonry. Using this expertise, 
he analyzed prepublication clues to uncover and 
blog about key elements of The Lost Symbol. He 
co-hosts the weekly podcast Masonic Central.
Puzzles/Games
$9.99 US / $11.99 CN / £7.99 UK
ISBN 978-0-470-59100-0
Go to Dummies.com®
for videos, step-by-step photos, 
how-to articles, or to shop!
Fascinated with the culture of conspiracy? Uncover the 
mysteries and test your knowledge of secret societies by 
solving cryptograms and deciphering codes that not 
only unveil historical fact and fiction but entertain you 
as well.  Walk in the footsteps of a symbologist by solving 
everything from the simplest puzzles to fiendishly difficult 
ciphers, using secret codes and lost symbols.  
•  Think like a symbologist — discover a variety of 
codes and wordplay and the strategies for solving 
each one
•  Build your code-cracking skills — work your way 
from solving simple cryptograms to difficult 
Masonic and double level ciphers
•  Uncover a bigger mystery — use the answers 
you discover to solve three conspiracy stories 
contained in the book
•  Appreciate the history of code and encryption —
reveal the secret world of Freemasonry, the 
Illuminati, and the Knights Templar
•  Check your work — find hints and answers for all 
the book’s puzzles
Solve compelling and challenging
puzzles to uncover secrets and
conspiracy plots

