
In Search of Human Evolution
 
 

 

In Search of Human 
Evolution
Field Research in Diverse Environments
MICHAEL H. CRAWFORD
 
 

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of 
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2024
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted 
by law, by license or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction 
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the 
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the 
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form and  
you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-​in-​Publication Data 
Names: Crawford, Michael H., 1939– author.  
Title: In search of human evolution : [field research in diverse 
environments] / Michael H. Crawford.  
Description: First edition. | New York : Oxford University Press, [2024] | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023054370 (print) | LCCN 2023054371 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780197679401 (hardback) | ISBN 9780197679418 (epub)  
Subjects: LCSH: Human evolution—Fieldwork. 
Classification: LCC GN281 .C735 2024  (print) | LCC GN281 (ebook) | 
DDC 599.93/8—dc23/eng/20240131 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023054370
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023054371
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.001.0001
Printed by Integrated Books International, United States of America
 
 
 

Contents
Preface
vii
1.	 Introduction to Fieldwork and Evolution
1
2.	 Background and Preparation for Fieldwork
8
3.	 Admixture and Genetic Differentiation of Transplanted 
Tlaxcaltecan Populations
31
4.	 Origins of the Irish Travelers (Tinkers)
54
5.	 Black Caribs (Garifuna) of Central America:  
An Evolutionary Success Story
62
6.	 Biological Aging and Population Structure of Midwest 
Mennonites
83
7.	 Genetic Structure and Origins of Siberian and Alaskan Arctic 
Populations
102
8.	 Aleutian Islands:  Small-​Island Evolution
121
9.	 Bio-​demography of Italian and Hungarian Populations
139
10.	 Genetic Epidemiology:  Primate (Baboon) Models of Disease
150
11.	 Basque Origins and Genetic Structure
154
12.	 Conclusion
160
Appendix A  
173
Appendix B: List of Former Graduate Students
175
References
177
Index
191
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Preface
Fieldwork in different geographical regions of the world with unique social 
organizations and environmental conditions provides comparative infor­
mation on evolutionary questions. Currently, it is extremely difficult to con­
duct field investigations in most parts of the world due to a series of factors, 
such as infectious disease epidemics, COVID-​19, political upheaval, wars, 
illegal drug smuggling, and past mistreatments of indigenous populations. 
This volume examines (1) the nature of a number of evolutionary questions; 
(2) sources and germination of the experimental design and its limits; 
(3) methods for obtaining permissions to conduct field investigations on an 
international, national, or local level; (4) methods employed for data collec­
tion; and (5) data analyses and interpretation.
Contemporary anthropological geneticists utilizing DNA analyses often 
receive specimens from field researchers and collaborators and then de­
cide what questions are possible or appropriate. There are increasing num­
bers of researchers who address anthropological issues without ever having 
conducted actual fieldwork. Instead of working with specific communities, 
they work on data. Instead of collecting appropriate data needed to address 
specific questions, they seem to get what data they can find and then de­
termine what questions they might attempt to answer. They rarely design a 
field project, collect data, and then test specific hypotheses. Often the exact 
sources of the samples sent to them are in question. Who was sampled and 
where? A number of studies have published conflicting genetic results from 
supposedly the same populations. These differing genetic results reflect pop­
ulation structure variation and geography. This book demonstrates the need 
to undertake fieldwork and engage with the communities of interest and in 
partnership with the researchers.
 Given more than 50 years of field research, I would like to acknowledge 
a large number of willing participants from an assortment of universities 
and research institutes. Each researcher who took active part in my field 
investigations is listed within the 12 chapters of this volume together with the 
role they played in each project.
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
Preface
 I would like to acknowledge the contributions of colleagues in the prep­
aration of this volume. Dr. M. J. Mosher, who originally participated in the 
organization and completion of the Mennonite research program, checked 
the prose and accuracy of the data discussed in the Mennonite chapter. She 
also edited text in this volume.
My maternal relative (third cousin) from Blagoveschensk, Siberia, 
Nadezhda Jakovleva, and her daughter Yana Mescheryakova helped recon­
struct my genealogy using Russian records and documents and checked the 
accuracy of the verbally transmitted family history.
I would like to thank my son, Kenneth Crawford, for preparing 
illustrations, editing text for this volume, and struggling over the style of the 
book. My wife, Carolynn, patiently tolerated my travel to many exotic re­
gions of the world and provided emotional support for my academic career.
 
newgenprepdf

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0001
1
Introduction to Fieldwork and Evolution
This volume focuses on the application of field investigations (i.e., research 
conducted in places other than one’s own laboratory) to the measure­
ment of human evolution in unique and diverse populations, particularly 
those groups that experienced migration and are located in contrasting 
environments of the world. A chapter entitled “The Importance of Field 
Research in Anthropological Genetics: Methods, Experiences and Results,” 
published by Cambridge University Press in a volume Anthropological 
Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications, introduces readers to the impact 
of field investigations to the understanding of human evolution (Crawford, 
2007d).
 Why would researchers be willing to subject themselves to scorching heat, 
swarms of Anopheles mosquitoes, and/​or frigid conditions in the mornings 
or nights as they struggle to use a smelly outhouse? Field research helps us 
answer a number of basic and universal questions: Who are we? Where did 
we come from? How did we get here?
Field research (particularly comparative investigations in other 
communities and countries) is an essential tool of anthropological genetics—​
a synthetic discipline that applies the methods and theories of genetics to 
evolutionary questions posed by biological anthropologists (Roberts, 1965, 
1968; Crawford, 2007d). It provides (1) a comparative dimension to a study; 
(2) a possible time dimension; and (3) unique demographic events (such
as migration) and social structures of populations. Fieldwork provides di­
verse environmental and cultural conditions that are not possible in labora­
tory situations for testing specific hypotheses (Crawford, 2007a). Traditional 
human genetic studies focus on random samples of communities or hospital
patients, and these conditions are traced through specific extended families.
In contrast, anthropological geneticists often conduct research away from
their laboratories in the field under more challenging social and environ­
mental conditions. For example, the Black Caribs (also known as Garifuna)
discussed in Chapter 5 of this volume, offer anthropological geneticists
an opportunity to examine unique social structure and apply statistical

2 
In Search of Human Evolution
methodology such as the half-​sib method for analyzing the variances as­
sociated with quantitative traits (Crawford, 1984). This social organization 
is possible because of the fluidity in the extended families of the Garifuna. 
According to cultural anthropologist Nancie Gonzalez (1984), the strongest 
and most enduring social unit among the Garifuna is the sibling group 
consisting of one mother but with a number of different fathers. Males pe­
riodically join the families and father children and then migrate for work to 
different regions of Central America. Thus, Garifuna families typically con­
sist of a number of half sibs, who share a common mother’s genome but with 
an assortment of different fathers and Y-​chromosome markers.
History provides a time dimension to human gene pools that have 
undergone fission and/​or transplantation to vastly different environments. 
For example, the indigenous Tlaxcaltecans of Central Mexico offer a unique 
opportunity to add a time dimension of more than 300 years to the study 
following the fission of the Valley populations into groups transplanted by 
the Spanish Crown to different regions of Mexico. Chapter 3 of this volume 
examines the genetic results of transplantation in 1525 of families and 
garrisons from the Valley of Tlaxcala to Cuanalan (a municipio of Acolman 
in the adjoining Valley of Mexico) and relocation in 1570 of 400 families from 
Tlaxcala to Saltillo with its desert-​like environment of northern Mexico.
Background and Experiences
Who in their right mind would willingly subject themselves to the rigors of 
fieldwork under severe conditions of heat, cold, or voracious insects? Chapter 2 
introduces the background and experiences that prepared me for fieldwork 
in diverse regions of the world, such as Mexico, Guatemala, Newfoundland, 
Belize, St. Vincent Island, Dominica, St. Lawrence Island, Ireland, Wales, 
Alaska, Evenkiya, and populations of Kamchatka, Siberia, the Aleutian 
Islands, Tiszahat, Hungary, and Sukhumi, Abkhasia. My life experiences inad­
vertently prepared me for extreme travel, existence, and research under chal­
lenging field conditions. Childhood experiences that prepared me for future 
fieldwork included (1) residence in Shanghai, China, during Japanese wartime 
occupation. My family experienced shortages of food, absence of medical 
services, and scarcity of housing; (2) travel from China to a displaced person’s 
camp in Tubabao, Philippine Islands, with survival for nine months living 
in a military surplus canvas tent, while existing under tropical conditions 
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction to Fieldwork and Evolution 
3
including heat, humidity, and periodic typhoons. This camp was located on a 
small island off the southern coast of Samar, Philippine Islands; (3) relocation 
by boat and train from the Philippine Islands to a displaced persons camp in 
Uranquinty, New South Wales, Australia. My family survived internment in 
the Philippine Islands despite no running water or electricity but with clouds 
of voracious mosquitoes. The morbidity and mortality of the displaced per­
sons living under such conditions was exceptionally high from a variety of 
infectious and chronic diseases. After one and one half years, the survivors 
of the Tubabao displaced persons camp were scattered throughout the world, 
relocated to Brazil, Australia, United States, Ecuador, and Argentina (Nash, 
2002). My family was transplanted from the Philippine Islands to a displaced 
persons camp in Australia. All of these life events occurred before settling in 
the United States at the tender age of 13 years.
In this volume, I review how multidisciplinary field investigations 
on human evolution are organized, specify the methods for selection of 
accompanying specialists, and explain how the indigenous communities are 
informed about the risks and benefits of the research. Because of past ethical 
abuses of indigenous peoples, currently, it is more difficult to conduct field 
research in some regions of the world. Often indigenous people are suspi­
cious of the “gringos” (a derogatory term in Spanish and/​or Portuguese for 
a foreigner, usually an English speaker of European descent) who asks em­
barrassing questions and wants samples of their body fluids, such as saliva or 
blood. Some governments, such as Russia, currently prohibit all exportation 
of DNA from indigenous populations.
Anthropological genetic research is a partnership with both the scientists 
of that country and the specific communities. The research teams should in­
clude local researchers and students so that in the future they can conduct 
their own research without outsider interference. Feedback to the commu­
nity, results and discoveries, must be shared with the study populations, local 
universities, and medical institutions. Upon the completion of the Aleutian 
Island project, more than 100 Aleuts attended my lectures in Anchorage 
when I provided feedback on questions of interest to the community. They 
were particularly interested in the Aleut origins: Who are we? Where did we 
come from? How did we get here? A summary of the results of research on 
the Aleutian Islands was published in a community newsletter The Aleutian 
Current and was available to all Aleuts (Crawford, 2006). Individual requests 
for genetic (DNA) results were provided; however, this confidential feedback 
was limited only to individual participants of the study.
 
 
 
 
 

4 
In Search of Human Evolution
What’s Evolution?
In this volume, In Search of Human Evolution, I define evolution as a change 
in the frequencies of genes in a population (gene pool) over time. Four 
forces of evolution affecting the frequencies of genes in a population include 
(1) mutations; (2) natural selection; (3) gene flow; and (4) genetic drift.
Mutations are spontaneous genetic changes in the genome during replica­
tion, and they are a source of new genes entering a gene pool. On a species 
level, mutations are the only source of new genetic material into the gene pool.
Consequences of mutations are as follows:
	 1.	 Origins of rare genes can be traced to specific mutant individuals in 
small populations. For example, Amish populations in Pennsylvania 
and Ohio with few founders have a number of deleterious mutations, 
such as hemophilia B, pyruvate kinase deficiency, and limb girdle mus­
cular dystrophy.
	 2.	 Source of variation that selection can affect. Best examples involve 
malaria operating on an assortment of mutations in different regions 
of the world. Glucose-​6-​Phosphate-​Dehydrogenase (G-​6-​PD) defi­
ciency, Duffy null, and Hemoglobin S and C are examples of a variety of 
mutations that affect the lifecycle of Plasmodium vivax or Plasmodium 
falciparum and provide resistance to malaria.
Natural selection is a force of evolution characterized directly through the 
calculation of fitness (w) and selection coefficient (s) in a population, or in­
directly through the examination of the resulting genomic variation. The 
survivor with the most children has the highest fitness and his/​her genes be­
come most numerous in the subsequent generations. Selection on a molec­
ular level can be detected by comparing variation in specific regions of the 
genome with surrounding genomic regions.
Consequences of natural selection include the following:
	 1.	 Increases in the frequencies of favorable genes in a population—​that is, 
causing evolutionary change
	 2.	 Balanced polymorphism where heterozygotes have an advantage over 
both homozygotes
	 3.	 Selection can be directional (e.g., lactase enzyme and ability to drink 
milk) or balancing selection (smallpox, plague, and malaria)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction to Fieldwork and Evolution 
5
Gene flow is the process through which genes are introduced from one 
gene pool of a breeding population into the gene pool of another population. 
This movement of genes is usually associated with migration. For example, 
the creation of the Mestizo gene pools in Central America was due to Spanish 
and African gene flow associated with cultural contact and conquest (Munoz 
and Crawford, 2021).
Consequences of gene flow are as follows:	
1.	 Introduces new genes into another environment	
2.	 Increases heterozygosity and decreases homozygosity	
3.	 Makes populations more similar genetically
Genetic drift is the cumulative effect of all random processes modifying 
the frequencies of genes in small populations (genetic isolates).
 Isolated populations are currently defined as subpopulations deriving from 
a relatively  small number of individuals (founders) who became isolated 
from their ancestral group  (e.g. through the settlement of a new territory) 
and/​or had experienced a significant  reduction in population size. (Lopes 
et al., 2016, p. 110)
Causes of genetic drift include (1) random variation that occurs from the 
passing of gametes from one generation to the next; and (2) unique historical 
events, such as founder effect or genetic bottleneck.
The consequences of genetic drift on populations include the following:	
1.	 Increase in homozygosity at the expense of heterozygosity	
2.	 The genetic differentiation of small populations	
3.	 Reduction in variation within subpopulations
Contents of This Book
This volume, In Search of Human Evolution, reviews my search of more than 
50 years for evidence of human evolution under a variety of environments 
and driven by unique historical events, such as population transplantation. 
This chapter introduces the reader to field research and the current evidence 
of human evolution. Chapter 2 describes those events in my life history that 

6 
In Search of Human Evolution
prepared me for field investigations and academic wars. Each subsequent 
chapter outlines the nature of the evolutionary question, the source and 
germination of the idea for field investigation, methods of data collection, 
analyses, and conclusion. Chapter 3 examines the effects of Tlaxcaltecan 
(Mexican) population fission, transplantation followed by massive gene flow 
from Spanish invaders (Crawford, 1976). The primary question posed by 
the Tlaxcaltecan project is this: Do populations evolve when separated geo­
graphically over time? Chapter 4 discusses the origins of Irish Travelers (also 
known as Tinkers or Itinerants), their social isolation, and genetic differentia­
tion from the surrounding Irish populations through genetic drift. Chapter 5 
focuses on the Black Caribs (Garifuna) of Central America and the Caribbean 
and documents an evolutionary success story, their forced migration from St. 
Vincent Island, their numerical expansion, and colonization of most of the 
Atlantic coast of Central America. Their evolutionary success resulted from 
their culture and extractive efficiency (a combination of fishing and horticul­
ture) and genetic adaptation through mutations that provided resistance to 
malaria. Chapter 6 examines the genetic consequences of population fission 
of a religious isolate, the Anabaptist Mennonites of Kansas and Nebraska, 
their genetic differentiation, and because of excellent family records, their 
histories, and the genetics of biological aging. Chapter 7 considers the ge­
netic structure of Siberian indigenous populations and their role in the 
peopling of the Americas. Chapter 8 documents the genetics of the Aleut 
(who refer to themselves as Unangan) expansion from Siberia into the 1,600-​
mile Alaskan Archipelago and considers the evolutionary consequences of 
population fission, gene flow associated with Russian colonization, and their 
genetic structure as assessed through molecular genetics. Chapters 9 and 
10 summarize a number of more limited research investigations conducted 
by the Laboratory of Biological Anthropology, some successful and others 
terminated for a variety of reasons. Chapter 9 reviews the application of bio-​
demography to two agricultural human populations, residing in Italy and 
Hungary: Valle Maira and Tiszahat. The first example of the application of 
bio-​demographic methodologies focuses on the breakdown of reproductive 
isolation in Valle Maira, an Italian mountain valley located south of the city 
of Torino. Church record analyses from Tiszahat, Hungary, permit the exam­
ination of the genetic consequences resulting from a shift in the international 
border between Russia and Hungary, which divided the Hungarian villages of 
Tiszahat. Chapter 10 applies genetic epidemiological methodology (genetic–​
environmental interactions) in the study of a complex infectious disease, 
 

Introduction to Fieldwork and Evolution 
7
lymphoma in a baboon (Papio hamadrayas) colony of Sukhumi, Abkhasia. 
Chapter 11 examines the molecular evidence for the origins and ancestry of 
the Basque populations of western, mountainous Spain and tests the likeli­
hood of three hypotheses generated by linguistic and standard blood genetic 
markers. The concluding chapter (Chapter 12) summarizes the scientific im­
portance of field investigations to our understanding of human evolution 
and considers the ethics of such programs.
Appendix A features a copy of a letter of acceptance written by Charles 
Darwin for his nomination for membership into the Argentine Academy of 
Sciences—​an honor that I shared with him, one century later. Appendix B 
includes a list of Ph.D.s in biological anthropology from the Laboratory of 
Biological Anthropology (LBA) at the University of Kansas, who were in­
volved in the research discussed by this volume.
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0002
2
Background and Preparation 
for Fieldwork
Genealogy and Migration
I was born on July 25, 1939, in Shanghai, China, of Russian/​Scottish 
American parents, namely Tamara Innokentievna Lovtsova and Herman 
Charles Crawford. Following Russian tradition, I was not given a middle 
name but assumed my father’s first name, Herman or German, since the 
Russian (Cyrillic) alphabet lacks the letter “H” but uses “G” in its stead. Thus, 
my father’s Russian name is “German,” after the lead character and gam­
bler of the Russian opera Pikovaya Dama (Pique Dame) composed by P. I. 
Tchaikovsky and his librettist brother, Modest. Therefore, my legal Russian 
name in China was Mikhail Germanovich Crawford. However, profession­
ally I went by the name Michael Herman Crawford, or M. H. Crawford.
Table 2.1 summarizes the migration patterns of my family during the 
18th to 20th centuries on both the maternal and paternal lines. My mother’s 
grandfather, Vsevelod Nabokov, was born in Pskov Province. He first served 
in the Russian military, trained in gold-​mining engineering at the highly 
acclaimed Mountain Institute of St. Petersburg, and worked as a mining en­
gineer at the Altai mines. Nabokov was invited by the governor of the Amur 
region of Siberia to establish gold-​mining operations in Blagoveschensk. 
The Russian Revolution drove my mother’s family first to Harbin and later to 
Shanghai. My paternal grandfather born in Dixon, Illinois, was also a gold-​
mining engineer, trained in South Dakota. He managed the tsar’s gold mines 
in Chita. My family was forced by the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia to es­
cape from Siberia to Shanghai. The Chinese communist takeover of China 
resulted in a rapid departure to the Philippine Islands. Because my family lost 
its US citizenship, making us stateless, we could only move to United Nations 
displaced persons (DP) camps in the Philippine Islands and Australia. This 
constant family relocation does select for personalities who are able to adapt 
to a wide variety of environmental and political situations.
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
9
Shanghai, China
My father, Herman Charles Crawford, was born in Chita, Siberia, son of 
Charles Hamilton Crawford, and Siberian mother, Nina Rogova. In 1927–​
1930, my father moved for educational and work opportunities from Chita 
to Harbin, Manchuria, and then to Shanghai, where he received formal 
training as an electrical engineer and installed Carrier air conditioning sys­
tems into the Grand and Cathay Theaters, the first air-​conditioned cinemas 
in Asia. Because of the extreme summer heat in Shanghai and the absence of 
home air conditioning units, Chinese oligarchs and international visitors to 
Shanghai, China, spent considerable time watching movies while cooling off 
in the air-​conditioned theaters. Herman Crawford hosted the Dai Li Lama 
when the Tibetan religious leader visited Shanghai. He also served as the 
manager of the famous Russian basso Feodor Ivanovich Chaliapin during 
Chaliapin’s tour of the Far East. My father eventually managed four cinema 
theaters (Nanking, Cathay, Grand, and Capitol) in Shanghai while employing 
more than 2,000 Chinese workers in these theaters. Without any formal lin­
guistic training, he mastered three Chinese dialects (Shanghai, Mandarin, 
and Cantonese) and spoke each of them fluently and without an accent. He 
learned both Russian and English as a child and had complete fluency in 
both languages.
My mother, Tamara Inakentivna Lovstova, attended primary school in 
Blagoveschensk (a Siberian city on the Amur River) but completed high 
school with honors at the Sacred Heart Academy in Shanghai, China. The 
family (consisting of Sofia Lovstova, Tamara, and her two surviving brothers) 
first moved to Harbin, Manchuria, to avoid the advancing Bolshevik army 
that had executed her White Russian father. The third brother of Tamara 
Crawford had died from upper respiratory illness. Harbin (Manchu word 
Table 2.1  Schematic Representation of Family Migration Summarized for the 
Maternal (Nabokov) and the Paternal (Crawford) Lines
Maternal Family: St. Petersburg, Russia → Blagoveshensk, Siberia → Harbin, Manchuria 
→ Shanghai, China → Tubabao, Philippines → Uranquinty, Australia → Sydney, Australia 
→ Seattle, Washington
Paternal Family: Dixon, Illinois → Chita, Siberia → Harbin, Manchuria → Shanghai, 
China → Tubabao, Philippines → Uranquinty and Sydney, Australia → Seattle, 
Washington
 
 
 
 
 

10 
In Search of Human Evolution
meaning a place for drying fishnets) was a small rural settlement on the 
Songhua River.
Harbin had become the largest enclave of Russian emigres. In 1931, fol­
lowing a false flag Mukden incident, staged by the Japanese military, the 
Japanese blew up a portion of their own railroad near the town of Mukden 
and blamed the Chinese nationalists. This incident provided a pretext for the 
invasion of Manchuria and the creation of the puppet state of Manchukuo. 
Due to this invasion, the majority of Russians left Harbin and fled to 
Shanghai, China. The USSR sold the Chinese Eastern Railway to the Japanese 
in 1935, precipitating the further migration of the Russians out of Harbin. 
Although my grandmother Sofia Lovstova remained in Harbin, until her 
death from breast cancer, my mother relocated to Shanghai, where she lived 
with her aunt and completed her high school education. On completion of 
high school with honors, she was hired by one of the theaters managed by my 
father. They were married in 1934 in Shanghai. My sister, Marion, was born 
in September 29, 1935, followed by my birth four years later.
Japanese Occupation of Shanghai
I was born in Shanghai, China, just prior to the Japanese military occupa­
tion of the city. In December 7, 1941, following the attack on Pearl Harbor, 
the Japanese Imperial Army, which had earlier encircled the city in 1937, 
invaded the Shanghai International Settlement.
Before the Japanese invasion, my family resided in a luxurious two-​story 
penthouse on the roof garden of the Cathay Theater that was located across 
the street from the neoclassical Cercie Sportif Francais (the French Club) 
with its striking red-​clay tennis courts. I used to watch tennis matches from 
the roof of the Cathay Theater. After the Japanese invasion, my family was 
evicted from the penthouse by the Japanese military, who had installed 
antiaircraft guns on the flat roof of Cathay Theater. During World War II, 
both Japanese troops and their horses were housed in the theater. Initially, 
we hoped to move into a large apartment owned by a German relative, by 
marriage, Rolf von Heinkel (after the war he changed his surname to Rolf 
Hennequel) and my mother’s aunt, Claudia (Clasha). However, being an ac­
ademic, with a Ph.D. (30 years earlier) from my alma mater, the University 
of Washington, he preferred privacy, and Rolf refused to accept such a move 
by my family. We were fortunate to be able to move into a house owned by 
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
11
my father’s aunt, Dariya (better known as Dasha), and her veterinarian hus­
band, Boris. He cared for the racehorses at the Shanghai Race Club track, 
which reopened soon after Japanese occupation and continued to host races 
throughout the war. With all four of the movie theaters in Shanghai even­
tually closed during the Japanese occupation, my father lost his position as 
manager but was able to eke out an existence by betting on horse racing at 
the Shanghai track. These money-​making bets on the horse races were made 
possible because Boris provided detailed information on the condition of 
each horse and the projected winners of most races. During the Japanese oc­
cupation, proximal to the house where we lived, was a prisoner-​of-​war camp. 
Such a camp was graphically depicted by J. G. Ballard in his award-​winning 
novel and movie Empire of the Sun. Ballard survived a prisoner-​of-​war camp 
while being interned from 1942 to 1945 at the Lung Hua Center of Shanghai 
(Ballard, 1985).
My family was fortunate in not being interned in a formal prisoner-​of-​
war camp because my father’s American citizenship had been revoked by 
the US Embassy following the death of his father but preceding the Japanese 
occupation. It turned out that my grandfather had committed bigamy by 
not divorcing his first wife, Bertha Todd. As a result, my family became 
stateless—​that is, people without a country. The city of Shanghai was divided 
between its more European western half and the more traditional Chinese 
eastern half. The Japanese occupation troops converted the entire city of 
Shanghai into a gigantic prisoner-​of-​war camp, closing entry and departure 
of its citizens.
During the Japanese occupation, the imperial army intelligence officers 
were skeptical of my father’s Russian/​stateless background: “Crawford . . . not 
Russian name! You are an American spy!” A Japanese officer chanted this 
accusation while interrogating my father at the infamous Shanghai Guard 
House. In the early phases of the Japanese occupation, while the Grand 
Theater was still operating, my father was ordered by the Japanese military 
intelligence to identify all foreign theater attendees. My father stated that he 
was merely an employee of an international company and could not provide 
such information without first obtaining permission. The officer then drew 
his samurai sword and swung it in a threatening manner around my father’s 
head. However, my father refused to show any signs of fear and reiterated his 
company’s policy as the sword swung closer and closer to his head. Following 
this frightening interrogation, Herman Crawford was released from the 
Shanghai Guard House. The next day a messenger came to invite him out 
 
 
 
 

12 
In Search of Human Evolution
to lunch at a geisha house as a guest of the interrogation officer. Apparently, 
the officer at the Guard House was impressed by my father’s courage and 
respected him because he did not “lose face.” The display of bravery was a sig­
nificant component of the samurai culture.
During the remainder of the war, the Japanese occupation forces left 
us alone because at that time the Russian displaced persons did not fit 
into any category of “enemy.” Japanese military sentries were stationed 
at all key intersections and bridges of Shanghai. Both Chinese and 
European pedestrians were obliged to bow before the sentries to pay their 
respects. However, my mother refused to bow to the Japanese military and 
choreographed elaborate strategies of avoiding these sentries by walking 
miles around specific intersections. In contrast, my grandmother Nina 
Rogova enjoyed such a spectacle and provided elaborate bows with many 
additional gestures. Then, in 1945, in the middle of the night, we heard 
someone on the street yelling to the prisoners of the camp: “The war is over! 
The war is over.” We had survived the war and Japanese occupation despite 
major shortages of food and restrictions on movements and lack of employ­
ment of Europeans throughout Shanghai.
After the War
After the war, my father served a short stint (December 1945–​April 1946) as 
a supervisor and interpreter for the Shanghai Air Depot before resuming his 
position as director of Shanghai movie theaters. I was enrolled in a French 
Catholic school, St. Jean d’ Arc. This school offered curricula either in English 
or French. I began my education in the First Standard of their English curric­
ulum without any earlier comprehension of the English language. My family 
only spoke Russian at home, and we had lived in relative isolation in the 
penthouse on the roof of Cathay Theater. As a result, I struggled during the 
first two years of primary school education in Shanghai trying to master the 
English language, while surrounded by an assortment of Russian, Chinese, 
and European classmates.
In 1949, with Chang Kei Sheik’s nationalists in full retreat, Mao Tse 
Zedong’s communist forces approached the city of Shanghai and established 
the People’s Republic of China. Because one of my father’s employees at the 
theater was married to Chairman Mao’s daughter, Mao offered us asylum if 
we wanted to remain in China. However, because of the horrendous events 
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
13
in Russia precipitated by the Communist Party, we decided that it would be 
maladaptive to stay in Shanghai. In addition, we could not get a visa to im­
migrate to the United States because we were classified “stateless,” and at that 
time the only way out of China for us was through the International Refugee 
Organization (IRO) founded by the United Nations. Our only option 
was requesting asylum in a DP camp in the Philippine Islands. Philippine 
President Quirino had offered refuge on a small island, Tubabao (off the 
South Eastern point of the Island of Samar), for 6,000 Russians escaping from 
China. My father arranged for our family to fly out of Shanghai on the last 
airplane prior to its occupation by Mao’s communist forces. It was a gray, 
drizzly morning in mid-​November, 1948, when a group of Russian emigres 
lined up to board the DC-​6 propeller-​driven airplane at the Shanghai air­
port. In the distance we could hear the rumbling of heavy artillery. This was 
my first flight in an airplane, which we laughingly termed the “vomit comet.” 
The flight went through a horrendous typhoon, and I experienced my first 
airsickness, turning a nice shade of green while disposing of an earlier meal.
Tubabao, Philippine Islands
We arrived in Manila at night and discovered that no overnight indoor 
accommodations were available at the airport while the flight to Samar 
Island (next to the DP camp location) was scheduled for the next day. That 
night, we slept outdoors in the humid, tropical heat, without mosquito net­
ting and thus were introduced to the mosquito population of Manila. My 
mother spent most of the night awake, trying to discourage mosquitoes from 
feasting on Marion and me. The next morning, we flew to the island of Samar 
and disembarked from the airplane to view an unfamiliar, iron-​rich, bright-​
red mud and palm trees surrounding the airport. We boarded jeeps and were 
driven to the tiny island of Tubabao, connected by the Timbre Bridge to the 
southeast coast of Samar. There we were unceremoniously dumped (lug­
gage and all) in a clearing surrounded by palm trees and tropical forest. The 
International Refugee Organization (IRO) of the United Nations provided 
US army surplus tents and tinned food. Ditches, excavated by hand, served 
as communal latrines with clusters of huts constructed around them. These 
outhouses contained five or six holes for deposition of excrement. At night, 
it was frightening for a young man to squat over one of these latrine holes, 
while a pair of shining eyes of creatures (such as lizards) were peering from 
 
 
 

14 
In Search of Human Evolution
the bottom of the latrine. As it turned out, this experience with communal 
latrines prepared me for the “culture” associated with similar facilities in 
Siberia. The Siberian outhouses also contained five or six holes in the wooden 
plank floors with no partitions and as many individuals squatting. When you 
enter this facility, you encounter friends, neighbors, and colleagues squat­
ting at their respective holes while clutching the latest issue of Pravda, their 
version of the US Sears catalogue, used for wiping rear ends. Siberian culture 
dictates that you do not recognize any of these “squatters” and proceed to 
do your business without greeting anyone with a cheerful “Good morning, 
Ivan.” In these outhouses, individual privacy was approximated through this 
“feigned” anonymity.
The IRO had been misinformed by the Philippine government that the 
former naval station on the island of Tubabao contained adequate living 
facilities with electricity, running water, residential huts, and roads. In re­
ality, there was neither running water nor electricity in the camp. Initially, to 
get water, we had to slide down a muddy hill to a small stream, fill our buckets 
with dirty water, and navigate the slippery slope lugging the heavy buckets. 
Eventually, my father (a trained engineer) led an expedition to an abandoned 
US naval base and repair facility, Manicani, on eastern Samar to strip off the 
available pipping, pumps, and other equipment necessary for the installa­
tion of a water system. After the installation of a diesel-​powered pump and 
an elevated sedimentary tank, we had access to showers and drinking water. 
Eventually, generators for the production of electricity were installed on the 
island of Tubabao, and each tent was wired for electricity but limited to the 
use of a single 25 watt light bulb for the night. Electrical power, switched off 
at 10:00 pm on a weekday basis and at 11:00 pm on Saturdays, allowed an 
extra hour for “relaxation.” Nash (2002) in a book published in New South 
Wales, Australia, described the living conditions that one Russian family (the 
Tarasovs) experienced on Tubabao and discussed family immigration from 
the Philippines to Australia.
In the Tubabao camp, food was prepared in communal kitchens with 
cooking responsibilities shared by the DP women on an alternating basis. 
These kitchens prepared our daily rations, with “delicacies” such as hash 
(canned corned beef and potato mixture) and other canned meats often 
served in a soup or a gruel. Since the communal kitchen only served two meals 
a day, breakfast consisted of a slice of bread, with a cheese spread and a cup of 
instant coffee. Periodically, my mother was able to supplement this unappe­
tizing diet with an occasional fresh fish purchased from Filipino fishermen 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
15
and tasty mangos sold by the locals but requiring US currency. In this way, 
my early experiences associated with living in a tent for nine months, under 
tropical conditions, with an assortment of insects (mosquitos, scorpions, poi­
sonous centipedes) and venous snakes prepared me for the future rigors of 
field research in a variety of “exotic places.” This Philippine experience rein­
forced my hatred of insects and made my field research in the Aleutian Islands 
particularly enjoyable with no mosquitoes, a cool environment, and a highly 
friendly community. In contrast, working in Siberia during the summer 
months meant clouds of ravenous Anopheles mosquitoes and having to wear 
mosquito netting at all times, making outdoor meals particularly challenging 
(see Figure 7.4 in Chapter 7). Since electricity was periodic and refrigerators 
and freezers unavailable, the food stored underground in permafrost after a 
few days began to rot. With this unpalatable diet, I managed to lose 25 pounds 
in one month in the field. Later in my life, I was tempted to establish Siberian 
“fat farms” for those desperate to quickly slim down by refusing to eat rotting 
food and thus losing large quantities of fat.
Since most of the instructors in the Tubabao tent schools were from 
Shanghai and mostly of Russian origin, the only available schooling for chil­
dren at the DP camp was in the Russian language and based on the Cyrillic 
script. Marion and I only spoke native Russian at home, but all instruction 
at our respective Catholic schools of Shanghai was in English. We chose not 
to attend these Russian tent schools on Tubabao because we were informed 
by the camp administrators that our stay in the DP camp was to be of short 
duration (an estimated maximum of four months), and changing the entire 
school curriculum from English to Russian could complicate our learning 
particularly in basic sciences and humanities. I could neither read nor write 
using Cyrillic until my undergraduate days at the University of Washington, 
Seattle, when I enrolled in courses on Russian literature and grammar.
Uranquinty, Australia
After nine months in this tent purgatory, with dozens of the elderly Russians 
succumbing to a wide variety of tropical and chronic diseases, Australia 
offered sanctuary. Russian Orthodox Archbishop John of Shanghai 
negotiated the relocation of the Russian colony from Tubabao to Australia. 
We boarded a US naval troop carrier, the “Marine Jumper,” which sailed from 
Samar, Philippine Islands, to Sydney Harbor, Australia.
 
 
 
 

16 
In Search of Human Evolution
From Sydney, my family was transported by train across the Blue 
Mountains to a DP camp, Uranquinty (aboriginal term for yellow box tree 
and plenty of rain), 15 kilometers south of the town of Wagga Wagga, New 
South Wales. This large riverine town was named after the Wiradjuri abo­
riginal word Wagga, meaning “crow.” Therefore, Wagga Wagga was a place 
of “many crows.” This camp was established in 1948 primarily for East 
European migrants to Australia on the site of the former RAAF Air Service 
Flying School, 5 kilometers northwest of the township of Uranquinty. 
From 1948 to 1952, 28,000 displaced persons passed through this camp. 
Adult males at the camp were required to sign contracts for physical 
labor on projects at the discretion of the Commonwealth Department 
of Immigration. Although my father was an electrical engineer with ex­
ceptional mechanical skills and vast experience in massive construc­
tion projects and maintenance of equipment, he was contracted by the 
Australian government to dig ditches at a construction site in Sydney. 
This migrant camp in Uranquinty consisted primarily of displaced per­
sons of European origin, transplanted by World War II, plus Russians who 
escaped from China through the Philippine Islands. The accommodations, 
consisting of wooden, military barracks, were more comfortable than the 
tents of Tubabao. At least we had toilets in the building instead of smelly 
outhouses. After one month at Uranquinty, my father began working in 
Sydney and was able to rent an apartment for the family on Roscoe Street, 
two blocks from the renowned and scenic Bondi Beach.
I was able to start schooling at Bondi Primary School, which was located 
approximately one mile from the apartment that we rented. Every weekday 
morning, I walked that mile.
Immigrants to Australia had to sign contracts to assist the development 
and construction of their newly adopted country by providing services in 
physical labor, such as ditch digging. Despite my academic interests and per­
formance, after graduating from my primary school at Bondi, I was assigned 
to a technical school (Bondi Technical High School) with an emphasis on 
woodworking and metalworking, which I detested! Marion registered at 
Dover Heights High School, where she was required to take appropriate 
courses, such as home economics, a prerequisite for future Australian 
housewives. However, my academic interests lay in medicine and biological 
research, which required university training and attendance at a prepara­
tory high school. At that time, some Australian educators believed that “New 
Australians” were not appropriate material for their universities and so to 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
17
get better educational and work opportunities, my family emigrated from 
Australia to the United States in 1952.
Seattle, Washington
My aunt Tamara (my father’s sister) and her American husband, Johnny 
Muttart (originally from a small community of Gold Bar, Washington), 
residents of Seattle, Washington, sponsored our visa from Australia to the 
United States. In 1952, we sailed from Sydney Harbor to Vancouver, Canada, 
with stopovers in Auckland, New Zealand; Suva, Fiji; Honolulu, Hawaii; and 
Vancouver Island before arriving in Vancouver, British Columbia. After my 
family disembarked from our ship at the docks of Vancouver, we cleared 
customs and were greeted by my aunt and her husband. They drove us by 
car across the border to Seattle, Washington. We lived with my aunt and 
her husband for two weeks before my father was able to find employment at 
Frederick and Nelson department store as a clerk unloading merchandise at 
the dock. We were then able to first rent a house located a few blocks from 
the Muttart residence in Ballard, Seattle, and eventually buy a house a few 
miles away.
In Seattle, my parents enrolled me at a Catholic high school, O’Dea, de­
spite not being of Catholic persuasion and becoming an eventual atheist! 
Several of my uncle’s relatives (particularly his nephew, Jack Anderson) 
attended Catholic schools in Seattle and attested to the high quality of edu­
cation. I started high school during the month of October 1952, at the tender 
age of 13 years, in part because of my academic record, letters of recommen­
dation from the Bondi Technical School, and because of the different or­
ganization of schooling in Australia. At that time, Australian children were 
required to obtain six years of primary school, followed by three years of 
regular high school; and if the students showed academic potential, an ad­
ditional two years of college preparatory school were required. As a result, 
Marion completed three years of high school training by 16 years of age and 
then started working for a pharmaceutical company in Sydney.
I enrolled in high school in Seattle despite having missed the beginning 
of the official school year. As a result, I was not exposed to an introduction 
to the study of Latin but was given a textbook by Brother Cerasoli (affec­
tionately nicknamed Mr. Peepers, from a popular TV program of the 1950s) 
and instructed to catch up to the class. Although eventually I found Latin 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
In Search of Human Evolution
to be extremely useful in biology, I struggled with it during my first year of 
high school. I also had to absorb mathematics without some of the under­
lying basics that my classmates had learned earlier. I was two years younger 
than most of my classmates at O’Dea. O’Dea provided solid training in 
chemistry, mathematics (algebra, geometry, and trigonometry), and history 
courses, but there was a lack of classes and training in biology and evolution. 
Thus, I had to catch up on some of these disciplines during my tenure at the 
University of Washington.
Undergraduate at the University of Washington
I completed my undergraduate degree in anthropology with a minor in bi­
ology in four years. Because of my lack of experience in several disciplines, 
my undergraduate grades were slightly above average, particularly in courses 
dealing with biology and evolution. I had taken a course from a young, en­
thusiastic anthropologist, Dr. Edgar “Bud” Winans, and he captured my 
interest in the field of anthropology. I had also taken some courses in gen­
eral genetics, with a focus on corn and red bread mold (Neurospora crassa) 
from Professor Herschel Roman and human genetics from Professor Stanley 
Gartler. I found human genetics to be particularly fascinating, at least 
until I enrolled in a class on population genetics within the Anthropology 
Department. The instructor was Professor Virginia Avis, a primatologist 
specializing in primate brachiation (arm-​over-​arm swinging locomotion in 
trees by gibbons and orangutans). Because there was a shortage of faculty in 
Anthropology with any expertise in genetics, the unfortunate Virginia Avis 
was assigned by the department to teach in an area that she lacked any formal 
training. She received her Ph.D. at the University of Chicago from Sherwood 
Washburn, who at that time was training a bevy of nonhuman primate be­
havioral specialists.
First Research Experience
Dr. Bertram S. Kraus, a physical anthropologist with training at the University 
of Arizona, had an appointment at the Dental School of the University of 
Washington. His research specialty was the embryogenesis and development 
of the craniofacial region and dentition in humans (Kraus, 1969). I met with 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
19
Bert Kraus, and he was enthusiastic about the prospects of having a student 
from Anthropology working with him. He gave me three human embryos, 
preserved in formalin, stored in jars, and instructed me to dissect the crani­
ofacial regions to learn about the morphology of embryos. Despite my wife’s 
protestations, I placed these embryos in a closet but could not muster suffi­
cient interest in their dissection. I returned the fetuses back to Kraus without 
dissecting any of them.
After searching the literature, I was intrigued by the apparent Mendelian 
bases for the ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and the distribu­
tion on human tongues of taste buds that sense bitterness. Kraus arranged 
for my use of a dental chair at the University of Washington Dental School, 
and I convinced dental patients to participate in this research on the localiza­
tion of taste buds for bitterness. I was able to demonstrate that the taste buds 
(receptors) for bitter taste were located on the vallate papillae along the root 
of the tongue. This was my first independent attempt at research as an un­
dergraduate student. The results were interesting but the sample sizes inade­
quate for publication. Shortly thereafter, Professor Kraus accepted a position 
as director of the Cleft Palate Center at the University of Pittsburgh. After 
I completed my Ph.D. in 1967, Kraus along with the eminent professor of ge­
netics (C. C. Li) enticed me to take my first full-​time academic position at the 
University of Pittsburgh.
Earlier, I had supplemented my undergraduate research experiences and 
my finances through a research assistantship with Dr. Dean Crystal, a car­
diologist who at that time was developing methods of heart transplants. My 
unpleasant task as a research assistant was to collect dogs scheduled to be 
euthanized by Seattle veterinarians and to prepare these dogs for open-​heart 
surgery. I would set up the surgical theater, load the heart-​lung machine with 
blood, and assist in the open-​heart surgery. At this time, I learned to draw 
blood by venipuncture, a skill that I was later able to employ in the field. This 
research experience convinced me that I did not want a medical career in 
surgery of humans.
After graduation from the University of Washington, I could not decide 
whether to apply for medical school or to focus my interests on academia and 
research. I delayed this decision by applying to the Naval Officer Candidate 
School in Rhode Island and spent four months in the Navy. After four months 
in the Officer Candidate School in Newport, Rhode Island, I washed out for 
health reasons and returned to Seattle, where I obtained a research assistant­
ship with Dr. William Cantrell, chief of Surgery at Harborview Hospital in 
 
 
 
 

20 
In Search of Human Evolution
Seattle. Cantrell was interested in the effects of hormones (particularly those 
associated with pregnancy) on wound healing and wanted me to develop a 
research program to explore these effects on animal models. I combined his­
tochemistry with surgical procedures on the paravertebral muscles of guinea 
pigs and later with the insertion of corneal implants. I documented the in­
vasion of epithelial cells to seal the excision and, through an implantation of 
small sponges, measured biochemical changes in levels of various markers.
Professional Beginnings
In the fall quarter of 1963, I was accepted into the graduate program by the 
Department of Anthropology, University of Washington. I was intrigued 
by how populations differentiated genetically from each other through mi­
gration and the processes of evolution. I enrolled in a seminar given by a 
visiting professor from Oxford University, Dr. Derek Francis Roberts, who 
had conducted a classical study of genetic drift in a small island population 
of Tristan da Cuhna, a volcanic island located in the South Atlantic Ocean 
(Roberts, 1968). During this seminar, he suggested that I review the litera­
ture on nonhuman primate genetic variation based on proteins and present 
it to the class. At that time, the method of starch gel electrophoresis, devel­
oped by Orville Smithies (1959), was being applied as a rough measure of ge­
netic variation based on differential mobility of protein variants on a starch 
gel medium. It took two consecutive three-​hour seminar sessions to review 
the vast new electrophoretic and immunological literature. After I completed 
this review, Roberts prompted me to write it up and submit a manuscript 
as my M.A. thesis. Unfortunately, because of a conflict between professors 
Derek Roberts and social anthropologist Kenneth E. (Mick) Read, chair of 
Anthropology, Roberts returned to the United Kingdom.
Fortunately, the teacher who introduced me to human genetics, 
Dr. Stanley Gartler, agreed to supervise my M.A. thesis: “A Re-​evaluation of 
the Taxonomy and Phylogeny of the Hominoidea, Based upon Biochemical 
and Cytogenetic Evidence.” I utilized published data from one-​ and two-​
dimensional starch gel electrophoresis, immunological methods (immuno-​
diffusion), red cell blood groups, and cytogenetics to evaluate phylogenetic 
reconstructions previously based on morphology of the Hominoids.
The summer of 1964 was particularly challenging. I applied and was ac­
cepted into a Summer Institute on Behavioral Genetics at the University of 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
21
California–​Berkeley sponsored by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
In addition, I also received financial support from Wenner-​Gren Foundation 
for Anthropological Research to attend the VIIth International Congress 
on Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences in Moscow, USSR. This was 
the first international, anthropological Congress held in the Soviet Union. 
Wenner-​Gren Foundation sought graduate students with knowledge of the 
Russian language, who could serve as translators at informal sessions be­
tween Russian and American scholars—​away from the prying eyes and KGB 
microphones. What made this fellowship so attractive to a graduate student 
was that it provided a glimpse into the ongoing transition from Stalinist to 
“Kruschevian” science in Russia and its impact on European academics.
Behavioral Genetics Institute
The six-​week Behavioral Genetics Institute ran from June 23 to July 31, 
1964, and featured an assortment of eminent geneticists, physiologists, 
anthropologists, psychiatrists, and biologists. It also included visits to the 
Sonoma State Hospital and Palo-​Alto Veterans Administration Hospital for 
direct observation of genetically influenced mental illnesses such as schiz­
ophrenia and manic-​depressive disorders. The program at the Institute 
included lectures on topics associated with behavioral genetics by interna­
tionally eminent scholars. The lecturers included David Rosenthal (genetics 
of schizophrenia); Jerry Hirsch on behavioral genetics of fruit flies and selec­
tion for specific behaviors; D. J. Merrell on the mapping of chromosomes and 
gene action; James McGaugh on stimulus-​response in animal models; and 
Cradock Roberts on quantitative genetics and measurement of heritability. 
I was fortunate to be able to discuss evolutionary theory using the Russian 
language with Professor Theodosius Dobzhansky, one of the founding fa­
thers of the modern evolutionary synthesis. This Institute generated new 
perspectives for me on the world of genetics—​not only on mechanisms of 
behavior but also population and quantitative approaches to genetics.
World Congress of Anthropological Sciences—​Moscow
My next academic adventure began on July 30, 1964, with flights from Berkeley 
to San Francisco to Dulles (Washington, DC) to London, UK, to Warsaw, 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
In Search of Human Evolution
Poland, and on August 2 to Moscow, USSR, for the VII World Congress 
on Anthropological Sciences. This was a heady experience for a young, as­
piring biological anthropologist from the University of Washington. I met 
an array of well-​known anthropologists, namely James Spuhler (early an­
thropological geneticist from University of Michigan); Henry Field (research 
fellow at the Field Museum of Natural History); and Mikhail Gerasimov 
(Russian archaeologist and anthropologist), who reconstructed the faces 
of Neandertals, Java Man, Tamerlane, and Ivan the Terrible (Ivan Groznii). 
Yuri Rychkov (population geneticist), despite the official Lamarckian policy 
in the USSR, applied the modern synthesis to the study of evolution. I was 
also able to discuss potential research collaborations with members of the 
Institute of Experimental Pathology and Therapy Center from Sukhumi, 
Abkhasia, and with Russian academics from the Anthropology Institute at 
Moscow’s State (Mikhail Lomonosov) University. I experienced the richness 
of Russian/​Soviet Union culture by attending the Prokopieff’s opera Love for 
Three Oranges, Tchaikovsky’s opera Evgenie Onegin, a Moscow Symphony 
Orchestra concert, and the Georgian National Dance Company perfor­
mance at Gorky Park. In addition, I was fortunate to visit a number of excep­
tional museums: Pushkin’s Historical and Art Gallery, Historical Museum 
on Red Square, Museum for the Development of Religion and Atheism in St. 
Petersburg, and Ethnographic Museum of Latvia (Riga). It is through the nu­
merous professional contacts and friendships acquired during this Congress 
and after that I was able to establish long-​term research programs in Siberia 
and in Sukhumi, Abkhasia. During the 1964 travel, I did not get an opportu­
nity to meet with Boris Lapin (director of the Primate Center in Sukhumi); 
however, we did establish a project when he later visited the United States to 
inspect the newly established Regional Primate Center at the University of 
Washington, Seattle.
Spuhler recommended that I apply to the University of Michigan for a 
Rackham fellowship to complete my Ph.D. At that time these fellowships 
provided only $200/​month stipends, and my family was about to increase 
with Carolynn, my wife, expecting a child, in November 1964. Therefore, we 
could not afford to move to Michigan and subsist on $200/​month. I made 
an appointment with the director (Dr. Ted Ruch) of the newly established 
Regional Primate Research Center at the University of Washington, and 
he suggested that I outline a potential program for nonhuman primate ge­
netic research. Within a few days, I submitted this document of potential 
research programs and was appointed (at $600/​month), to serve as the sole 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
23
primate geneticist of the Regional Primate Center, University of Washington. 
Dr. Ruch assigned to me a state-​of-​the-​art biochemistry laboratory at the 
Primate Center and provided funding for laboratory supplies, equipment, 
and professional travel to national and international meetings. I also had ac­
cess to an editor, a photographer, and a first-​rate library on primate research. 
Because of such an attractive position, I was able to complete my research 
and dissertation in two years and publish, as sole author, an article in the 
prestigious journal Science (Crawford, 1966).
Ph.D. Dissertation
My doctoral dissertation research focused on the phylogeny of the 
Hominoidea, based on biochemical and immunological markers (Crawford, 
1967). The purpose of this study was twofold: (1) to determine the amount 
of genetic variation in the Hominoids based on eight blood loci; and (2) to 
evaluate theories of hominoid phylogeny and taxonomy. Protein and im­
munological genetic markers were utilized to explore primate taxonomy 
and phylogeny. At that time, the taxonomy of the Great Apes and humans 
was primarily based on morphological similarity and differences. I obtained 
from eight regional primate centers and a number of zoos a total of 132 blood 
samples representing the major hominoid taxa. Eight protein systems from 
the erythrocytes and serum were characterized using starch gel electropho­
resis. These loci included glucose-​6-​phosphate dehydrogenase (G-​6-​PD), 
6-​phospho-​gluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD), serum pseudocholines­
terase, acid phosphatase (AP), phosphoglucomutase (PGM), hemoglobin 
(Hb), transferrins (Tf), and haptoglobins (Hp). Several immunological 
techniques (micro-​complement fixation, immunodiffusion, and percentage 
fixation) were utilized to test genetic affinities among representatives of the 
Hominoidea. These experimental data demonstrated that the Chimpanzees 
(Pan) were phylogenetically more closely related to humans than to any other 
primate. The Gibbons (Hylobates) belong to a separate subfamily within the 
family Pongidae. Many of the ambiguities associated with the application 
of electrophoresis and immunological techniques to taxonomy do not exist 
now that DNA sequencing is available and employed directly for phyloge­
netic reconstruction.
Because of the rapid turnover of Physical Anthropology faculty at the 
University of Washington, I was trained in both traditional anthropology by 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
In Search of Human Evolution
Franz Boas’s former students (Mel Jacobs and Vern Ray) and modern genetics 
by Arno Motulsky, Derek Roberts, and Stanley Gartler. In addition, I can trace 
my intellectual pedigree to Albert Hooton, through Marshall Newman and 
Virginia Avis. In 1966–​1967 during my last year in graduate school, Marshall 
(Bud) Newman accepted the biological anthropology professorship at the 
University of Washington. He assumed the chair of my doctoral committee 
because Arno Motulsky (former chair) was on leave, conducting field research 
on the genetics of malaria resistance in Central Africa. Motulsky, an MD, had 
done a postdoctoral fellowship with James Neel at the University of Michigan. 
Neel introduced Motulsky to biochemical and medical genetics. Virginia Avis 
completed her dissertation on primate brachiation with Sherwood Washburn, 
a former student of Hooton. I also had a course on evolutionary theory from 
Theodosius Dobzhansky and an assortment of geneticists and psychologists 
at the Behavioral Genetics Institute at the University of California–​Berkeley. 
Derek Roberts traced his academic roots to eminent statistician R. A. Fisher 
at Oxford University. I acquired first-​hand biochemical laboratory skills from 
Professor Akira Yoshida, who supervised and suffered through my attempts 
to purify red blood cell enzyme glucose-​6-​phosphate dehydrogenase (G-​6-​
PD) on a chromatography column. I managed to get formal training in bio­
chemical and population genetics from a series of mentors, while remaining 
at the University of Washington (see Figure 2.1).
I am not recommending that every reader of this volume who is contemplating 
field research in another country should experience an identical background to 
mine. To successfully complete fieldwork in another country, you need not nec­
essarily be born in another country, such as China, survive several DP camps in 
the Philippine Islands, and live in a tent under tropical conditions for one year. 
Instead, traveling and having broad cultural experience and interacting with 
people of different social and economic backgrounds will help you adapt more 
easily to field conditions. Learning the languages of the populations that you 
want to study can be of great assistance as well. In my case, being able to speak 
Russian was of great help in initiating the Siberian research.
Genetically, I consider myself a case of cultural and genetic “heterozy­
gosity,” that is, with a combination of several ethnicities: Scottish, Russian, 
Buriyat, and German ancestry. In addition, I was raised in an assortment of 
environments, such as urban China, tropical Philippine Islands, temperate 
Australia, and the United States. This complex of genetic/​environmental 
interactions prepared me for a career in anthropological genetics and a fond­
ness of field investigations.
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
25
Professional Experiences: Navigating the Choppy  
Waters of Anthropology
University of Pittsburgh
During the summer of 1967, I defended my doctoral dissertation before the 
faculty and students of the Department of Anthropology, at the University 
of Washington. My dissertation applied protein chemistry and immunology 
to the taxonomy and phylogeny of the Hominoidea. Since none of the fac­
ulty within the Department of Anthropology had the background to evaluate 
such genetic/​biochemical research, Newman sent my dissertation for review 
to the two most prominent specialists at that time, namely Professors Morris 
Goodman (Department of Microbiology, Wayne State University) and John 
Buettner-​Janusch (Department of Anthropology at Duke University). After 
my dissertation was reviewed and approved by these two external reviewers, 
I defended it formally before the Department of Anthropology at the 
University of Washington in August 1967. Within a few days of the defense 
of the dissertation, my family (wife Carolynn and son Kenneth) and I drove 
C. Lyell
T. Malthus
Charles Darwin
A. Hrdlicka
A. Hooton
A. Keith
L.S. Penrose
J.B. Haldane
F. Galton
R.A. Fisher
H. Harris
C. Stern
L. Pauling
J.V. Neel
L.C. Dunn
D.F. Roberts
Stan Gartler
Arno Motulsky
M.H. Crawford
S. Washburn
Virginia Avis
M.T. Newman
Mel Jacobs
Verne Ray
F. Boas
T. Dobzhansky
Figure 2.1  Summary of my academic connections, tracing from Derek 
Roberts back to R. A. Fisher and Charles Darwin. My training and research 
collaboration with Arno Motulsky gave me an indirect connection to James 
Neel and Curt Stern.
 

26 
In Search of Human Evolution
in a Chevy Nova station wagon from Seattle to Pittsburgh to begin a tenure-​
track assistant professor position in Anthropology with a salary of $9,500/​
year. I had accepted the Pittsburgh position because of the reputation of the 
Anthropology Department with its three former presidents of the American 
Anthropological Association on the faculty. They were as follows: George 
Peter Murdoch (who developed the Human Relations Area Files [HRAF] 
while at Yale and was honored for his contributions to science by Hirohito, 
emperor of Japan); John Gillen (Latin American specialist); and Alexander 
Spoehr (former president of the East-​West Center at University of Hawaii 
and a renaissance archaeologist). Despite my youth and professional inex­
perience, I was appointed by the University of Pittsburgh to develop a phys­
ical anthropology presence in what appeared to be a first-​rate Anthropology 
Department.
University of Kansas
I had interviewed at several other universities and research institutions be­
fore settling on Kansas. These included the University of Illinois at Urbana, 
CUNY-​Hunter College in New York City, the New York Blood Bank, and 
the University of Wisconsin–​Madison. After relocating in Lawrence, 
I was recruited for the chairmanship of a highly divided and combative 
Anthropology Department (consisting of Maoists, political conservatives, 
and a physical anthropologist, Bill Laughlin, who was isolated like some vir­
ulent bacterium at the Medical Center) at the University of Connecticut in 
Storrs. However, since I had received a Research Career Development Award 
in 1976 from NIH, which freed me to focus on my research, I rejected the 
challenging offer from Connecticut.
Although my academic specialty was anthropological genetics, I was ap­
pointed by the Department of Anthropology, University of Kansas, as a re­
placement for the eminent forensic osteologist Professor William Bass.
Research at the LBA
In 1976, I received a five-​year Research Career Development Award from 
NIH and since this grant freed me from teaching duties for five years while 
providing a 12-​month salary, I decided to stay at the University of Kansas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
27
This Career Development Award freed the funds from my nine-​month salary, 
normally provided by the state of Kansas. These funds permitted the univer­
sity to hire my replacement for three years and then to support an interna­
tional lecture series for two additional years that resulted in the publication 
by Plenum Press of two volumes on Current Developments in Anthropological 
Genetics (Mielke and Crawford, 1980; Crawford and Mielke, 1982). I added 
a newly hired junior faculty member, James Mielke, as senior editor of the 
first volume of the Plenum series. In addition, we collaborated on a study 
of the genetic structure of Inuit populations, published in the American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology (Crawford et al., 1981). A third volume in 
the Anthropological Genetics series published by Plenum Press was built 
around my research program with the Black Caribs of Central America 
and the Caribbean and was independent of the University of Kansas lec­
ture series (Crawford, 1984). Most of the contributors to volume 3 (Current 
Developments in Anthropological Genetics, Black Caribs: A Case Study in 
Biocultural Adaptation) were participants in an all-​day symposium that I or­
ganized and held at the American Anthropological Association meetings in 
Houston in 1977.
The funding of my grant applications by National Institute of Dental 
Research (NIDR), National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institute of 
Aging (NIA), National Science Foundation (NSF), and the US Office of 
Education provided considerable leverage for the establishment of the 
Laboratory of Biological Anthropology (LBA) in 1975 (Crawford, 2016). The 
availability of such facilities plus generous federal funding permitted the de­
velopment of a number of simultaneous research programs on (1) dental ev­
olution of transplanted Tlaxcaltecan populations of Mexico; (2) admixture 
estimates of Mexican Mestizo populations; (3) genetic micro-​differentiation 
of indigenous populations of Siberia and Alaska; (4) the genetics of biological 
aging of Mennonite populations of Kansas and Nebraska. This Mennonite 
project continued for more than 30 years and developed physiological and 
neuromuscular measures of biological aging; (5) environmental influences 
affecting learning in an African American community of Kansas City. This 
project was developed and initiated by research assistant Amy Ferrera, one 
of three graduate students who transferred from the University of Pittsburgh 
to continue working with me at the University of Kansas; and (6) genetic epi­
demiological study of a lymphoma epidemic in a baboon (Papio hamadryas) 
colony of the Institute of Experimental Pathology and Therapy of Sukhumi, 
USSR. Two doctoral students, Dennis O’Rourke and Robert Baum, received 

28 
In Search of Human Evolution
support from NCI under a contract to the LBA and collected morphological 
and genealogical data for their dissertations based on the effects of inbreeding 
on a free-​ranging sibship of baboons of Sukhumi. In addition to the availa­
bility of funding and laboratory space, three generations of graduate students 
and postdoctoral fellows helped generate a search for human evolutionary 
effects on morphology, population genetics, and disease. Table 12.1 of this 
volume summarizes the chronology, locations, and sponsors of field research 
programs, conducted from 1968 to the present. In this book, I mainly stress 
my involvement in holistic programs that examine the actions of evolu­
tionary forces and migration.
In 1989, Wayne State University Press, through associate editor Alice 
Nighosian, appointed me editor-​in-​chief of the historic journal Human 
Biology, established in 1929 by eminent biologist Raymond Pearl (Crawford, 
2018). I viewed this editorial change as an opportunity to redirect the journal 
Human Biology from coverage of general human biology to a new focus 
on anthropological genetics. The first issue of Human Biology that I edited 
together with past editor Gabriel Lasker was a special double issue on the 
Foundations of Anthropological Genetics (Crawford and Lasker, 1989). 
We reprinted ten of the most significant publications in the field, including 
contributions by eminent geneticists: J. B. S. Haldane, James F. Crow, James 
V. Neel, Arno Motulsky, James Spuhler, Frank Livingstone, Derek Roberts, 
and Morris Goodman. These reprinted articles were accompanied by brief 
updates written either by the original authors or (if the authors were de­
ceased) major contemporary specialists in the field of anthropological 
genetics. This publication provided an opportunity to trace the roots of an­
thropological genetics to its founders and to position the journal Human 
Biology as the leading publication in the field of anthropological genetics 
(Crawford and Lasker, 1989).
Professional Recognition
During my tenure at University of Kansas, my contributions to the fields 
of anthropological genetics and human biology (from 1971 to 2020) were 
recognized through the following awards by a variety of scientific organi­
zations and institutions. This recognition made possible the receipt of more 
than 90 grants from national and international agencies that were used to 
conduct 35 field investigations.
 
 
 
 
 

Background and Preparation for Fieldwork 
29	
1.	 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
honored me in 1996 by naming me fellow of the Association. This
award was given at the AAAS national meeting in Seattle, Washington.	
2.	 In 1995, the American Association of Anthropological Genetics
(AAAG) elected me as its first president. Together with Moses
Schanfield and Dennis O’Rourke, the three of us established this as­
sociation at a meeting in Denver, Colorado. The primary function of
AAAG was to support the journal Human Biology and to help develop
a field that came into existence in 1973 with the publication of the
volume Methods and Theories of Anthropological Genetics.	
3.	 In 1997, I was elected president of the Human Biology Association.
This society published a newly created journal, American Journal of
Human Biology, a competitor of the classic Human Biology. My duties
included president elect, 1997–​1998; president, 1998–​2000; past presi­
dent, 2000–​2001. This election placed me in somewhat of an awkward
position, being the editor-​in chief of Human Biology, while president of 
an organization that supports its intellectual competition.	
4.	 The Argentine Academy of Sciences of Cordoba inducted me as a for­
eign academician in 2001. This induction was an honor that I shared
with Charles Darwin, who accepted membership to the same academy
more than 100 years earlier, on March 18, 1879 (see letter of acceptance 
from Darwin in Appendix A).	
5.	 On April 14, 2011, the Human Biology Association at its na­
tional meeting honored me with the Franz Boas Lifetime Research
Achievement Award. This award (presented by colleague and friend
William Leonard) was given to me for lifetime achievements and
contributions to the field of human biology.	
6.	 Dennis O’ Rourke presented to me the Charles R. Darwin Research
Achievement Award on behalf of the American Association of Physical 
Anthropology in April 15, 2016.
Conclusion
Through the last 50 years of my academic career, I managed to remain rela­
tively current in a rapidly changing scientific discipline and was able to nav­
igate the informational and molecular revolutions through the assistance of 
three generations of highly talented graduate students (41 Ph.D.s mentored) 

30 
In Search of Human Evolution
and 20 postdoctoral fellows. Mentoring highly talented students not only 
makes the investment of time and effort feel worthwhile, but it opens up new 
collaborative opportunities and encouraged me to stay on the cutting edge 
of the field. As a result, a number of my former doctoral students have con­
tinued collaborating with me on various research programs until the present 
time. Appendix B lists the Ph.Ds. that I mentored from the first, Robert 
Halberstein (who transferred from the University of Pittsburgh with me in 
1971), to the last, Randy David, from SUNY.
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0003
3
Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
of Transplanted Tlaxcaltecan Populations
Introduction
Anthropological geneticists generally agree that in order to detect the actions 
of evolutionary forces an extended time dimension is necessary. However, 
historical reconstructions and major environmental changes provide insight 
into how evolution operates. Darwin originally viewed evolution through 
the lens of survival of the fittest—​that is, natural selection. The modern 
synthesis demonstrated that four forces of evolution, namely natural selec­
tion, mutation, genetic drift, and gene flow, interact to modify the genetics 
of human populations. The significance of each force of evolution and their 
interaction depends on the effective size of the population and its demog­
raphy and history. Populations that have small effective sizes and are repro­
ductively isolated are more likely to experience stochastic fluctuations in the 
frequencies of genes. However, large populations undergoing migrations 
will exhibit allelic frequency changes due to gene flow and possibly selec­
tion. For example, Native American populations have experienced genetic 
changes through massive European gene flow and selection, particularly 
due to the introduction of new diseases. Through the study of the genetics 
of transplanted populations over lengthy time periods, history provides 
unique opportunities to evaluate evolutionary change resulting from migra­
tion and selection through measures of high mortality and low fertility rates 
(Crawford et al., 2021).
History of Tlaxcala, Mexico
In the 1970s, Tlaxcala was the smallest (4,600 square kilometers) and ec­
onomically the poorest state in the Republic of Mexico with a popula­
tion of 454,000 persons (Crawford et al., 1976). This state occupies the 

32 
In Search of Human Evolution
central and northern regions of the Tlaxcalan-​Pueblan Valley in the Central 
Highlands of Mexico. The State of Tlaxcala is bordered on the west by the 
Valley of Mexico and to the east and south by the State of Puebla (see map in 
Figure 3.1).
While at the University of Pittsburgh, I learned from my colleague 
Professor Hugo Nutini (an Italian-​Chilean cultural anthropologist and a 
former Olympic Games bronze medalist in the 800-​meter run) about the 
unique role that the Tlaxcaltecan people played in the conquest of Mexico 
(Crawford, 1976). In the year 1521, the Tlaxcaltecans formed a military alli­
ance (known as the Segura de la Frontera) with conquistador Hernan Cortes 
and the invading Spanish expeditionary force. At Contact times, the people 
of the Valley of Tlaxcala had been the objects of continuous hostility and 
warfare with the Aztecs of the adjoining valley (see map in Figure 3.1). The 
Aztecs did not conquer the Tlaxcaltecans but periodically raided the Valley 
in search of sacrificial victims for their bloody ceremonies to abate var­
ious gods.
For their services to the Spanish Crown, the Tlaxcaltecans were 
rewarded with a number of privileges. These included being addressed 
by the honorific title of “Don”; they were also permitted by the Spaniards 
to ride on horseback, and their land in the Valley of Tlaxcala was not 
confiscated by the conquering Spaniards to set up haciendas (Nutini, 
Figure 3.1  Map of Mexico and the State of Tlaxcala, which locates the sites of 
transplantation of Tlaxcaltecans to Saltillo and Cuanalan.
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, 
Morphology and Genetics. © 1976, The Author.
 
 
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
33
1976). The Spaniards residing in the State of Tlaxcala were limited to 
three administrative centers. In return, the Tlaxcaltecans served as merce­
nary troops involved in the subjugation of Mexico. Because of this alliance 
with the Spaniards and the role they played in the conquest of Mexico, 
the Tlaxcaltecans were considered by the majority of Mexicans as traitors 
who sold out to foreign invaders. In 1521, a garrison from the Valley of 
Tlaxcala was transplanted to the adjoining Valley of Mexico to construct 
and protect irrigation dikes and to prevent the Aztecs from flooding the 
region. In 1571, the City of Saltillo was founded by conquistador Alberto 
del Canto. The Spanish, Native American settlement of Saltillo had been 
constantly besieged by the warlike Chichimec tribes of Northern Mexico. 
In response to these hostilities, in 1591, 400 families from the Valley of 
Tlaxcala were relocated to northern Mexico to establish the village of San 
Esteban de Nueva Tlaxcala, now known as Saltillo (Aguirre, 1976). The 
Spanish did this to encourage the cultivation of the land and to accelerate 
the stalled colonization of the region. Initially, Saltillo (now a city of more 
than 800,000) grew slowly because of water shortages and constant warfare 
with the surrounding Chichimec tribes. This fission of the Tlaxcala gene 
pool occurred more than 350 years ago with the settlement of the families 
from the moist, temperate altiplano (high mountainous plateau) of Central 
Mexico to the arid, desert-​like landscape of northern Mexico.
John McCullough (at that time a graduate student from Penn State 
University who was surveying the Valley of Mexico for possible archaeolog­
ical sites) informed me that in 1521 a garrison from the Valley of 
Tlaxcala was transplanted to the adjoining Valley of Mexico. This enclave 
of Tlaxcaltecans became a barrio of Cuanalan, located within the municipio 
of Acolman (see Figure 3.2). While the exact size of the original garrison 
was not historically known, the earliest census from the 18th century 
enumerates a total of 212 (Indian) “Indio” and 10 Mestizo families. This 
barrio is within sight of the ceremonial complex of Teotihuacan, with its 
pyramids and temples (see Figure 3.2). Social isolation, due to the perceived 
view of most Mexicans that the Tlaxcaltecans were “traitors,” made a genetic 
analysis of the contemporary descendants of the garrison of potential 
evolutionary interest. The experimental design for this study consisted of 
an assessment of genetic, morphological, and demographic differentiation 
between the populations within the Valley of Tlaxcala (San Pablo del Monte 
and the City of Tlaxcala) with two transplanted populations, Cuanalan 
and Saltillo. Given more than 350 years of separation, have these groups 

34 
In Search of Human Evolution
differentiated genetically, morphologically, or culturally? There is evidence 
to suggest that Native Americans from Tlaxcala built the earliest Catholic 
Church in the Americas in what is now Santa Fe, New Mexico. However, 
no records were located as to the exact numbers of Tlaxcaltecans brought 
to Santa Fe, nor any data concerning the current geographic distribution of 
their descendants.
Figure 3.2  Map of the Municipio of Acolman and Barrio of Cuanalan in the 
Valley of Mexico.
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, 
Morphology and Genetics. © 1976, The Author.
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
35
Valley of Tlaxcala—​Research Team
In 1969, I assembled a multidisciplinary research team primarily from the 
University of Pittsburgh, and we began a research program on two populations 
from the Valley of Tlaxcala—​an indigenous Native American community of 
San Pablo del Monte and a Mestizo City of Tlaxcala. San Pablo was a geo­
graphically isolated community of approximately 10,000 inhabitants located 
on the slopes of the volcano La Malinche (named after Cortes’s translator and 
concubine). According to several cultural anthropologists, this community 
experienced little, if any Spanish admixture. Genetic characterization of this 
village and the absence of any European marker genes supported the selec­
tion of this community as representative of Tlaxcaltecan Native Americans. 
The City of Tlaxcala, with a population of approximately 15,000 Mestizos, 
was founded in the 16th century as an administrative center by the Spanish 
and as a result reflected considerable Spanish gene flow into the contempo­
rary population.
Early Human Experimentation
At the time of the development of the Tlaxcala research, the US govern­
mental regulations on human experimentation were undergoing major 
modifications through the creation of Internal Review Boards (IRBs) 
and the monitoring of risk in research. This research program in Tlaxcala 
preceded the enactment of the National Research Act (Pub. L 93-​348) by the 
US Congress in 1974, which mandated that IRBs review all Public Health 
Service–​funded research. This committee was charged with the identifica­
tion of the basic ethical principles that should underlie the conduct of bi­
omedical and behavioral research involving human subjects. However, the 
Tlaxcala field research program was initiated before the documentation of 
ethics violations associated with the Tuskegee study of syphilis in African 
Americans and the implementation of laws and regulations associated with 
human research.
In the early 1970s, the Belmont Report (1974) on ethical guidelines for 
fieldwork had not yet been compiled or published. Although the IRBs had 
not been constituted, by the time this research program was organized, we 
followed the general guidelines for human experimentation as outlined 
by distinguished geneticist and physician James Neel and Salzano in 1964 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
In Search of Human Evolution
to the World Health Organization. They stressed that local populations 
should be informed about the research risks, methods, and benefits from 
medical and dental-​related services. In the Tlaxcala study, Hugo Nutini 
explained to the community through a series of lectures the nature and 
purpose of the research and that each individual had the option of whether 
to participate and to provide voluntary consent. In additional lectures by 
the Spanish-​speaking members of our research team, the benefits and risks 
of participating in this study were discussed with the community and its 
leaders. In Tlaxcala, each individual gave verbal informed consent and 
chose to participate and to receive medical and/​or dental care. A few of 
the participants accepted the medical care but refused to participate in the 
research program. This contrasts with the 1968 study of alpine villages of 
northern Italy, where the communities agreed to participate but only in the 
demographic/​genealogical portions of the study but refused to give blood 
for a genetic component, thus restricting us to collecting demographic data 
from church records and family interviews but cancelling any genetic data 
collection (see Chapter 9).
Participants in Tlaxcala
The multidisciplinary research team first conducted field investigations in 
the State of Tlaxcala (at San Pablo del Monte and the City of Tlaxcala) for 
two months during the summer of 1969. The team consisted of the following 
researchers:
	 1.	 Dr. Seishi W. Oka, a clinically trained dentist and member of the 
Human Genetics Program at the University of Pittsburgh, provided 
dental care to participants of the study and documented variation in 
dentition by taking dental impressions and casts. While in the field, 
he also provided transportation in his Volkswagen microbus, some­
times frightening the passengers and local drivers by exhibiting a 
bottle of tequila as he sped through the traffic in the “Glorietas” of 
Mexico City.
	 2.	 Dr. T. Aidan Cockburn, originally from the United Kingdom, was the 
chief medical officer for the city of Detroit. He was one of the pioneers 
in the field of paleopathology (Cockburn, 1963). He provided medical 
care and obtained blood samples through venipuncture.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
37
	 3.	 Robert A. Halberstein (better known as Halfstone or Chick Hall), a 
graduate student in physical anthropology at Pittsburgh, collected dem­
ographic and genealogical information by administering demographic 
proformae and interviewing participants (Halberstein and Crawford, 
1973). He preceded the arrival of the research team by participating in 
a summer field school in the Valley of Tlaxcala, organized by Professor 
Hugo Nutini. In 1973, Halberstein went on to a Ph.D. at the University 
of Kansas, and eventual professorship and chair of the Department of 
Anthropology at University of Miami in Coral Gables.
	 4.	 Patricia Potrezebowski, graduate student in human genetics at the 
University of Pittsburgh, completed her Ph.D. with Professor C. C. Li 
and eventually became executive director of the National Association 
for Public Health Statistics and Information. Her research duties in 
this study included the preparation of blood specimens for shipment to 
NIH and the collection of finger and palm prints from 307 individuals 
of San Pablo and Tlaxcala.
	 5.	 Paul Scuilli, graduate student in physical anthropology at the University 
of Pittsburgh, assisted Dr. Oka in casting the dental impressions. He 
completed his Ph.D. at Pitt and went on to a highly successful career as 
professor of anthropology and chair at Ohio State University.
	 6.	 Professor Hugo Nutini, a highly experienced cultural anthropologist, 
who had conducted numerous field investigations in the Valley of 
Tlaxcala, obtained local permissions and oral informed consent from 
participants of this study
	 7.	 Michael H. Crawford obtained grant support for this project, organ­
ized the research stations at the public health clinics for data collection, 
and conducted anthropometric measurements on consenting research 
subjects.
Most of the team accompanied Dr. Seishi Oka, who drove his Volkswagen 
microbus, loaded with equipment and paperwork, all the way from 
Pittsburgh to Tlaxcala and back. This Volkswagen microbus was our primary 
means of transport in Mexico City and in Tlaxcala. Dr. Aidan Cockburn flew 
solo from Detroit to Mexico City while attempting to import the medications, 
donated for the study. Since he spoke no Spanish, he could not explain the 
reasons for bringing all of these “drugs” to Mexico, and the customs officials 
confiscated a bag full of medications. After escaping customs, he hailed the 
first taxi he could find at the airport and drove all the way to the adjoining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
In Search of Human Evolution
valley. Aidan explained to a taxi driver that he wanted to be driven to . . . 
“Tlaxcala, Tlaxcala.” After he greeted me in the hotel in the city of Tlaxcala, 
I learned about his adventures and compensated him for the horrendous cost 
of that taxi trip from one valley to the adjoining valley.
Methodology—​First Phase
A total of 395 research subjects (138 from the City of Tlaxcala and 257 from 
San Pablo del Monte) participated in the initial phase of this study (Crawford 
et al., 1979). The population from the Native community, San Pablo del 
Monte, enthusiastically agreed to participate in this research. Dr. Aidan 
Cockburn, team physician, provided medical treatment, whenever possible. 
Dr. Seishi Oka provided dental care and made casts of teeth using amalgam 
and dental stone. Participants had an option to avail themselves of dental 
and medical services or could reject any participation in the research project. 
Some of the participants insisted that blood be drawn from both arms to 
drain the lungs of bad blood, and they even offered to pay the nurse phlebot­
omist for drawing a second sample from the other arm. I first noticed scars 
on both arms and traced this enthusiastic support of the bilateral venipunc­
ture to a local curandero who punctured the arm with a sharp knife, drew a 
sardine can filled with blood, prayed, and then buried the can as a treatment 
for specific ills. I apprenticed myself to this curandero, who displayed excep­
tional anatomical knowledge and managed to combine bloodletting (prac­
ticed by Central American Natives by painfully inserting cactus spines into 
their tongues) and Spanish bloodletting as a treatment method. The curan­
dero presented the bloodletting practice within a religious, Catholic context 
and the recitation of appropriate prayers accompanying the burial of a sar­
dine can full of blood.
Initially, the Mestizos from the City of Tlaxcala were suspicious of the 
“gringo doctors” and were reluctant to participate in any research projects. 
Despite highly informative talks given to the community by Professor Hugo 
Nutini, explaining our research and the availability of free medical and dental 
services, few families initially came to our clinic. To stimulate the interest of 
the community, I turned out for the City of Tlaxcala football (soccer) team—​
surprisingly named after the Italian town of “Padua.” The yellow-​uniformed 
Padua soccer team played in a spacious stadium with well-​manicured grass 
on the field. Following the footsteps of my distant relative (mother’s side) 
 
 
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
39
Vladimir Nabokov, eminent writer, and university professor at Cornell 
University, I played both soccer and tennis in college. However, unlike him, 
I played as an attacking midfielder or in a central forward position. While 
in exile in Germany, Nabokov played goalkeeper on the soccer team and 
gave tennis lessons (Field, 1977). After college, I continued competing in 
semi-​professional leagues of the Northwest and in the Keystone league of 
Pittsburgh. My competitive instincts, initially displayed on the soccer field 
and the tennis courts, were further expressed in later academic wars. Despite 
the skills that I acquired while playing soccer for many years in the United 
States, Australia, and China, practicing and playing soccer at an elevation 
of 8,500 feet was a challenge in regard to hypoxic stress. I made the team 
and received some recognition from the community after scoring a hat trick 
(three goals) in a single game against a village team. Because I was stockier 
than most of the slight Tlaxcaltecan players, I received the nickname of “El 
Gordo” (fat boy). Because of my newly acquired reputation on the soccer 
field, families of the players started attending our clinics as the word spread 
throughout the community. One could say that in Tlaxcala: “I sacrificed my 
shins for science.”
Results
The blood samples drawn by Dr. Cockburn and a nurse phlebotomist from the 
public health clinic were centrifuged and prepared for shipment by Patricia 
Potrzebowski. These blood samples, packed in ice, were sent for analysis to the 
Human Genetics Branch of NIDR. Blood groups, serum, and red blood cell 
proteins for the two populations and were analyzed by NIH laboratory tech­
nician Chad Leyshon and compared to other Native American, African, and 
Spanish samples (Crawford et al., 1976). We estimated triracial ancestry using 
multiple regression analyses on 26 allelic frequencies of the Mestizos from the 
City of Tlaxcala (Crawford et al., 1976). The analyses of genetic ancestry, using 
blood group and protein genes revealed that 16% of the genes of Tlaxcaltecan 
Mestizos were of Spanish origin, 76% were Native American, and 8% were of 
African ancestry (Crawford et al., 1981). This research preceded the molec­
ular revolution; thus, we were limited to Mendelian markers such as blood 
groups and protein variants identified through blood typing and starch gel 
electrophoresis. Later, these initial estimates of admixture for Mestizos from 
Tlaxcala were compared (based on HLA molecular markers) to the ancestry 
 
 
 
 

40 
In Search of Human Evolution
of 181 participants from the City of Tlaxcala by a Mexican research team 
(Pavon-​Vargas et al., 2019). Although the DNA markers are much more in­
formative, a recent analysis based on HLA class I and II frequencies yielded 
almost identical estimates of ancestry computed by maximum likelihood 
(ML): Native American 75.13% +​/​–​ 1.56; European 16.10% +​/​–​ 4.98; African 
8.78% +​/​–​ 4.09. The 8% African admixture among the Tlaxcaltecan Mestizos 
reflected the presence of approximately 3,000 Africans registered in Tlaxcala 
by 1580 (Aguirre Beltran, 1944). The highest incidence of African genetic 
markers came from populations residing along the east coast of Mexico 
where slaves worked on the fruit plantations and mines. If a bi-​population 
model (based only on Spanish and Tlaxcaltecan ancestral allelic frequencies) 
was employed to estimate Mestizo ancestry, 70% of the genes are of Native 
American origin and 30% came from Spain. A tri-​population ancestral model 
reveals that the African component only lowers the estimated Spanish an­
cestry. Was there some gene flow from the west coast of Mexico, or were we 
detecting a Moorish component in the conquistador army? It is clear from 
this portion of the Tlaxcaltecan research program that one force of evolution, 
namely gene flow, was the primary determinant of the genetic structure of 
populations from Central Mexico. The effects of selection operating on spe­
cific genetic markers were estimated by comparing the proportion of admix­
ture in various genetic markers within the same population. However, small 
sample sizes and the questionable accuracy of the estimates of frequencies of 
the alleles in the ancestral populations complicated such analyses.
 HLA—​DNA
A more recent Mexican study (initiated by Dr. Rodrigo Barquera and his 
colleagues) of two Tlaxcaltecan populations, City of Tlaxcala, and rural vil­
lage samples based on the molecular genetics of Human Leuckocyte Antigen 
(HLA) system provide similar estimates of European ancestry compared to our 
earlier studies using blood group markers (Pavon-​Vargas et al., 2019; Adalid-​
Sainz et al., 2019). HLA class I (HLA-​A, -​B) and class II (HLA-​DRB1, -​DQB1) 
alleles were identified by PCR-​SSP in 1,011 Mexicans from the State of Tlaxcala 
and those residing in the City of Tlaxcala (N =​ 181) and surrounding rural 
communities (N =​ 830). The City of Tlaxcala exhibits 71% Native American 
haplotypes and 20% European haplotypes and 4% African haplotypes. While 
this more recent follow-​up study measured ancestry in rural Tlaxcala but 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
41
did not sample San Pablo del Monte, which had not exhibited any European 
markers in the earlier study—​that is, displayed 100% Native American 
markers. A more sensitive series of markers, HLA, detected 16% European and 
4% African ancestry in the City of Tlaxcala. In the 1969 study, the village of San 
Pablo del Monte was much more isolated genetically and geographically from 
other Tlaxcaltecan populations. We had originally hypothesized that the small 
African component in Tlaxcala came with the Spanish army and reflected 
North African (Moorish) influence. However, after the HLA analysis, it is more 
likely that the observed African ancestry was gene flow introduced from the 
east coast of Mexico, where slaves were located to work the plantations.
Cuanalan—​Transplanted Population
During the 16th century, one garrison from the Valley of Tlaxcala was 
relocated to Cuanalan (a barrio in the municipio of Acolman, located in the 
Valley of Mexico) to construct and guard an irrigation dike on the edge of 
Lake Texcoco (see Figure 3.2). In 1521, approximately 16,000 warriors from 
Tlaxcala accompanied Cortes in the conquest of the Aztecs in the Valley of 
Mexico. This region of the Valley of Mexico had been continuously inhabited 
for an extended period of time. There is evidence of human habitation in this 
region dating back to 12,000 to 14,000 years in the person of a Tepexepan 
pre-​Columbian skeleton discovered in 1947 on the shores of Lake Texcoco.
I learned from John McCullough, a graduate student at Penn State 
University, who was surveying the Valley of Mexico for possible excava­
tion sites, that in 1521 a garrison from the Valley of Tlaxcala was stationed 
in Cuanalan. In the summer of 1972, a field team from the University of 
Kansas was assembled to investigate the genetic micro-​differentiation of 
descendants of the garrison sent from the Valley of Tlaxcala to the adjoining 
Valley of Mexico almost 400 years ago.
Participants
This research team from the University of Kansas consisted of the following:
	 1.	 Robert Halberstein, a graduate student in biological anthropology, 
participated in the 1969 study in the Valley of Tlaxcala. He collected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
In Search of Human Evolution
demographic and genealogical information in Cuanalan and wrote a 
dissertation in 1974 comparing the demographic characteristics of San 
Pablo, Tlaxcala, with the transplanted community of Cuanalan.	
2.	 Francis Lees, a biological anthropology graduate student, wrote his
dissertation on the anthropometrics of transplanted Tlaxcaltecan
populations. He measured the bodies of Cuanalan research subjects and 
compared them to participants from the Valley of Tlaxcala and Saltillo. 
He later served as a faculty member at SUNY-​Albany and an adminis­
trator at Rockefeller University and the Museum of Natural History in
New York. In this project, Frank Lees was accompanied by his first wife, 
Patricia, who recorded the anthropometric measurements.	
3.	 John Hall, cultural anthropology graduate student from the University
of Kansas, is fluent in Spanish. His role in this project was to obtain
verbal informed consent from the participants, to reconstruct family
histories, and to explain the nature of the research to the community.	
4.	 David Busija, a graduate student from the University of Kansas, col­
lected dermal prints from 348 Cuanalan participants. His anthropology 
M.A. thesis focused on the genetics of Tlaxcaltecan dermatoglyphics.
However, he completed his Ph.D. in physiology at the University of
Kansas and eventually became a distinguished professor of physiology
at Wake Forest University.	
5.	 Ivanho Gamboa, a physician from Puebla, Mexico, provided health
care to the people of Cuanalan. He also drew blood by venipuncture
and collected information on nutrition and disease, comparing San
Pablo del Monte with Cuanalan (Gamboa, 1976).	
6.	 Ruben Lisker, a medical geneticist and physician from the National
Institute of Nutrition of Mexico, obtained governmental permissions
for this research program from the Ministry of Health of Mexico.
Dr. Lisker and his research assistant, Rocio Perez Briceno, analyzed
in the Department of Genetics Laboratory at the National Institute
of Nutrition in Mexico City 536 blood samples from a total of 2,040
residents of Cuanalan (Crawford, Lisker and Perez Briceno, 1976).
Saltillo
In 1974, following the informative research on the Tlaxcaltecans of Cuanalan 
(from the Valley of Mexico), a research team was organized at the University 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
43
of Kansas to assess the genetic and demographic changes experienced by 
the 400 families transplanted from the Valley of Tlaxcala to arid, northern 
Mexico (see Figure 3.1). Governmental permissions for this study were 
obtained through the Mexican collaborating physician and medical ge­
neticist, Dr. Ruben Lisker, from the Salud Publica el Estado de Coahuila. 
Ruben and I first met in 1965 when he was a postdoctoral fellow working 
in Dr. Arno Motulsky’s laboratory at the University of Washington, Seattle. 
At that time, I was a graduate student collaborating with Motulsky on red 
blood cell enzyme glucose-​6-​phosphate dehydrogenase (G-​6-​PD) varia­
tion in nonhuman primates. Field investigations in Saltillo (from July 1 to 
August 15, 1974) were initiated by a multidisciplinary research team from 
the University of Kansas (KU). We traveled in a KU state vehicle from 
Lawrence, Kansas, to Saltillo, Coahuila. On our arrival in Saltillo one eve­
ning, the KU vehicle was broken into and robbed of the skin color reflectom­
eter, needles, and vacutainers. We had parked the vehicle across the street 
from the restaurant where we had dinner. Mistake—​we thought that this was 
a safe parking spot because of the presence of Saltillo police. To complete the 
projected research, we had to purchase additional vacutainers in Mexico City. 
History of Saltillo
Because of the warlike nature of the indigenous Chichimec tribes of northern 
Mexico, the Viceroy of Mexico recommended to the Spanish Crown that a 
group of peaceful, Christian, Native American farmers should be resettled 
in northern Mexico. Spanish administrators hoped that the Chichimecs 
would follow the examples of these transplanted farmers and settle to a more 
peaceful farming subsistence. In June 1591, an expedition consisting of 400 
families (100 from each of the four administrative subdivisions of the state 
of Tlaxcala) and an escort of Spanish soldiers led by conquistador Zarate de­
parted from Tlaxcala (Aguirre, 1976). The environmental contrasts between 
the moist, altiplano Valley of Tlaxcala at 7,500–​8,500 feet elevation versus an 
arid, desert-​like environment at 5,000 feet elevation of Saltillo should pro­
vide insight into unique evolutionary changes in the population after almost 
400 years of separation. Six months later, the Spanish resettled 91 families 
and 16 single males (all from the principality of Tizatlan in Tlaxcala) to a new 
colony adjoining the beleaguered Spanish garrison of Saltillo (Nava, 1969). 
The remaining transplanted families from Tlaxcala were relocated to the 
following communities: San Luis Potosi, Colotlan, San Jeronimo del Agua, 
and El Venado. The City of Saltillo, being primarily of Tlaxcaltecan origin, 
remained of relatively small size from the 17th to 19th centuries. At the turn 
 
 
 

44 
In Search of Human Evolution
of the 20th century, Saltillo with industrialization experienced considerable 
migration and admixture from surrounding regions. By 1974, Saltillo had 
grown into a settlement consisting of 175,000 residents (see Figure 3.1). Given 
the problems of sampling such a large urban center, we decided to focus on 
two barrios, Chamizal and La Minita. Chamizal was an established barrio of 
approximately 2,000 persons, containing mostly Tlaxcaltecan surnames. In 
contrast, La Minita was a small shantytown with approximately 250 residents, 
adjacent to Chamizal and proximal to the edge of town. While Chamizal 
contained the descendants of the original Tlaxcaltecan settlers, La Minita 
represented migrants from surrounding regions who were brought from the 
east coast of Mexico to work in the mines of Saltillo.
Participants—​Research Team
The field team of the 1974 research project consisted of the following 
individuals:
	 1.	 Eileen Mulhare, a bilingual Spanish-​English cultural anthropologist, 
with her family originally from Argentina. She collected genealogical 
and demographic information on the community. Eileen developed 
into an eminent scholar of Nahua-​speaking populations of the Puebla 
region of Mexico. Sadly, she died unexpectedly in 2006 from a heart 
condition followed by a massive stroke.
	 2.	 Renan del Barco, who had a career as a journalist in Lima, Peru, returned 
to academia for a degree at the University of Kansas in cultural anthro­
pology. During this fieldwork in Saltillo, Renan was accompanied by 
his wife Delores (Dolly) and two children. He obtained informed con­
sent and demographic and cultural data on the population of Saltillo. 
Renan del Barco died in 2012 at 80 years of age.
	 3.	 Delores (Dolly) Villasenor, wife of Renan del Barco, is of Mexican or­
igin, thus a bilingual Spanish/​English speaker, who assisted del Barco in 
collecting the genealogical and demographic data through interviews. 
She was accompanied by their son and daughter, Mandalit del Barco 
(who is currently an award-​winning NPR reporter in Los Angeles).
	 4.	 Dennis O’Rourke, a graduate student at the University of Kansas. He 
completed his Ph.D. in 1980 and went on to a highly successful career 
in anthropological genetics of ancient populations. He is currently a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
45
distinguished professor at the University of Kansas. His role in the 1974 
research program was the collection of dental impressions and casts 
(O’Rourke and Crawford, 1976).	
5.	 Francis Lees, a graduate student in biological anthropology at the
University of Kansas. He conducted anthropometric measurements
on the barrios of Saltillo and analyzed these data for his dissertation
(Lees, 1975).	
6.	 Two local physicians, Drs. Horacio Jimenez and Antonio Cardenas
Alvarado, provided medical care for Saltillo residents who attended the 
school clinics.	
7.	 M. H. Crawford. I obtained grant support for this project and organized 
the field investigations. Financial support for this study came from the
National Institute of Health (NIH), the University of Kansas General
Research Funds, and a Biomedical Science Support Grant.
While the exact locations of the Tlaxcaltecan settlements in Saltillo are 
described by historical sources, during our field investigations it became evi­
dent that the expanding business district had pushed out some of the original 
settlers to adjoining areas (Nava, 1969). A clinic was set up at a schoolhouse 
within the barrio of La Minita, two blocks from the historically known 
barrio of Chamizal. There was some difficulty in the self-​identification of the 
descendants of the founders because of a stigma of being an “Indio” in this 
industrial, culturally Mestizo community. As a result, some of the informants 
were reluctant to acknowledge their Tlaxcaltecan origins. This reluctance, 
in its extreme form, was demonstrated by an incident in which an elderly, 
mustache-​adorned Native American sporting a large sombrero, and being 
a veteran of the Pancho Villa campaign, was asked if he was a descendant of 
the Tlaxcaltecan founders of Saltillo. He gravely replied: “No, señor. I am not 
Tlaxcaltecan—​but my brother is!” (Crawford, 1976).
Genetic Results
Standard Markers
Complications to the direct measurement of genetic micro-​differentiation of 
transplanted populations, Cuanalan, and Saltillo from the Valley of Tlaxcala 
include the varying levels of differential gene flow and admixture. Given the 

46 
In Search of Human Evolution
perception by the surrounding Mexican populations that the Tlaxcaltecans 
were traitors and were socially isolated from other Mexican groups, we ex­
pected less gene flow into the transplanted groups. Earlier generations of 
Cuanalan residents did not experience as much gene flow, but the most re­
cent generations intermixed with migrants heading to Mexico City.
As shown in Table 3.1, 302 persons participated in the Saltillo portion of 
the study, with 133 from the barrio LaMinta, 121 from Chamizal, and 48 
walk-​ins from adjacent barrios. This table also enumerates sample sizes for 
Cuanalan, San Pablo del Monte, and the City of Tlaxcala. Blood samples were 
drawn by venipuncture into vacutainers with ACD preservative, packed in 
ice and shipped for analysis directly to the collaborative Minneapolis War 
Memorial Blood Bank. Blood phenotyping included 12 blood group loci, 5 
serum proteins, and 6 erythrocyte proteins.
Based on the allelic frequencies of 12 blood group and protein loci, a 
three-​dimensional model was constructed based on the square root of ge­
netic distance of Cavalli-​Sforza and Edwards D2. A ball-​and-​stick model 
reveals that the parental Indian community (San Pablo) is distinct geneti­
cally from the City of Tlaxcala (located in the same valley) and followed next 
by the transplanted Cuanalan residents (CUAN RES) with the least amount 
Table 3.1  Sample Sizes of Tlaxcaltecan Populations 
Divided by Location and Migration History
Population
Sample Sizes
Cuanalan
Residents
Admixed
Immigrants
Total 
144
205
129
477
Saltillo
LaMinita
Chamizal
Saltillo Misc.
Total
133
121
48
302
San Pablo del Monte
257
City of Tlaxcala
TOTAL
138
1174
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H., and 
Devor, E. J., “Population Structure and Admixture in Tlaxcaltecan 
Populations,” Am. J. Phys. Anthropol., 52, pp. 485–​490 © 1980, Wiley.
 
 
 
 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
47
of admixture (Figure 3.3). Of all the Tlaxcaltecan populations, Saltillo is 
most distant from San Pablo both geographically and genetically. This ge­
netic distance reflects the genetic divergence due to 400 years of reproductive 
isolation plus some gene flow. Saltillo exhibits the closest genetic affinity 
to the African composite than any other Tlaxcaltecan group. San Pablo and 
Cuanalan residents experienced the least amount of Spanish and African 
gene flow.
Admixture of Transplanted Populations
Dr. Moses Schanfield (1976) analyzed the immunoglobulin haplotypes (GM 
and KM) for Chamizal, LaMinita, and other barrios. Chamizal reflects ad­
mixture of the Tlaxcaltecan families with the original Spanish garrison 
and exhibits the highest Spanish admixture of 45%, while 53% had Native 
American ancestry. LaMinita displays the highest African admixture 
SAN PABLO
SALTILLO
TLAXCALA
CUANALAN   IMMIGRANTS
CUANALAN
HYBRIDS
CUANALAN
RESIDENTS
Figure 3.3  Projection of a three-​dimensional model for genetic relationships 
between Tlaxcaltecan populations based on allelic frequencies and the square 
root of genetic distance D2.
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, 
Morphology and Genetics. © 1976, The Author.
 
 
 
 
 

48 
In Search of Human Evolution
(6% based on blood group and protein markers versus 6% based on GMs) 
from slaves who were brought to work the mines in northern Mexico. 
Additionally, the degree of immigrant ancestry was confirmed through 
searches of the municipal records, censuses, and the administration of dem­
ographic questionnaires (Turner, 1976). Based upon family interviews, 
the participants from the barrio of Cuanalan were subdivided into three 
groups: (1) Residents are individuals with no known ancestors born outside 
Cuanalan for at least two generations; (2) Cuanalan Admixed (Hybrids) are 
persons born in Cuanalan with at least one grandparent born outside the 
barrio; and (3) Cuanalan Immigrants are persons born outside the barrio, 
whose parents immigrated into Cuanalan.
The residents of Cuanalan are predominantly Native American—​96%, 
with 4% Spanish and with no measurable African ancestry (see Table 3.2). 
Those individuals who most recently migrated to Cuanalan displayed the 
highest Spanish ancestry: 29% (Crawford et al., 1976). Cuanalan is located 
a short distance from Mexico City and is a migrant stopover barrio be­
fore settlement in the big city. In Saltillo, the Residents (Chamizal) have 
high Spanish ancestry of 45% plus 3% African gene flow. The transplanted 
Tlaxcaltecans intermixed genetically with the Spanish garrison that had 
preceded them in the 16th century. The migrants into LaMinita worked the 
mines and exhibited the highest African admixture of 6%.
To assess the relative roles of stochastic versus systematic forces of evolu­
tion, mean per locus heterozygosity versus relative distance from the center 
(rii) of distribution were regressed. San Pablo del Monte has received much 
less systematic pressure (gene flow) than the average Tlaxcaltecan popula­
tion. This analysis further supported the culturally based observation of the 
Table 3.2  Admixture Estimates for Migrants, Admixed, and Residents of 
Cuanalan and Saltillo Based upon Immunoglobulin Haplotypes
Population
Native American
Spanish
African
Cuanalan
Residents
Admixed
Immigrants
Saltillo
Chamizal
LaMinita
95.70
83.40
66.50
52.50
57.80
4.30
13.90
28.90
44.70
36.10
0.00
2.70
4.60
2.80
6.10
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, 
Morphology and Genetics, © 1976, The Author.

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
49
absence of Spanish gene flow into the small, isolated mountainside commu­
nity of San Pablo. In contrast, the barrio of Chamizal reflects greater system­
atic pressure, as shown by the deviation to the right of the theoretical 
regression line.
Serendipity and Genetics Mapping of the  
Rhesus Blood Group Locus
The Rhesus blood group system has been characterized by a series of five 
antigens (D, C, c, E, and e) in two closely linked structural genes—​D and 
CE (Renwick, 1971). These structural genes map on the short arm p34–​36 
of chromosome 1. In our earlier research, we assumed (based on RA Fisher’s 
conclusion) that the Rhesus blood group system consisted of three closely 
linked loci: C, D, and E. However, DNA analyses of the Rhesus system re­
vealed that there were only two closely linked loci (Flegel, 2011). Based on 
blood grouping methods, a Tlaxcaltecan family was identified by a rare D-​
phenotype, with the presence of the D antigen but with the absence of C and 
E. Using cytogenetic banding techniques, a small, but significant deletion 
was identified on the short arm of chromosome 1 (Turner et al., 1975, 1976). 
These data confirmed the earlier assignment of the Rhesus complex to chro­
mosome 1 (Marsh et al., 1974).
Statistical evaluation of cytogenetic banding and segregation of Rhesus 
genotypes on chromosome 1 permitted the localization of the Rhesus locus 
to chromosome 1. A chromosomal deletion of the A region by band pIa3 was 
found in three familial pedigree members of family G (Turner et al., 1975).
Morphological Differentiation of Transplanted Populations
Morphological traits, based on anthropometrics, odontometrics, and der­
matoglyphics, are the result of polygenic inheritance interacting with en­
vironmental factors. Transplanting Tlaxcaltecan populations to different 
regions of Mexico with contrasting environments provided a unique oppor­
tunity to examine the sensitivity of the genes controlling these complex traits 
to environmental influences. However, there were major complications to the 
interpretation of the observed differentiation of the Mexican transplanted 
populations: (1) the degree of gene flow and admixture with Spanish, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
In Search of Human Evolution
African, and non-​Tlaxcaltecan Native American; and (2) interobserver error 
in the anthropometric measurements.
Anthropometrics
Nine standardized anthropometric variables assessed morphological var­
iation in 606 participants from the six Mexican groupings: Cuanalan 
(Residents, Admixed Immigrants), San Pablo del Monte, City of Tlaxcala, 
and Saltillo. The nine standardized anthropometric traits included head 
length, head breadth, head height, bizygomatic breadth, total face height, jaw 
height, nose length, and head circumference. These specific measurements 
were used in this study because of their higher heritability, previously 
observed in linear traits and facial dimensions in Mennonite populations 
(Devor et al., 1986a, 1986b). The age of each participant and their stature 
were not significantly different among males or females; however, every 
other variable used in the one-​way analyses of variance was significant (Lees 
et al., 1976). Mahalanobis’s D2 genetic distance analysis for both males and 
females revealed that San Pablo (the Native American community) was 
unique when compared to the other groups. The City of Tlaxcala, located 
in the same valley, is closer to San Pablo del Monte since they shared similar 
environments. Interpopulation variation was assessed in the socially defined 
subdivisions of Cuanalan into Residents, Admixed, and Migrants. As ex­
pected, Cuanalan Residents clustered with both San Pablo males and females. 
This observation is in agreement with models predicting greatest morpho­
logical similarity between populations that share the most recent common 
ancestry (Lees and Crawford, 1976). Figure 3.4 is a three-​dimensional scat­
tergram of male group means revealing the optimal separation of groups 
along each axis. San Pablo del Monte, Saltillo, and Tlaxcala are separated 
along the first axis, while Cuanalan differs statistically along the second axis 
(Cavalli-​Sforza and Edwards, 1967).
Dermatoglyphics
Finger and palm prints have been widely used for forensic identification 
by law enforcement agencies and anthropologists for the assessment of ge­
netic affinities among human populations (Holt, 1968). Methods for the 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
51
characterization of dermal ridges, patterns, and palmar lines were first 
proposed by Galton (1892), improved by Henry (1900), and further refined 
by Cummins and Midlo (1943). These methods for characterizing dermal 
variation between populations on a worldwide basis were initially applied by 
Cummins and Midlo (1943). They included some of the earliest investigations 
of dermatoglyphic variation in Mexican indigenous populations (Cumins, 
1930). Finger and palm prints were collected from the Valley of Tlaxcala, 
Cuanalan, and Saltillo in 1969, 1972, and 1974.
A total of 910 participants provided dermal prints (187 from San Pablo, 
120 from Tlaxcala, 348 from Cuanalan, and 255 from Saltillo). Males and 
females were analyzed separately because of the differential number of ridges 
CUANALAN
IMMIGRANTS
TLAXCALA
CUANALAN
RESIDENTS
MALES
SAN PABLO
SALTILLO
CUANALAN
HYBRIDS
Figure 3.4  Three-​dimensional scattergram of male group means on the first 
three canonical axes. This plot pictures the optimum separation of groups along 
each axis.
 Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, 
Morphology and Genetics. © 1976, The Author.
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
In Search of Human Evolution
associated with size of hand and gender. Comparisons of the four male 
Tlaxcaltecan groups revealed that the Saltillo sample (containing the highest 
Spanish ancestry) was the most different from the other three groups. The 
Cuanalan sample most closely resembles the Native American village of San 
Pablo del Monte, in the adjoining valley. The heterogeneity of the dermal 
traits, numbers of ridges, frequencies of patterns on fingers, and palm lines 
complicate genetic analyses.
Dentition
Morphological variation of dentition has been widely utilized in the char­
acterization of hominin evolution. Teeth, because of their hardness, tend 
to be better preserved than other skeletal remains of the body. Dental casts 
have been utilized for the characterization of dental variation in contem­
porary human populations. Studies of morphological variation based on 
dentition utilize either odontometrics (measurements of size and shape) 
or the presence of discrete traits, such as cusp of Carabelli, shoveling of the 
incisors, and cusp numbers (Baume and Crawford, 1978, 1980). These dis­
crete dental traits were scored for each individual using standard methods 
developed by Dahlberg (1956) and applied by graduate research assistant 
Robert Baume. In this research program on the transplanted Tlaxcaltecan 
populations, odontometrics and incidence of discrete traits were used 
to measure population affinities. However, these analyses were compli­
cated by varying degrees of admixture and smaller sample sizes because 
there was less enthusiasm by participants in the process of making dental 
impressions. In addition, only adult dentitions were used and the sample 
sizes were further reduced by absence of the second and third molars 
occurring in 30% of the sample (O’Rourke and Crawford, 1976). Dental 
measurements (odontometrics) provided a reliable but conservative re­
flection of population history. Discriminant function analysis based on 
odontometrics shows significant differences between all populations but 
Tlaxcala City and San Pablo del Monte, the two populations from the same 
valley of origin. The genetic distances between the Mestizo populations 
are much smaller than between the Native American community and the 
Mestizo groups.
Paul Lin (1976) applied an analytical method, factor analysis, to 
Tlaxcaltecan odontometrics. He noted microevolutionary divergences in 

Admixture and Genetic Differentiation 
53
the underlying factors of the dentition for Cuanalan, San Pablo del Monte, 
and the City of Tlaxcala. The intergroup differences were evaluated based on 
the concordance in loading patterns between the metameres (one of a series 
of homologous parts) and between the members of a morphological tooth 
group. This method relies on a visual approach and requires a quantitative 
measure of agreement in factor structures. He also observed a general con­
cordance between the morphological tooth classes and the discrete units de­
fined by the distribution of factor loadings.
Discrete dental traits characterized morphological variation among the 
transplanted populations and the sole Native American community from 
their Valley of Tlaxcala (O’Rourke and Crawford, 1976; Baume and Crawford, 
1978). Interpopulation genetic distances based on discrete traits revealed 
that Cuanalan and San Pablo are the most divergent groups, while the City 
of Tlaxcala and San Pablo del Monte clustered together. In these analyses, it 
appears that populations sharing similar environments (such as residents in 
the same Valley) exhibit similar morphology. Factor analyses of three of the 
populations (San Pablo, City of Tlaxcala, and Cuanalan) were suggestive of 
morphological divergences in the underlying factors of dentitions. Concise 
assessments of population affinities were not possible because of different 
levels of gene flow from Spanish and African groups into the transplanted 
populations. Reproductive isolation in both Tlaxcaltecan transplants 
was lost approximately two generations ago with the influx of immigrants 
(Crawford et al., 1976). The dental casts used in this study are available for 
possible reanalysis at the Crawford Collection, Maxwell Museum, Santa Fe, 
New Mexico.
Conclusion of Tlaxcala Project
This Tlaxcaltecan research program demonstrated that populations 
undergoing fission and relocation for 300+​ years differentiate genetically 
and morphologically (Crawford, 1980). However, the genetic makeup of the 
original ancestral populations and the degree of gene flow after population 
transplantation complicates the interpretation of exact measures of differ­
entiation. Admixture measures based on standard markers gave an almost 
identical estimate of ancestry as did the HLA system assessed by molecular 
genetic methods. This study also provides some insight into the underlying 
genetic bases of dental, anthropometric, and dermatoglyphic traits.

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0004
4
Origins of the Irish Travelers (Tinkers)
Introduction
As a graduate student, while working with Derek Roberts on an analysis of 
the genetics of the populations living on a small, isolated island in the Atlantic 
(Tristan da Cunha), I became interested in detecting genetic drift in human 
populations. A few years later, I learned from Eileen Kane (a former colleague 
at the University of Pittsburgh) that the southern coast of Ireland contained 
an assortment of small islands, inhabited by miniscule populations. In 1970, 
I contacted the Dublin-​based Medico-​Social Research Board (MSRB) of 
Ireland and inquired about the possibility of collaborative documentation 
of genetic drift on an island off the southern coast of Ireland. I received an 
enthusiastic response from the director of the Institute, Dr. Geoffrey Dean, 
who sent two physicians to an island to explore the possibility of research and 
the availability of health clinics and facilities to accommodate a collaborative 
team of researchers. The physicians inquired about the presence of specific 
facilities and the community willingness to participate in a research program. 
I was given the impression from MSRB that all arrangements had been made 
and then I applied to the Wenner-​Gren Foundation for Anthropological 
Research for financial support for this project.
Participants
After being informed by Wenner-​Gren Foundation that the project (grant 
number 2647) was funded, I solicited assistance from a cultural anthropol­
ogist, Dr. George Gmelch (University of San Francisco), to help reconstruct 
historical and demographic data as background and interpret the genetic 
characterization of the population. In addition, a dentist from Kansas City, 
Dr. Ted Rebich, agreed to provide dental care to the Irish population. In the 
summer of 1970, the three of us arrived in Dublin and met with Dr. Geoffrey 
Dean, director of MSRB of Ireland, to discover that the physicians that Dean 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Origins of the Irish Travelers (Tinkers) 
55
had sent to the island managed to antagonize the island community. They 
had asked questions in an inappropriate manner concerning the availability 
of housing, refrigeration, and centrifuges in the clinics on the island and re­
ceived a response of “Who do the Americans think we are?” “We are civilized 
and have all the available equipment!” The inhabitants found this explora­
tion of the availability of facilities as condescending and refused to partic­
ipate in any study associated with MSRB and any US researchers. Thus, on 
our arrival in Dublin, with a grant in hand, we did not have a viable study. 
While in Ireland, however, I observed the presence of Tinkers (also known 
as Travelers or Itinerants), who traversed the countryside in horse-​drawn, 
colorfully painted barrel-​top wagons with women and children begging on 
the streets of the city. Given their unique lifestyle, I inquired as to whether 
these travelers (Tinkers) had Romany Gypsy ancestry or were of Irish 
origin—​and was told that no one really knows. They spoke a unique dialect 
or distinct argot, Gammon or Cant, which is unintelligible to the settled Irish 
populations.
Theories of Itinerant Origins
MacMahon (1971) summarized the major theories of the ethno-​genesis of 
the Itinerants of Ireland: (1) The Itinerants are descendants of the outcasts 
who lived beyond “the circle of the ancient body of common law of prehis­
toric Ireland.” (2) They are descendants of native chieftains, and their families 
were dispossessed by the successive English plantations. In support of this 
theory, McMahon claimed that the Tinkers of today bear the names of some 
of the so-​called noblest Irish clans associated with territories inhabited by 
their chieftain ancestors. (3) The Itinerants are a result of admixture between 
the Irish and Romany Gypsies. (4) The Itinerants are displaced peasants and 
laborers driven from their lands and occupations by economic upheavals, 
famines, and conflict. Cromwell’s conquest of Ireland (1649–​1650) was 
followed by the Act of Settlement of 1652, passed by the Parliament of 
England. This Act imposed penalties, including death and land confiscation, 
against participants in the Irish Rebellion of 1641. This Act resulted in the 
seizure of Irish lands and forced some of the Irish population to assume an 
itinerant lifestyle.
The Tinkers assumed a traveler’s lifestyle and were distributed geographi­
cally throughout the counties of Ireland (Bohn and Gmelch, 1976). However, 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
In Search of Human Evolution
the Irish government in the Report of the Commission on Itineracy wanted 
to settle the travelers in housing projects of Dublin (Government of Ireland, 
1963). The majority of these travelers refused to settle in government housing 
and continued traveling their regular circuits, usually within the confines 
of one or two counties. Tinsmithing was one of their primary occupations, 
but some Travelers (blockers) specialized in trading and selling horses (usu­
ally in regional fairs), swept chimneys, peddled small wares, and performed 
various odd jobs in rural communities. With the decline in their traditional 
occupations, Traveler men turned to collecting scrap metal while women 
and children begged at specific street corners on the streets of Dublin.
By the late 1960s, a substantial majority of Ireland’s Traveler population 
had migrated from the countryside to urban government settlements. In 
1971, 248 of Ireland’s 1,302 Traveler families were living on the outskirts 
of Dublin (Crawford and Gmelch, 1974). In response to a large number 
of migrants moving from rural to urban locations, the Irish government 
constructed housing for these itinerants. The Irish government built 70 
serviced campsites specifically for itinerant families.
Currently, approximately 300 families are living on government sites. 
Some of these families are permanently settled in government housing while 
others remain at these sites a few months each year before resuming a trav­
eling lifestyle (see Figure 4.1).
In 1970, approximately 300 families were residing in government housing 
in several sites surrounding Dublin. Some Travelers settled permanently, 
while the majority remained in government housing for a few months before 
hitting the road again. Approximately 800 families continued living along the 
roadside in their horse-​drawn wagons. According to government censuses, 
the size of the Traveler population of Ireland was increasing exponentially.
The reason for this massive population increase is that the Irish Travelers 
exhibited one of the highest fertility rates recorded in contemporary human 
populations. The mean number of children per prolific woman 40 years of 
age or older is 10.43 with a variance of 22.39 (Crawford and Gmelch, 1974). 
The mean number of children per prolific woman in the total Traveler popu­
lation is 7.94 with a variance of 2.68. This exceptionally high fertility is 
explained by the long reproductive careers of the females, who are married 
on average at 16 years of age and continue reproducing until 45 years of age. 
There appears to be significant differences in the achieved reproduction rates 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Origins of the Irish Travelers (Tinkers) 
57
of the recently settled Travelers from those following the more traditional 
lifestyle. The mean number of children in the government settlements is 9.73, 
while the Travelers who maintain a more mobile existence have on average 
5.70 children. This fertility differential is most likely due to an earlier age of 
marriage, availability of potential mates in settlements, and a reduction in 
infant mortality. The settled Travelers have better access to health clinics that 
provide free medical care.
Methodology
During the summer of 1970, genealogical, demographic information 
and blood specimens were collected from 119 Irish Traveler participants 
in health clinics set up in the settlements and along the roadside of rural 
Ireland (Crawford and Gmelch, 1974; Crawford, 1975). Three governmental 
settlements on the outskirts of Dublin, Labre Park, Finglas, and Rathfarnam 
Figure 4.1  Photograph of a Traveler couple posing in front of their horse-​
drawn wagon.
Source: Photo courtesy of George Gmelch.
 

58 
In Search of Human Evolution
were the primary sites of investigation of the settled communities. Dental 
care was provided by a team dentist from Kansas City (Dr. Ted Rebich) and 
a certified dentist from Dublin (Dr. Liam Convery). This arrangement was 
necessitated because the Irish Dental Association requires local certification 
to practice dentistry. Ted Rebich, uncertified in Ireland, could not carry out 
any major clinical procedures without appropriate Irish supervision. The 
Irish Heart Association kindly provided 95 blood specimens from unrelated 
individuals drawn during their survey of the town of Kilkenny. For compar­
ative purposes, allelic frequencies of genetic markers in other populations 
of Ireland and British Gypsies were compiled from the published literature 
(Crawford, 1975).
Results
Data on the frequencies of 33 alleles from 12 red blood cell loci were utilized 
for the genetic characterization of the Traveler population and compared 
with Eurasian populations, Romany Gypsy groups, and populations of 
Punjab, India (North et al., 2000). Table 4.1 lists the genetic distances among 
eight populations.
Genetic Affinities
Although standard genetic markers (14 alleles and chromosomal segments) 
are often less informative than DNA-​based comparisons, the Travelers are 
closest genetically to average frequencies for Ireland and the Irish town of 
Kilkenny. However, Travelers are significantly different from the East Indian 
populations that have been proposed as ancestors of the Romany Gypsies of 
Europe. Despite the shared lifestyle with European Gypsies, Travelers differ 
genetically from Hungarian Gypsies.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 4.1  Genetic Distances among Travelers, European Populations, and Indian Populations Based on Sanghvi’s X2 
Travelers
Kilkenny
Ireland
England
Iceland
Hung. Gypsies
Hungary
Punjab
Travelers
0
Kilkenny
1.150
0
Ireland
1.446
0.674
0
England
2.312
0.851
0.457
0
Iceland
3.949
1.770
1.338
0.798
0
Hung. Gypsies
3.269
1.840
4.574
4.200
5.341
0
Hungary
1.823
2.479
2.109
1.702
2.823
0.658
0
Punjab
3.088
3.214
6.007
6.487
8.231
0.868
2.144
0
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H., “Genetic Affinities and Origin of the Irish Tinkers,” in Biosocial Interrelations in Population Adaptations, ed. E. Watts, 
F. Johnston, and G. W. Lasker, pp. 93–​103. © 1975, Mouton Press, The Hague.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

60 
In Search of Human Evolution
Conclusions
Two primary hypotheses were posed in regard to the origins of the Irish 
Travelers:
1.	 Travelers are genetically related to the Roma Gypsies since they share a 
similar nomadic lifestyle and exhibit some cultural similarities with the 
Roma populations of Europe (Crawford, 1975; North et al., 2000).
2.	 Travelers are of Irish origin but have differentiated genetically from settled 
Irish populations through stochastic processes, such as genetic drift 
(Relethford and Crawford, 2013). Genetic distances based on frequencies 
of genetic markers of the blood reveal a close genetic affinity of the 
Travelers to the settled populations of Ireland (Crawford, 1975). However, 
we found that the Travelers are genetically distinct from a number of 
Irish populations. This drift hypothesis was tested by Relethford and 
Crawford (2013), comparing genetic distances of the Travelers to four 
geographic regions of Ireland. After adjustment for geography through 
distances, the genetic distances were compared, using the method devel­
oped by Relethford. The unadjusted distances revealed the genetic dis­
tinctiveness of the Travelers, who appear to be equidistant from other 
Irish populations. According to a mathematical model used in our study, 
the observed genetic differences reflect the action of genetic drift, since 
there is no evidence for external gene flow (Relethford and Crawford, 
2013). This study of the Irish Travelers (Itinerants) demonstrated the ac­
tion of genetic drift (stochastic processes) on small, isolated populations 
of Ireland traveling the roads of the rural countryside.
Contrary to MacMahon’s (1971) hypothesis that the Travelers were forced 
to take to the roads by the famines of the 1880s, the historical accounts sug­
gest that the Traveler population predated the potato blights and the agri­
cultural plantations of Cromwell. The literature of both Ireland and England 
contains numerous references to “Tinkers” (now preferentially referred to 
as Travelers or Itinerants). For example, in the late 1500s, Shakespeare re­
ferred to the so-​called Tinkers in several of his plays, most notably in Henry 
IV. In the early 1500s, legislation directed against the Tinkers was passed in 
Ireland. It appears that a number of historical events, such as the closing of 
monasteries due to Norman invasion, the potato famine, and agricultural 
droughts, forced the Travelers to take to the road and assume an itinerant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Origins of the Irish Travelers (Tinkers) 
61
lifestyle. The combination of famines, droughts, and repression by the British 
occupation thus created the current Irish Traveler (Tinker) society (North 
et al., 2000).
Travelers have a complex history with additions to the population being 
a function of various social and historical disruptions in Ireland. The potato 
blight, closing of the monasteries, social isolation, and the action of genetic 
drift all contributed to the genetic differentiation of the Travelers from the 
surrounding Irish settlements.
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0005
5
Black Caribs (Garifuna) of  
Central America
An Evolutionary Success Story
Introduction
In 1975, I was invited by Professor Thomas Weaver, colleague, friend, and 
former racquetball partner from the University of Pittsburgh, to give a pres­
entation in a symposium that he organized on causes of migration at the 
Applied Anthropology Congress in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. During 
this meeting, Weaver attended a reception for the officers of the Applied 
Anthropology Association, and he took me along. At that reception, I met 
Nancie Gonzalez, an outgoing officer of the organization. She was interested 
in the genetics of the Black Carib population of Livingston, Guatemala, and 
wondered if their ancestry and gene flow (admixture) could be reconstructed 
using genetic markers. I recounted some of our past research in Tlaxcala 
and explained that if the population agreed to participate and provide blood 
specimens, then we could estimate their African and Native American an­
cestry using an assortment of genetic markers, such as blood groups, pro­
tein variants, and immunoglobulins. Being highly interested in a genetic 
approach, Nancie Gonzalez invited me to accompany her to Livingston, 
Guatemala, where she planned to continue conducting field investigations 
that summer. After the Congress in Amsterdam, I went back to Lawrence 
and hustled some financial support from the University of Kansas to cover 
the costs of fieldwork in Livingston. The primary focus of these investigations 
was to estimate the Carib Native American contribution to the formation of 
the Black Carib gene pool (Crawford, 1983, 1984).
I was also able to convince one of my former Ph.D. students, Dr. Paul Lin, 
to accompany me to Livingston and to examine morphological variation 
in the admixed population using anthropometric measurements. During 
World War II, Paul Lin had survived the Japanese occupation of Taiwan and 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
63
was forced (as a teenager) to assist in the repair of the runway in Taipei, while 
being strafed by US fighter planes. During this time, Paul learned Japanese 
and later enjoyed needling me by addressing me as “anjin san.” In the 1980 
TV miniseries Shogun, a British navigator, Jon Blackthorne (played by 
Richard Chamberlain), was addressed as “anjin san” (boss) in feudal Japan. 
This TV program, based on James Clavell’s 1975 novel, popularized this term 
among TV viewers of the United States.
Participants
That summer, Paul Lin and I flew to Guatemala City and were met at the air­
port by Dr. Reynaldo Mattorell, one of my colleagues from the University of 
Washington. We stayed in his apartment in Guatemala City, and he kindly 
provided a tour of Antigua, a city in the Central Highlands of Guatemala. 
During the 18th century, this city of Antigua was partially destroyed by a hor­
rendous earthquake. Such earthquakes are frequent in Guatemala, because 
the country lies on a major fault zone that cuts across Guatemala and forms 
a tectonic boundary between the Caribbean and North American plates. 
Antigua’s colonial architecture had been destroyed by severe earthquakes, 
and only remnants of some churches and administrative buildings escaped 
destruction and have survived to this time.
During our stay in Guatemala City, Reynaldo Mattorell took Paul and 
me out for a drink to an impressive mansion. We were served drinks but 
noticed a series of Asian businessmen pairing off with attractive women 
and disappearing from view. Several of these women approached us and 
offered their services. At this point, it finally dawned on both of us that Rey 
had taken us to a high-​class Guatemalan brothel. We thanked these ladies 
profusely for their attention and kind offers but beat a rapid retreat from 
the premises.
The next day Paul Lin and I took a bus from Guatemala City to Puerto 
Barrios on the Caribbean coast of Guatemala, 297 kilometers northeast 
and the terminus of highway CA9. Puerto Barrios is the main port to the 
Caribbean seaport and a point of departure to Livingston. At that time, 
Puerto Barrios, consisting of 17,000 inhabitants, was a fascinating mix of 
Afro-​Guatemalans, Maya, and Afro-​Jamaicans. We boarded a boat in Puerto 
Barrios, which took us to Livingston, Guatemala, where Nancie Gonzalez 
met us and introduced us to the Garifuna population.
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
In Search of Human Evolution
History of the Black Carib Population
Archaeological evidence from approximately 8,000 years ago exists for 
the initial settlement of the Lesser Antilles. The original home of the Black 
Caribs, St. Vincent Island, was first colonized by Native Americans from 
the Orinoco River Basin of South America (Fitzpatrick, 2015). There is 
some controversy as to whether the earliest settlers of this region were 
Arawak speakers or Caribs from Central America. The initial settle­
ment of the Lesser Antilles followed a Carib invasion. European contact 
occurred in 1492. By 1503, the Spanish Crown had claimed St. Vincent 
Island. During the Atlantic Slave Trade, more than two million African 
slaves were forcibly relocated from the west coast of Africa to the Antilles 
(Davis and Knecht, 2010). By 1676, there were 3,000 Black Caribs (a mix­
ture of African and Carib) living on St. Vincent Island. The French initially 
colonized St. Vincent Island; however, this island was transferred to British 
control under the Treaty of Paris. Currently, Livingston has a population 
of 18,000 persons and has become a major tourist attraction. During the 
1790s, warfare for control of St. Vincent Island ensued between the British 
and the Black Caribs (Taylor, 2012). The British army prevailed and in 1797 
several thousand Black Caribs were deported to Baliceaux, a small island 
south of St. Vincent. However, this island had a scarcity of drinking water, 
and during their imprisonment at least 1,000 of the Black Caribs perished 
from disease, most likely yellow fever or typhus.
The Black Caribs originated on St. Vincent Island of the Lesser Antilles and 
were descendants of shipwrecked slaves and Native American inhabitants 
of the island. In the 17th century, some African slaves escaped from the 
slave center on the adjoining island, Barbados, resulting in a mixed Native 
American/​African population (see Figure 5.1). The Africans interbred with 
the local indigenous populations to create the Garifuna (Black Caribs) of St. 
Vincent Island. In 1797, after rebellion against the British colonizing forces, 
a total of 2,026 Garifuna were forcibly deported by the British Navy, first to a 
small island off the coast of St. Vincent, Baliceaux (see Figure 5.2) followed by 
relocation to Roatan, in the Bay Islands. From Roatan, the Garifuna migrants 
were transported by a Spanish fleet to the coast of Honduras, near Trujillo, 
and from there spread rapidly into Guatemala, British Honduras (Belize), 
Honduras, and Nicaragua. The Garifuna expanded numerically from fewer 
than 2,000 founders in 1800 (residing in two communities in Honduras) 
to more than 100,000 persons in 54 small horticultural and fishing villages 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
65
located along the coast of Central America (Davidson, 1984) (see Figure 5.3). 
This unique numerical expansion of the Garifuna was followed by multiple 
fissions of the population as result of (1) favorable environmental conditions, 
(2) availability of food resources, and (3) exceptionally high fertility during 
the first few generations (Brennan’s 1983 study of fertility among the Garifuna 
found on average each prolific woman had 10.9 children at the completion of 
her reproductive career), and (4) genetic adaptation to malaria, in the form 
of abnormal hemoglobin (sickle cell anemia and hemoglobin C), Duffy null, 
and G-​6-​PD deficiency; these were introduced into Central America prima­
rily by African slaves working the fruit plantations. There is considerable evi­
dence that the Coast of Central America had a relatively high incidence of 
malaria (Custodio and Huntsman, 1984). Judging from the absence of any 
genetic markers associated with resistance to malaria in Native Americans, 
the coastal populations of Central America experienced massive selection 
after African slaves brought Plasmodium organism (one cause of malaria) to 
the Americas.
Figure 5.1  Deportation of Garifuna from South America to the Bay Islands and 
to Honduras.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Davidson, W. V., “The Garifuna in Central America,” in 
Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics, ed. M. H. Crawford, © 1984, Springer.
 
 
 
 

66 
In Search of Human Evolution
The Garifuna were forcibly relocated by the British forces of occupation, 
first south to Balliceaux Island and then to the Bay Islands, off the coast of 
Honduras. The Spanish authorities had political control of the Bay Islands and 
did not expect the deposition of several thousand Garifuna to their shores. 
Most of these migrants were not interested in residing in the Bay Islands and 
convinced the Spanish authorities to transport approximately 2,000 Garifuna 
to the coast of Central America. Because of the introduction of malaria to 
the coast of Honduras, Native Americans migrated inland while the coast of 
Belize, Honduras, and Guatemala was available for the rapid colonization by 
the Garifuna. Figure 5.2 reconstructs the rapid movement of the migrants 
from two Honduran villages (where the Garifuna originally settled) to 54 
coastal communities distributed from Belize to Nicaragua.
This takeover of the coast of Central America by the Garifuna was 
facilitated by (1) exceptional fertility; (2) their resistance to malaria because 
of an African origin; and (3) a combination of horticultural and fishing 
culture that they brought from St. Vincent Island to the coast of Central 
America. The Garifuna population size increased dramatically from fewer 
than 2,000 individuals transported from Roatan in the Bay Islands to more 
than 100,000 distributed throughout Central America in the 1970s. In 1975, 
Livingston was a Black Carib (Garifuna) community of approximately 3,000 
Figure 5.2  A chronological schematic representation of the migration of the 
Garifuna from Roatan to Honduras, Guatemala, Belize, and Nicaragua.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Davidson, W. V., “The Garifuna in Central America,” in 
Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics, ed. M. H. Crawford, © 1984, Springer.
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
67
inhabitants located on the north Atlantic coast of Guatemala proximal to 
the Belizean border (Crawford et al., 2021). Currently, Livingston is a much 
larger population that attracts numerous tourists.
Figure 5.3 plots the broad coastal distribution of the Garifuna settlements, 
from Belize to Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua (Davison, 1984). 
Following the transplantation of 2,000 Black Caribs from the Bay Islands to 
two villages in Honduras, the founding populations underwent fission into 
54 settlements. The chronology of the migrations of Garifuna from Roatan to 
Honduras to Belize, Guatemala, and Nicaragua is shown in Figure 5.2, which 
also places the geographic locations of 54 Garifuna communities of Central 
America (see Figure 5.3).
Figure 5.3  Location of 54 Garifuna communities scattered throughout the 
coast of Central America.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Davidson, W. V., “The Garifuna in Central America,” in 
Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics, ed. M. H. Crawford, © 1984, Springer.
 
 
 
 

68 
In Search of Human Evolution
Field Research
Because of her longtime research experience in Livingston and polit­
ical connections in Guatemala, Nancie Gonzalez obtained the necessary 
permissions from the Guatemalan government and local officials (Gonzalez, 
1969). She also obtained individual verbal informed consent from 206 
Garifuna who participated in the study, with blood samples drawn by ven­
ipuncture at the meeting hall of the local Catholic Church. During the 
summer of 1975, a research team formed consisting of Nancie Gonzalez, Paul 
Lin, and me. I collected blood specimens, finger and palm prints, anthropo­
metric measurements, and genealogical/​demographic data from inhabitants 
of Livingston, Guatemala. The blood samples, preserved in vacutainers 
containing ACD and packed in ice, were shipped for analysis to the War 
Memorial Blood Bank of Minneapolis, Minnesota, where laboratory director 
Chad Leyshon genotyped an assortment of erythrocyte antigens, serum, 
red blood cell proteins, and enzymes (Crawford et al., 1981; Schanfield 
et al., 1984). Dr. Moses Schanfield at the Red Cross National Headquarters 
in Washington, DC, characterized immunoglobulin (GMs and KMs) 
haplotypes in Black Carib populations. The GM haplotypes tend to cluster in 
specific populations reflecting their past disease history, migration, and the 
effects of natural selection. Ancestry of the Livingston, Garifuna was deter­
mined, using blood markers and GMs (gamma globulins), with 70%–​75% of 
the genome coming from Africa, 22%–​29% Native American, and 1%–​2% of 
Spanish origin (Crawford, 1983).
Sickle Cell Polymorphism
Reflecting their African ancestry, 30 of the Garifuna from Livingston 
exhibited high genetic heterozygosity and genotype AS (sickle cell trait) 
at the hemoglobin locus. Only one individual exhibited sickle cell anemia 
(Hb SS); that is, two alleles for sickle cell. The Livingston population had 
an Hb S allelic frequency of 7%. In comparison, Firschein (1961), who had 
earlier sampled Garifuna for the presence of sickle cell genes, found an in­
cidence of 24% with the sickle cell trait (Hb AS). Similarly, Custodio and 
Huntsman (1984) detected that the incidence of the sickle cell trait varied in 
Honduras from 15% to 19%. Duffy null allele-​Fy (which provides resistance 
to Plasmodium vivax) ranges from 78% to 93% in Garifuna populations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
69
The genetic adaptation of the Garifuna to malaria added to their evolu­
tionary success during their rapid expansion along the coast of Central 
America. Native Americans residing along the coast were at a selective dis­
advantage competing for regions parasitized by the Plasmodium falcip­
arum and Plasmodium vivax organisms (Crawford et al., 2021). To avoid the 
consequences of malarial diseases, some of the indigenous Native American 
populations relocated from the coast of Central America into the highlands.
Firschein (1961) compared the reproductive rates of Garifuna women 
who were heterozygous for the sickle cell allele (Hb AS) with those homozy­
gous for the normal adult hemoglobin (Hb AA). On average, Hb AS females 
produced 6.17 children during their reproductive careers compared to 4.25 
livebirths for Hb AA women. Thus, in a malarial environment of coastal 
Belize, Hb AS females were 1.45 times more fertile than women with Hb AA. 
Firschein suggested that the Hb AA mothers experienced a greater number 
of pregnancy interruptions than the heterozygous mothers, resulting in 
loss of fetal lives with more males than females dying, reflected in the sec­
ondary sex ratio. However, Custodio and Huntsman (1984) found evidence 
that contradicted Firschein’s findings. They observed that Hb AA females 
were more fertile than the carrier females with averages of 6.14 versus 5.0 
livebirths for women 40 years of age and older. In addition, no statistically 
significant differences were observed in comparisons of the numbers of 
abortions and stillbirths between the Hb AA and Hb AS mothers. Research 
findings of Custodio and Huntsman (1984) contradict the earlier conclu­
sion by Firschein (1984) that natural selection maintains the hemoglobin 
polymorphism through the greater fertility of the heterozygous females. In 
Africa, the hemoglobin locus is maintained at polymorphic levels through 
differential survivorship of children, particularly up to six years of age.
Garifuna of Belize
The tantalizing evolutionary results from the Livingston field investigations 
prompted me to expand the Garifuna research to a more intensive program 
in Belize. In the Livingston portion of the study, our data collection was lim­
ited because of the collective expertise of the three team members in cultural 
anthropology, genetics, and anthropometrics. In 1976, the Belize research 
program expanded to include the following methods and health services: (1) 
the Schroeder et al. (1973) and Schroeder (1974) micro-​chromatographic 

70 
In Search of Human Evolution
method for identifying abnormal hemoglobin in the field without the avail­
ability of electricity (this permitted comparison of differential fertility of 
women with sickle cell versus those without any of the hemoglobinopathies); 
(2) application of anthropometric techniques to the assessment of growth and 
development of Garifuna children; (3) measurement of melanin concentra­
tion in the skin using reflectometry methods to assess admixture and gene
flow; (4) assessment of morphological variation, based on dental morphology 
and dermatoglyphics; and (5) provision of medical care and reconstruction
of individual medical histories by team physician Dr. David Hiebert. These
additions to the Belize field research were supported financially by several
universities through grants awarded to participating principal investigators.
This was a multifaceted project involving five institutions: University of 
Kansas, University of Kentucky, University at SUNY-​Albany, Wichita State 
University, and the National Science Foundation (NSF). Since funds were 
allocated to individual institutions, human experimentation approvals 
had to be obtained separately through four different Institutional Review 
Boards (IRBs). Nancie Gonzalez obtained governmental permissions from 
Dr. CLB Rogers, Minister of Health, and Dr. K. Pike, Chief Medical Officer 
of Belize.
Participants
The research team of the Belize project during the summer of 1976 consisted 
of the following:
1.	 Elizabeth Murray, a graduate student in anthropology at the University
of Kansas (KU), helped adjust a micro-​chromatographic method, which
could be adapted to the field because it was self-​contained and did not
require electricity to identify individuals with hemoglobinopathies. The
construction of this apparatus based on publications by Schroeder and
colleagues was under the guidance of KU biochemistry Professor Paul
Kitos. Murray completed a Ph.D. in the Department of Genetics at KU.
2.	 Dennis O’Rourke, with previous field experience in Saltillo, Mexico, made 
amalgam impressions and poured dental casts from Garifuna willing to
participate in this study (O’Rourke et al., 1984). O’Rourke completed his
Ph.D. at KU in 1980, went on to a distinguished career at the University of 
Utah, and is currently a distinguished professor of anthropology at KU.

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
71
3.	 Because of her duties as program director of anthropology at NSF, Nancie 
Gonzalez joined the research team several weeks after the start of the 
project. During Gonzalez’s absence, the cultural and genealogical in­
formation from Belizean Garifuna were collected by Loretta St. Louis, 
her former graduate student from Boston University (Gonzalez, 1984). 
After her term as program director at NSF, Gonzalez moved from Boston 
University and eventually was appointed the provost at the University of 
Maryland.
4.	 Highly experienced former Ph.D. student at KU, Professor Francis Lees, 
having conducted research in Cuanalan and Saltillo, Mexico, received a 
grant from SUNY-​Albany (his first academic position) for research in 
Belize. He was accompanied by research assistant Pamela J. Byard, an 
M.A. student from SUNY Albany. They jointly utilized two reflectometers 
(British EEL and US Photo-​volt) to measure melanin concentrations 
in research subjects and estimate admixture based on skin color in the 
Garifuna (Byard and Lees, 1981).
5.	 Professor Byard, having received her Ph.D. at KU, was appointed as­
sistant professor and subsequently received tenure in the Department 
of Pediatrics at Case Western Reserve University. She left academia in 
the 1990s.
6.	 Professor Paul Lin (University of Chicago and Wichita State University) 
had collected finger and palm prints in Livingston and Belize and 
compared them to Spanish and African populations (Lin et al., 1984). 
He also published anthropometric measurements for Black Caribs of St. 
Vincent Island and Livingston (Lin, 1984).
7.	 Anthropometric measurements of the Garifuna volunteers were taken by 
Dr. Eugenie C. Scott, at that time an assistant professor at the University 
of Kentucky. She joined the research team because she wanted to switch 
research focus from skeletal biology to human biology of contemporary 
populations. Even though she standardized her measurements with those 
of Paul Lin, attempts at replication failed and her anthropometric data were 
never published. The only anthropometric data for Black Caribs came from 
Livingston and St. Vincent Island by Paul Lin. In 1976, Scott was a visiting 
assistant professor at KU, but her contract was not renewed. She did not get 
tenure at the University of Kentucky, nor at the Universities of Colorado and 
California at San Francisco. She eventually found her niche as director of 
the National Center for Science Education, which primarily supports the 
teaching of evolution in high schools (Scott, 2004).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
In Search of Human Evolution
8.	 The late Dr. David Hiebert, a physician and radiologist from Lawrence, 
Kansas, administered medical assistance and diagnoses to local 
physicians at the health clinics in Belize. He also served as the team physi­
cian on St. Lawrence Island, Alaska, in 1977.
Because of the strife among the researchers during the Belize field 
investigations, followed by litigation, I now prefer to limit field research to 
smaller teams with a single principal investigator, responsible for the all 
aspects of the research. Several of the researchers received funds from their 
own universities and exhibited varying degrees of training, competence, and 
research sophistication.
St. Vincent Island
I obtained permission to conduct field investigations on St. Vincent Island 
(an island in the Lesser Antilles) from the chief medical officer for the is­
land, Dr. J. W. Kibukamusoke. He was Idi Amin Dadda’s personal physician 
but had to leave Uganda after he fell out of favor with the dictator. Amin, a 
military officer, was known as the butcher of Uganda. He was president of 
Uganda from 1971 to 1979 when he was deposed. However, he managed to 
avoid justice by escaping to Saudi Arabia, where he spent the remainder of 
his life.
The Black Caribs (Garifuna) originated on St. Vincent Island as a cul­
tural and biological amalgam between Native Americans (Arawak and 
Island Caribs) and African survivors of two sunken slave ships. A total of 
2,026 Black Caribs were deported by the British in 1797 from St. Vincent 
Island to Baliceaux Island, and those who survived this confinement were 
transported to the Bay Islands and finally to the coast of Central America. 
Currently the descendants of the Garifuna who escaped British deporta­
tion (206 individuals) live in three villages (Fancy, Owia, and Sandy Bay) 
on the northeast slope of the volcano La Soufriere on St. Vincent Island. 
In 1979, three of the Black Carib villages from St. Vincent Island were 
sampled by a small research team consisting of Paul Lin, Michael Crawford, 
and Janis Hutchinson (Lin et al., 1984). For her doctoral dissertation, Janis 
Hutchinson focused on the relationship between the proportion of African 
ancestry and risk of hypertension. Usually African Americans experi­
ence a higher incidence of hypertension than subjects with only European 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
73
ancestry (Rahman et al., 2008). Paul Lin measured anthropometrically 
a sample of the Black Caribs from the three communities. Several local 
nurses from the public health clinics served as phlebotomists. During the 
field research (April 1979), the volcano La Soufriere erupted, causing the 
relocation of some of the Garifuna from their villages of origin. An earlier 
devastating eruption in 1902 had killed 1,600 Caribs from the same three 
villages, namely Sandy Bay, Owia, and Fancy.
In the 1970s field seasons, we were limited to the use of protein varia­
tion, blood group markers, and immunoglobulin haplotypes. During the 
summers of 1975, 1976, and 1978, a total of 1,327 blood specimens were 
drawn from Garifuna and Creole volunteers from Belize, Guatemala, and 
St. Vincent Island (Crawford et al., 1984). Table 5.1 summarizes the number 
of participants in the initial anthropological genetic study of the Garifuna 
of Belize, Guatemala, and St. Vincent Island. The purpose of that study was 
to determine the evolutionary effects of forced migration on transplanted 
Garifuna populations (Crawford, 1983).
A summary of the blood genetic frequencies for Livingston, Stann 
Creek, Punta Gorda, Sandy Bay, Owia, and Limon is contained in a chapter 
of the volume on the Garifuna (Crawford, 1983). In addition to the allelic 
frequencies of an assortment of genetic markers, the proportion of African 
versus Native American admixture was calculated for six Garifuna popula­
tion using a total of 26 alleles. See Table 5.1 for admixture estimates.
Table 5.1  Proportion of African versus Native American Admixture in Black 
Carib Populations of Guatemala, Belize, and St. Vincent Island 
Carib Populations
African 
Native American
Livingston, Guatemala
75%
25%
Stann Creek, Belize
67%
33%
Punta Gorda, Belize
70%
30%
Sandy Bay, St. Vincent Island
46%
53%
Owia, St Vincent
61%
39%
Limon, Honduras
64%
36%
Note: Since St. Vincent Island was an amalgam of Caribs/​Arawak Native Americans, an average of 
gene frequencies of Arawak and Venezuelan Caribs was used to estimate ancestry.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H., Dykes, D. D., Skradsky, K., and Polesky, 
H., “Blood Group, Serum Protein, and Red Cell Enzyme Polymorphisms, and Admixture among 
the Black Caribs and Creoles of Central America and the Caribbean,” in Current Developments in 
Anthropological Genetics, ed. M. H. Crawford. © 1984, Springer.
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
In Search of Human Evolution
Based on the calculation of Bernstein’s admixture estimate of m, Livingston 
has the highest proportion of African genes, while Sandy Bay (St. Vincent 
Island) has the lowest, reflecting the history of their founding (Crawford, 1984). 
The founders of Sandy Bay, who escaped deportation to Central America, had 
the lowest African and highest Native American ancestry. In the use of genetic 
markers for the estimates of admixture, immunoglobulins (Gm and Km) and 
loci utilizing isoelectric focusing (IEF) were the most informative.
Quantitative Variation
Skin color variation (melanin concentration) was assessed among the 
Garifuna and Creoles of Belize, through skin reflectometry by Byard and 
Lees (1981). Creoles exhibit less melanin in the skin, and their melanin con­
centration was more variable than among the Garifuna (Byard and Lees, 
1983). There was a concordance of admixture estimates based on skin color 
and blood genetic markers.
Black Carib and Creole populations were also compared morphologically 
using dental traits, odontometric traits, and odontological traits (Baume and 
Crawford, 1980; O’Rourke et al., 1984). Although Garifuna could not be dis­
tinguished from Creoles on the basis of discrete dental traits, odontometrics 
revealed significant differences between these two ethnic groups.
R-​matrix analyses, based on finger and palm prints, reconstructed the 
genetic structure of the Garifuna populations (Lin et al., 1984). Significant 
correlations were observed between dermatoglyphics and geography—​
r =​ 0.64 for males and 0.35 for females—​reflecting the patterns of gender 
influencing migration and population fission.
This research program on the Garifuna also examined several genetic epi­
demiological problems:
	 1.	 The relationship between African ancestry and essential hyperten­
sion was explored. In contrast to several earlier studies, Hutchinson 
and Crawford (1981) failed to demonstrate the expected greater risk 
of hypertension in individuals with high African ancestry. However, a 
statistical association was noted between body dimensions and blood 
pressure (Hutchinson et al., 1983).
	 2.	 In a collaborative study with NCI, field investigations on St. Vincent 
Island demonstrated a high incidence of antibodies against human T-​cell 
leukemia/​lymphoma virus that was similar to HTLV in American Blacks 
and identical to Japanese adult T-​cell leukemia (ATL; Blattner et al., 1982).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
75
DNA Results
During the 1980s and 1990s with the methodological developments in DNA 
extraction, characterization of DNA haplotypes and sequencing permitted 
much finer grained analyses of population differentiation and a more infor­
mative assessment of evolutionary change (Rubicz et al., 2007). Starting in 
2005, a new series of follow-​up investigations on Garifuna populations were 
initiated by faculty and graduate students from the Laboratory of Biological 
Anthropology (LBA) University of Kansas. See Table 5.1 for a summary of 
the samples collected in the Caribs of Dominica and Garifuna populations 
of Belize, Honduras, and Roatan in the Bay Islands. In addition, Noel Boaz 
(a physician, biological anthropologist, and faculty member of the Medical 
School at Dominica) and I characterized a population of Caribs from the Carib 
Reserve of Dominica. Dr. Boaz obtained signed informed consent, provided 
medical care, and collected blood through venipuncture from volunteers.
Resampling of St. Vincent and Belize
Christine Phillips-​Krawczak (2012), at that time a doctoral candidate in 
human genetics at KU, conducted a follow-​up study of the effects of migra­
tion on the Black Carib populations of Central America. She sampled the 
descendants of the original population of the Garifuna on St. Vincent Island 
and populations of Belize (Phillips-​Krawczak, 2012). In addition, Kristine 
Beaty, a graduate student from the LBA, University of Kansas, accompanied 
a team of physicians from a medical school in Honduras and explored ge­
netic variation and structure of three villages in Honduras plus the popula­
tion of Roatan in the Bay Islands (Beaty, 2017).
Dominica
Dominica is the most northerly of the Windward Islands of the Lesser 
Antilles (see Figure 5.1). This island, first settled by Arawak-​speaking 
Native Americans, was followed by the later expansion of Caribs from South 
America and absorption with gradual displacement of the Arawaks from the 
1200s to the time of European contact. Due to warfare and newly introduced 
diseases, most of the Island Caribs did not survive contact with the European 
colonizers. Remnants of Carib-​Arawak populations remain on Dominica. In 
the 1960 census, the total population of Dominica was 59,916 individuals, 

76 
In Search of Human Evolution
of whom 39,575 were of African origin, 19,606 were “mixed,” and 251 had 
European ancestry. In 2013, the total population of the island of Dominica 
was 73,286 with 2.9% being of Carib origin.
In the 18th century, a Carib Reserve was established in the northeastern 
region of Dominica, in an inaccessible, steep, volcanic/​forested region. 
The population size of the Carib Reserve, enumerated by the 1960 census, 
was 1,136 persons. The current estimate of the total Carib population of 
Dominica is 2,200, almost double the 1960 census size.
Results
In 2006, the Carib Reserve on Dominica was sampled by a research team 
consisting of Drs. Noel Boaz and Michael Crawford. Boaz, a biological an­
thropologist and physician trained in Dominica, was a faculty member of the 
Medical School on the island. He obtained written informed consent from 
71 individuals who agreed to participate in the study. Kristin Beaty, research 
assistant at the LBA, following standard procedures, extracted DNA from the 
blood samples and analyzed them for genetic markers.
Mitochondrial DNA
DNA analyses included uniparental markers, mitochondria, and Y-​
chromosome. Mitochondria (small organelles in the cytoplasm of eukary­
otic cells) originate in the mother’s ova and are fertilized by sperm containing 
the Y-​chromosome. Lynn Sagan (Margulis) (1967) suggested that the 
mitochondria descended from a symbiotic bacterium that found its way into 
an early ancestor of the eukaryotic cell. These ideas were labeled the endo­
symbiotic theory. The adaptive function of mitochondria is to provide cel­
lular energy through respiration and oxidation. Human mitochondrial DNA 
are double-​stranded (16,569 base pairs) circular DNA. It is highly conserv­
ative with no introns, and 90% is involved in coding. The coding region 
contains 37 exons (22 transfer RNAs, 13 proteins, two other RNAs). MtDNA 
is altered only by mutations and since it is uniparental, there is no recombi­
nation. The coding region of mtDNA contains a rapid mutation rate that is 
5 to 10 times faster than nuclear DNA, at 0.07 × 10–​6 substitutions per sites/​
year (Pakendorf and Stoneking, 2005). The hypervariable region (HVR) of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
77
the D-​loop of mtDNA is located between regions that code for the t-​RNA-​
proline and t-​RNA-​phenylalanine genes. The D-​loop consists of three HVR 
regions—​1, 2, and 3, each approximately 300 to 400 base pairs. The HVR 
sections of mtDNA display the greatest amount of variation and are usually 
first sequenced in most evolutionary studies.
Y-​Chromosome Markers
The Y-​chromosome is paternally inherited and can be used as an evolu­
tionary marker for patrilineal descent. In humans, the Y-​chromosome is 
approximately 60 million bases long, with 95% nonrecombining (NRY) 
Tilford et al., 2001. This chromosome is often characterized by single nu­
cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and short tandem repeats (STRs). Five 
major haplogroups (R, I, J, G, and E) have been identified worldwide, 
with R1b being the most common marker. Y-​chromosome STR mutation 
rate per marker generation is faster than the mutation rate in HVR 
of mtDNA.
Table 5.2  Sample sizes of Garifuna communities sampled in the study
Samples
Island/​Country
Village
N
Previous Fieldwork
St. Vincent Island, 2004
Phillips-​Krawczak (CPK)
Belize, CPK, 2005
Dominica, MHC, 2005
Fancy
Sandy Bay
Owia
Greggs
Punta Gorda
Barranco
Kalinago Reserve
24
34
22
20
50
27
71
Recent Fieldwork
Honduras Coast, 2014
K Beaty
Roatan, 2014
Cristales
Rio Negro
Santa Fe
Punta Gorda
44
76
60
132
Y-​STR data
Honduras Coast
Dr. Matamoros
Iriona
Bajaamr
Corozal
7
26
20
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H., “The Anthropological Genetics of 
the Black Caribs (Garifuna) of Central America,” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 26: 161–​192. 
© 1983, Wiley.
 
 
 
 
 

78 
In Search of Human Evolution
The analyses of Garifuna genomes included mtDNA HVS I and II 
sequences (81–​400 and 16050–​16400) and RFLPs for subtypes, NRY SNPs 
(M9, DYS199, YAP, 92R7, and SRY), and eight STR loci. The majority of the 
mitochondrial DNA haplogroups—​C1 at 9% A2 (55%)—​were of Native 
American origin. The remaining mtDNA haplogroups were of African or­
igin: L1b1, 4%; L1c, 6%; L2a, 4%; L2b, 2%; L3, 6%; and L3e, 9%.
Molecular studies of mtDNA in Dominica first began in 2006, with field 
investigations by M. H. Crawford and N. Boaz on the Kalinago Carib Reserve 
and analyzed by Phillips-​Krawyczak, 2012 at the LBA. This was an early at­
tempt to reconstruct the genetic structure of Carib ancestral populations. 
The Native American contribution to the currently admixed population 
of the Reserve is 67%, based largely upon the presence of Native American 
haplogroup C (57%) and A2 (10%). In contrast, Benn Torres et al (2015) 
found that the majority of individuals who they sampled on the Island of 
Dominica had African mitochondrial DNA haplogroups, with L being the 
most common. They reported that in Dominica only 28% of the lineages 
were of Native American, with a small founding population, high nucleotide 
diversity indicative of high level of admixture. Benn-​Torres et al (2015) also 
reported, based on mtDNA, an extremely high African ancestry of 63%, for 
St. Vincent Island Black Caribs.
The study by members of the LBA reconstructed the genetic structure of 
Carib ancestral populations. The Native American contribution to the cur­
rently admixed population of the Dominica Reserve is 67%, based largely 
upon the presence of mtDNA haplogroups C (57%) and A2 (10%). In con­
trast, Benn Torres et al (2013) found that the majority of individuals who they 
sampled on Dominica exhibited African mtDNA haplogroups, with L being 
the most common. They reported that in Dominica only 28% of the lineages 
were of Native American, with a small founding population, high nucleotide 
diversity indicative of high level of admixture. Ben Torres et al. (2015) also 
reported, based on mtDNA, an extremely high African ancestry, 63%, for 
St. Vincent Island Black Caribs. Why the huge differences and conclusions 
in the two studies of the same islands? These studies indicate that admixture 
estimates are determined by who was sampled in the population, their geo­
graphic locations and what genetic markers are used. These discrepancies are 
due to sampling procedures: Torres study failed to characterize population 
substructure of the island populations. The LBA samples were focused on the 
presence of Native American subpopulations on Dominica (Carib Reserve) 
and St. Vincent (Carib villages on the slope of the volcano). Historical events 

Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
79
play major roles in explaining island population structure and the distribu­
tion of marker genes.
Harvey et al. (1969) conducted the initial study on the genetics of the 
Caribs of Dominica. Blood samples from 126 volunteers were tested for an 
array of blood group antigens and a series of red cell enzymes and serum 
proteins. These samples resembled Native Americans with O blood group 
frequencies of 96%, Duffy (Fy) with a frequency of only 21%, and hemo­
globin S at 2%. They concluded that the population had experienced some 
African gene flow but at low frequencies.
Chris Phillips-​Krawczak genotyped the mtDNA haplotypes for her 
Ph.D. dissertation. The characterization of island populations is a function 
of sample sizes and geographic locations. St. Vincent Island and Dominica 
Caribs display considerable Native American ancestry with the considerable 
presence of A2 and C1 (see Figure 5.4). In contrast, the mtDNA haplotypes 
in Belize and Honduras primarily exhibit African mtDNA haplotypes L0–​
L3 with a miniscule incidence of Native American haplotypes—​A2 and CI. 
It is likely the Black Carib populations expanded into Central America and 
admixed with Creoles.
Table 5.3 summarizes the frequencies of mtDNA haplotypes in populations 
of St. Vincent and Dominica and surprisingly shows vast differences in 
frequencies of the same populations. Specifically, the Torres group observed 
Table 5.3  Admixture Estimates of Garifuna populations
Population
African
European
Native American
St. Vincent Island
Caribs
Sandy Bay
Owia
41.1%
57.9
16.7%
9.8
42.2
32.3
Belize Garifuna
Stann Creek
Livingstone
79.9
70.0
17.1
1.0
7.4
29.0
Creoles
Belize City
74.7
16.7
8.6
Note: CPK is Christine Phillips-​Krawczak; MHC is Michael H. Crawford; and K Beaty is 
Kristine Beaty.
Source: Adapted with permission from Beaty, K. G., Forced Migration and Population Expansion: The 
Genetic Story of the Garifuna. Ph.D. diss., University of Kansas, 2017.
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
In Search of Human Evolution
little Native American ancestry in both Dominica (28%) and St. Vincent Island 
(3.6%). In contrast, the LBA group found 60% Native American ancestry on 
Dominica and 43.4% on St. Vincent. The Black Caribs on St. Vincent Island 
are located in three villages on the northern slopes of the volcano. Samples of 
populations other than Sandy Bay, Owia, and Fancy yielded a Creole popula­
tion. Similarly, samples obtained from Dominica in regions other than in the 
Reserve did not yield Black Carib frequencies but those of Creole populations.
Roatan
For her dissertation research, in 2016, Kristin Beaty joined a team from the 
Honduran Medical School led by Dr. Hernandez. The Honduran team sampled 
three communities in Honduras, where the original community from Roatan 
had been transplanted. This preliminary study was followed the following year by 
a sample from Roatan in the Bay Islands (Herrera-Paz and Mattamoros, 2010).
Figure 5.4 compares the frequencies of mtDNA haplotypes of Garifuna 
populations with those from Africa and the Americas. The two island Carib 
populations, St. Vincent and Dominica, cluster closely and reflect evolu­
tionary history and migration. A more recent study of the population struc­
ture of Dominica using molecular markers measured genetic ancestry and 
population structure in rural populations of Dominica (Keith et al., 2021).
Conclusion
The molecular genetic data reveal that there was a reduction in genetic diver­
sity due to a series of population bottlenecks (Beaty, 2017). This reduction 
Table 5.4  Comparison of Admixture Estimates Based on mtDNA by Torres 
et al. and the KU Group for Dominica and St. Vincent
Dominica
St. Vincent
Parental Populations
LBA
Torres et al.
LBA
Torres et al.
Native American
60%
28%
43.4%
3.6%
African
40%
72%
56.7%
92.7%
European
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 5.4  Comparison of mtDNA haplotype frequencies in St. Vincent, Belize, and Honduras Garifuna with those of Dominica.
Source: Adapted with permission from Beaty, K. G., Forced Migration and Population Expansion: The Genetic Story of the Garifuna. Ph.D. diss., University of 
Kansas, 2017.
  
 
newgenrtpdf

82 
In Search of Human Evolution
took place despite the gene flow from surrounding populations. St. Vincent 
Island exhibits the highest African mtDNA variation with 11 subtypes of L 
versus 7 subtypes in Belize and 6 in Dominica. These subtypes of L haplotypes 
reflect a geographically broader African origin in St. Vincent Island. The 
hypothesized origin of the African component was from the wreckage of a 
slave ship containing a heterogeneous population of slaves. On a cautionary 
note, island populations are often not homogeneous genetically and are 
structured into subpopulations and enclaves.
After arrival in Central America, the Garifuna modified their family 
residence patterns from patrilocality to matrilocality. This was an adap­
tation to the social environment and the patterns of male work migration. 
The Garifuna population is an example of evolutionary success, roughly 
increasing from fewer than 2,000 to 300,000 and from two villages in 
Honduras to 54 communities along the Caribbean coast (see Figure 5.3). 
These communities experienced gene flow from outside groups, such as 
Creoles and Spanish and Garifuna villages.
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0006
6
Biological Aging and Population Structure 
of Midwest Mennonites
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale
—​William Shakespeare, As You Like It
This research program on the genetics of biological aging had its roots in 
1975, when I received a telephone call from Professor Solomon Katz, a col­
league from the University of Pennsylvania. Knowing that I was a trained 
geneticist who was fluent in Russian, Katz wanted to know if I would be in­
terested in serving as a consultant to a study of longevity among the so-​called 
yogurt-​eating dolgozhitili (long-​living) of Abkhasia and Georgia of the USSR. 
At that time, the literature was replete with examples of claimed longevity on a 
worldwide basis. Alexander Leaf championed extreme longevity in Georgia, 
Russia; in Hunza, Pakistan; and in the Karakoran Mountains (Leaf, 1973). 
Earlier, George Coggeshall described a longevity haven in Vilcabamba, 
Ecuador. However, Mazess and Forman (1979) on the bases of demographic 
data challenged the claimed extreme longevity of the inhabitants of this 
Ecuadoran valley. The 1970 census of Abkhasia listed 12% of the population 
as centenarians. In the 1970s, there was considerable controversy on the ex­
istence of hidden valleys with exceptional longevity attributed to genetics or 
environmental factors such as low-​calorie diets, consumption of yogurt, and 
physical activity.
The Research Institute for the Study of Man (RISM) at Columbia University 
was planning to develop a research program in regions of the Soviet Union 
where there were claims of exceptional longevity and an apparent slowdown 
of the aging process. While in their 90s and 100s, Abkhasian men were 
reputed to be so spry as to be able to dance, to drink wine and vodka, and at 
such advanced ages to “chase women” (see Figure 6.1). Together with RISM 
researchers, Drs. Vera Rubin (Director of RISM) and Sula Benet (author of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84 
In Search of Human Evolution
popular volume, How to Live to Be 100; Benet, 1976), I helped outline a bio-​
cultural research program for a study of longevity among the populations 
of Abkhasia and Georgia. The International Research and Exchange Board 
(IREX) sent the three of us (Sula Benet, Vera Rubin, and me) to Moscow, 
Kiev, Tbilisi, and Sukhumi to develop an international collaborative program 
on bio-​cultural dimensions of the aging process. An agreement for a joint 
US-​USSR research program was signed by the researchers from the Institute 
of Anthropology in Moscow and US researchers from RISM. We first applied 
for financial support from the National Institute of Aging (NIA) for a pilot 
study to standardize methodologies for the assessment of biological aging. 
The pilot study was funded (by NIA) through RISM and preliminary field­
work began in Abkhasia.
A pilot study in Abkhasia on the dolgozhitili, using an anamnestic method 
(recalling to mind), revealed that there was significant exaggeration of the 
claimed ages. Each purportedly longevous person was instructed to identify 
the main stages of his or her life history and to connect them with specific 
dated events—​such as the great blizzard of 1911. The purported ages were 
verified in only 38% from the 115 dolgozhitili interviewed. When the mor­
tality curves were corrected for age exaggeration and differential emigration 
Figure 6.1  Photograph of three dolgozhitili (long living) from Abkhasia, USSR, 
all claiming to be over 90 years of age.
 
 
 
 
 

Midwest Mennonites 
85
of the young added to the equation, it became evident that the survivorship 
patterns in Abkhasia did not differ significantly from those observed in 
Miami, Florida, populated by retirees from northern cities. This exaggera­
tion of age was one strategy Abkhasian males used to avoid Russian military 
service. In addition, the elderly of Georgia and Abkhasia are highly revered 
and specially honored by their respective societies. This same pattern of age 
exaggeration occurred in another hidden valley of longevity, Vilcabamba, 
Ecuador (Mazess and Forman, 1979).
Midwestern Mennonites
Since our pilot study helped drain Ponce de Leon’s imaginary fountain of 
youth, I decided to refocus my research efforts from the populations of the 
USSR to the nearby Mennonites of Kansas and Nebraska (Crawford and 
Rogers, 1982). The Mennonites exhibit greater life expectancy and longevity 
than the surrounding farming communities of Kansas (82 years of age for 
males and 86 for females) because they do not smoke or drink alcohol, lead 
an active agricultural lifestyle, and have a closed social support system. In ad­
dition, the Mennonites of Kansas and Nebraska have exceptionally accurate 
birth and death records, have large extended families, and are enthusiastic 
about learning about their origins and the genetics of biological aging.
General Conference (Dyck, 1993) and Haldeman Mennonites reside 
primarily in Goessel and Meridian in central Kansas (see Figure 6.2). They 
constitute a well-​defined religious isolate group with the following charac­
teristics: (1) they have a unique immigration history; (2) they have extensive 
written genealogies; (3) they have complex, extended family relationships 
permitting the study of heritability and linkage of biological aging; (4) they 
have genetic, environmental, and cultural homogeneity, which decreases the 
background noise for the polygenic study of biological aging; and (5) they do 
not smoke or drink alcohol and thus have an average life expectancy greater 
than those in surrounding populations.
Mennonites are an Anabaptist group that participated in the European 
Reformation of the 16th century (Rogers, 1984). A number of sects 
arose in Switzerland, Germany, and the Netherlands, who believed in 
adult baptism, the separation of church and state, and pacifism. They 
followed charismatic leaders, such as (1) Menno Simons, a Dutch-​North 
German branch (became known as the Mennonites) and (2) Jacob Hutter, 

86 
In Search of Human Evolution
an Austrian branch of Anabaptists (known as Hutterites or Hutterian 
Bretheren). (3) Jacob Amman’s followers were from Switzerland and were 
designated Amish or Amish Mennonites. Local authorities viewed the 
Anabaptists as a threat to the social order and began persecuting them. 
This resulted in the migration of the Anabaptist groups first moving to 
underdeveloped regions of Eastern Europe and the Americas. Dutch 
and German Mennonites migrated to Polish-​controlled regions around 
Danzig (see Figure 6.3). In 1699, 18 families formed the Przechova church 
and relocated in 1821 to the Ukraine near the Molotschna River (Rogers 
Figure 6.2  Map locating the six Mennonite communities from Kansas and 
Nebraska that participated in the study of genetics and biological aging.
Source: Adapted with permission from Beaty, K. G., Mosher, M. J., Crawford, M. H., and Melton, 
P., “Paternal Genetic Structure in Contemporary Mennonite Communities from the American 
Midwest,” Human Biology 88(2): 95–​108. © 2016, The Authors.

Midwest Mennonites 
87
and Rogers, 2000). This congregation adopted the name Alexanderwohl, 
in honor of the Russian czar (see Figure 6.4). Subsequent changes in eco­
nomic conditions and shifts in Russian governmental polices concerning 
military exemptions prompted the Alexanderwohl Mennonites to pur­
chase land from the Santa Fe railroad and migrate to the United States 
in 1874. Upon arrival in the United States, the Alexanderwohl community 
split into two separate congregations, one in Henderson, Nebraska, 
and one in Goessel, Kansas. A separate congregation (Church of God in 
Christ) of Mennonites, founded in Ohio in 1858 by John Holderman, 
was organized in Kansas. This heterogeneous community, consisting 
of Pennsylvania Dutch, German Mennonites, and Amish, formed the 
Meridian community in Kansas. This Holderman Mennonite community 
further split into Garden View and Lone Tree.
Figure 6.3  Movement of Mennonites from Western Europe to form the 
Molotchina colony in the Crimea.
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), Different Seasons: Biological Aging Among the 
Mennonites of the Midwestern United States, p. 39, fig. 4.9. © 2000, The Author.
 
 
 

88 
In Search of Human Evolution
Population History
The Kansas Mennonites are descendants of 191 families who migrated from 
Europe in 1874. All of the Mennonite populations originated as part of the 16th–​
17th-​century Anabaptist movement in the Netherlands, Northern Germany, 
and Switzerland (see Figure 6.4). They first migrated to Central Europe and 
then to Crimea, Ukraine, where the population was geographically isolated 
and exhibited a high inbreeding coefficient (Crawford, 1980). The Mennonites 
were enticed by the Russian czar to settle in Crimea with promises of exemption 
from military service and the availability of land. However, the succeeding 
czar revoked these privileges. The Mennonites sent expeditionary groups to the 
United States and purchased land from the Santa Fe railroad. Population fission 
was along familial lines after migration to the United States in 1874 with 
the General Conference Alexanderwohl community dividing into two groups, 
Goessel in Kansas and Henderson in Nebraska (Figure 6.4). The General 
Conference Mennonites, formed in 1860, is an association of US and Canadian 
conferences sharing goals of education and mission work (Dyck, 1993).
Western Europe
Russia
United States
Tabor 1909
Goessel 1920
Evangelical
Bethesda
Meridan
Henderson MB
Church of God
in Christ
Mennonites
Bethesda
(Nebraska)
1874
Alexanderwohl
(Kansas)
Alexanderwohl
Swiss-Volhynian “Amish”
Netherlands
Galicians
West Prussians
Ostorogers
Mennonite Brethern
Alexanderwohl
Figure 6.4  Mennonite phylogenetic tree, based on historical reconstructions. It 
contains the ethnic contributions from Western Europe to the Alexanderwohl 
congregations.
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), Different Seasons: Biological Aging Among the 
Mennonites of the Midwestern United States, p. 37, fig. 4.5. © 2000, The Author.
 
 
 
 
 

Midwest Mennonites 
89
Meridian was the first Halderman community that we sampled in 1981. 
Lone Tree and Garden View Mennonites were offshoots from the original 
Meridian community, much more heterogeneous genetically, formed by 
the followers of charismatic leader Halderman. His converts included both 
Mennonites and Amish (see Figure 6.5). The Halderman offshoots, Lone 
Tree and Garden View, were sampled in 2004.
In 1979, the NIA (AG 01646) funded a three-​year research program on 
the genetics of biological aging of a transplanted Mennonite community, 
who emigrated from Crimea to Kansas and Nebraska. The leaders of the 
Molotschna colony decided to emigrate from Crimea because land availa­
bility became scarce and the Russian government revoked their exemption 
from military service (Rogers and Rogers, 2000). The Mennonites of Gossel 
100
200
Dominant hand strength
300
400
500
600
700
0.40
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85+
Age cohort
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85+
Age cohort
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85+
Age cohort
Simple reaction time
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.10
Movement time
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
50
100
Trunk ﬂexibility
150
200
250
300
600
650
Hand steadiness
700
750
800
850
50
100
Hand-eye coordination
150
200
***
***
*
**
**
**
*
***
***
*
*** *** ***
***
***
***
***
***
**
*
Figure 6.5  Changes in neuromuscular performance as a function of age. Values 
for males are shown as squares; females as circles.
Source: Adapted with permission from Devor, E. J., Crawford, M. H., and Osness, W., 
“Neuromuscular Performance in a Kansas Mennonite Community: Age and Sex Effects in 
Performance,” Human Biology 57(2): 202, fig. 1. © 1985, The Authors.

90 
In Search of Human Evolution
and Henderson are the descendants of the 1,063 passengers who arrived in 
the United States in 1874. A total of 191 founding families were members of 
the original Alexanderwohl church from the Molotschna colony of Crimea, 
Russia. Meridian Mennonites have a more complex ancestry from the two 
Alexanderwohl communities with converts from several Mennonite and 
Amish communities. In addition to the study of genetics of biological aging, 
the transplanted Mennonite community underwent initial fission into two 
populations, one in Goessel, Kansas, and another in Henderson, Nebraska. 
The Goessel Mennonites planted winter wheat that they brought from the 
Crimea, while the Henderson Mennonites planted corn twice a year and be­
came economically well-​off. A genetic comparison of the two subdivisions of 
the original Alexanderwohl congregation provided an opportunity to assess 
how historical events (such as fission and familial founding) influence the 
genetic drift of small populations (Crawford, 2000).
Methodology
Sample Sizes
Maximum sample sizes of volunteers from the three Mennonite communities 
varied from 616 in Goessel and 549 for Henderson and 87 from Meridian. 
Goessel and Henderson were larger communities, and the percentage of 
participants of the total communities varied from 47% to 51% (see Table 6.1). 
Meridian was the smallest community but had the highest percentage of 54% 
participants in the study. Since this was a study of biological aging, all of the 
participants were adults.
Table 6.1  Maximum Sample Sizes of the Volunteers from the Three Mennonite 
Communities
Population
Sample Size (N)
% of Total Community
Goessel
Meridian
Henderson
Total
616
87
549
1,252
47
54
51
Source: Reproduced from Crawford, M. H. (Ed.), Different Seasons: Biological Aging among the 
Mennonites of the Midwestern United States. © 2000, The Author.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Midwest Mennonites 
91
Participants
Field investigations in Goessel and Meridian, Kansas, began during the 
winter of 1979–​1980 (see Table 6.1). In 1979, the research team set up a clinic 
at the Alexanderwohl church meeting hall in Goessel, Kansas. This research 
constituted a partnership between the Mennonite communities and the 
University of Kansas.
Several Mennonites from the Goessel community were members of the 
research team, namely: two physicians—​Drs. Peter Hiebert and his son and 
radiologist David Hiebert, cultural anthropologist Professor John Janzen, 
and psychologist Douglas Penner. This team also included researchers from 
Lawrence, the University of Kansas, and Cornell University:
1.	 Dr. Ralph Reed (internist MD from Lawrence)
2.	 Mennonite nurses from Central Kansas
3.	 Four University of Kansas (KU) exercise physiologists (Professor Wayne
Osness and three of his graduate students)
4.	 Donald Stull, Jeff Longhofer, and Jerry Floerish (cultural anthropologists). 
Longhofer (1986) wrote his dissertation on the relationship between land, 
household and community.
5.	 KU sociologist Dr. Jill Quadagno
6.	 Graduate student from Cornell University, Joanne McGreevy (student of
collaborating colleague, Dr. Jere Haas)
7.	 Social psychologist from the Department of Psychology, University of
Kansas, Dr. William Bowerman
8.	 Five biological anthropologists also participated in the study, three fac­
ulty members—​Tibor Koertvelyessy (visiting professor from Ohio
University), Paul Lin (from Wichita State University), and Michael
Crawford. Tibor Koertvelyessy tested the Mennonite participants for
taste variation of PTC (Koertvelyessy et al., 1982). They did observe a
low-​level correlation between biological aging and loss of taste percep­
tion. However, this relationship was not due to the aging process of the
taste buds but is most likely the result of smoking.
9.	 Two KU graduate research assistants from the Department of
Anthropology, Laurine Oberdieck Rogers and Janis Hutchinson, played
prominent roles in the organization of the study and data collection.
The three physicians, through medical examinations and interviews,
reconstructed the health histories of the participants, while the exercise

92 
In Search of Human Evolution
physiologists measured the neuromuscular, pulmonary function of all 
participating Mennonites. The cultural anthropologists collected genea­
logical and demographic data from the three communities.
Anthropometric measurements were individually taken by three members 
of the research team, namely Paul Lin, Laurine Oberdieck Rogers, and 
Joanne McGreevy (Cornell University). However, to minimize interobserver 
error, each investigator only measured the specific body dimensions in all of 
the research subjects. One researcher measured the head, another measured 
linear body dimensions, and a third focused on circumferential measures 
and weight.
Field investigations were limited to the winter months, when the 
Mennonite farmers were freed from time-​consuming agricultural activities. 
Field investigations on such a massive scale were made possible by the su­
perb administrative skills of research assistant, Laurine Oberdieck Rogers, 
who coordinated the scheduling, transportation, accommodations, and 
meals (prepared by the church members) for all researchers (Crawford and 
Rogers, 1982). Each researcher was assigned to his/​her own station (work­
table) plus an assistant who recorded the data/​measurements. The clinics 
held at the meeting hall, adjacent to the church, were arranged into num­
bered “stations,” so that each volunteer was met at the door and after giving 
informed consent was escorted to the appropriate and available station. In 
this way, there was a continuous flow of research subjects moving rapidly 
through the clinic.
Because of the size, diverse specialties of the research team, and the cooper­
ation and interest of the Mennonite communities, a total of 1,252 Mennonites 
from three communities participated in this research (see Table 5.3). This 
sample represented large proportions of the total sizes of the communities; 
47% of Goessel residents participated, 54% volunteered from the smaller, 
more heterogeneous Meridian community, and 51% of the Henderson com­
munity volunteered for the study. Since this research program focused on 
biological aging, only adults were included in the sample. The following neu­
romuscular performances were assessed: motor time (MT), simple reaction 
time (SRT), hand-​eye coordination (HEC), hand steadiness time (HST), 
dominant grip strength (DGS), and trunk flexibility (TF). Professor Wayne 
Osness and his graduate students from the Exercise Physiology Department 
at KU also measured pulmonary functions (FVC and FEV1.0). Physicians 
assessed the health status of the Mennonites and measured heart rates (HR), 
 
 
 
 

Midwest Mennonites 
93
systolic blood pressure (SBP), and diastolic blood pressure (DP) (Crawford, 
2005). A total of 35 anthropometric traits were measured by three of the bi­
ological anthropologists, each measuring either the linear traits (which had 
the highest transmissibility), cranial measures, or circumferential traits 
(most affected by the environment). Blood specimens, drawn by nurses, 
were analyzed for 35 blood chemistry markers, ranging from total choles­
terol to glucose levels to potassium levels (see Uttley and Crawford, 2000, 
for a complete listing of the blood chemistry panel). Lisa Martin focused her 
M.A. thesis on genetic/​environmental interaction of thyroxine variation in
Mennonite populations (Martin, 1993).
Neuromuscular and Pulmonary Traits
The neuromuscular and pulmonary traits measured in this study are all a 
function of the chronological age. As an individual ages, his/​her pulmo­
nary function diminishes, strength deteriorates, and reaction/​motor times 
increase (see Figure 6.5). Morphologically, body mass index (BMI) and 
most circumferential measures increase with age (Devor et al., 1985). Only 
hand steadiness fails to show sex difference in mean performance levels. 
The strongest mean difference is on the dominant hand strength, in which 
average grip pressure in males is more than one and one half times greater 
than in females. However, females exhibit greater trunk flexibility than males 
(Devor, 2000). In addition, most of the blood chemistries varied as a func­
tion of age. A linear or curvilinear decline in neuromuscular and pulmonary 
performance was observed as a function of age beginning at 50 years and de­
clining rapidly until death (see Figure 6.5).
Longevity as measured as a phenotype in years contains limited infor­
mation on functional status. Mennonites live longer than non-​Mennonite 
farmers in the surrounding regions with female life expectancy of 84 years 
of age, while male life expectancy is 82. The interesting question is which 
neuromuscular, pulmonary function, blood chemistries, and morphology 
are associated with greater longevity? We created a functional profile rela­
tive to an individual’s peers. Chronological age was regressed on identified 
predictors, and the residual values (distance from the prediction line) were 
utilized to estimate biological age (Duggirala et al., 1992). The predictors 
represent various organs or physiological systems and are often associated 
with chronic diseases. Biological aging was assessed through a set of complex 

94 
In Search of Human Evolution
phenotypes: (1) neuromuscular—​hand steadiness, grip strength, hand-​eye 
coordination, reaction time, motor time, and trunk flexibility; (2) pulmo­
nary function—​FEV1 (one-​second forced expiration volume) and FVC 
(forced vital capacity); (3) anthropometrics—​BMI and four skinfolds (bi­
ceps, suprailiocristal, subscapular, and triceps skinfolds); (4) biochem­
ical markers—​panel of lipid profiles, liver enzymes, electrolytes, blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, blood proteins, and thyroxin (T4); and 
(5) physiology—​systolic and diastolic blood pressures and heart rate. The
10 significant predictors of chronological age include biochemical meas­
ures, BUN, glucose, total cholesterol, albumin, and ln potassium. Functional
measures that are statistically significant +​/​–​ 0.05 include systolic blood
pressure, FEV1, reaction time, trunk flexibility, and grip strength. The ge­
netic variance (heritability) based on residuals (the difference between
chronological and predicted ages), biological age, is 0.469 +​/​–​ 0.180 with a
p-​value of 0.0053 (Duggirala et al., 2002). Roughly, one-​half variation asso­
ciated with biological aging in Goessel Mennonites is controlled by genetics
and one-​half by environmental factors (Duggirala et al., 2002). However, our 
estimates of heritability for biological age may be slightly inflated due to the
influences of shared environment.
Multivariate analyses identified predictors for an individual on chrono­
logical age and use of residuals as the estimate of biological age. Predictors 
represent various organ or physiological systems, often associated with 
chronic diseases (Uttley, 1991; Uttley and Crawford, 1994). Creatinine and 
BUN are associated with kidney function and are major predictors of mor­
tality. Glucose (diabetes) plays a major role in predicting survivorship. Study 
age for both males and females provides the best predictor for being alive or 
dead (Uttley and Crawford, 1994). Biological aging has a strong genetic de­
terminant in Mennonite populations (Uttley, 1991; Duggirala et al., 2012).
2004 Field Follow-​up
In 2004, funds became available through the Kansas Attorney General’s 
Office to conduct follow-​up research dealing with nutrition and health in 
populations of Kansas. These funds were collected by the State of Kansas 
from commercial nutritional companies who misrepresented their products. 
Doctoral candidate M. J. Mosher and I applied for a grant from the Attorney 
General’s Office Settlement Fund on the Kansas Mennonites and received 

Midwest Mennonites 
95
generous financial support ($123,000). We were able to organize field teams 
consisting of several graduate and undergraduate students from KU (M. 
J. Mosher, Mark Zlojutro [Kos], Rohina Rubicz, Kris Young, Phil Melton, and 
Ellen Quillen) plus a postdoctoral fellow from Argentina, Dario Demarchi.
Ellen Quillen (an undergraduate student at KU) served as coordinator and
welcomed each participant at the door, obtained signed informed consent,
and guided the participant to the appropriate station. We hired phlebotomists 
from the local hospital to draw blood samples.
The funds from the Attorney General’s Settlement grant permitted the ex­
pansion of the samples from the original three groups (Goessel, Henderson, 
and Meridian) to six populations. Figure 6.2 locates the six Mennonite 
populations on a map of Kansas and Nebraska. Based on origins and his­
tory, Goessel and Henderson (General Conference Mennonites) should be 
most similar genetically because they shared common ancestry until the 
1870s when a community from Crimea, Russia, emigrated to the United 
States and underwent fission. Lone Tree and Garden View were offshoots 
of Halderman Meridian Mennonites that share common ancestry but 
a complex, heterogeneous origin. Old Order (Old Colony) Mennonites 
were transplants from Cuauhtemoc, Mexico, to western Kansas and had a 
unique history and ancestry. These Old Colony Mennonites originally came 
from Chortitza, Russia, and then settled in Manitoba, Canada, and eventu­
ally 7,000 emigrated to Mexico in 1926. A small group of Mennonites from 
Cuauhtemoc, Mexico, moved to western Kansas to escape the drug wars and 
severe violence of northern Mexico.
The Mennonite research program provided excellent training to both 
graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows of the 
Anthropology Department at KU. Five graduate students wrote dissertations 
on topics ranging from population dynamics (inbreeding—​Laurine Rogers, 
1984), social anthropology (Jeff Longhofer, 1986), genetics of lipids (Ravi 
Duggirala, 1995), biological aging (Meredith Uttley, 1991), and genetics of 
blood pressure in Mennonites (Sobha Puppala, 2000). In addition, the recon­
struction of large Mennonite families permitted the analysis for preparation 
of M.A. theses on the genetics of thyroxine (Lisa Martin, 1993), serum cal­
cium, and acid phosphate levels of the blood (Alexa Pfeiffer). Postdoctoral 
fellows in the Laboratory of Biological Anthropology employed anthropom­
etry to examine Mennonite body morphology (Paul Lin), the genetics of neu­
romuscular and pulmonary function (Eric Devor), nutrition (M. J. Mosher), 
and the genetics of apolipoproteins (initiated by Dario Demarchi).

96 
In Search of Human Evolution
DNA Results—​MtDNA
Mitochondrial DNA and Y-​chromosome haplotypes (groups of alleles that 
are uniparental—​i.e., inherited from a single parent) were characterized 
in all Mennonite participants. A research assistant (Melton, 2010) first 
characterized the mitochondrial DNA haplotypes and haplogroups (groups 
of similar haplotypes that share common ancestry with a single nucleotide 
mutation) in 118 Mennonite participants. They exhibited eight common 
Western European haplogroups: H, HVO, I, J, K, T, U, and X (Melton, 2012). 
H was the most frequent mtDNA haplogroup in all six of the Mennonite 
communities—​ranging from 35% among the Halderman community of 
Lone Tree to 75% in a smaller sample of Old Colony. Multidimensional 
scaling (MDS) and principal component analyses (PCA) based on mtDNA 
revealed as predicted a close genetic relationship between Goessel and 
Henderson, thus reflecting the fission of the Crimean Mennonites into these 
two communities on arrival to the United States. The Halderman Mennonite 
communities, Garden View, Meridian, and Lone Tree, cluster together and 
reflect the fission from ancestral population, Meridian. The molecular ge­
netic data support the historical relationship between the Mennonite 
communities and are indicative of patterns of fission-​fusion along familial 
lines. All of the analyses indicate the genetic uniqueness of the Old Colony 
Mennonites based on history and small sample sizes.
Y-​Chromosome Markers
Several common European Y-​haplogroups were identified among the six 
Mennonite communities, including haplogroups R1b (56.3%), R1a and I2 
(9.6%), E1b (6.4%), I1 and Q (5.3%), G2a (3.2%), J2 (2.1%), L, and an uniden­
tified haplotype (1.1%). The distribution of these haplogroups varied among 
the congregations (see Figure 6.6). Haplogroups R1b (50%–​63.2%) and R1a 
(4%–​26.3%) were the only haplogroups found in all five congregations (Beaty 
2016). The Alexanderwohl congregations of Goessel and Henderson both 
exhibited haplotypes belonging to haplogroups G2a and J2a. Goessel dis­
played the most haplogroup diversity with six haplogroups—​R1b (53.8%), 
I2a (15.4%), J2a, G2a, R1a, and Q (7.7%)—​represented in 13 individuals 
and the highest mean number of pairwise differences between haplotypes 
(11.48). Meridian exhibited the second highest haplogroup diversity with 
 
 
 
 
 

Midwest Mennonites 
97
at least 7 NRY haplogroups present (R1b, 56%; E1b1, 12%; I1a and Q, 4%; 
I2, L, R1a, and one unidentified haplotype, 4%) in 25 individuals and an 
average number of pairwise differences of 11.22. It was the only congregation 
to exhibit haplogroup L. Lone Tree exhibited the lowest haplogroup diversity, 
with 63.2% of the individuals belonging to haplogroup R1b, 26.3% 
belonging to haplogroup R1a, and 5.3% representing haplogroups E1b1a and 
I2a; whereas Garden View had four haplogroups represented (R1b, 50%; I2, 
35.7%; R1b and Q, 7.1%) and exhibited the lowest average number of pairwise 
differences between haplotypes, 9.8476 (Melton, 2016).
Population Structure
AMOVA results for NRY STR and mtDNA variation are summarized in 
Table 6.2. As with mtDNA, the magnitude of variation seen among groups 
is lower than seen within all populations, while the amount of variation 
within populations is high. The amount of variation seen within populations 
is higher for mtDNA versus NRY STR data. The amount of NRY STR 
Gardenview
Lonetree
Old Order Amish
Meridian
Goessel
Henderson
Switzerland
Italy
Dutch
Germany
Poland
Hutterites
Sweden
W. Finland
PCoA Ordination
E. Finland
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
Axis 1 (25.5%)
Axis 2 (20.7%)
–0.6
0.5
1.0
W. Russia
Alexanderwohl
Holdeman
Other Anabaptists
European
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Figure 6.6  Y-​chromosome haplotype frequencies in five Mennonite 
communities.
Source: Adapted with permission from Beaty, K. G. et al., “Paternal Genetic Structure in 
Contemporary Mennonite Communities from the American Midwest,” Human Biology 88(2): 95–​
108. © 2016, The Authors.
 
 
 
 
 

Table 6.2  Results from Stepwise Discriminant Function of Blood Chemicals and Neuromuscular Performance
Group
Classified Correctly (%)
Alive
Deceased
Group Centroid
Variable
Factor Loadings*
Women
Alive
Deceased
79.4
80.3
370
24
96
57
0.12665
–​1.59657
Study age
BUN
BUN/​creatinine ratio
Chloride
LDL
Creatinine
Albumin
–​0.73278
–​0.66957
–​0.50659
0.35658
–​0.31418
–​0.30010
0.27958
Men
Alive
Deceased
79.9
78.5
321
14
81
51
–​0.20305
1.51880
Study age
BUN
Albumin
Glucose
BUN/​creatinine ratio
Albumin/​globulin
Total protein
0.78119
0.47637
–​0.43012
0.35172
0.34564
–​0.27615
–​0.18944
BUN, blood urea nitrogen.
*Correlation between the variable and the discriminant function standardized by the pooled within-​group variances.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Uttley, M., Relationship of Measures of Biological Age to Survivorship among Mennonites. Ph.D. diss., University of 
Kansas, 1991.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

Midwest Mennonites 
99
variation explained among communities within each grouping is lower 
(6.12% vs. 7.57%) when Lone Tree is treated as a separate group from the 
other Holderman communities. When Mantel tests are applied to these 
data, geographic proximity, geography, and NRY variation are negatively 
correlated with mtDNA variation (Table 6.2). This is particularly true of NRY 
STR and mtDNA distances (r =​ –​0.5531); however, neither of these results 
gave significant p-​values. There is a slight correlation (r =​ 0.1283) of geog­
raphy by NRY STR distances, but these results are also nonsignificant.
Intrapopulation Analyses
Principal components analysis (PCA) examined the relationship of the 
Mennonite congregations with other Anabaptists groups based on a reduced 
number of loci. The PCA of Mennonite communities plots 77.5% of the NRY 
variation on the first two axes and shows that these Mennonite congregations 
are more similar to each other than they are to either the Old Order Amish 
or Hutterite Anabaptist populations (see Figure 6.6). However, this PCA also 
indicates that Mennonite communities do not cluster with their founding 
congregations of Alexanderwohl and Holdeman, while the community 
of Garden View is the farthest from the Mennonite communities in the 
plot. There is no sharing of paternal haplotypes between the Mennonite 
communities based on an expanded set of 15 NRY STRs, but with a reduced 
loci set of 6 STRs, sharing of haplotypes does occur. All of the shared pa­
ternal haplotypes between the communities belong to the most common 
and widespread western European NRY haplogroup, R1b. The sharing of pa­
ternal haplotypes also includes 4 R1b haplotypes shared with the Old Order 
Amish, with at least one of these haplotypes found in each of the Mennonite 
communities. However, no Mennonite communities shared haplotypes with 
Hutterite populations included in this analysis, and this group is the furthest 
outlier within this plot (Beaty et al, 2016).
Population genetic studies examining religious isolates are particularly in­
formative for the study of rare genetic disorders, due to their unique popu­
lation structure (Pollin et al., 2007; Pichler et al., 2010; Melton et al., 2006). 
However, to date few studies have examined molecular genetic data to in­
terpret the diaspora of Anabaptist populations following the Reformation. 
The one focus for this current study was to determine the paternal genetic 
relationship between five Mennonite communities using NRY STR data 

100 
In Search of Human Evolution
and to determine if these data support the history of fission-​fusion that has 
been demonstrated for these groups. Despite a shared history originating 
after the Reformation, there is no sharing of paternal haplotypes between 
Mennonite communities. Figure 6.6 shows the close genetic affinities be­
tween Henderson and Goessel based on Y-​chromosome haplotypes. West 
European haplotype R1b is by far the most common in all of the Mennonite 
communities. Meridian, Garden view, and Lone Tree, all related Halderman 
populations, show greater variability that reflects population fission from 
the founding Meridian population. Using PCoA, Figure 6.6 compares 
Mennonite populations to other European groups and shows their close ge­
netic affinities to German, Dutch, and Swiss populations.
In addition to the uniparental markers being utilized to characterize the 
genetic structure of Mennonite populations, a postdoctoral fellow from 
Argentina (Dr. Dario Demarchi et al., 2005) identified Apoprotein genetic 
variation for APOE and APOB. However, these genetic markers are less poly­
morphic and the allelic frequencies appear to be less useful in the reconstruc­
tion of the evolutionary history of the Mennonite congregations (Demarchi 
et al., 2005).
Mennonite Anthropometrics and Neuromuscular Function
Anthropometric variation results from the interaction of complex genetic 
factors and environmental interaction. This research program permitted 
a comparison of two groups that resulted from the fission of a single con­
gregation almost 100 years ago (1874–​1979). These two related groups 
(Alexanderwohl and Bethesda) were compared to Meridian Mennonites 
who arose from the combination of several Anabaptist groups.
A total of 1,197 Mennonites (567 males and 630 females) from 
Alexanderwohl and Meridian, Kansas, and Henderson, Nebraska, 
volunteered to be measured anthropometrically. Thirty-​five different an­
thropometric traits were utilized to characterize the morphological variation 
observed in Mennonite populations (Devor et al., 1986a). All of the same 
anthropometric measurements were taken by each of the three researchers 
(Paul Lin, Laurine Oberdieck Rogers, and Joanne McGreevy). In this way, 
interobserver error was minimized, with each researcher measuring all 
subjects for specific traits.

Midwest Mennonites 
101
The effects of age and sex on neuromuscular performance were examined 
in a cross-​sectional sample of 559 members of the (Alexanderwohl) Goessel 
community. Age and sex effects on neuromuscular traits were assessed using 
a stepwise polynomial regression method. Of the six neuromuscular traits 
(DHS, HST, HEY, SRT, MT, and TKF) only hand steadiness (HST) failed to 
show a significant sex difference. Trunk flexibility (TKF) did not show a sig­
nificant nonlinear trend with age (Figure 6.5). All of the other neuromus­
cular traits display a decline in performance after age 45 of up to 60% (Devor 
et al., 1985).
Conclusion
Biological aging indices provide a more accurate predictor of survivorship 
than chronological age among the Mennonites. Because of the longitudinal 
nature of this research, the relationship between aging and mortality was 
tested. The stepwise discriminant function computes one or more vectors 
that maximally separate two or more groups or subjects. Discriminant anal­
ysis computes an individual function score that is used to predict group 
membership of individuals into alive versus deceased status. Males who aged 
faster than the predicted rate (by stepwise multiple regression analysis) died 
sooner than those who were “slower agers” (Crawford, 2005).
Despite the relatively recent subpopulation fission, populations of 
Mennonites have differentiated genetically. The observed genetic differentia­
tion was caused by the genetic makeup of the founding populations, genetic 
drift, and patterns of gene flow.
 
 
 
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0007
7
Genetic Structure and Origins of Siberian 
and Alaskan Arctic Populations
Introduction
In 1976, I received a grant from National Science Foundation (NSF; OPP-​
0327676 ) for initiating a research program on the peopling of the Americas 
based on a comparison of genetic markers of the blood from Siberian and 
Alaskan Native populations. This research program was designed to com­
pare the genetics of Yupik-​speaking Alaskan populations with two groups 
from Kamchatka, Siberia. Unfortunately, at that time, the Soviet govern­
ment did not approve field research by American scientists on indige­
nous populations of Chukotka. Since the original experimental design was 
not possible, my alternative was to compare two Yupik-​speaking Eskimo 
populations of St. Lawrence Island (Savoonga and Gambell) with two 
Inupik-​speaking populations of Wales and King Island, Alaska (Crawford, 
2007e). The gene frequencies from these four populations were compared 
with those of Siberian groups located on the coast of Chukotka (allelic 
frequencies compiled from Russian literature). Norton Sound Health 
Corporation of Nome, Alaska, and tribal organizations in each community 
approved the Alaskan portion of the study. Because of a particularly “frigid 
period” in the Cold War, we could not get approval from the Soviet govern­
ment to conduct any comparative research on the indigenous populations 
of Siberia. With NSF approval, the proposed research program excluded 
field investigations in Siberia. Instead, I focused on a genetic comparison 
of Yupik versus Inupik-​speaking Eskimo populations and compared them 
to published Siberian and Greenland gene frequencies. Such a comparison 
limited the number of genetic markers available for population comparisons 
because at that time Soviet genetic laboratories phenotyped fewer genetic 
markers than US facilities.
A total of 250 Yupik-​speaking Inuit volunteers from St. Lawrence Island 
(170 from Savoonga and 80 from Gambell) participated in this study. Before 
 
 
 
 
 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
103
1878, St. Lawrence Island population consisted of approximately 4,000 
inhabitants distributed among 35 settlements located around the periphery 
of the island (Crawford et al., 1997). By 1904, European whalers and traders 
moved to the island, bringing disease and famine, while reducing the pop­
ulation from an estimated 4,000 to 250 persons. In 1900, the US govern­
ment introduced reindeer domestication and herding to the populations of 
St. Lawrence Island. This resulted in the formation of two separate villages, 
Gambell and Savoonga (Byard and Crawford, 1991). At present, approxi­
mately 400 persons continue to reside in each community.
The village of Wales, located at the narrowest point of separation of Asia 
and Alaska, contained the largest known Eskimo village in historical Alaska 
(see Figure 7.1). This village had an estimated size of 400 Inupik speakers, but 
the total population size was reduced to 117 persons by 1975. This reduction 
in size was due to the introduction of diseases, such as the influenza epidemic 
of 1918 plus some outmigration.
Figure 7.1  Map of the Bering region, showing the locations of Gambell, 
Savoonga, King Island, and Wales, Alaska.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H., The Origins of Native Americans. p. 44, 
fig. 14. © 1998, Cambridge University Press.
 

104 
In Search of Human Evolution
King Island is a small island located due south of Wales, Alaska, and west 
of the Seward Peninsula (see Figure 7.1). In 1791, its population size, based 
on historical records, was estimated to be 170 persons. However, this com­
munity relocated in its entirety to Nome, Alaska, with 215 King Islanders 
currently residing in Nome.
Participants
Field Research
During the summer of 1978, a field research team (consisting of Pamela 
Byard, Paul Lin, Michael Crawford, and dentist Terry Rigdon) from the 
University of Kansas spent one month on St. Lawrence Island, Wales, and 
Nome, Alaska, collecting demographic, morphologic, and genetic data from 
the four indigenous communities, containing 1,120 residents. A total of 370 
participants (one-​third of the entire population) agreed to participate in 
the study and to submit to venipuncture. The blood specimens, drawn into 
vacutainers containing ACD preservative, were packed in ice and shipped to 
the War Memorial Blood Bank of Minneapolis for analysis of standard ge­
netic markers.
Genetic Analyses
Allelic frequencies of 13 blood groups and 10 red blood cell and serum 
protein loci for four populations were compiled in Crawford et al. (1981). 
Seventeen of these loci are polymorphic, and three are monomorphic. A plot 
of a three-​dimensional least-​squares “genetic map” clearly reflects the his­
tory of the four populations with Yupik-​speaking Gambell and Savoonga of 
St. Lawrence Island clustering closely together, while Inupik-​speaking Wales 
and King Island reflect genetic differentiation (Byard and Crawford, 1991; 
Crawford et al., 1981).
A pseudo-​three-​dimensional plot of 19 circumpolar groups based on 
standard genetic markers reveals that there is a relationship between lan­
guage and genetic affinities. Wales and King Island form a tight cluster 
together with other Inupik-​speaking populations—​Wainwright, Barrow, 
Anaktuvuk Pass, and Greenland (see Figure 7.2). The second, more diffuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
105
cluster includes Siberian and Yupik-​speaking communities. Samoyed 
groups located on the Tamyr Peninsula of Siberia are clearly separated 
along the second axis from all of the other populations. Aleutian Bering 
and Mednii Islands cluster with the Siberian populations, supporting their 
historical origins. There is considerable agreement in the genetic affinities 
between Siberian and Alaskan populations as revealed by blood groups 
and proteins.
Recent European admixture and resettlement programs have added 
some complications to the interpretation of the genetic structure of the 
four Alaskan Eskimo populations. Admixture was computed using the inci­
dence of immunoglobulin haplotype Gmf;b, a marker haplotype found pri­
marily in Europeans. This genetic marker was entirely absent in the King 
Island population but revealed that Gambell on St. Lawrence Island had 
8.8% European ancestry, while Savoonga displayed 4% European ancestry 
(Byard et al., 1983). Wales, Alaska, exhibited an incidence of Gmf;b of 0.23 
and an estimated European contribution of 7.6% (Crawford, 2007, 2010a). 
Eskimo populations from St. Lawrence Island (Gambell and Savoonga) 
and Pribilof Island Aleuts (St. Paul and St. George, Alaska) were compared 
anthropometrically, using data collected by William Laughlin from 1979 
to 1981 (Justice et al., 2010). Anthropometric measurement was used to 
Figure 7.2  A pseudo-​three-​dimensional plot of the genetic structure of 19 
circumpolar populations.
Source: Adapted with permission from Crawford, M. H., Mielke, J. H., Devor, E. J., Dykes, D. D., and 
Polesky, H. F., “Population Structure of Alaskan and Siberian Indigenous Communities,” American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology, 55: 168, fig. 1. © 1981, Wiley.

106 
In Search of Human Evolution
reconstruct population history of Aleuts and Eskimos of the Bering Sea. 
Our results show a relationship between the populations linking geography, 
history, and underlying genetic relationships among Native American 
populations (Justice et al., 2010).
Siberian Geography
Siberia encompasses one-​third of the Asian continent with 11 time zones 
stretching from Moscow to Chukotka. Siberia consists of two unequal ge­
ographical regions: (1) a wide, swampy, eastern lowlands, from the Ural 
Mountains to the Lena River; and (2) mountains and river valleys from the 
Lena River to the Pacific Ocean. The ecology of Siberia consists of the taiga, 
tundra, and steppe grasslands of the south. Tundra is a flat moss-​ and lichen-​
covered expanse characterized by poor drainage, a short growing season, 
and the general presence of permafrost. The Taiga is an expanse made up of 
mixed deciduous and coniferous forest. The steppes of Southern Siberia con­
sist primarily of grasslands.
The widely distributed populations of Siberia cluster into three different 
linguistic groups: (1) Altaic speakers; (2) Uralic speakers; and (3) Paleo-​
Asiatic speakers. The Altaic speakers include Tungusic groups, such as the 
Evens, Evenki, and Udegeys. The Tungusic populations such as the Evenki 
reindeer herders number 29,900, Eveni speakers 17,000, while the Udegeys 
are the smallest, most isolated group consisting of fewer than 1,900 persons 
and located in far eastern Siberia, near the Sea of Okhost. Numerically, the 
largest populations of indigenous Siberians consist of Uralic Samoyedic 
speakers: Entsi (N =​ 190), Nentsi (N =​ 34,200), Ngansani (N =​ 1,300), and 
Sel’kupi (N =​ 3,600). Included in the Uralic speakers are Ugric groups, 
consisting of Khants (N =​ 22,300) and Mantsi (N =​ 8,300). Paleo-​Asiatic 
speakers include the populations of the Kamchatkan Peninsula: Chukchi 
(N =​ 15,100), Itel’meni (N =​ 2,400), Koryaks (N =​ 8,900), and Eskimo-​Aleut 
(Yupik Eskimos, N =​ 1,700, Aleuts, N =​ 650). Of special anthropological in­
terest are the linguistic isolates: Kets (N =​ 1,080), Nivkhs (N =​ 4,600), and 
Yukaghirs (N =​ 1,000).
Based on linguistic evidence, several studies have proposed that the 
Kets are related to Na-​Dene speakers of Canada and must have had recent 
common ancestry (Ruhlen, 1991, 1998; Vayda, 2010). However, genetic and 
DNA data do not support this hypothesis (Rubicz et al., 2002).

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
107
Russian Contact
Russian contact with indigenous populations of Siberia began in 1580 when 
Yarmak (an outlawed Cossack chieftain) crossed the Urals with fewer than 
2,000 men and conquered the lands of Tartar prince Kutshum Khan. The 
capital of these conquered Tatar lands was named “Sibir.” Russians advanced 
river valley to river valley founding towns as they moved in an eastwardly 
direction. Tobolsk was founded in 1587, Yakutsk in 1632, and Irkutsk in 
1651. The first Russian government expedition to Kamchatka was organized 
in 1733.
Siberia, At Last!
In 1991, we finally received permission through the Institute of Cytology 
and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences at Novosibirsk, to begin a re­
search program with indigenous populations of Siberia. In 1958, Demitry 
Konstantinovich Belyaev transplanted this academic institute from Moscow 
to Academgorodok in Siberia. Because of his acceptance of the concept of 
Mendelian genetics, Belyaev was dismissed from the Department of Fur 
Animal Breeding. The relocation of the Institute from Moscow to Siberia 
permitted Belyaev to escape the political quagmire and intrigues of Moscow. 
At that time, Denisovich Lysenko, a Soviet agronomist, had rejected 
Mendelian genetics in favor of Lamarckism, which better fit Soviet ideology. 
Stalin had appointed Lysenko in 1940 to the directorship of the Institute of 
Genetics in Moscow.
Academician Demitry Belyaev, together with Dr. Ludmila Trut, initiated 
the experimental behavioral genetic study of silver foxes. In 1952, they began 
domesticating silver foxes at the Institute of Genetics, Academgorodok, in 
Novosibirsk. To date, there are more than 60 generations of silver foxes raised 
at the Institute. I was fortunate to receive the grand tour of the facilities and be 
given a historical explanation of their research by Professor Demitry Belyaev.
In the midst of our field investigation on the genetics of a lymphoma epi­
demic among the baboons of Sukhumi, Abkhasia, Dennis O’Rourke and I were 
informed by Dr. Rem Sukernik (director of the Genetics Laboratory, Institute 
of Cytology) that permission was granted for field research on the Evenki rein­
deer herders of Central Siberia (see Figure 7.3). Politically, this was a tense time 
in Sukhumi prior to the war between Abkhasia and Georgia. We were invited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
In Search of Human Evolution
by the Academy of Sciences to join Rem Sukernik in Academgorodok, and he 
announced that we could fly north from Sukhumi to Moscow and Krasnoyarsk 
and then proceed to Evenkiya for a pilot study. We arrived by Aeroflot jet plane 
to Karsnoyarsk, which was officially a restricted zone because of its role in the 
production of nuclear weapons. The officials at the airport who did not expect 
us “freaked out” when we arrived, but Sukernik was able to convince them that 
we had governmental permission to travel to Evenkiya. From Krasnoyarsk, we 
flew on a small propeller-​driven Aeroflot plane to the town of Baykit, a small 
town of 3,500 persons located along the Stony Tunguska River. For this occa­
sion, the pilots prepared a “picnic lunch” consisting of beluga caviar, smoked 
fish, and champagne. During the flight, they organized a Siberian “picnic” on 
the floor of the airplane.
The pilots were thrilled to be able to transport an American research team. 
Since I was the only team member besides Russian native Rem Sukernik 
who spoke Russian, I was seated in the front cabin next to the pilot. Midway 
through the flight, the pilot inquired if I would like to take over the controls 
of the plane. I responded by explaining that I had never flown a plane. The 
Figure 7.3  A map of Central Siberia, locating the Stony Tunguska River and 
the Evenki villages of Surinda and Poligus. Ket village of Sulamai is located 
west of the river. Southeast of the Stony Tunguska River is the Altaiian village of 
Mendur Sokhon.
Source: Adapted with permission from Crawford, M. H., Mielke, J. H., Devor, E. J., Dykes, D. D., and 
Polesky, H. F., “Population Structure of Alaskan and Siberian Indigenous Communities,” American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology, 55: 180, fig. 6. © 1981, Wiley.
 
 
 
 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
109
pilot reviewed the simplicity of the controls and handed them over to me. In 
the back of the airplane, the research team became nervous at the thought of 
a novice flying the plane. As we approached the runway, the appropriate pilot 
took control of the airplane and expertly landed it. This plane was greeted by 
a “canine delegation,” which chased it to a stop.
You Gotta Have Heart!
Surinda
Since there were no roads leading into this region of Evenkiya, our only op­
tion was to travel by plane or helicopter, rented from Aeroflot. On the expedi­
tion in 1992, we planned to visit two of the Evenki reindeer herding 
brigades: Surinda and Poligus. We boarded the helicopter in the town of 
Baykit and flew across the taiga to a clearing on the edge of the Surinda 
brigade. We were greeted by the local headman who guided us with all of 
our gear up a steep hill to a settlement of chums (similar in appearance to 
Midwestern Native American tepees) that housed the families of the herders. 
Since we were the first westerners to visit the brigade, the chief had a reindeer 
slaughtered in our honor. As the most senior visitor and director of our 
team, a still-​beating heart of the reindeer was first offered to me. I thanked 
the headman profusely but explained that because of my age, I was dyspeptic 
and could not digest such a special “treat”; however, the young guys of my 
team loved raw heart! Unable to object in Russian, Tony Comuzzie and Bill 
Leonard were good sports and accepted this cardiac delicacy. As they were 
sitting on a log, chewing on bits of the heart, I asked them how it tasted. Bill, 
with blood dripping from his mouth, cheerfully replied: “It’s a little tough 
but has the texture of bubble gum.” However, Tony quietly munched on his 
cardiac treat. That evening we were invited to an outdoor dinner arranged by 
the headman (see Figure 7.4). As our group settled down around a blanket 
adorned with Evenki delicacies, clouds of Anopheles mosquitos announced 
that we were on their menu. American veins are a rare treat in Evenkiya, and 
the mosquitos attempted to feed on our blood. Fortunately, I wore a hat with 
a mosquito net and managed to raise it periodically for an occasional inser­
tion of food. I spotted one of my favorite Siberian foods, deep-​fried sour 
dough pastry normally containing ground beef inside. My mother (born in 
Siberia) used to prepare these “peroshki” stuffed with ground beef, onions, 
and eggs. I bit into one of the Evenki peroshki and discovered a crunchy, 
 
 
 
 

110 
In Search of Human Evolution
unique, and somewhat unpleasant taste that definitely did not have the taste 
and texture of ground beef. I naively inquired: “What’s in the peroshki?” The 
headman explained that the Evenki use chopped reindeer lung tissue for the 
peroshki. That was the last peroshok that I ate while in Siberia.
Throughout this outdoor dinner, our team physician Rem Sukernik was 
busily swatting mosquitos off his forehead. Blood was oozing from the bites, 
so I offered the spare mosquito net to him. He refused the offer, emphatically 
stating: “You cannot let it bother you! Ignore the mosquitos.” Even though it 
was more difficult to eat with a mosquito net draped across my face, I refused 
to follow his instructions and kept the mosquitos away using my methods 
(see Figure 7.4).
Poligus
After sampling the population of the Surinda brigade, the research team 
boarded an Aeroflot helicopter and flew to the adjoining brigade, Poligus. 
Figure 7.4  Dinner in Surinda hosted by the chief of the Evenki community. 
Included in this photograph are members of the research team: A. Comuzzie, 
R. Sukernik, M. H. Crawford, and community head.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
111
As we hovered over a clearing, I noticed human bodies scattered all over 
the ground. As we landed, these “bodies” slowly stirred, arose, and shuffled 
toward the helicopter. We learned that Poligus had received a huge ship­
ment of vodka, from Japanese traders, in exchange for reindeer antlers. 
These antlers were highly prized in Asia as aphrodisiacs and often traded 
for alcohol and TV sets—​even though there was no available electricity in 
this area. The males from the community had been heavily drinking vodka 
for several days until they passed out, and many of the men collapsed in 
a drunken stupor in the clearing. Our arrival by helicopter revived the 
drinkers, and after we deplaned, they demanded that we fly them to the 
adjoining brigade who had recently received a shipment of vodka. The 
revelers forced their way into the helicopter, prompting the Russian crew 
to push them out of the rear exit. After several confrontations, one of the 
Evenki males took out his knife and slashed a helicopter tire. Given the 
dangers that one flat tire poses—​it makes the helicopter list to one side, 
thus making takeoff and future landings precarious—​we would be stuck 
in the middle of the taiga, hundreds of miles from the nearest town. We 
immediately loaded ourselves back into the helicopter and took off. Since 
one of the tires was flat, we hovered a few feet over the clearances in the 
forest. One of the pilots jumped out of the helicopter, dragged a log from 
the forest, and placed it under the flat tire. In this way, through the bravery 
and skill of the Russian pilots, we managed to continue visiting the various 
brigades.
Before the Soviet takeover of the Siberian taiga, each extended Evenki 
family controlled and grazed its own reindeer herd. With the Russian com­
munist reorganization, extended families were forced to join these so-​called 
brigades. In the early spring, representatives of each brigade searched for new 
grazing for their reindeer herds, and when appropriate grounds were located, 
the brigade members would drive the herds from their winter locations to the 
rich grasslands of the taiga (see Figure 7.5). Each of the brigades herded ap­
proximately 2,000 reindeer. Normally, during the winter months the Evenki 
children attend boarding schools in towns such as Baiykit. Thus, the Evenki 
speak their native Tungusic language but are literate in the Russian language. 
During the summers, reindeer herding families are reunited with their chil­
dren in the brigades located in the taiga. Figure 7.6 shows the similarities in 
the construction between Evenki chums and tepees of Plains Indians in the 
United States.
 
 

112 
In Search of Human Evolution
Kets of Sulamai
The Kets are numerically one of the smallest indigenous populations of 
Siberia, with fewer than 1,000 persons living along the Yenissey River. Their 
primary form of subsistence is fishing, supplemented by hunting. The last 
of the surviving Yenesain speakers were located in a small village next to 
the Yenesai River. Bill Leonard, Rem Sukernik, and I rented a small boat 
and crossed the wide Yenesai River to the village of Sulamai. This village 
Figure 7.5  Evenki reindeer herder saddled atop a reindeer.
 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
113
consisted of a small number of wooden huts, and we set up to collect blood 
from as many volunteers as possible. A total of 25 Kets agreed to participate 
and donated blood for this study. Studies on the classification of languages of 
Siberia by F. Merritt Ruhlen suggested that NaDene languages 
cluster with Yenisean languages. This conclusion was further supported by 
Edward Vayda’s research based on Ket vocabulary. He proposed the existence 
of a close linguistic affinity between the Ket speakers of Siberia and Na-​
Dene speakers of Alaska despite a geographic separation of a thousand miles 
(Vayda, 2010). However, a genetic comparison between Ket and Na-​Dene 
populations did not reveal such a close affinity. Instead, the Kets clustered 
with central Siberian populations, while the Algonkian groups clustered 
with Canadian indigenous groups (Rubicz et al., 2002).
Figure 7.6  Evenki housing.

114 
In Search of Human Evolution
Altai—​Kizhi of Gorno Altai
In the summer of 1983, a research team from the Siberian branch of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences drove from Novosibirsk to Mindar-​Sokhon, to 
sample the Turkic-​speaking, cattle-​herding, Kizhi population of the moun­
tain Altai. The research team included Drs. Tatiana Karafet, Olga Posukh, 
Michael Crawford, and Ludmila Osipova. Our collaboration with Rem 
Sukernik had been terminated because (1) he was illegally peddling the 
Siberian blood samples that we collected to various US laboratories; and 
(2) he insisted that my NSF grant should continue to support travel and sub­
sistence in the United States for Elena Starikovskaya, even though she had
completed training in mtDNA phenotyping in Doug Wallace’s laboratory.
Earlier, I had arranged for Sukernik to receive similar training in molecular
genetics in Mark Stoneking’s laboratory at Penn State University. However,
shortly after Sukernik’s arrival at Stoneking laboratory, I received a telephone 
call from Stoneking requesting that I take Sukernik off his hands. Apparently, 
Sukernik refused to master the basic laboratory procedures required for a
collaborative project. Fortunately, Dr. Wallace was willing to take him into
his laboratory in exchange for access to the blood specimens. That is how
Sukernik ended up in Atlanta at Emory University (Torroni et al., 1993).
Results
A comparison of mtDNA variation of the Evenki and nine other Siberian 
indigenous populations with Native Americans revealed the presence of 
haplogroups A, C, and D, but the absence of haplogroup B (Toroni et al., 
1993). Analyses included PCR amplification, restriction analysis, and control 
region sequencing (Comuzzie, 1993). Table 8.1 in Chapter 8 summarizes the 
distribution of mtDNA haplogroups in the Bering region of Siberia/​Alaska. 
Haplogroup B is defined by a 9 bp deletion in region V of the mitochondrial 
DNA. The presence of haplogroups A, C, and D support the age-​old belief 
that Native Americans came from Siberia (Crawford et al., 1981). Comuzie 
and Crawford (1990) revealed the relationship between biochemical heter­
ozygosity and morphological variability in Siberian populations (Comuzzie 
and Crawford, 1990).
Five Native American haplotypes, originated in Asia, with A, C, and D 
haplotypes distributed throughout Siberia. However, Siberian populations 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
115
exhibit additional haplotypes such as F, G, M, U, and Z that have not been 
identified among Native Americans (Starikovskaya et al., 1998). Although 
haplogroup B is rare among Siberian populations, it has been detected among 
the Altai, the Buryats, and the Touvans (Kolman et al., 1996). Similarly, 
haplogroup X is infrequent among Siberian populations but occurs in the 
Altai at low frequencies. The presence of all five of the mtDNA haplogroups 
in the Altai is suggestive of Native American origins in southern Siberia 
(Rubicz and Crawford, 2016).
Y-​Chromosome Markers
Y-​chromosome markers are less variable than mitochondrial haplogroups
and sequences. The majority of Native American populations belong to
haplogroup Q, identified by a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) M242
(Seielstad et al., 2003). In addition to the presence of this SNP throughout
the Americas, it has been identified in Asian, European, and North African
populations. The subhaplogroup Q3 has been observed throughout the
Americas and among the Siberian Inuits (Karafet et al., 2008).
Figure 8.5 in Chapter 8 plots the relationship between mean per locus het­
erozygosity and the distance from the centroid of distribution. Harpending 
and Ward (1982) developed a model that aids in the assessment of the effects 
of different micro-​evolutionary forces. Deviation from the expected het­
erozygosity is suggestive of gene flow. McComb et al. (1996) applied the 
Harpending-​Ward model based on VNTR variation in Siberian indigenous 
populations.
Other Molecular Markers—​ABO
In addition to the standard uniparental markers, researchers from the 
Laboratory of Biological Anthropology examined the region of the genome 
(ninth chromosome) that codes for the ABO locus. DNA samples used in 
these analyses were collected during fieldwork in Siberia by M. H. Crawford 
(director of the LBA) and Larissa Tarskaya, a Siberian Yakut postdoc­
toral fellow at the LBA. In 2014, molecular and statistical analyses of these 
Siberian DNA samples were completed by graduate student Jacob T. Boyd, 

116 
In Search of Human Evolution
in fulfillment of his M.A. thesis. He is currently a medical resident at the 
University of Colorado Medical School.
A geographic map representing Siberian and Native American 
populations and their ABO haplotype frequencies is presented in Figure 7.7. 
All populations shown exhibit three O haplotypes: O1, O1v, and O1v542. 
Haplotype O1v was the most common, and O1v542 occurs in frequencies 
between 1% and 4% in all populations.
Figure 7.7  ABO molecular distributions in the Americas and northeast Siberia.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Boyd, J. T., Peopling of the Americas: ABO Blood Group 
Haplotypes as an Indicator of Native American Origins and Migration from Siberia. M.A. Thesis, 
University of Kansas, 2014.

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
117
The most frequent haplotype of the O blood group in the Americas is 
O1v (Estrada-​Mena et al., 2010). Another haplotype differing from O1v by 
a single mutation, O1v542, has been discovered at frequencies between 4% 
and 60% in Native American populations but is absent in Asian populations. 
Researchers have utilized this marker as an ancestral informative marker 
(AIM) because of its broad distribution from Canadian Native American 
populations to Chilean populations of South America. Other AIMs have 
been observed in indigenous Native Americans, most notably the nine-​
base repeat allele (9RA), which along with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
and nonrecombining Y DNA (NRY-​DNA), has led to the reconstruction of a 
likely Beringian route into the Americas from Siberia (Schroeder et al2009).
The Bering Incubation Model (BIM) hypothesizes that between 28,000 
and 11,000 years ago an ancestral population moved across northeastern 
Siberia and then paused on the Bering land bridge (Meltzer, 2009). The 
combination of mutations and genetic drift resulted in unique marker de­
velopment before continuing into the Americas. This expanding population 
may have stalled in Beringia because most of North America (from east to 
west) was covered by two ice sheets until approximately 16,000 BP (Lambeck 
et al., 2002).
Reich (2012) suggested a three-​wave migration model from Siberia to 
the Americas. According to this three-​wave model, a west coast migration 
across the Americas occurred first because that is where the ice sheets ini­
tially receded. The second wave moved inland between the two ice sheets. 
The third wave populated the northern latitudes, resulting in the establish­
ment of Aleut, Inuit, and Eskimo populations.
These molecular analyses of the ABO blood group system in four dif­
ferent Siberian populations (Aleut, Chukchi, Koryaks, and Altai) were 
completed by Jacob Boyd (2014). The four populations from Siberia were as­
sociated with the original peopling of the Americas. The Aleuts from Siberia 
constituted the last migration into the Americas following the Beringian 
incubation (Crawford et al., 2010). The Chukchi and the Koryak, currently 
located on the Siberian side of the Bering Sea, are the two populations most 
consistently linked to Native Americans through genetic analyses. The Altai 
are a native central Siberian population who exhibit all five of the mtDNA 
haplogroups present in Native American populations. The four Siberian 
groups display all or many of the mtDNA (A, B, C, D) and NRY-​DNA (C, P, 
Q, R) haplogroups found in the Americas along with the autosomal STR 9RA 
marker in Chukchi, Koryak, and Aleut populations (Crawford, 2007). This 

118 
In Search of Human Evolution
application of O1v542 as an AIM may also reveal if the frequency of the O 
blood group is the result of natural selection or genetic drift.
The presence of O1v542 in the Chukchi and Koryak populations is 
most likely the result of an expansion from an ancestral population and 
not due to back migration, thus supporting the proposed three-​wave 
model of Tamm et al. (2007). The primary argument based on DNA data 
by Rubicz et al. (2010) against Kamchatkans originating from the same 
ancestral population as Native Americans is genetic discontinuity with 
the Aleut population, thus supporting back migration as an explanation 
for the observed frequency of 9RA. The Aleuts have a more recent mi­
gratory history (circa 9000 BP) compared to other Native Americans, 
so the observed differences between the Aleut and Kamchatkans are to 
be expected. The magnitude of back migration necessary to obtain the 
observed frequency of the 9RA seen in the Chukchi and Koryak is 92%, 
and both the Chukchi and the Koryak are more closely related to the other 
Native American populations than to the Aleuts. The likely explanation 
is that the Chukchi and Koryak split from the same ancestral source as 
the Aleut earlier, followed by genetic separation. Gene flow undoubtedly 
played a role across all populations throughout the entire process with 
small movements back and forth, but four major dispersions after the 
Bering Incubation Model (BIM) best explain the distributions of the ABO 
haplotypes observed to date.
Based on multidimensional scaling and neighbor joining methods of anal­
ysis, three primary Native American clusters and one Siberian cluster from 
the same ancestral population are shown in Figure 7.8. These results sup­
port the Beringian Incubation Model (BIM), which proposes that the an­
cestral population entered Beringia and then paused because of blockage by 
glaciers. During this pause, mutations followed by genetic drift resulted in a 
series of unique markers, such as 01v542 and 9RA.
The three-​wave migration theory into the Americas with a standstill in 
Beringia agrees with previous genetic, linguistic, and archaeological evidence 
(Reich et al., 2012). The first wave traveled along the west coast, passing 
through the Tlingit population and then splitting into two South American 
groups: (a) Parakana and Aymara, Chile, and (b) Mazahua and Aymara of 
Bolivia. The second wave was inland and ended along the east coast, con­
necting the Nahua, Maya, Cayapo, Yanomama, Arara, and Chile. The 
UPGMA tree suggests that the Huilliche because of the highest frequency of 

Siberian and Alaskan Arctic Populations 
119
the O1v542 mutation may have split from other Native American groups (see 
Figure 8.4 in Chapter 8). The third wave into the Americas occurred much 
later, leading to the formation of an Aleutian group. There is also a suggestion 
of a fourth split in Meso-​America that leads to central South American 
populations that differ from the coastal populations.
Figure 7.8  Migratory paths based on combined data from the MDS and 
phylogenetic trees.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Boyd, J. T., Peopling of the Americas: ABO Blood Group 
Haplotypes as an Indicator of Native American Origins and Migration from Siberia. M.A. Thesis, 
University of Kansas, 2014.
 
 
 

120 
In Search of Human Evolution
Conclusion
Siberian populations and Native Americans share most of the same mito­
chondrial DNA, Y-​chromosome, and ABO haplogroups. As expected, the 
parental Siberian groups have greater genetic variation (because of a longer 
evolutionary history), and only a subset of the markers were brought by 
the founders of the Native American populations. The Altai populations of 
Central Siberia share all five of the mtDNA haplogroups found in Native 
American populations, based on multivariate analyses cluster with Native 
Americans.
 
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0008
8
Aleutian Islands
Small-​Island Evolution
Human populations have experienced a series of fissions and geo­
graphic expansions, with a genesis in Africa more than 200,000 years BP, 
to the far corners of Eurasia, the Americas, and Oceania. The causes and 
consequences of such migrations depended on ecological, climatic, social, 
demographic, and biological factors. This chapter focuses on the causes and 
consequences of Aleut (endonym: Unangan) migrations and settlements 
from Siberia, across Beringia, and ultimately to an archipelago consisting 
of 200 islands distributed over 1,800 square kilometers of the Pacific, be­
tween North America and Asia. The chronology of this migration was in­
itially reconstructed using a synthesis of archaeological, geological, and 
ethnological evidence (Jochelson, 1933). The primary objectives of my 
initial study of the Aleutian Island populations were (1) to determine the 
genetic relationships among Beringian populations; (2) to test models for 
the peopling of the Aleutian Archipelago based on molecular genetic ev­
idence from contemporary populations; and (3) to characterize the dem­
ographic and genetic sequelae of European contact on the populations of 
the Aleutian Islands. This research was completed in collaboration with 
Professor Dennis O’Rourke, University of Utah. This chapter focuses on 
the causes and consequences of the migrations and settlements of Unangan 
(Aleut) populations expanding out of Siberia along Beringian landmass 
to settle in an archipelago consisting of 200 islands distributed over 1,800 
kilometers between North America and Asia (Figure 8.1). The chronology 
of this out-​of-​Siberia migration was reconstructed based on a combination 
of archaeological, geological, and molecular genetic evidence (Crawford 
and West, 2012; West et al., 2010).
 
 
 
 
 

122 
In Search of Human Evolution
History
The earliest evidence of human habitation in the Aleutian Archipelago 
is based on stratigraphy and radiocarbon dating (14C dates) of 9,000 to 
8,000 years BP from sites located in the eastern Fox Islands at Anagula 
and Hog Island in Unalaska Bay (Davis and Knecht, 2010). Central islands 
(Andreanof Islands) of this archipelago have sites dating back to 5,000 years 
BP. The westernmost islands (Rat Islands, Attu, and Shemya) were settled 
approximately 3,000 years ago. Apparently, the earliest Aleuts crossed the 
Bering land bridge more than 9,000 years ago and colonized the islands 
nearest to the Alaska Peninsula and in a westward direction reaching the 
Far Islands only 3,000 years ago (West et al., 2007). The prehistoric Aleut 
populations failed to reach the most westerly islands of the archipelago, 
Commander Islands (Bering and Mednii), and the northeastern Pribilof 
Islands (St. George and St. Paul). Russians forcibly relocated Aleut hunters 
(1825–​1830) from Umnak and Unalaska to the Pribilof Islands to harvest fur 
pelts for commerce in Europe.
What drove these migrations of the Siberians into the Americas? Why was 
this movement of Arctic hunters primarily in a westerly direction? Why did 
the Unangan cross Beringia and move in a westerly direction from island to 
island instead of moving in an easterly direction from Kamchatka?
Figure 8.1  Map of the Aleutian Archipelago, including the locations of the 
Alaska Peninsula, Kamchatka, and islands between Asia and Alaska.
 

Aleutian Islands 
123
Population Dynamics
Given the relative scarcity of food and limited technology, most populations 
of hunters and gatherers tend to consist of extended families of 50–​60 
individuals (Crawford, 1998). However, in a population migrating into 
eco-​niches with abundant resources, the mortality decreases and fertility 
increases, resulting in population fission and further migration. There is 
evidence based on the optimal foraging theory that applies to migrating 
Aleut populations, which posits that organisms first locate, capture, and 
consume calorically rich food resources (Winterhalder and Smith, 1981). 
Aleuts maximized their net energy intake per unit time by colonizing pre­
viously uninhabited islands. Evidence of this survival tactic was observed in 
the earliest site on Shemya Island, where the largest cod was initially caught 
by the first migrants, then followed by smaller fish and then harder-​to-​catch 
birds. When Aleuts depleted their top-​ranked resources, they first relied on 
smaller, harder-​to-​obtain and less caloric-​rich resources. The population 
increased in size, followed by fission and movement to adjoining islands to 
acquire previously untapped foraging territories.
Causes of Migration: Volcanic Eruption 
There is evidence from the Anagula Blade site (located on Ananiuliak 
Island) that volcanic eruptions destroyed food sources and forced the Aleuts 
to migrate and relocate to adjoining islands. Blade tools excavated from 
the Anagula site were covered by 10–​20 cm layers of volcanic ash, most 
likely associated with a volcanic eruption that created the Okmok Caldera 
(McCartney and Veltre, 1996). They suggested that the Anagula people fled 
to the Four Mountains islands to escape this Okmok eruption. Recent vol­
canic activity in 2008 of the Kasatochi volcano demonstrated the destruc­
tive effects of major volcanic eruptions on the surrounding Bering ecosystem 
and resulted in forced human migration. Events such as migrations and 
interactions between groups leave a genetic imprint on populations. Lydia 
Black (1981) has discussed the effects of volcanism on human ecology.
Climatic Changes
Climatic variation played a significant role in Aleut migrations. Savinetsky 
et al. (2011) analyzed diatoms from natural peat bog deposits on Adak 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

124 
In Search of Human Evolution
Island and demonstrated that the Central Aleutian Islands were inhabited 
during the coldest period of the Holocene. Cold climatic intervals 
coincided with the highest biodiversity, including the remains of saffron 
cod, an extremely cold-​tolerant fish dating back to 6,000 years BP. This 
cooler but drier climate was associated with weaker cyclonic activity, less 
wind, and calmer seas. Another window of opportunity for Aleuts to mi­
grate from the central islands to the western Near Islands of the archipelago 
occurred approximately 4,000 years ago. Peat bog analyses on Shemya 
Island revealed a cooler but drier climate, accompanied by weakened cy­
clonic activity that resulted in less wind and calmer seas. These climatic 
conditions enabled long-​distance interisland travel (e.g., from Rat Island to 
the Near Islands a distance of 221 km) to previously uninhabited islands in 
the far west.
Culture Contact and Colonization
The earliest Russian contact with the Aleuts began in the 18th century 
with voyages of exploration by Vitus Bering and Aleksei Cherikov. The 
Commander Islands were accidentally “discovered” by Bering and his crew 
when they were shipwrecked on their return voyage from the exploration of 
the Americas (Jochelson, 1933). After spending the winter on Bering Island, 
the survivors returned to Siberia with a harvest of fur pelts that triggered 
a rush by promyshlennki (fur hunters) to the Commander Islands. Between 
1824 and 1828, Aleuts from central and western islands were forcibly 
relocated by the Russian American Company to the Commander Islands 
to hunt for seals. Because of this contact and relocation, the Aleut popula­
tion was reduced in size from an estimated 8,000–​20,000 in the 17th century 
to fewer than 2,000 survivors of disease epidemics and warfare (Reedy-​
Maschner, 2010). Population sizes of Aleuts in the Commander Islands 
fluctuated from 45 residents in 1825 to a maximum of 626 in 1892. During 
the 1825–​1830 time period, Aleuts, primarily from Unalaska, were forcibly 
transplanted by the Russian administration to the Pribilof Islands (St. George 
and St. Paul) to hunt for seal fur.
In 1867, Alaska, including the Aleutian Archipelago, was purchased by 
the United States from Russia. All of the Aleutian Islands, except for the 
Commander Islands (Bering and Mednii), were included in the sale and 
came under US political jurisdiction. This purchase politically isolated the 
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
125
western Aleuts from the central and eastern groups and created a political 
barrier for any massive population movement
During World War II in 1943, the Japanese Imperial Navy bombed Dutch 
Harbor in the eastern Aleutian Islands and invaded Attu and Kiska Islands to 
the west. Aleut inhabitants and US Navy weather monitoring personnel were 
interred in a prisoner-​of-​war camp on Hokkaido, Japan. Few of the Attuans 
survived this internment and on their release returned to the adjoining is­
land, Atka, and to mainland Alaska, leaving Attu unoccupied. The American 
military also relocated Aleuts living on six islands from the center of the ar­
chipelago to evacuation camps in southeast Alaska. As a result, most of the 
islands in the Aleutian Archipelago are currently uninhabited.
Population Background of Unangans (Aleuts) 
The Aleuts primarily subsisted on marine resources, including sea mammals, 
fish, and various invertebrates. They constructed highly seaworthy kayaks, 
called “baidarkas,” which were ideal for fishing and hunting sea mammals, 
and capable of crossing ocean expanses between islands. These baidarkas 
consisted of soft sealskins stretched over a rigid space frame. The frame was 
usually constructed of driftwood since trees and wood were in scarce supply 
on the islands. These baidarkas permitted vast migrations that resulted in re­
gional differentiation in linguistic dialects, archaeological assemblages, and 
regional cultural differences. Dialectic groupings of Unangan language in­
clude Eastern Atkan and Attuan (now extinct). As of 2007, only 150 speakers 
of Aleut remain. Traditionally, the Aleuts lived in subterranean complexes, 
termed by the Russians as barbaras. The Aleuts preferred to call their tradi­
tional homes ulaxin.
Uniparential DNA Sampling and Analyses
In 1999, under the sponsorship of the National Science Foundation, research 
assistants from the University of Kansas, Rohina Rubicz and Mark Zlojutro, 
accompanied by Aleut elder, Alice Petrovelli and I, began an eight-​year re­
search program on the populations of the Aleutian Islands and Kamchatka, 
Siberia (Crawford et al., 2010). Initially, we sampled 267 Aleut volunteers 
from 11 island populations: Akutan, Atka, Bering (Commander Islands), 
False Pass, King Cove, Nelson Lagoon, Nikolski, Pribilof Islands (St. George 
and St. Paul), Sand Point, Umnak, Unalaska, and relocated Aleuts residing 

126 
In Search of Human Evolution
in Anchorage. Travel from island to island was by a small single-​propeller 
airplane that flew only in good weather. Buccal swabs and/​or blood samples 
were collected from Aleut volunteers, DNA extracted and analyzed for 
mtDNA haplotypes and sequences, and NRY chromosome markers (Rubicz 
et al., 2003; Zlojutro et al., 2009; Crawford et al., 2010). Given the choice be­
tween venipuncture and buccal swabs, the vast majority of the US Aleuts 
were willing to participate and provided buccal swabs. However, Aleuts and 
other indigenous groups of Siberia preferred venipuncture after providing 
written informed consent.
Out of the possible mitochondrial DNA haplogroups observed in Siberia 
and the Americas, only two haplogroups, A and D, are present in contempo­
rary Aleut populations (see Table 8.1). The geographic distribution of these 
haplogroups in Aleut populations is suggestive of a west-​to-​east gradient. The 
statistical relationship between geography and genetics was demonstrated 
through Mantel tests using correlations between genetic and geographic 
distance matrices. The relationship between geography and genetics for 
Table 8.1  Summary of the Distribution of mtDNA Haplogroups in the Bering 
Region 
Population
N
Haplogroup A
Haplogroup C 
Haplogroup D 
Other
Unalaska
Nikolski
Atka
St. George
St. Paul
Bering
Akutan
False Pass
King Cove
Nelson Lagoon
Sand Point
28
10
17
28
35
35
16
11
33
16
38
0.607
0.400
0.294
0.179
0.286
0.000
0.563
0.727
0.515
0.563
0.447
—​
—​ 
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
0.393
0.600
0.706
0.821
0.714
1.000
0.438
0.273
0.485
0.438
0.553
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
Aleut: Total
Alaskan Yupik
Siberian Yupik
Chukchi
Athapaskan
Koryak
Itelmen
267
25
90
72
21
147
46
0.378
0.960
0.700
0.708
0.952
0.054
0.065
0.000
0.000
0.022
0.097
0.048
0.361
0.130
0.622
0.000
0.278
0.111
0.000
0.014
0.000
0.000
0.400
0.000
0.083
0.000
0.571
0.804
Source: Reproduced with permission from Rubicz, R. C., Evolutionary Consequences of Recently 
Founded Aleut Communities in the Commander and Pribilof Islands. Ph.D. diss., University of 
Kansas, 2007.
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
127
the Aleutian populations was highly significant with r =​ 0.72 and p < 0.000 
(Crawford, 2007c). In part, this geographic gradient was further enhanced 
by the relocation to Bering Island by the Russian administrators of specific 
families bearing only the D haplogroups. The A7 haplotype (A2a1A) 
observed in Aleut populations differs from NaDene and Eskimo A3 by a spe­
cific Aleut mutation 16212 G (Zlojutro et al., 2006). Raff et al. (2010) found 
the B2 mtDNA haplogroup in 25% of the skeletal remains from the Brooks 
River site (Raff et al., 2010). These were transitions at np 16189C and 16217C 
diagnostic for the B2 lineage and suggestive of greater genetic diversity prior 
to population fission. The presence of B2, A2a1a, and D2a1a in DNA ancient 
samples was followed by temporal migration and loss of B2 throughout the 
archipelago. One result of the fission and population migration was the loss of 
genetic diversity throughout the Aleutian Islands.
The Aleut population of Bering Island contains a single haplogroup 
D. Fixation of D and loss of A have been attributed to genocide and epidemics 
by Derbeneva et al. (2002). Given that the frequency of haplogroup A is
30% in Aleut populations, it is unlikely that individuals with A were selec­
tively eliminated. Genetic drift hypothesis demonstrated that fixation of D
could not have occurred in six generations, given such a high frequency of
haplogroup D in the founding population.
Genetic Evidence of Kin Migration
Based on hypervariable region I and II mitochondrial DNA sequences, the 
spatial autocorrelation statistical method of Bertorelle and Barbujani (1995) 
was utilized to further elucidate the relationship between geography and ge­
netic markers. In Figure 8.2, the x-​axis contains the “lag geographic distances 
(kilometers),” while the y-​axis displays “product moment coefficients” anal­
ogous to Moran’s “I.” As predicted by the isolation-​by-​distance model, those 
populations closest geographically have the greatest, significant correlations. 
Those populations beyond approximately 1,300 km “lag geographic dis­
tance,” however, have negative correlations, suggestive of kin migration fol­
lowing population fission and resettlement. Spatial autocorrelation plots are 
indicative of kin/​family migration from island to island and indicate a rapid 
genetic differentiation of island populations and greater interisland genetic 
differentiation. The application of population genetic structure to complex 
diseases is discussed in Crawford (2015).

128 
In Search of Human Evolution
In contrast to mtDNA haplotypes found in contemporary Aleutian Islands 
that are entirely Native American, Y-​chromosome haplotypes reveal the 
extensive gene flow from the Russian military and administrators into the 
Aleut gene pool. Aleut males were separated from females by being moved 
to other islands to hunt fur seals. The Russian administration encouraged 
unions between Aleut females and Russian males as a way of politically con­
trolling the admixed populations. These asymmetric gene pools prompted 
Reedy-​Maschner (2010) to write an article posing the question: “Where did 
all the Aleut males go?”
Figure 8.2 plots the spatial patterns of mtDNA sequence diversity. The 
ordinate contains the autocorrelation indices, while the abscissa is the dis­
tance in kilometers between the islands. Using the method of Bertorelle and 
Barbujani (1995), the relationship between geographic distance and mtDNA 
sequences is highly significant (p < 0.000). This plot supports a kin struc­
tured migration model—​that is, fission occurred along familial lines. The 
highest correlation between populations is in the 500-​km distance, followed 
by lower correlations in the 1,000-​km lag and negative correlations in the 
greater distances. The relationship between geography and genetics appears 
to be linear and highly significant statistically, indicating kin migration.
Figure 8.4 presents a plot of the Aleutian Islands based on Monmonier’s 
(1973) Maximum Difference algorithm, which identifies triangulation 
500
0.5
0.0
–0.5
1000
Product Moment Coefficient
Lag Geographic Distance (Km)
2000
2600
**
**
**
**
**
Figure 8.2  Spatial autocorrelation plot of populations from the Alaskan 
archipelago using mtDNA sequences and the methods of Bertorelle and 
Barbujani (1995).
Source: Adapted with permission from Crawford, M. H. et al., “Origins of Aleuts and Genetic 
Structure of Populations of the Archipelago,” Human Biology 82(5–​6): 710. © 2010, The Authors.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
129
Hg.A
Hg.D
Other
Chukchi
Itelmen
Koryak
Bering Is.
St. Paul
St.George
Attu
Atka
Ikatan
Akutan
Nikolski
Unalaska Is.
Sanak Is.
Shumagin Islands
Upper Alaska Peninsula
Alaskan Yupik
Athabaskan
Siberian Yupik
Siberia
Alaska
Bering Sea
Belkofski
Figure 8.3  Mitochondrial DNA haplotypes distributed over the Aleutian 
Archipelago, Alaska, and Siberia.
Source: Adapted with permission from Crawford, M. H. et al., “Origins of Aleuts and Genetic 
Structure of Populations of the Archipelago,” Human Biology 82(5–​6): 701, fig. 3. © 2010, The 
Authors.
Figure 8.4  Triangulation plot for identifying genetic discontinuity.
Source: Adapted with permission from Crawford, M. H. et al., “Origins of Aleuts and Genetic 
Structure of Populations of the Archipelago,” Human Biology 82 (5–​6): 708, fig. 8. © 2010, The 
Authors.
 
 
 
 
 

130 
In Search of Human Evolution
genetic boundaries, namely, geographic zones where differences are largest 
(Barrier, version 2.2). This method identifies genetic discontinuity based on 
the proportion of the total genetic variance resulting from differences be­
tween groups. In regard to Aleut migration, barriers exist on the western 
Alaskan peninsula and the central region. The triangulation method also 
reveals a genetic barrier between Kamchatka and the eastern Aleutian 
Islands. The Aleutian Islands have two other genetic barriers connected to 
migrations made possible by changes in weather.
Y-​chromosome geographic distribution in the Aleutian Islands reflects 
Russian admixture primarily in the central and western islands. Thus, 
haplogroup R1a (East European) is most common on Bering Island and 
the Pribilof Islands (see Figure 8.5). The eastern Aleutian Islands experi­
enced gene flow primarily from west European fishermen and exhibit the 
haplogroup R1b, which is most frequently found in Scotland and England.
The principal component plot, based on Y-​chromome single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), reveals a clustering of the Aleut populations ex­
cept for Akutan and False Pass. This variation is most likely due to small 
sample sizes collected from those islands. St. George and St. Paul cluster with 
Russian populations due to high frequency of gene flow. Nelson Lagoon and 
Sand Point reflect west European admixture.
Kamchatka
In August 2001, we wanted to test the hypothesis (originally generated by 
Russian researchers) that Aleuts originated in Kamchatka and expanded 
into the islands from the east in a westward direction. Archaeological data 
suggested that Aleuts came from Siberia with the earliest site located in 
an eastern island. We set up a collaborative project with Professor Victor 
Spitsyn from the Institute of Anthropology in Moscow. Spitsyn and his 
research team had to cross eight Russian time zones to fly from Moscow 
to Petropavlovsk, capital of Kamchatka. The research team drove from 
Petropavlovsk to two communities on Kamchatka, namely Esso, which is 
520 km north of the capital, and Anavgai, approximately 100 km east of Esso. 
This allowed us to obtain DNA samples from Evens and Koryaks—​two in­
digenous Siberian populations that had settled in Kamchatka. Following the 
research in Anavgai and Esso, we returned to Petropavlovsk and then flew 
on a small airplane to Nikolskoye, Bering Island. Bering Island and Mednii 
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
131
(Copper) Island are part of the Commander Islands. Although Mednii once 
had a small Aleut community, it was vacated during the 1960s. Because of 
severe fog, bad weather, and fracturing my left tibula in an accidental fall on 
the side of a volcano, we were one week late returning to Petropavlovsk. This 
created a crisis because we would overstay by a few days our agreement with 
the Russian National Academy of Sciences. At that time a single commercial 
flight of 1,500 miles was available per week from Petropavlosk to Anchorage. 
The “apparatchiks” (Russian contemptible administrators) of Kamchatka 
demanded written permission from the Academy of Science, located in 
Moscow, for an extension of our stay for a few extra days. However, academi­
cian Spitsyn was able to persuade the Kamchatkan administrators to 
Nelson Lagoon
6
5
5
4
4
2
4
5
7
3
4
2
3
1
30
21.9
25.5
8.8
6.6
7.3
5.1
13.9
7.3
3.6
0.0
35
12
9
10
7
19
10
5
0
1
5
1
2
1
1
3
3
2
1
3
1
1
6
3
3
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
2
1
3
3
3
1
2
1
5
1
3
9
1
Sand Point
King Cove
False Pass
Akutan
Unalaska
St. George
St. Paul
Bering Island
TOTAL
M269
Percentage
M269
10381b M3
P36
M231
12f2
M253
M170
P2
P39
10381b M3
P36
M231
12f2
M253
M170
P2
P39
R1b
R1a
Q3
Q*
N
J
I1a
I*
E3
C3b
B
A
Figure 8.5  Y-​chromosome haplotypes based on single nucleotide 
polymorphisms for the Aleutian Islands.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Zlojutro, M., Mitochondrial DNA and Y-​chromosome 
Variation of Eastern Aleut Populations: Implications for the Genetic Structure and Peopling of the 
Aleutian Archipelago. Ph.D. diss., University of Kansas, 2008.
 
 
 

132 
In Search of Human Evolution
allow us to stay a few extra days without formal written permission from the 
Moscow-​based Academy of Science. The US portion of the team flew from 
Petropavlosk to Anchorage the following week.
Resampling of the Aleutian Archipelago 
The sampling of Aleut populations was further expanded in October 2015 
during a yearly meeting of the Aleutian Corporation in Anchorage, Alaska. 
More than 200 representatives from eleven of the Aleutian Islands attended 
this meeting. After I gave a lecture outlining the significance of the research 
program to the assembled trustees, 116 Aleuts volunteered to participate 
in this study. Through the support of a National Geographic Society grant, 
GENO 2.0 Grant #178163, Randy David and I were able to obtain written 
informed consent, collect buccal swabs, extract DNA, and test for 750,000 
SNPs distributed throughout the genome. Although the Aleuts of the Siberian 
Islands agreed to provide blood samples through venipuncture, the trustees 
of the Aleutian Island Corporation were only willing to offer buccal swabs 
and genealogical information. Randy David, a doctoral student from the 
University of Kansas, assisted me in the collection of the buccal swabs, dem­
ographic/​genealogical information, and written informed consent from a 
table located outside the trustee-​meeting hall. The results of the DNA analyses 
were provided (confidentially) to individuals who had requested feedback 
during the initial interviews. With the availability of GENO 2.0 SNP chips 
characterizing 750,000 SNPs through the sponsorship of National Geographic 
Society (NGS), this survey of the Aleutian Islands was much more informa­
tive than the earlier analyses based only on uniparental markers mtDNA and 
NRY. Gene by Gene Limited Laboratories genotyped 145 Aleuts using an 
Illumina platform and the newly developed NGS SNP chip.
Results
Varying degrees of admixture with Russian, English, and Scottish immigrants 
were recorded, depending on geographic location, of individuals sampled. 
Table 8.2 summarizes Russian ancestry for eight geographic zones with the 
highest Russian/​European admixture in the Pribilof Islands and the Eastern 
Archipelago. There was low Aleut ancestry, only 7.6%, in the few individuals 
who did not provide their place of birth to the researchers. On average, 51.4% 
of the genes in the Aleutian Islands were of European ancestry.
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
133
Principal Component Analyses
Principal components analyses (PCA) is a useful method for evaluating an­
cestry since the genes mirror the evolutionary and demographic history 
of human populations. PCA is a dimension reduction method, and in this 
study it was performed on 170,636 SNPs from the 750,000 SNPs initially 
characterized using the GENO 2.0 chip (Patterson et al., 2006). The SNPs 
were pruned using the computer program PLINK, which removed SNPs 
that were in linkage disequilibrium with other SNPs (Purcell et al., 2007). 
Individuals missing more than 10% of their SNPs and in cases of relatives 
with IBD values of 0.2, one of the two SNPs was removed from the anal­
ysis. PCA captures variation in multidimensional data and reorganizes 
it along orthogonal axes, ordered by the variances that they capture (Price 
et al., 2006). The 170,636 SNPs and 2,499 individuals (72 remaining from 
the Aleuts) were aggregated and provided a glimpse into the genetic struc­
ture and ancestry of Aleuts, by comparing them to Africans, East Asians, 
Europeans, Native Americans, and South Asians compiled from the 1000 
Genome Project (The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2015). The first 
PC axis separated the Africans from all other populations, while the second 
PC separated East Asians and Europeans. A few of the Aleuts clustered 
among Europeans indicating considerable Russian or west European admix­
ture. In the PCA, individual Aleut participants were distributed between East 
Asians and European populations with several culturally identified Aleuts 
clustering solely with European genomes.
Table 8.2  Admixture Estimates of Ethnic Aleuts Residing in Different Regions 
of Alaska and Siberia
Population
Aleut
Other (European/​Russian)
Bering
Eastern Peninsula
Pribilof Islands
Central Archipelago
Eastern Archipelago
Mainland Alaska
Mainland United States
Unknown, POB
Total
59.7
56.8
38.2
48.1
40.0
48.9
40.5
7.6
48.6
40.3
43.2
61.8
51.9
60.0
51.1
59.5
92.4
51.4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

134 
In Search of Human Evolution
Admixture Analysis
Depending on methods used and genetic markers employed, there is con­
siderable variation as to the estimated proportion of Aleut versus Russian/​
European ancestry. If uniparental markers (mtDNA) are utilized for diallelic 
estimates, 100% of Aleuts with known Native American ancestry display 
only indigenous American haplogroups—​“A” and “D.” However, only 15% of 
Aleuts displayed Native American NRY markers. Admixture estimates based 
on autosomal STR markers suggest that 60% of Aleut ancestry-​informing 
sites are indigenous American and 40% are the result of gene flow from 
European sources (see Figure 8.5). Admixture estimates for Bering Island 
(the least admixed of all islands in the archipelago) based on 750,000 SNPs 
provide similar ancestry proportions of 60% Aleut and 40% Russian gene 
flow (see Table 8.3).
The Admixture 1.3 program was utilized for estimating ancestry in a 
model-​based analysis from a large autosomal SNP data set using unrelated 
individuals (Alexander et al., 2009). The “K-​means” algorithm sorted 
individuals into an increasing number of clusters and yielded a Bayesian 
Information Criterion (BIC) value for K. The K value with the lowest BIC 
yields evidence of the best fit for the data. Equal sample-​sized populations 
of genomes were used in this analysis to represent six geographic regions 
(downloaded from the 1000 Genomes Project) and compared to the 
Aleuts (Crawford et al., 2021). The best fit for the admixture analysis (with 
the lowest cross validation error BIC =​ 1414.64) was k =​ 2 suggestive of 
Table 8.3  Admixture/​Ancestry Estimates Based on Uniparental Markers, 
Autosomal Short Tandem Repeats, and Genomic 750,000 Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms
Genetic Marker(s) 
Percentage Aleut 
(Indigenous American)
Percentage  
Russian/​European
Mitochondrial DNA
100
0
Nonrecombining Y STRs
15
85
Autosomal STRs
60
40
Genomic SNPs 
60
40
SNPs: single nucleotide polymorphisms; STRs: short tandem repeats.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Zlojutro, M., Mitochondrial DNA and Y-​chromosome 
Variation of Eastern Aleut Populations: Implications for the Genetic Structure and Peopling of the 
Aleutian Archipelago. Ph.D. diss., University of Kansas, 2008.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
135
Aleut and European (Russian/​Scandinavian ancestry). The next best fit 
(BIC =​ 1417.395), k =​ 3 reflected an earlier evolutionary event, the replace­
ment of Paleo-​Aleuts by Neo-​Aleuts (see Figure 8.6).
Since 1999, we have conducted research on the origins and genetic struc­
ture of indigenous populations of the Aleutian Islands primarily based on 
uniparental markers—​mtDNA and NRY. These studies revealed the fol­
lowing: (1) The underlying Aleut genetic structure was preserved in the ma­
ternal genomes with an exceptionally high correlation (r =​ 0.68, p > 0.004) 
between geographic and genetic distances among 11 islands distributed 
from the Alaska peninsula to Kamchatka, Siberia. (2) In contrast to mtDNA 
markers, no significant correlation was observed between NRY markers and 
geography. (3) Only 15% of indigenous Aleut Y-​chromosomes were observed 
in Aleut males. Most of the NYR markers originated in Russia, Scandinavia, 
or England.
This is a follow-​up study using buccal swabs from 115 volunteer Aleuts, 
attending a corporation meeting in Anchorage, Alaska, in 2014. An addi­
tional 30 blood samples were available from Aleuts of Bering Island from 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ancestry
Individuals
0.8
1.0
Figure 8.6  Population structure inferred from an ADMIXTURE analysis. 
ADMIXTURE indicates two clusters (k =​ 2). Each individual is represented by a 
vertical stacked column indicating the proportions of ancestry in k constructed 
ancestral groups.
 
 
 
 
 

136 
In Search of Human Evolution
the earlier field research of 2004. DNA was extracted and 750,000 SNPs 
were identified by FTDNA Genomics Center of Houston, Texas. This new 
Geno 2.0 Chip is an illumina HD select genotyping bead array that includes 
mtDNA, NRY, and autosomal SNPs distributed throughout the genome. 
These SNPs were pruned by the removal of related individuals through pair­
wise linkage disequilibrium (LD) in the PLINK program. PCA analyses were 
plotted using the EIGENSOFT package, and population structure was re­
vealed using the ADMIXTURE Program. Intra-​ and interpopulation diver­
sity were estimated using Arlequin software version 3.5.
ADMIXTURE 1.3 program was used for estimating ancestry in a model-​
based analysis using a large autosomal SNP genotype data set with unrelated 
individuals (Alexander et al., 2009). K-​means algorithm sorted individuals 
African
East Asian
European
Native
American
South Asian
K = 7
K = 6
K = 5
K = 4
K = 3
Aleut
Figure 8.7  ADMIXTURE analysis based on 1000 Genomes Project data and 
compared to Unangax autosomal SNPs. Individuals are represented by vertical 
lines partitioned into segments corresponding to their membership in genetic 
clusters, indicated by color.
Source: Adapted from Muñoz-​Moreno, M., and Crawford, M. H. (Eds.), Human 
Migration: Biocultural Perspectives, p. 29, fig. 2.6. © Oxford University Press 2021.
 
 
 
 

Aleutian Islands 
137
into an increasing number of clusters and then provided a Bayesian 
Information Criterion (BIC) value of K. The K with the lowest BIC is the best 
fit for the data. Using unsupervised clustering (adegenet), the best fit for the 
number of gene clusters in the Aleut dataset is K =​ 1 with the Bering Island 
sample being the least admixed population.
Mitochondrial DNA sequences preserved the genetic structure of Aleutian 
populations, as evidenced by the high correlation of genetic distances with 
geographic distances. Residents with Aleut mothers exhibit either the A or 
D haplotypes. Gene flow from Russian males to Aleut females is reflected in 
only 15% of the Y-​chromosome haplogroups Q or Q3—​Native American. 
Remaining haplogroups are of European (E, I, I1a) or Eurasian (J, N, R1a, 
and R1b) origin. This pattern of gene flow (Russian males and Aleut females) 
resulted from a policy advocated by the Russian governor of Bering.
The use of 750,000 mutational markers across the entire genome pro­
vided greater precision and statistical power when compared to population 
–0.03
–0.03
–0.02
–0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
–0.02
–0.01
Principal Component #1
African
Aleut
East Asian
European
Native American
South Asian
Principal Component #2
0.00
0.01
Figure 8.8  Principal component analysis for six ancestral populations (k). The 
ancestral populations include Africa, Aleut, East Asia, Europe, Native America, 
and South Asia.
Source: Adapted from Muñoz-​Moreno, M., and Crawford, M. H. (Eds.), Human 
Migration: Biocultural Perspectives, p. 28, fig. 2.5. © Oxford University Press 2021.
 
 
 
 
 

138 
In Search of Human Evolution
structure reconstruction using uniparental markers. Comparative data from 
NGS allowed identification of gene flow from specific regions of Europe.
Conclusion
Evolutionary consequences of the settlement of the Aleutian Islands in­
clude the following: (1) Loss of genetic variability resulted from population 
fission and founder effect. This conclusion is confirmed by the absence of 
mitochondrial haplogroup “B” in contemporary populations, despite being 
found at 25% in a small prehistoric site. (2) Spatial autocorrelation results 
reflect frequent kin migration. This form of familial migration resulted in 
increased genetic drift, and hence rapid genetic differentiation of the more 
distant island populations, and further reduced genetic variation in Unangan 
populations of the archipelago. (3) Genetic discontinuity is illustrated by the 
presence of mating/​genetic barriers that reflect historical climatic variation. 
Long-​distance migrations occurred principally during periods of extreme 
cold and aridity that resulted in pacific seas. By contrast, periods of cyclonic 
activity and tempestuous seas coincided with relatively less population 
movement and greater genetic differentiation of island group populations. 
(4) Mitochondrial DNA sequences preserved interisland maternal popula­
tion structure and migration patterns. mtDNA evidence supports the high 
correlation of genetic distance with geographic distance (r =​ 0.72; p < 0.000). 
This intimate relationship between genetics and geography was observed 
in contemporary populations despite numerous sociopolitical and demo­
graphic upheavals, such as World War II relocation to Anchorage and the 
1825 forced relocation of Unangan males to the Commander and Pribilof 
Islands for the harvesting of seal furs. (5) No statistically significant corre­
lation was observed between genomics and geography based on NRY ge­
netic markers. This finding is due to the clear pattern of gene flow between 
Russian male migrants and Unangan females. Only 15% of the contem­
porary Unangan male population exhibited indigenous American NRY 
haplogroups, Q and Q3. Remaining haplogroups are of European (E, I, I1A) 
and Eurasian (J, N, R1a, and R1b) origin. Post-​contact gene flow into the 
Aleutian Islands was from Russian males in the central and western regions; 
English and Scandinavian fishermen entered the Eastern Islands after the 
sale of Alaska by Russia.
 
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0009
9
Bio-​demography of Italian  
and Hungarian Populations
Introduction
The genetic structure of human populations can be analyzed using demo­
graphic data. Under some political and social situations, it is not possible 
to obtain genetic data from specific populations, even though their genetic 
structure may provide significant evolutionary information. Normally, 
demographic and social data are gathered together with the genetic and 
morphological data by teams of researchers in the field (Crawford et al., 
2007d). During 50+​ years of field investigations, in several studies it was 
not always possible to collect genetic data due either to the reluctance of the 
communities or the specifications of the supporting granting agencies. I had 
to rely on bio-​demographic analyses, based on church records, documents, 
and family interviews, to assess affinities among populations based on mi­
gration matrices. In this chapter, I will review two such examples: (1) a study 
of three alpine villages experiencing a breakdown of reproductive isolation 
in northern Italy and (2) 24 agricultural communities isolated by a bend 
in the Tisza River and affected by a change in the location of the Russian 
border (Crawford et al., 1999). The Tiszahat project was supported by the 
Earthwatch Foundation and staffed by volunteers experiencing fieldwork for 
the first time while receiving class training in genetics and anthropology.
Italian Valley—​Valle Maira
My research on human population dynamics was initiated during the 
summer of 1968. A colleague from University of Pittsburgh, Professor Alan 
McPherron, who had conducted archaeological excavations in Yugoslavia, 
was a strong advocate for expanding anthropological genetic research to 
this geographic region. When I attended an academic meeting at the former 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

140 
In Search of Human Evolution
dacha of Generalisimo Tito (located in Andrejevlhe), little was known about 
the genetics of Serbian populations. Yugoslavia was just emerging out of 
Soviet domination, and as a result there were numerous restrictions on for­
eign research. I met most of the Serbian and Croatian anthropologists at this 
meeting but became aware of the difficulties of conducting genetic research 
in Yugoslavia. I returned by train with a stopover in Torino, where I visited 
Professor Brunetto Chiarelli, the head of the Institute of Anthropology at the 
University of Torino. He convinced me that the alpine valleys south of Torino 
offered better opportunities for evolutionary research of isolated villages.
Valle Maira is an Alpine valley of northern Italy, carved by the meanderings 
of the Po River with an entrance approximately 40 km northwest of the City 
of Cuneo and 100 km south of the city of Torino (see Figure 9.1). This valley 
is 43 km in length, narrow, with villages lining a single road traversing its 
length. Some of the villages located off the main road are inaccessible from 
four to six months of the year due to heavy snowfall and danger of avalanches 
during the winter months.
According to the 1962 census, the total population of Valle Maira 
was 15,472 inhabitants, with the village of Dronero at the mouth of the 
valley being most populous—​that is, consisting of 6,670 inhabitants. 
Administratively, the valley was divided into nine communes, which are 
comparable to townships. This study focused on three communes: Acceglio 
(with 482 inhabitants located at the eastern terminus of the valley), Elva 
(with 94 inhabitants and geographically the most isolated community, north 
Figure 9.1  Map of Valle Maira, including the three communes, Acceglio, Elca, 
and Dronero, sampled in this study.
Source: Reproduced with permission from A. W. Eriksson et al. (Eds.), Population Structure and 
Genetic Disorders. © 1980, Elsevier.
 
 
 
 
 

Italian and Hungarian Populations 
141
of the Valley), and Tetti, a hamlet (frazione) of the commune of Dronero, 
located at the mouth of the valley. These three communities were selected for 
study to examine varying degrees of geographic isolation and potential gene 
flow (see Figure 9.2).
Participants
A research team from the Anthropological Institute of the University of 
Torino consisted of graduate students, including Chiara Bullo, Anna Vidili, 
Lorenzo Grosspietro, and Anna Imasi. We spent three months conducting 
research on three villages: Acceglio (endpoint of the valley near the border 
of France was divided into seven hamlets), Dronero (village closest to the 
entrance to Valle Maira), and Elva (the most isolated village north of the 
valley). This research team focused on transcribing church records to recon­
struct changes in migration, mating patterns, and marital distances over a 
period of several generations. Standard demographic questionnaires were 
administered to the heads of 260 households from the three communities. 
These forms were designed to reconstruct genealogies and to obtain 
Figure 9.2  Photograph of Valle Maira with the village of Acceglio visible at a 
distance. This village is closest to the French border to the west of the commune.
 
 
 
 
 

142 
In Search of Human Evolution
demographic information on three or four generations. However, we learned 
that the residents of the three villages did not wish to participate in genetic 
aspects of the study, particularly involving the drawing of blood through 
venipuncture. At that time, buccal swabs were not an option, and DNA ex­
traction was too expensive and technically not feasible.
The church records from Valle Maira offered an opportunity to measure 
the breakdown of reproductive isolation in a series of genetic isolates. I de­
fined “genetic isolate” as small populations with varying degrees of reproduc­
tive isolation (Crawford, 1980). This study attempted to document the degree 
of reproductive isolation of alpine populations and recent increase in immi­
gration and emigration resulting from tourism and industrialization during 
the last 50 years in large urban centers, such as Torino and Milano, proximal 
to the valley. The demographic analyses documenting the gradual disinte­
gration of social isolation included changes in the frequencies of isonymous 
marriages (marriages between mating pairs having the same surname and 
possibly sharing common ancestry) and geographic expansion of marital 
distances (North and Crawford, 1996). In small village populations with a 
limited number of surnames, frequency of isonymy provides a rough estimate 
of isolation and inbreeding. Lasker (1985: 525) observed that “Surnames are 
used by human biologists because in many cultures they are inherited like 
genes.” Graf et al. (2010) demonstrated the relationship between surname 
distributions and Y-​chromosome markers in Aleut populations.
Demographic Analyses
An examination of the incidence of exogamous marriages, over four gener­
ations, reveals that Elva was reproductively the most isolated with only 4% 
of marriages in the earliest generation being exogamous (see Table 9.1). The 
commune of Acceglio displayed the next most frequent exogamy rates and 
displayed the disintegration of population isolation. During the last gener­
ation, more than one of every two marriages came from outside the village. 
This breakdown of reproductive isolation came from migration to larger 
towns, Torino and Cuneo, for employment and tourism into the valley.
The commune of Acceglio had been declining numerically during the 
last 50 years. The census of 1951 revealed a reduction of 47% from 1951 to 
1967. This drastic reduction in population size was a result of two world 
wars, which constricted the population pyramid through a combination of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Italian and Hungarian Populations 
143
factors: rapid increase in mortality of young men killed during the wars and 
reduction in fertility plus high westward emigration to France and to the in­
dustrial cities of the north and south.
Similarly, the incidence of individuals with the same surname mar­
rying, that is, isonymy, is highest in the most isolated community, Elva (see 
Table 9.2). In small isolated communities with a limited number of surnames, 
isonymy provides an approximation of degree of inbreeding (Lasker, 1985). 
Only four surnames were present in the church records of Elva, and this 
community displays from 21% to 12% isonymous marriages. Tetti, the least 
isolated frazione, displays from 9% to 2% isonymous marriages. Analysis of 
Tarpa (northeastern community) based on isonymy and repeated pairs (RP) 
revealed the population structure of this Valle Maira community from 1780 
to 1979 (Duggirala et al., 1992).
The degree of reproductive isolation was assessed on the basis of marital 
exogamy and constancy of surnames in the population over time. Genetic 
isolation underwent a rapid change during World War I, Benito Mussolini’s 
Table 9.1  Frequencies of Exogamous Marriages in Three Italian Alpine 
Communities
Generation
Dates
Acceglio
Elva
Tetti
4
1890–​1910
7.91
4.00
10.00
3
1911–​1930
4.32
6.15
15.25
2
1931–​1950
20.00
15.45
32.00
1
1951–​1968
50.49
25.00
52.00
Source: Reproduced with permission from A. W. Eriksson et al. (Eds.), Population Structure and 
Genetic Disorders. © 1980, Elsevier.
Table 9.2  Frequencies of Isonymous Marriages during Four Time Periods in 
Three Italian Alpine Communities
Generation
Dates
Acceglio
Elva
Tetti
4
1869–​1888
15.12
21.50
9.00
3
1889–​1908
15.00
16.31
10.26
2
1909–​1928
3.90
12.32
4.32
1
1929–​1948
4.13
12.60
2.10
Source: Reproduced with permission from A. W. Eriksson et al. (Eds.), Population Structure and 
Genetic Disorders. © 1980, Elsevier.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

144 
In Search of Human Evolution
ascent to power, and World War II. Geographic barriers such as mountains 
influence mate selection and marital movement. However, economic factors 
such as employment in heavy industry attract laborers from the valley into 
cities at a disproportionate rate.
Conclusion
Although genetic documentation of the breakdown of reproductive isola­
tion, based on blood groups and protein markers, was not possible in the 
1960s, currently there is greater interest in molecular genetics and individual 
ancestry. It may now be possible to document the genetic changes associated 
with population movement.
Tiszahat, Hungary—​Subdivided Agricultural Populations
Introduction
In 1985, the National Academy of Sciences funded a pilot study by Michael 
Crawford conducted in Tiszahat. In 1986, Earthwatch Foundation funded 
an expedition to Tiszahat, Hungary, for 15 volunteer/​participants to obtain 
training and unique cultural experiences. A team of faculty and graduate 
students of anthropology from Kosuth University at Debrecen, plus sev­
eral US and United Kingdom professors were organized to provide lectures 
and training and to supervise research by the volunteers. Native Hungarian 
graduate students from Kosuth University were paired with the English-​
speaking volunteers to record church records and to interview Tiszahat 
families.
Participants
Two Hungarian faculty members, Professors Miklos Pap and Katalin 
Szilagyi, from the Department of Evolutionary Zoology and Human Biology 
at Kosuth University, obtained the necessary governmental permissions 
for this research program and helped train the volunteers. In addition, 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Italian and Hungarian Populations 
145
graduate students from Kosuth University were paired with the Earthwatch 
volunteers.
Professor Tibor Koertvelyessy, from Ohio University, a Hungarian emigre 
to the United States during the Hungarian uprising of the 1960s was a bi­
lingual Hungarian/​English speaker with considerable field experience and 
knowledge of Hungarian history. He lectured to the Earthwatch volunteers 
about the use of church records for bio-​demographic studies.
Dr. Rosalind Harding, currently an Associate Professor of Biological 
Anthropology at Oxford University, also provided lectures on the ge­
netic structure of human populations based on demographic data. Her 
Ph.D. dissertation at LaTrobe University of Melbourne focused on demo­
graphic aspects of population biology.
Professor Peter Nute, Department of Anthropology, University of 
Washington, provided lectures on genetic theory in the training sessions for 
the volunteers.
History
Tiszahat is an agricultural region of northeastern Hungary outlined by a 
bend in the Tisza River and the Russian border. Tiszahat has been highly 
stable numerically with settlements dating back to the 12th century AD. 
However, in 1945 after World War II, a new Hungarian-​USSR Russian 
border was imposed, partitioning the region. In addition, migration across 
the Soviet border was difficult due to political reasons. Tiszahat populations 
were chosen for study because of their subdivision into 21 villages and geo­
graphic isolation from the remainder of Hungary. The Tisza River inundated 
the region periodically, creating a swampy land infested with mosquitos and 
malaria. Because of its geographic isolation and disease patterns, Tiszahat 
remained culturally and genetically homogeneous and avoided invasion by 
various European and Asian armies. However, despite the cultural homoge­
neity, a religious dichotomy into Catholic and Calvinist congregations was 
observed in several villages of Tiszahat. The demographic consequences 
and possible evolutionary implications of the Tiszahat region split into a 
religious dichotomy has been earlier discussed by Koertvelyessy et al. 
(1992, 1993).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

146 
In Search of Human Evolution
Methodology
Calvinist Church records were transcribed for all 24 of the Tiszahat villages 
from the end of the 18th century to 1986. Some of these villages in close ge­
ography proximity had merged because of their numerical growth, and the 
records had to be combined. As a result, matrimonial migration patterns 
Figure 9.3  Map of the Tiszahat region of northeastern Hungary.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H. et al., “The Effects of a New Political 
Border on the Migration Patterns and Predicted Kinship (PHI) in a Subdivided Hungarian 
Agricultural Population: Tiszahat,” Homo-​journal of Comparative Human Biology 50(3): 201–​210. © 
1999, Elsevier.
 
 
 
 
 

Italian and Hungarian Populations 
147
were measured for 20 villages (Crawford et al., 1999). Migration patterns for 
two time periods, 1875–​1899 and 1950–​1974, were compared. These periods 
of time were chosen to contrast patterns of migration prior to World War 
I and II versus migration after the establishment of a new border and the 
political subdivision of Tiszahat. Surname repetition and isonymy were 
compared as a measure of population structure in Tiszahat communities 
(Koertvelyessy et al., 1990).
Two marital migration matrices were constructed with male and female 
villages of birth represented by rows and columns. Based on these ma­
trices, predicted kinship Øij, a measure of the genetic similarity between 
populations, was computed (Morton, 1973). The diagonal elements of the 
matrix provide the probability that two random genes in a population were 
identical by descent and denoted local kinship (Crawford et al., 1999). The 
off diagonal elements of the matrices measure the genetic relationship be­
tween any two populations: i and j. High values denote close population 
affinity, while low values suggest little genetic resemblance (Crawford 
et al., 1999).
Results
A comparison of predicted kinship Phi between two time periods reveals a 
significant reduction in Phi from 1875 to 1979. Specific comparisons of pairs 
of villages reveal a breakdown in isolation in some villages and no statisti­
cally significant differences in others. Only two villages (Gergelyiugornya 
and Beregsurany) out of 20 comparisons had a slight increase in predicted 
kinship. Given the increase in migration and breakdown of isolation from 
1875 to 1979, it is not surprising that the likelihood of random genes being of 
common descent is reduced.
The correlation between the Phi values for all 20 communities during the 
two time periods is 0.56, which is highly significant (p < 0.001). A matrix 
correlation between Phi and geography (as measured by trail distances be­
tween the villages) exhibits a negative association of r =​ –​0.58 NS. As shown 
in Figure 9.4, the relationship between Phi and geography is curvilinear 
for both time periods, resulting in a pseudo-​leptokurtic curve (Crawford 
et al., 1999).
 
 
 
 
 
 

148 
In Search of Human Evolution
Conclusion
The bio-​demographic results generate hypotheses that can be tested using 
genetic data. In the Tiszahat study the relationship between geography and 
predicted kinship decreased over the two periods and resembled Malecott’s 
(1969) isolation-​by-​distance model. The effects of the imposition of a new 
border between Hungary and the USSR in 1945 resulted in a reduction of 
endogamy and a decrease in predicted kinship. The closing of the border 
in 1945 created a linear effect as a result of greater gene exchanges between 
–10.00
–5000.00
0.00
5000.00
Predicted Kinship
10000.00
15000.00
20000.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
Figure 9.4  Predicted kinship versus geography for 1875 to 1899.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Crawford, M. H. et al., “The Effects of a New Political 
Border on the Migration Patterns and Predicted Kinship (PHI) in a Subdivided Hungarian 
Agricultural Population: Tiszahat,” Homo-​journal of Comparative Human Biology 50(3): 201–​210. © 
1999, Elsevier.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Italian and Hungarian Populations 
149
adjacent villages and the elimination of gene flow from an easterly direction. 
Application of molecular genetic data to test the demographic results would 
permit the testing of hypotheses generated by the church record–​based mi­
gration data. “Tiszahat population structure has been affected in a single gen­
eration by a unique historical effect”—​that is, the creation of a new border 
(Crawford et al., 1999: 209).
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0010
10
Genetic Epidemiology
Primate (Baboon) Models of Disease
Sukhumi Baboons and Outbreak of Leukemia/​Lymphoma
In 1964, I visited the Sukhumi Primate Center in Abkhasia with hopes of 
obtaining blood samples from the massive Papio hamadryas (baboon) 
colony for characterizing the genetic structure of captive colonies (see 
Figure 10.1). Unfortunately, its director, Boris Lapin (a decorated and 
wounded pilot from World War II), was not present during my initial visit, 
but the assistant director escorted me on a tour of the facilities. I was in­
formed at that time that it was not possible to ship blood samples from the 
USSR to the United States. Later, while on a National Academy of Sciences 
Exchange to the Soviet Union in 1976, I revisited the Sukhumi Primate 
Center again and discovered that an outbreak of malignant lymphoma 
(malignancy of lymphoid tissue) was sweeping through the baboon colony 
(Lapin, 1975). Boris Lapin (director) asked me to develop a collaborative 
research program on the causes of this apparent epidemic. According to 
Lapin, in the 1960s Soviet scientists inoculated 12 baboons with cells from 
hospitalized human leukemia patients (cancer of leukemic cells that make 
up bone marrow and blood) causing infection and the eventual death of 
300 baboons from the 3,219 animals housed in the open-​air enclosures of 
Sukhumi Primate Center (Voevodin et al., 1996). The death rate from lym­
phoma was considerable at approximately 12 baboons per year. Human T-​
cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-​1), a related virus, was implicated as 
the etiological agent.
A number of significant questions arose: (1) Was the malignant lymphoma 
caused by a virus introduced from human hosts? (2) Once infected, was the 
infectious agent transmitted from baboon to baboon through physical con­
tact such as bites? (3) Since the lymphoma clustered among specific baboon 
sibships, did genetic predisposition play any role in lymphoma transmission? 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Primate (Baboon) Models of Disease 
151
(4) Why did the free-​ranging baboons in a separate colony on the outskirts of 
Sukhumi show no signs of the lymphoma?
Because of an oncology agreement between the US National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) and the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences, I was able to in­
itiate a research program on the baboon colony and obtained blood samples 
and pedigrees. The inbreeding coefficient for 1,226 members of the colony, 
reconstructed using baboon pedigrees, was a modest F =​ 0.027. However, 
with the removal of unrelated baboons (i.e., F =​ 0.0) from the analysis, the 
inbreeding coefficient increased to 10% (0.096) higher than any F-​value 
documented for human populations. The highest known inbreeding coef­
ficient in human populations was F =​ 0.04. The inbreeding coefficient (F) is 
the probability that two genes at any locus in an individual are identical by 
descent. There was no relationship between increased risk of contracting 
lymphoma and level of inbreeding (Crawford et al., 1984). In the 1970s, 
whole genomic DNA sequencing was difficult from a technical and financial 
Figure 10.1  Free-​ranging baboons of Sukhumi, located in a colony on the 
outskirts of the City of Sukhumi. No evidence of malignant lymphoma in this 
colony of baboons.
Source: Photo courtesy of Dennis O’Rourke.
 
 
 
 

152 
In Search of Human Evolution
standpoint; however, the baboon specimens were characterized geneti­
cally by an assortment of protein markers. The only significant association, 
at 0.005, was between phosphoglucomutase loci, PGM*1 and PGM*2, and 
the incidence of lymphoma infection. A statistical association between PGM 
loci with high anti-​VCA-​HVP titers was demonstrated in the baboon colony 
(Crawford and O’Rourke, 1978). Based on path analyses of baboon sibships, 
approximately 55% of the phenotypic variance (death from lymphoma) is 
explained by direct parent-​to-​offspring transmission.
Human T-​cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-​1) was implicated by 
researchers from NCI as the etiological agent of the Sukhumi baboon lym­
phoma (Blattner et al., 1982). These were the only genetic analyses possible 
at that time prior to the molecular revolution and the sequencing of the 
viral DNA.
Surprise!
In 1996, Voevodin and colleagues observed on the basis of the molecular 
similarity between baboon and macaque viruses that a possible interspecies 
transmission had occurred between Rhesus macaque STLV-​1 (simian T cell 
leukemia/​lymphoma virus type) to the Sukhumi baboons (Schatzl et al., 
1993). Partial env gene sequences of all four STLV-​1 isolates from Sukhumi 
lymphomatous baboons were 97% to 100% similar to the sequence of known 
Rhesus STLV-​1 (Voevodin et al., 1996). They concluded that on the bases 
of 37 Sukhumi STLV-​1 isolates that interspecies transmission occurred and 
caused the outbreak of lymphoma in Sukhumi baboons.
Two Ph.D. dissertations by graduate students from the Laboratory of 
Biological Anthropology at the University of Kansas examined the under­
lying genetic bases of morphological structures in free-​ranging baboons. 
Dennis O’Rourke measured the body of each baboon that was anesthetized 
by a dart and capture gun, for purposes of venipuncture. He examined 
the relationship of “Papiometrics” to the degree of inbreeding (F). At the 
same time, Robert Baume used amalgam to make dental impressions and 
casts for each baboon and examined the relationship of odontometrics and 
dental morphology to the inbreeding coefficient (Baume and Crawford, 
1978, 1980).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Primate (Baboon) Models of Disease 
153
Conclusion
In answer to the original questions posed:
1.	 Virus (STLV-​1) appears to be the etiological agent of the Sukhumi ba­
boon lymphoma outbreak.
2.	 Judging from the spatial distribution of infections in baboon sibships, 
the virus is most likely transmitted through bites, thus inoculating other 
animals.
3.	 It is not clear whether the occurrence of the lymphoma infection is 
influenced by a genetic predisposition or that related baboons are more 
likely to socially interact and inoculate each other.
4.	 Free-​ranging baboons in the geographically separate colony did not ex­
hibit any lymphoma because most likely they were not exposed to inter­
specific contact with the macaques. What is more puzzling is how and 
when did the macaques interact with the baboons? The apparent lym­
phoma outbreak was initially traced by the Russian scientists to the inoc­
ulation of the baboons with human leukemia cells.
Using field research on animal models can provide considerable insight 
into genetic–​environmental interactions in complex diseases such as leu­
kemia or lymphoma.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0011
11
Basque Origins and Genetic Structure
Introduction
This research on the genetic structure and origins of the Basque people of 
northern Spain and western France was based on a collaborative project between 
researchers from a number of different laboratories, institutions, and intellec­
tual approaches. In March 2000, the Laboratory of Biological Anthropology 
received DNA from Dr. Antonio Arnaiz-​Villena (Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid) a small sample of 20 unrelated persons from Vizcaya Province in 
Spain (Arnaiz-​Villena et al., 2002). We compared their genetic affinities to other 
European populations by testing for 13 tetrameric short tandem repeat (STR) 
loci. The allelic frequencies of these polymorphic STRs were compared with 21 
European and North African populations for nine of the typed STRs (Zlojutro 
et al., 2006). Neighbor-​joining trees and multidimensional scaling plots of DA 
genetic distances revealed that the Vizcayan Basques are an outlier to neigh­
boring Iberian and North African populations. This result raised the question 
about the origins of the Basques: Where did they come from?
Dr. Arantza Apraiz-​Gonzalez, a Spanish/​Basque, postdoctoral fellow in the 
Laboratory of Biological Anthropology (LBA) at the University of Kansas, 
followed up on the analyses of the Vizcaya Basque samples and initiated a field 
research program on the origins of the Basques. She received her Ph.D. in an­
thropology from the University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, under 
the mentorship of Professor Rosario Calderon, currently at the University of 
Madrid. Dr. Apraiz was co-​investigator of a grant proposal on the origin of the 
Basques submitted to the National Geographic Society. This grant received ex­
cellent reviews and was awarded to the LBA at the University of Kansas (Project 
6935-​00). Being of Basque/​Spanish ancestry helped Dr. Apraiz-​Gonzalez gain 
access to a total of 35 mountain villages (in the western Pyrenees) and recruit 
652 autochthonous participants (who claimed four Basque grandparents). 
Buccal swab DNA was obtained from populations residing in four Spanish 
Basque provinces (Alava, Vizcaya, Guipuzkoa, and Navarro). These field 
investigations in Spain were conducted by a single researcher during a 2000 to 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Basque Origins and Genetic Structure 
155
2002 timeframe (see Figure 11.1). The DNA from village Basques constitute 
a unique sample, much more informative than earlier pilot studies of urban 
Basque schoolchildren and admixed Basque/​Spanish adult populations 
from cities such as Bilbao. DNA from Basque buccal swabs was extracted by 
Kristin L. Young (research assistant at the LBA) employing standard phenol-​
chloroform protocols (Young et al., 2012). Mitochondrial DNA haplogroup 
sites were identified through the analyses of restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms (RFLPs) plus the sequencing of the first hypervariable seg­
ment of the control region (HVS-​1) Young et al., 2012.
Kristin Young analyzed the Basque DNA and wrote her dissertation “The 
Basques in the Genetic Landscape of Europe” at the University of Kansas 
(Young, 2009). Because of her training in both analytical methods and mo­
lecular sciences, she collaborated on this Basque project with Dr. Apraiz 
and me. She identified uniparental haplogroups for mtDNA and supervised 
mtDNA sequencing at the University of Kansas. She analyzed mtDNA 
Figure 11.1  Basque provinces sampled by Dr. Arantza Gonzelez Apraiz.
Source: Adapted with permission from Young, K., The Basques in the Genetic Landscape of Europe. 
Ph.D. diss., University of Kansas, 2009.
 
 
 
 
 

156 
In Search of Human Evolution
and Y-​chromosome data and, using the molecular results, tested several 
hypotheses concerning the origins of the Basque populations. Since the LBA 
was not set up for STR analyses at that time, that research was supervised 
by Professor Ranjan Deka in his laboratory at the University of Cincinnati 
Medical Center. Dr. Guangyun Sun analyzed the Y-​STR haplotypes in 
Dr. Deka’s laboratory (Young et al., 2011a, 2011b).
History
The origins of Basque populations have fascinated anthropologists, linguists, 
and geneticists for many decades. For a summary of the genetic history of the 
Basques and their geographic location, see Calafell and Bertranpetit (1994). 
Earlier, Ammerman and Cavalli-​Sforza (1984) after reviewing the known 
blood marker frequencies for European populations concluded that the con­
temporary genetic variation in Europe is the result of Neolithic farmers 
expanding out the Middle East. This demic diffusion model (DDM) attributes 
the linguistic spread of Indo-​European languages to bands of Neolithic farmers. 
Novelletto (2007) based on Y-​chromosome variation has argued that the 
–2.0
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
–1.5
–1.0
Bulgaria
Greece
Italy Rome Sweden
Belgians
Piedmont Italy
Spain Andalusia
Spain Valencia
Spain Galicia
Basque Residents
North Portugal
France
Basque (Garcia)
Basque 1
North Italy
Estonia
Basque (Brion)
Ireland
Romania
Hungary
Serbia
Russia
Latvia
Croatia
Western Russia
Germany
Lithuania
Poland
Bosnia
–0.5
0.0
I
II
0.5
1.0
Figure 11.2  Multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot of 29 European populations 
using Y-​chromosome markers.
Source: Adapted with permission from Young, K., The Basques in the Genetic Landscape of Europe. 
Ph.D. diss., University of Kansas, 2009.

Basque Origins and Genetic Structure 
157
expansion of farmers into Europe 10,000 years ago carried their technology but 
not necessarily genes. This introduction of technology without gene flow into 
Europe has been termed the cultural diffusion model (CDM). The Basques are 
one of a few, non-​Indo-​European speaking populations of Europe. They speak 
a language, Euskara, considered a linguistic isolate, unrelated to any other ex­
tant language in Europe. Indo-​European languages were likely introduced into 
Europe by technologically advanced Neolithic farming populations from the 
Middle East. The Basques do not speak any of the Indo-​European languages, 
much like the linguistic isolates—​Hungarian and the Lapp of Finland.
Origin Hypotheses
Three major theories about the origins of the Basques have appeared in the 
literature:
1.	 Basques share recent common ancestry with populations of the Caucasus. 
This theory was based primarily on human leuckocyte antigens (HLAs) 
and immunoglobulin analyses (GMs) Bertorelle and Barbujani, 1995.
2.	 Basques are descendants of ancient Iberian populations who migrated to 
the peninsula from North Africa following a major climatic change in the 
Sahara between 4000 and 8000 BC (Arnaiz-​Villena et al., 2002).
3.	 They are a remnant population and descendants of Paleolithic Europeans, 
who evolved in Spain with little gene flow from the Neolithic farmers 
(Calafell and Bertranpetit, 1994).
Results
Genetically, the Basques are distinct from other European populations for several 
classical markers, namely, cde Rhesus blood group (>50%), GM*ZAG (35%), 
AcP*B (73%), and ADA*1 (>97%). Based on PCA analyses of R matrix using 13 
standard loci and 21 alleles, the Basques are separated from all other groups.
On a molecular basis, Basques have high frequencies of uniparental 
haplogroups likely to be Paleolithic in origin: mtDNA and NYR. These 
haplogroups include Y-​chromosome R1b and mtDNA common European 
haplogroups H and U5. HVS-​1 sequences place the date of population ex­
pansion to the Paleolithic, arguing in opposition to the complete replace­
ment DDM of the Neolithic transition.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 11.1  Mitochondrial DNA Haplogroups Identified in Basque Populations of Spain
Province
H
I/​X
J
N1b
T
V
W
U/​K
U
K
Not Determined
Total
Alava
71
0
3
0
2
5
3
1
21
4
8
118
Vizcaya
111
2
20
0
3
15
1
4
31
10
36
233
Guipuzcoa
102
1
6
1
1
14
1
10
27
10
52
225
Total
314
3
29
1
6
34
5
15
80
24
104
615
Note: Total includes samples from a small number of individuals from Navarre.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Young, K. L., Devor, E. J., and Crawford M. H., “Demic Expansion or Cultural Diffusion: Migration and Basque Origin,” in Causes 
and Consequences of Human Migration, pp. 224–​249. © 2012, Cambridge University Press.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

Basque Origins and Genetic Structure 
159
Young et al. (2011a) examined the genetic structure of 27 mountain 
villages (n =​ 377 individuals) from contemporary Basque populations based 
on nine autosomal short tandem repeat loci (D3S1358, D5S818, D7S820, 
D8S1179, D13S317, Di8S51, D21S11, FGA, and vWA). The multidimen­
sional MDS plot of Shriver’s DSW distance matrix revealed that the Basques 
differed from both the populations of the Caucasus and North Africa. Thus, 
STR analyses do not support the theory that the Basques shared common an­
cestry with these populations.
An MDS plot of 31 populations using nine autosomal STR loci reveals 
that the Basque populations are separated from all other groups along the 
first axis. These molecular results parallel blood group and protein based 
European variation.
Conclusion
Basques are a European ethnic group that experienced considerable ge­
netic drift and some gene flow since the last Glacial Maximum. Although 
Basques and the people of the Caucasus speak non-​European, agglutinative 
languages (such as Hungarian), a close genetic relationship between them 
is not supported by DNA evidence. Genetic barriers were detected and no 
common, non-​European ancestor was suggested. Thus, Basques are a rem­
nant European population that has experienced some admixture, particu­
larly with geographically adjacent Iberian populations.
Based on mtDNA haplogroups, Y-​chromosome paternal markers, and au­
tosomal STRs, no statistically significant genetic heterogeneity was observed 
in locus-​by-​locus analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) comparisons of 
autosomal STRs between the Basque provinces. HVS-​1 sequences suggest 
that the date of Basque population expansion was in the Paleolithic, arguing 
against a complete replacement demic diffusion of a Neolithic transition.
 
 
 
 
 
 

In Search of Human Evolution. Michael H. Crawford, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2024. 
DOI: 10.1093/​9780197679432.003.0012
12
Conclusion
Introduction
The topical and geographic breadth of 50+​ years of my field investigations are 
revealed in Table 12.1. This table summarizes my professional career as an an­
thropological geneticist. I organized and participated in more than 13 major 
projects, and this table lists the local sponsors and funding agencies that 
supported my research. Some of these projects were relatively short-​lived, 
conducted by postdocs and graduate students; I played a minor role, mainly 
obtaining funding and permissions, and writing sections of the publications. 
While on a Fulbright fellowship, I collected blood samples based on caste 
status at the University of Andhra Pradesh in India. DNA analyses and 
subsequent publications comparing the castes of India were generated by 
former University of Kansas (KU) graduate student Michael Bamshad (MD) 
and University of Utah Professor of Genetics Lynn Jorde (Bamshad et al., 
1996). In the fishing villages (out ports) of Newfoundland, the collection 
of the blood samples and genetic marker analyses were carried out by the 
Canadian Red Cross Blood Center research assistant Marilyn Collins, under 
the direction of Dr. Richard Huntsman and postdoctoral fellow Dr. Tibor 
Koertvelyessy. My role in this research was data analysis and publication of 
the results. The study of the farming communities of Tiszahat, Hungary, was 
part of an Earthwatch summer training and research program, and no blood 
samples or DNA was collected.
This book provides the reader with a glimpse of the methodological his­
tory of anthropological genetics, by presenting a series of chapters roughly 
in chronological order of the fieldwork and data collection. The first field 
expeditions during the 1960s and 1970s preceded the molecular and the in­
formational revolutions; thus, no DNA analyses were possible. Populations 
were characterized genetically through the observed variation in red blood 
cell groups, serum proteins, and erythrocyte proteins. Whole blood samples, 
taken by venipuncture, were collected into vacutainers containing pre­
servative (ACD) and shipped, packed in ice, to laboratories in the United 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(continued)
Table 12.1  Field Research Programs Conducted by the Laboratory of Biological Anthropology (LBA) from 1968 to Present (Crawford, 2007d)
Populations
Chronology
Sites 
Local Sponsors
Funding Agencies
Italian Alpine
Tlaxcaltecans
Irish Itinerants
Baboons of Sukhumi
Black Caribs (Garifuna)
Castes of India
Yupik and Inupik Eskimos of Alaska
Fishing Outports
Mennonites
Farming Villages of Hungary
Siberia
1968
1969–​1975
1970
1974–​1980
1975–​1982
2010–​2018
1990–​1991
1976–​1977
1981–​1983
1979–​2018
1986–​1988
1989–​2001
1999–​2005
2010–​2011
Valle Maira
City of Tlaxcala, San Pablo del 
Monte, Saltillo, Cuanalan
Dublin, Wexford
Institute of Experimental 
Pathology & Therapy, Sukhumi, 
Abkhasia
Belize, Guatemala,
St. Vincent, Honduras
Roatan, Dominica
Andhra Pradesh
St. Lawrence Isl., Wales,  
King Island
Newfoundland
Kansas and Nebraska
Tiszahat, Hungary
Central Siberia, Kamchatka
U. of Torino
Ministry of Health
Medical Social Board of 
Ireland
Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences
Ministry of Health
Medical School in Dominica 
& Honduras
University of Andhra Pradesh
Norton Sound Health 
Corporation
Canadian Red Cross
General Conference and 
Holderman Churches
Debrecen U.
Soviet Academy of Science,
Academy of Medical Science
U. of Pittsburgh
NIH
Wenner-​Gren Foundation, 
University Center U. of Pittsburgh
NCI (contract)
NIH, KU, Biomedical Research
NIH, NSF
Fulbright (CIES)
NSF
Wenner-​Gren Foundation
NIA, Attorney General’s 
Settlement Fund Earthwatch,
National Academy of Science
NSF
 
newgenrtpdf

Populations
Chronology
Sites 
Local Sponsors
Funding Agencies
Unangan (Aleuts)
Basque villages
1999–​2006
2001–​2003
Aleutian Archipelago
Northern Spain
Aleut Corp
Pribloff Island Association
Tribal Councils
Village elders were contacted 
by Basque postdoc Dr. 
Gonzalez-​Apraiz
NSF
National Geographic Society 
Grant (6935-​00)
NCI, National Cancer Institute; NIA, National Institute of Aging; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NSF, National Science Foundation.
 
newgenrtpdf
Table 12.1  Continued

Conclusion 
163
States for analyses. After the blood samples were genotyped in a labora­
tory, the resulting data were key punched for computer analysis. These data 
were primarily analyzed using computer programs at the Computer Center, 
University of Kansas. I remember how thrilled the members of the LBA were 
when we received funding from the National Science Foundation to install a 
computer terminal connected to the university main frame. This installation 
of the terminal eliminated the numerous trips to the Computer Center nec­
essary to collect and view the results of the research.
Team Research
Interdisciplinary team collaboration can accomplish significantly more re­
search in a shorter time period than projects generated and carried out by 
a sole investigator. Several of my research programs would not have been 
possible without the participation of cultural and biological anthropologists, 
archaeologists, and physicians. The Tlaxcala research design would not 
have been developed without input from cultural anthropologist and col­
league Professor Hugo Nutini. He had invested several decades of research 
in the Tlaxcala-​Puebla Valley and reconstructed the ethnohistory of the 
populations. His knowledge and insight provided a time dimension to the 
transplantation of the Tlaxcaltecans from the Valley of Tlaxcala to the Valley 
of Mexico in 1525. The massive transplantation of 400 families from the 
Valley of Tlaxcala to Saltillo in the 1570s provided another time dimension 
and marked a significant fission of the Tlaxcaltecan gene pool. This unique 
interaction of Cortes, the Spanish Crown, with the Tlaxcaltecans provided 
historical insight into the Spanish governmental policies.
I learned about the unique history of the Black Caribs/​Garifuna from 
cultural/​applied anthropologist Nancie Gonzalez. We conducted two joint 
field investigations in Livingston, Guatemala, and in several communities of 
Belize. In addition, historical and social background provided by Gonzalez 
allowed the interpretation of the genetic and biological results.
Field investigations on the genetics of biological aging in Mennonite 
populations would not have been possible without the participation of 
Professor John Janzen. Janzen’s family was part of the immigration of the 
Mennonites from Crimea to Kansas in the 1860s. John Janzen is a highly 
respected member of the Goessel community, and his participation made the 
fieldwork that included 25 collaborating researchers possible.
 
 
 
 
 

164 
In Search of Human Evolution
Why Field Research?
Crawford (2007d), in a chapter on the significance of field research in an­
thropological genetics, reviewed the following: (1) Importance of adding a 
comparative dimension to a study or analysis. Complex diseases, such as hy­
pertension or diabetes, are influenced by the action of unique environments 
and provide insights into genetic–​environmental interactions. (2) The addi­
tion of a time dimension of several hundred years to the research design. In 
the case of the Tlaxcaltecans, a time dimension was included in the study 
through the historical reconstruction of population fission. Similarly, the 
history of the populations provided the study with examples of population 
fission and the possibility of testing hypotheses concerning the genetic and 
morphological differentiation and population structure. (3) Unique social 
and demographic structures of populations. Field research provides access to 
genetic isolates, such as the Mennonites of central Kansas, and the analyses 
of complex phenotypes, such as biological aging (Crawford, 2000, 2005).
Why Do Communities Participate?
Many members of indigenous communities are curious about their origins 
and history. For example, the Aleuts of Alaska are fascinated by their origins, 
specifically, where did they originate in Siberia, who migrated, and when? 
The Aleut populations were willing to participate in studies of their history, 
but they were less interested in disease etiology. The Aleuts felt that earlier 
they were deceived by physicians in historical/​cultural studies, but under the 
guise of disease etiology.
Ethical Considerations
The Nuremberg Code, written in response to the Nazi human experimen­
tation, provided an original set of ethical standards for research on human 
individuals. The code requires (1) voluntary consent; (2) the disclosure of the 
nature, duration, and purpose of the experimentation; (3) description of the 
methods employed; (4) revelation of any potential hazards of the research—​
either physical or social; and (5) discussion of any possible benefits or lack of 
direct benefits to society.

Conclusion 
165
The American Anthropological Association’s (AAA) Principles of 
Professional Responsibility provided the following ethical field research 
guidelines:
1.  Do No Harm
The AAA Code of Ethics states: “Anthropological researchers must do eve­
rything in their power to ensure that their research does not harm the safety, 
dignity or privacy of the people with whom they work.” A book written 
by journalist Patrick Tierney, Darkness in El Dorado: How Scientists and 
Journalists Devastated the Amazon, charges prominent scholars with uneth­
ical misbehavior in their work with an Amazonian tribe. Tierney claimed 
that Napoleon Chagnon violated professional ethics for 30 years by en­
couraging conflict and falsifying evidence to exaggerate the ferocity of the 
Yanomami. Tierney accused Chagnon with ethically dubious field methods 
such as bribing children for information about tattoos, taking photos 
without permission, and improper involvement in conflicts between villages. 
Tierney also accused James Neel, an MD geneticist, of deliberately injecting 
tribal people with a controversial measles vaccine (Edmonston B vaccine), 
causing a massive epidemic. The American Society of Human Genetics 
investigated the charges and found them to be gross misrepresentations and 
basically false.
The AAA appointed a committee to determine if further action should be 
taken. This committee recommended the creation of a five-​person task force 
to inquire into Tierney’s allegations. Since the AAA does not accredit or issue 
credentials to its members, it cannot investigate, censure, or expel anyone 
for ethical misconduct. The task force’s final report was posted on the AAA 
website in May 2002. It was a mixture of opinions, interviews, meditations on 
ethics, and recommendations.
Each researcher should consider and discuss possible ways that the re­
search might cause harm to members of the population. The AAA warns 
of possible damage, such as harm to dignity, and bodily and material well-​
being. Potential unintended consequences of the research and its impact 
on individuals, communities, and environments should be considered. 
For example, in biological anthropology and genetics, potential risk as­
sociated with venipuncture, such as infection or the accidental creation of 
hematomas, must be revealed to potential research subjects. To date, the 
 
 
 
 
 
 

166 
In Search of Human Evolution
American Association of Anthropological Genetics has not yet published 
specific guidelines for ethical principles of field investigations (Turner et al., 
2018). Ethical guidelines have been proposed by the American Association 
of Physical (Biological) Anthropologists (2003) and the American 
Anthropological Association (1971). Turner (2005) edited the proceedings 
of a symposium held in 2001 at an AAPA meeting. This edited volume cov­
ered a cross-​section of the field of biological anthropology and included 
chapters on genetics and human biology. Two chapters discuss research on 
ancient DNA and focus on how agreements were reached with different in­
digenous communities (O’Rourke, 1980).
2.  Be Open and Honest Regarding Your Work
Researchers should be clear and open regarding the purposes, methods, 
outcomes, and sponsors of the research. Ethical requirements include open­
ness, honesty, transparency, and informed consent. Since 1974, Congress has 
enacted federal regulations requiring the approval of the methods of research 
by an Institutional Review Board (IRB), who assure the rights and welfare of 
participating subjects. Generally, IRB approval is required for studies in the 
fields of health, genetics, and social sciences. They protect subjects from po­
tential physical, psychological, or social harm.
The Havasupai tribe sued scientists at the Arizona State University (ASU) for 
misrepresenting a genetic study as a medical project. The tribal lawsuit alleged 
that researchers from ASU used DNA for studies without proper consent. The 
Havasupai were awarded several million dollars in damages. Politically charged 
interpretations of this dispute have fanned tribal distrust of academics.
3.  Obtain Informed Consent and Necessary Permissions
Obtaining permission varies depending on the country, the background 
of the participants, and the nature of the proposed research. If the research 
includes a health component, permissions should be obtained from the com­
munity, chief health officer, and/​or the minister of health. In the case of re­
search on St. Vincent Island, the chief medical officer granted permission 
for our research. These communities and populations were contacted prior 
to the commencement of the research. The research methodology and risk 

Conclusion 
167
factors must be fully explained and permission obtained. It is wise to include 
local physicians or scientists from the community.
Informed consent is a process for obtaining permission before conducting 
research on a subject. Informed consent is obtained either in written form 
or orally. If oral informed consent is requested, a witness should be present 
who can confirm that all regulations have been followed. The following 
components must be present for valid informed consent: (1) purpose of the 
study—​that is, what is to be accomplished?; (2) any discomfort or risk must 
be explained; (3) benefit of the project to the participant or society; (4) the 
subject should have the freedom to participate or to quit the study without 
prejudice; (5) alternative procedures, if possible, should be described 
(Crawford, 2007). For example, DNA can be obtained from an individual ei­
ther through venipuncture or by buccal swabs, which are less invasive.
4.   Competing Ethical Obligations
Anthropologists must weigh competing ethical obligations to research 
participants, students, professional colleagues, and funding agencies. In 
anthropological genetics, methodologies should be considered with the 
least amount of risk versus the quantity and quality of data. As an example, 
Siberian indigenous populations agreed to the use of venipuncture for DNA 
studies. In contrast, Alaskan Aleuts were only willing to provide buccal 
swabs with the understanding that the DNA will only be used to explore their 
origins in Siberia but not for biomedical research.
5.  Make Your Results Accessible
Feedback on the results of the study should be provided to members of the 
community as quickly as possible and disseminated in clear, understandable 
ways. The Aleut project provided three different methods of informing the 
participants of the results of the research: (1) I addressed the yearly meeting/​
dinner of the island trustees and village representatives. Several hundred 
Aleuts attended this meeting in Anchorage and, after my lecture, asked many 
probing and revealing questions. (2) The Aleut Corporation publishes a 
monthly newsletter, Aleut Current, that I was invited to contribute to. It is 
widely read by Aleuts from all of the islands. (3) Publications in scientific 
 
 
 
 
 
 

168 
In Search of Human Evolution
journals and books describing the results of the research were made avail­
able to the Aleut Association and Corporation. I compiled a special issue of 
the journal Human Biology, devoted entirely to Aleut genetics, demography, 
history, linguistics, and archaeology (Crawford et al., 2010). The Aleutian 
Corporation and Pribilof Island Association received copies of this special 
journal issue and distributed it among interested members of the community.
The Mennonites of the Midwest were most interested in the genetics of 
biological aging. The communities had several physicians in residence and 
preferred that the results of the individual blood chemistries should be 
transmitted to their primary care physicians for possible insight into the 
patient’s current health.
6.  Protect and Preserve Records
As stated by the AAA Administration in 2012: “Anthropologists have an eth­
ical responsibility for ensuring the integrity, preservation, and protection of 
their work.” I protected the confidentiality and security of the demographic 
and primary DNA data. There was considerable interest in the community 
about individual mitochondrial and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
results. We provided individual phenotypes to those requesting their own 
results. However, no individual data were shared with family members or 
unrelated members of the community, anxious to determine potential pa­
ternal relationships. DNA samples were frozen and kept in the Laboratory of 
Biological Anthropology at the University of Kansas.
How long should the data be stored? Who should be credited as an author?
7.  What’s in It for the Community?
Medical and dental care by physicians and dentists on the research team 
should be provided (if possible) to any interested persons from the com­
munity. However, participation in the study should not be a requirement 
for getting these services. All members of the community should have ac­
cess to the physicians and dentists without feeling any coercion to participate 
in the study. In most of the LBA projects, a physician or several physicians 
accompanied the research team and provided health care to any community 
member who wanted and needed their services. There may be accreditation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Conclusion 
169
problems in some countries that prevented a KU team physician or den­
tist from practicing their craft. Under those circumstances, local, certified 
specialists are employed to provide the necessary services. Although our 
dentist, Dr. Ted Rebich, accompanied the research team to Ireland, he was 
not legally permitted to practice dentistry on local, itinerant populations. In 
this case, a local, certified dentist (Dr. Liam Convery) treated the Traveler 
community’s dental needs.
In the Mennonite research program on biological aging, three physicians 
collected health histories and drew blood samples from participants. One 
of the physicians, Dr. Peter Hiebert, was a resident of the Goessel commu­
nity while his physician son Dr. David Hiebert, a radiologist from Lawrence, 
Kansas, was part of the research team. The presence of a research team of 
specialists, exercise physiologists, biological and cultural anthropologists, 
and physicians generated community interest in biological aging, and more 
than 1,200 Mennonites from three congregations initially participated in the 
study. Since metabolic blood chemistry panels were assessed for each par­
ticipant, the results of these tests were sent to the primary care physicians as 
specified by the participants.
Five graduate students from the University of Kansas received field 
experiences with Mennonite populations and wrote doctoral dissertations 
on various aspects of the aging process. Three of the dissertations focused on 
biological aging and two dissertations described the social organization and 
culture of the Mennonite communities. Several M.A. theses were based on 
the fieldwork.
In 2004, a follow-​up study of the Mennonite biological aging and nutrition 
was made possible by the availability of funds from the Attorney General’s 
Office. These funds were the result of a lawsuit filed by the Attorney General’s 
Office against a number of food supplement companies for misrepresenting 
the efficacy of their products and ultimately made available for research 
on Kansas communities involving health and nutrition. Fortunately, the 
Laboratory of Biological Anthropology had in residence two key researchers 
with expertise in nutrition and molecular genetics (Dr. M. J. Mosher from 
KU and Dr. Dario Demarche from Cordoba, Argentina). M. J. Mosher 
completed her Ph.D. dissertation at KU on the Buriyat populations of Siberia 
with an emphasis on nutrition and genetics. She wrote a major portion of the 
successful grant application, “Lipids, Health and Coronary Heart Disease,” 
to the Attorney General’s Settlement Fund and received $132,120 for a two-​
year study. She also organized a research team of graduate students from 

170 
In Search of Human Evolution
the University of Kansas to update research completed two decades earlier 
(Mosher et al., 2016). While on a postdoctoral fellowship at the Laboratory 
of Biological Anthropology, Dr. Demarchi completed research on the rela­
tionship of apolipoprotein variation, lipid levels, and survivorship among the 
Kansas Mennonites (Demarchi et al., 2005).
Camelot Affair
A social science research project (Camelot) was funded in 1964 by the US 
Army to assess the causes of conflict between national groups. Chile was 
to be the test case, but the project was cancelled in 1965 after congressional 
hearings. Professor Hugo Nutini (University of Pittsburgh) was a key con­
sultant to this project. He asked for permission to approach Chilean social 
scientists who exposed this Army anti-​insurgency project to the Chilean leg­
islature. Following this exposure, Hugo Nutini became a persona non-​gratia 
in Chile (despite the fact that he had won a bronze medal for Chile in the 
Olympic Games), and for a time all anthropological research was forbidden.
Potential Dangers and Risks
In some cases, field research in a particular community is not possible because 
of ongoing pandemics, political unrest, extreme hostility, or lack of interest 
by the community. Currently travel restrictions due to COVID-​19 persist in 
a number of countries. Vaccinations, the wearing of facemasks, and keeping 
distance from research subjects are necessary to lower risk of infection. Before 
the pandemic started in Peru, the LBA in collaboration with a Peruvian 
Medical School and the Diabetes Center at KU began a research program on 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus. A research team consisting of social anthropologist 
Professor Bart Dean, physician and director of the Diabetes Center at KUMC 
David Robbins, and KU graduate student and biostatistician Chad Gerhold 
started a pilot study in a settlement located in lowland Amazonia. I was un­
able to accompany the research team because of ill health. Blood samples were 
drawn by venipuncture by Peruvian nurses, and blood glucose levels were 
characterized by a local medical center. Individual diabetics and their families 
were identified, and DNA was extracted. However, because of the COVID-​19 
pandemic, shipping the DNA samples to US laboratories for sequencing was 
not possible at that time. The samples were stored in freezers at an American 

Conclusion 
171
laboratory in Lima but recently shipped to the United States. In addition to 
potential risks to participants in the study, in a pandemic situation, risk to 
members of the research team must also be considered.
Social and Political Instability
Some of the Old Order Mennonites were relocated from Canada to 
Cuauhtemoc, in northern Mexico. However, currently it is extremely dan­
gerous to conduct field research in that region of Mexico due to the vio­
lent drug wars among the cartels, gangs, and the Mexican government. 
Alternative solution: collaborating with individual Old Order Mennonites 
who have relocated to a safer location. While it was dangerous to work with 
Mexican Mennonites, it was possible to collaborate with Mennonites who 
migrated to Garden City in southwestern Kansas to escape ongoing violence 
from narcotic traffickers along the US-​Mexican border.
Unfortunately, it is no longer possible to resample the baboon colonies 
of Sukhumi, Abkhasia, described in Chapter 8. Warfare between Abkhasia 
and Georgia over political control resulted in the destruction of the Sukhumi 
Primate Center and the deaths of most of the baboon colony. A few non­
human primate species were smuggled by the research staff out of Abkhasia 
across the border to southern Russia.
Conclusion
Is any field research appropriate and ethical? Do researchers take advan­
tage of individuals who assume that there is a direct benefit to themselves? 
Some researchers pay the research subjects for the time spent on the project. 
However, this practice has been criticized as preventing potential subjects 
from rejecting participation because they are economically strapped and 
cannot afford to pass up the opportunity to earn some money.
Ethical field research of the future must include an equal partnership be­
tween the indigenous communities and the scientists. Such collaborations 
will provide local scientists with the necessary field team experience and pre­
pare them for initiating their own research programs. The cultures of science 
and that of the indigenous people must include communication, considera­
tion, and sensitivity to each other.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 APPENDIX A
  
Figure A.1  Letter from Charles Darwin.
 

 

APPENDIX B
List of Former Graduate Students
Michael H. Crawford has chaired 42 dissertation committees and a total of 31 M.A. thesis 
committees and 23 postdoctoral fellows at the University of Kansas. The following grad­
uate students obtained their Ph.D.s under his supervision. A listing of their present aca­
demic appointments is included:	
1.	 Linda Klepinger, 1972, University of Illinois, Professor Emerita 	
2.	 Robert A. Halberstein, 1973, University of Miami, Former Chair, Professor, 
Emeritus	
3.	 Paul Lin*, 1973, University of Chicago, Research Director of Psychiatric Institute. 
Retired.	
4.	 Paul Sciulli, 1974, Ohio State University (he completed Ph.D. at Pittsburgh after 
Dr. Crawford moved to Kansas) Emeritus Professor	
5.	 Douglas Ubelaker (co-​chaired Ph.D. committee with T. D. Stewart), 1973, 
Smithsonian Institution, Chair of Division	
6.	 Stewart Shermis*, 1974, Long Beach State University, died	
7.	 Francis Lees, 1975, SUNY-​Albany, Rockefeller University, Chief of 
Communications at the Museum of Natural History, NY, Retired, Professor 
Emeritus	
8.	 Martin Nickels, 1975, Illinois State University, Professor Emeritus	
9.	 Kenneth Turner*, 1976, University of Alabama, Associate Professor, Director of a 
museum in Oklahoma	
10.	 Robert Baume, 1981, Connecticut Health Department, Chief Researcher, retired	
11.	 Dennis O’Rourke, 1980, Foundation Professor of Anthropology, University 
of Kansas	
12.	 Pamela J. Byard, 1981, Case Western Reserve University Medical School, 
Department of Pediatrics, Associate Professor, currently in the private sector	
13.	 Janis Hutchinson, 1984, University of Houston, Professor, Former President of 
the Black Anthropologists Association, Emerita	
14.	 Laurine Oberdieck Rogers, 1984, Idaho State University, Iowa State University, 
Adjunct Associate Professor	
15.	 Lorena Madrigal, 1988, Southern Florida University, Professor, former President 
of the American Association of Physical Anthropology	
16.	 Sueb-​sak Sirijaraya*, 1988, University in Bangkok, died recently	
17.	 Meredith Uttley, 1991, Idaho State, Lander University, Professor and Chair 	
18.	 Anthony G. Comuzzie, 1993, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, 
Scientist (equivalent to Professor), currently President of Obesity Society	
19.	 Ravi Duggirala, 1995, University of Texas at San Antonio Medical Center, 
Associate Professor of Medicine and Genetic Epidemiology, currently Professor 
at University of Texas Medical School, SW Foundation for Biomedical 

176 
Appendix B
Research—​former President of the American Association of Anthropological 
Genetics	
20.	 Rector Arya, 1999, University of Texas at San Antonio Medical Center, currently 
Assistant Professor in Genetic Epidemiology	
21.	 Lisa Martin, 1999, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio, 
postdoctoral fellow; currently Professor in Genetic Epidemiology, University of 
Cincinnati	
22.	 Joseph McComb, 1999, Merck Pharmaceutical Company, NJ—​scientist	
23.	 Kari North, 2000, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio, 
postdoctoral fellow; currently Professor, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, Department of Epidemiology	
24.	 Sobha Puppala, 2001, Case Western Reserve University, postdoctoral fellow, sci­
entist, SW Foundation for Biomedical Research, currently Assistant Professor, 
Wake Forest University	
25.	 M. J. Mosher, 2002 postdoctoral fellow, Laboratory of Biological Anthropology, 
University of Kansas 2002–​2003; postdoctoral fellow, Department of 
Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Associate Professor, 
Western Washington University, Emerita	
26.	 Rohina Rubicz, 2007 postdoctoral fellow, scientist, Department of Genetics, 
Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio; currently scientist 
at Hutchinson Center, Seattle	
27.	 Phillip E. Melton, 2008 postdoctoral fellow (Cowles Fellowship), Department 
of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio. 
Associate Professor, Western Australian University, Perth, Australia	
28.	 Mark Zlojutro, 2008, Department of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for 
Biomedical Research, San Antonio, University of Texas, Assistant Professor	
29.	 Kristin L. Young, 2009, postdoctoral fellow, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
Kansas City, KS, postdoctoral fellow, University of North Carolina—​Chapel Hill, 
currently Research Assistant Professor	
30.	 Jay Sarthy, MD, Self-​Fellow, July 16, 2009, defended dissertation in Genetics 
Program. Northwestern Medical School, Fall 2009, Ph.D.; currently faculty at 
University of Washington.	
31.	 Geetha Chittoor, 2009, Genetic Epidemiology of Blood Pressure in Mexican 
Americans of San Antonio, postdoctoral fellowship (Cowles Fellowship) at SFBR, 
San Antonio. University of North Carolina; currently Geisinger Institute, PA	
32.	 Anne Justice, 2011, Genetic structure of Ch’orti Maya from eastern Guatemala, 
postdoctoral fellow at University of North Carolina; currently Geisinger 
Institute, PA	
33.	 Christine Phillips Krawczak—​Genetics Program, 2012, postdoctoral fellow, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota	
34.	 Norberto Baldi Salas, 2013, Assistant Professor, University of Costa Rica	
35.	 Jasem Theyab, 2013, Assistant Professor, University of Kuwait 	
36.	 Kristine G. Beaty, 2017 postdoctoral fellow, University of Oklahoma, Laboratory 
Director, KU	
37.	 Delisa Phillips, 2017, private sector	
38.	 Melody Ratcliffe, 2018, Tennessee	
39.	 Randy David, 2019, San Francisco

References
Adalid-​Sainz, C., R. Barquera, M. H. Crawford, A. Lona-​Sanchez, S. Clayton, E. Arrieta-​
Bolanos, H. Delgado-​Aguirre, L. Gonzalez-​Medina, H. Pacheco-​Ubaldo, D. I. 
Hernandez-​Zaragoza, A. Bravo-​Acevedo, N. Escareno-​Montiel, J. Moran-​Martinez, 
M. D. R. Gonzalez-​Martinez, Y. Jaramillo-​Rodriguez, A. Salgado-​Adame, F. Juarez-​
de la Cruz, J. Zuniga, C. Beuter-​Mendez, and J. Granados. 2019. Genetic Diversity of
HLA System in Three Populations from Coahuila, Mexico: Torreon, Saltillo and Rural 
Coahuila, Mexico. Human Immunology 81(19): 492–​495.
Aguirre Beltran, G. 1944. The Slave Trade in Mexico. The Hispanic American Historical 
Review 24: 412–​431.
Aguirre, J. D. 1976. Tlaxcaltecan Colonization and Its Influence in Northern Mexico. 
In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, ed. Michael 
H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 35–​38. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in
Anthropology.
Alexander, D. H., J. Novembre, and K. Lange. 2009. Fast Model-​Based Estimation of 
Ancestry in Unrelated Individuals. Genome Research  19: 1655–​1664.
American Anthropological Association Ethics Statement.  2012. Principles of Professional 
Responsibility.  Washington, DC: Author.
Ammerman, A. J., and L. L. Cavalli-​Sforza. 1984. The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics 
of the Populations in Europe. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Arnaiz-​Villena, A., E. Gomez-​Casado, and J. Martinez-​Laso. 2002. Population Genetic 
Relationships between Mediterranean Populations Determined by HLA Allele 
Distribution and Historic Perspective. Tissue Antigens 60(2): 111–​121.
Baldi Salas, N. 2013. Genetic Structure and Biodemography of the Rama Amerindians from 
the Southern Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Ballard, J. G. 1985. Empire of the Sun. London: Panther Books.
Bamshad, M., A. E. Fraley, M. H. Crawford, R. L. Cann, B. R. Busi, J. H. Naidu, and L. 
Jorde. 1996. MtDNA Variation in Caste Populations of Andhra Pradesh, India. Human 
Biology 68(1): 1–​20.
Baume, R. M., and M. H. Crawford. 1978. Discrete Dental Traits in Four Tlaxcaltecan 
Mexican Populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 49: 351–​360.
Baume, R. M., and M. H. Crawford. 1980. Discrete Dental Trait Asymmetry in Mexican 
and Belizean Groups. American Journal of Physical Anthropology  52: 315–​322.
Beaty, K. G. 2017. Forced Migration and Population Expansion. The Genetic Story of the 
Garifuna. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Beaty, K. G., M. J. Mosher, M. H. Crawford, and P. Melton. 2016. Paternal Genetic 
Structure in Contemporary Mennonite Communities from the American Midwest. 
Human Biology  88(2): 95–​108.
Belmont Report. 1978. Report of the National Commission for the Protection of Human 
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. US Department of Health, Education 
and Welfare. Federal Register 44(76): 23191–​23197.

178 
References
Belmont Report. April 18, 1979. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The 
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects and Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research.
Benet, S. 1976. How to Live To Be 100: The Life-​Style of the People of the Caucasus. 
New York: Dial Press.
Benn-​Torres, J., A. Stone, and R. Kittles. 2013. An Anthropological Genetic Perspective on 
Creolization in the Anglophone Caribbean. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 
15: 135–​143.
Benn-​Torres, J., M. G. Vilar, G. A. Torres, et al. 2015. Genetic Diversity in the Lesser Antilles 
and Its Implications for the Settlement of the Caribbean Basin. PLoS 10(10): e0139192.
Bernstein, F. 1931. Verteilung der Blutgruppen und thre anthropologische Bedeutung. 
In Comitato Italiano per Studio dei Problemi della Populazionne, pp. 227–243. Rome: 
Instituto Polygrafico dello Stato Roma. 
Bertorelle, G., and G. Barbujani. 1995. Analysis of DNA Diversity by Spatial 
Autocorrelation. Genetics  140: 811–​819.
Black, L. T. 1981. Volcanism as a Factor in Human Ecology: The Aleutian Case. 
Ethnohistory 28(4): 313–​333.
Blattner, W. A., V. S. Kalyanaraman, M. Robert-​Guroff, T. Andrew Lister, D. A. G. Galton, 
P. S. Sarin, M. H. Crawford, D. Catovsky, M. Greaves, and R. C. Gallo. 1982. The Human 
Type-​C Retrovirus, HTLV, in Blacks from the Caribbean Region and Relationship to 
Adult T-​Cell Leukemia/​Lymphoma. International Journal of Cancer  30: 257–​264.
Bohn Gmelch, S., and G. Gmelch. 1976. The Emergence of an Ethnic Group: The Irish 
Tinkers. Anthropological Quarterly 49(4): 225–​238.
Boyd, J. T. 2014. Peopling of the Americas: ABO Blood Group Haplotypes as an Indicator of 
Native American Origins and Migration from Siberia. M.A. thesis, University of Kansas.
Brennan, E. 1983. Factors Underlying Decreasing Fertility among the Garifuna of 
Honduras. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 60: 177.
Byard, P. J., and M. H. Crawford. 1991. Founder Effect and Genetic Diversity on St. 
Lawrence Island, Alaska. Homo  41: 219–​227.
Byard, P. J., and F. C. Lees. 1981. Estimating the Number of Loci Determining Skin Color 
in a Hybrid Population. Annals of Human Biology  8: 49–​58.
Byard, P. J., M. S. Schanfield, and M. H. Crawford. 1983. Admixture and Heterozygosity in 
West Alaskan Populations. Journal of Biosocial Science  15(2): 207–​216.
Calafell, F., and J. Bertranpetit. 1994. Mountains and Genes: Population History of the 
Pyrenees. Human Biology  66(5): 823–​842.
Cavalli-​Sforza, L. L., and A. W. F. Edwards. 1967. Phylogenetic Analysis: Models and 
Estimation Procedures. American Journal of Human Genetics. 19: 233–​257.
Clavell, J. 1975. Shogun: A Novel of Japan. New York: Macmillan.
Cockburn, T. A. 1963. The Evolution and Eradication of Infectious Disease. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins Press.
Comuzzie, A. G. 1993. Genomic, Genetic and Morphological Variation in a Sample of 
Modern Evenki and Their Relationship with Other Indigenous Siberian Populations. 
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Comuzzie, A. G., and M. H. Crawford. 1990. Biochemical Heterozygosity and 
Morphological Variability: Interpopulational versus Intrapopulational Analyses. 
Human Biology  62: 101–​112.
Crawford, M. H. 1966. Hemoglobin Polymorphism in Macaca nemestrina. Science 
154: 398–​399. 

References 
179
Crawford, M. H. 1967. A Re-​examination of the Taxonomy and Phylogeny of the 
Hominoidea Based upon Experimental Data. Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Washington.
Crawford, M. H. 1975. Genetic Affinities and Origin of the Irish Tinkers. In Biosocial 
Interrelations in Population Adaptations, edited by E. Watts, F. Johnston, and G. W. 
Lasker, pp. 93–​103. The Hague: Mouton Press.
Crawford, M. H. 1976. Introduction: Problems and Hypotheses. In The 
Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, edited by M. 
H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 1–​5. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in
Anthropology.
Crawford, M. H. 1980. The Breakdown of Reproductive Isolation in an Alpine Genetic 
Isolate: Acceglio, Italy. In Population Structure and Genetic Disorders, edited by A. 
Eriksson, H. R. Forsius, H. R. Nevanlinna, P. L. Workman, and R. J. Norio, pp. 57–​71. 
New York: Academic Press.
Crawford, M. H. 1983. The Anthropological Genetics of the Black Caribs (Garifuna) of 
Central America. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 26: 161–​192.
Crawford, M. H., ed. 1984. Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 3. Black 
Caribs. A Case Study in Biocultural Adaptation. New York: Plenum Press.
Crawford, M. H. 1998. Origins of Native Americans: Evidence from Anthropological 
Genetics. Cambridge University Press.
Crawford, M. H., ed. 2000. Different Seasons: Biological Aging among the Mennonites of the 
Midwestern United States. University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology, vol. 21. 
Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
Crawford, M. H. 2005. Genetics of Biological Aging in Mennonites of Midwestern United 
States. Przeglad Antropologiczny Anthropological Review  68: 3–​18.
Crawford, M. H. 2006. Who Are We? Aleut Research Program (1999–​2006). The Aleutian 
Current. Aleut Corporation Newsletter 35(4): 6–​7.
Crawford, M. H., ed. 2007a. Anthropological Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Crawford, M. H. 2007b. Foundations of Anthropological Genetics. In Anthropological 
Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 1–​16. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Crawford, M. H. 2007c. Genetic Structure of Circumpolar Populations: A Synthesis. 
American Journal of Human Biology  19: 203–​217.
Crawford, M. H. 2007d. The Importance of Field Research in Anthropological 
Genetics: Methods, Experiences and Results. In Anthropological Genetics. Theories, 
Methods and Applications, pp. 79–​111. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Crawford, M. H. 2010a. Origin of Aleuts and the Genetic Structure of Populations of 
the Archipelago: Molecular and Archaeological Perspectives. Human Biology  82(5–​
6): 695–​717.
Crawford, M. H. 2015. Genetic Structure and Its Implications for Genetic 
Epidemiology: Aleutian Island Populations. In Genomics in Human and Non-​Human 
Primates, edited by R. Duggirala, A. G. Comuzzie, S. Williams-​Blangero, and C. Cole, 
pp. 129–​140. New York: Springer Life Sciences.
Crawford, M. H. 2016. Introduction to the Fortieth Anniversary of the Founding of the 
Laboratory of Biological Anthropology. Special Issue. Human Biology 88(2): 93–​94.
Crawford, M. H. 2018. Raymond Pearl. The International Encyclopedia of Biological 
Anthropology. Edited by Wenda Trevathan. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell. 

180 
References
Crawford, M. H., S. Alden, R. E. David, and K. Beaty. 2021. Unangan (Aleut) 
Migrations: Causes and Consequences. In Human Migration: Biocultural Perspectives, 
edited by L. Munoz-​Moreno and M. H. Crawford, pp. 20–​31. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Crawford, M. H., and E. J. Devor. 1980. Population Structure and Admixture in 
Tlaxcaltecan Populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52: 485–​490.
Crawford, M. H., D. D. Dykes, K. Skradski, and H. F. Polesky. 1979. Gene Flow and Genetic 
Microdifferentiation of a Transplanted Tlaxcaltecan Indian Population: Saltillo. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 50(3): 401–​413.
Crawford, M. H., D. Dykes, J. Mielke, and H. F. Polesky. 1981. Population Structure of 
Circumpolar Alaskan and Siberian Indigenous Communities. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology 55: 167–​186.
Crawford, M. H., D. D. Dykes, K. Skradsky, and H. Polesky. 1984. Blood Group, Serum 
Protein, and Red Cell Enzyme Polymorphisms, and Admixture among the Black 
Caribs and Creoles of Central America and the Caribbean. In Current Developments in 
Anthropological Genetics: Black Caribs: A Case Study in Biocultural Adaptation, edited 
by M. H. Crawford, vol. 3, pp. 303–​333. New York: Plenum Press.
Crawford, M. H., and G. Gmelch. 1974. The Human Biology of the Irish 
Tinkers: Demography, Ethnohistory and Genetics. Social Biology 21: 321–​331.
Crawford, M. H., N. L. Gonzalez, M. S. Schanfield, et al. 1981. The Black Caribs (Garifuna) 
of Livingston, Guatemala: Genetic Markers and Admixture Estimates. Human Biology 
53(1): 87–​103.
Crawford, M. H., T. Koertvelyessy, M. Pap, K. Szilagyi, and R. Duggirala. 1999. The Effects 
of a New Political Border on the Migration Patterns and Predicted Kinship (PHI) in a 
Subdivided Hungarian Agricultural Population: Tiszahat. Homo  50(3): 201–​210.
Crawford, M. H., and G. W. Lasker, eds. 1989. Foundations of Anthropological Genetics. 
Human Biology  61(5–​6): v–​vi.
Crawford, M. H., R. Lisker, and R. Perez Briceno. 1976. Genetic Microdifferentiation 
of Two Transplanted Tlaxcaltecan Populations. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, 
Demography, Morphology and Genetics, edited by M. H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 169–​175. 
Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology.
Crawford, M. H., and J. H. Mielke, eds. 1982. Current Developments in Anthropological 
Genetics. Vol. II. Ecology and Population Structure. New York: Plenum Press.
Crawford, M. H., and D. H. O’Rourke. 1978. Inbreeding, Lymphoma, Genetics and 
Morphology of the Papio hamadryas Colony of Sukhumi. Journal of Medical 
Primatology 7(6): 355–​360.
Crawford, M. H., D. H. O`Rourke, D. D. Dykes, L. A. Yakovleva, A. F. Voevodin, B. Lapin. 
and H. F. Polesky. 1984. Inbreeding, Heterozygosity and Lymphoma Risk among the 
Baboons (Papio hamadryas) of the Sukhumi Primate Center. American Journal of 
Primatology 63: 143–​153.
Crawford, M. H., C. Phillips-​Krawczak, C. G. Beaty, and N. Boaz. 2021. Migration 
of Garifuna: Evolutionary Success Story. In Human Migration: Biocultural 
Perspectives,edited by L. Munoz-​Moreno and M. H. Crawford, pp. 153–​168. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Crawford, M. H., and L. Rogers. 1982. Population Genetic Models in the Study of Aging 
and Longevity in a Mennonite Community. Social Science and Medicine 18: 149–​153.

References 
181
Crawford, M. H., R. Rubicz, and M. Zlojutro. 2010. Origins of the Aleuts and the 
Genetic Structure of Populations of the Archipelago: Molecular and Archaeological 
Perspective. Human Biology  82(5–​6): 695–​718.
Crawford, M. H., and D. West. 2012. Evolutionary Consequences of Human 
Migration: Genetic, Historic and Archaeological Perspectives in the Caribbean 
and Aleutian Islands. In Causes and Consequences of Human Migration, pp. 65–​86. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Crawford, M. H., D. West, and D. H. O’Rourke, eds. 2010. Double-​Special-​Issue on: The 
Aleuts: Origins, Culture and Genetics. Human Biology 82(5–​6): 481–​764.
Crawford, M. H., J. T. Williams, and R. Duggirala. 1997. Genetic Structure of Indigenous 
Populations of Siberia. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 104(2): 177–​192.
Crawford, M. H., P. L. Workman, C. McLean, and F. C. Lees. 1976. Admixture Estimates 
and Selection in Tlaxcala. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology 
and Genetics, vol. 7, pp. 161–​168. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in 
Anthropology. 
Cummins, H. 1930. Dermatoglyphics in Indians of Southern Mexico and Central 
America. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 15: 123–​130.
Cummins, H., and D. Midlo. 1943. Finger Prints, Palms and Soles. Philadelphia: Blackiston.
Custodio, R., and R. Huntsman. 1984. Abnormal Hemoglobins among the Black 
Caribs. In Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics: Black Caribs, a Case 
Study in Biocultural Adaptation, edited by M. H. Crawford, vol. 3, pp. 335–​343. 
New York: Plenum Press.
Dahlberg, A. A. 1956. Materials for the Establishment of Standards for the Classification 
of Tooth Characters, Attributes and Techniques in Morphological Studies of Dentition. 
Zoller Laboratory of Dental Anthropology.  Chicago: University of Chicago.
Davidson, W. V. 1984. The Garifuna in Central America: Ethnohistorical and 
Geographical Foundations. In Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics: Black 
Caribs. A Case Study in Biocultural Adaptation, edited by M. H. Crawford, vol. 3, pp. 
13–​33. New York: Plenum Press.
Davila Aguirre, J. J. 1976. Tlaxcaltecan Colonialization and Its Influence in Northern 
Mexico. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, ed­
ited by M. H. Crawford, , vol. 7, pp. 35–​37. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications 
in Anthropology.
Davis, D. D., and C. Goodwin. 1990. Island Carib Origins: Evidence and Nonevidence. 
American Antiquity  55(1): 37–​48.
Davis, R. S., and R. A. Knecht. 2010. Continuity and Change in the Eastern Aleutian 
Archaeological Sequence. Human Biology 82(5–​6): 507–​524.
Demarchi, D., M. J. Mosher, and M. H. Crawford. 2005. Apolipoproteins (Apoproteins) 
and LPL Variation in Mennonite Populations of Kansas and Nebraska. American 
Journal of Human Biology 17(5): 593–​600.
Derbeneva, O. A., R. I. Sukernik, N. V. Voldodko, S. H. Hosseini, and M. Y. Lott. 2002. 
Analysis of Mitochondrial DNA Diversity in the Aleuts of the Commander Islands 
and Its Implications for the Genetic History of Beringia. American Journal of Human 
Genetics  71(2): 415–​421.
Devor, E. J. 2000. Age and the Quantitative Genetics of Neuromuscular Performance. In 
Different Seasons: Biological Aging among Mennonites of Midwestern United States, pp. 
69–​76. Publications in Anthropology, vol. 21. Lawrence: University of Kansas.

182 
References
Devor, E. J., M. H. Crawford, and W. Osness. 1985. Neuromuscular Performance in a 
Kansas Mennonite Community: Age and Sex Effects in Performance. Human Biology  
57(2): 197–​212. 
Devor, E. J., M. McGue, M. H. Crawford, and P. M. Lin. 1986a. Transmissible and Non-​
Transmissible Components of Anthropometric Variation in the Alexanderwohl 
Mennonites. I. Description and Familial Correlations. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology 69(1): 71–​82.
Devor, E. J., M. McGue, M. H. Crawford, and P. M. Lin. 1986b. Transmissible and Non-​
Transmissible Components of Anthropometric Variation in the Alexanderwohl 
Mennonites. II. Resolution by Path Analysis. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 
69(1): 83–​92.
Duggirala, R. 1995. Cultural and Genetic Determinants of Lipids and Lipoproteins in the 
Mennonite Community. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Duggirala, R., M. H. Crawford, and T. Koertvelyessy. 1992. Tarpa, Northeastern 
Hungary: 1780–​1979. Based on Isonymy and Repeated Pairs (RP) Methods. Journal of 
Indian Anthropological Society  26: 63–​75. 
Duggirala, R., M. Uttley, K. K. Williams, R. Arya, J. Blangero, and M. H. Crawford. 2002. 
Genetic Determination of Biological Aging in the Mennonites of the Midwestern 
United States. Genetic Epidemiology  23: 97–​109.
Dyck, C. J. 1993. The General Conference Mennonite Church. In An Introduction to 
Mennonite History, pp. 252–​276. Scottdale, PA: Herald Press.
Estrada-​Mena, B., F. J. Estrada, R. Ulloa-​Arvizu, et al. 2010. Blood Group O Alleles in 
Native Americas: Implications in the Peopling of the Americas. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology  142(1): 85–​94.
Field, A. 1977. Nabokov: His Life in Part. New York: Penguin Books.
Firschein, L. I. 1961. Population Dynamics of the Sickle-​Cell Trait in the Black Caribs 
of British Honduras, Central America. American Journal of Human Genetics 
13(2): 233–​254.
Firschein, L. I. 1984. Demographic Patterns of the Garifuna (Black Caribs) of Belize. In 
Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 3. Black Caribs. A Case Study in 
Biocultural Adaptation, pp. 67–​94. New York: Plenum Press.
Fitzpatrick, S. M. 2015. The Pre-​Columbian Caribbean Colonization, Population 
Dispersal, and Island Adaptations. Research Gate, November, 305–​331.
Flegel, W. A. 2011. Molecular Genetics and Clinical Applications for RH. Transfusion  
44(1): 81–​91.
Galton, F. 1892. Finger Prints. London: MacMillan.
Gamboa, I. 1976. Malnutrition and Disease among the Tlaxcaltecans: San Pablo del Monte 
and Cuanalan. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, 
vol. 7, pp. 145–​149. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology.
Gonzalez, N. L. 1969. Black Carib Household Structure. Seattle: University of Washington.
Gonzalez, N. L. 1984. Garifuna (Black Carib) Social Organization. In Current 
Developments in Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 3. Black Caribs: A Case Study in 
Biocultural Adaptation, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 51–​65. New York: Plenum Press.
Graf, O., M. Zlojutro, R. Rubicz, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. Surname Distributions and 
Y-​Chromosome Markers in the Aleutian Islands. Human Biology 82(5–​6): 745–​758.
Halberstein, R. A. 1973. Evolutionary Implications of Demographic Structure of a 
Transplanted Population in Central Mexico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University 
of Kansas. 

References 
183
Halberstein, R. A., M. H. Crawford, and H. G. Nutini. 1973. Historical Demographic 
Analysis of Indian Populations in Tlaxcala, Mexico. Social Biology 20: 40–​50.
Harpending, H., and R. Ward. 1982. Chemical Systematics and Human Populations. In 
Biochemical Aspects of Evolutionary Biology, edited by M. H. Nitecki, pp. 213–256. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harvey, R. G., M. J. Godber, A. C. Kopec, A. R. Mourant, and D. Tills. 1969. Frequency of 
Genetic Traits in the Caribs of Dominica. Human Biology 41(3): 342–​364.
Henry, E. R. 1900. Classification and Uses of Finger-​Prints. London: Routledge.
Herrera-​Paz, E. F., M. Mattamoros, and A. Carracedo. 2010. The Garifuna (Black Carib) 
People of the Atlantic Coasts of Honduras. American Journal of Human Biology 
22: 36–​44.
Holt, S. B. 1968. The Genetics of Dermal Ridges. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Hutchinson, J., and M. H. Crawford. 1981. Genetic Determinants of Blood Pressure Level 
among the Black Caribs of St. Vincent. Human Biology  533: 453–​466.
Hutchinson, J., P. Lin, and M. H. Crawford. 1983. Factors Influencing Blood Pressure 
Level among the Black Caribs of St. Vincent Island. In Current Developments in 
Anthropological Genetics, vol. 3. The Black Caribs, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 215–​
237. New York: Plenum Press.
Jochelson, V. I. 1933. History, Ethnology, and Anthropology of the Aleut. Publication 432. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Justice, A., R. Rubicz, G. Chitoor, R. L. Jantz, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. Anthropometric 
Variation among Bering Sea Natives. Human Biology  82(5–​6): 653–​676.
Karafet, T., F. L. Mendez, M Meilerman, P. A. Underhill, S. L. Zegura, and M. Hammer. 
2008. New Binary Polymorphisms Reshape and Increase Resolution of the Human Y 
Chromosomal Haplogroup Tree. Genome Res 18(5): 30–​38.
Keith, M. H., M. V. Flinn, H. J. Durbin, T. N. Rowan, G. E. Blomquist, K. H. Taylor, J. F. 
Taylor, and J. E. Decker. 2021. Genetic Ancestry, Admixture, and Population Structure 
in Rural Dominica. PLoS  16(11): e0258735.
Koertvelyessy, T., M. H. Crawford, and J. Hutchinson. 1982. PTC Threshold Distributions 
and Age in Mennonite Populations. Human Biology  54(3): 636–​646.
Koertvelyessy, T., M. H. Crawford, M. Pap, and K. Szilagyi. 1990. Surname Repetition and 
Isonymy in Northeastern Hungarian Marriages. Human Biology  62(4): 515–​524.
Koertvelyessy, T., M. H. Crawford, M. Pap, and K. Szilagyi. 1992. The Influence of 
Religious Affiliation on Surname Repetition in Marriages in Tiszaszalka, Hungary. 
Journal of Biosocial Science  24(1): 113–​121.
Koertvelyessy, T., M. H. Crawford, M. Pap, and K. Szilagyi. 1993. The Influence of 
Religious Affiliation on Surname Repetition (RP) in Marriages of Marokpapi, Hungary. 
Antropologischen Anzieger 51: 309–​316.
Kolman, C. J., N. Sambuughin, and E. Bermingham. 1996. Mitochondrial DNA Analysis 
of Mongolian Populations and Implications for the Origin of New World Founders. 
Genetics  142: 1321–​1334.
Kraus, B. S. 1969. Dental Anatomy and Occlusion: A Study of the Masticatory System. 
Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins.
Lambeck, K., Y. Yokoyama, and T. Purcell. 2002. Into and out of the Last Glacial 
Maximum: Sea-​Level Changes during Oxygen Isotope Stage 3 and 2. Quarternary 
Science Review  21: 343–​360.

184 
References
Lapin, B. 1975. Possible Ways of Viral Leukemia Spreads among the Hamadryas 
Baboons of the Sukhumi Monkey Colony. In Comparative Leukemia Research 1973, 
Leukemogenesis, edited by Y. Ito and R. Dutcher, pp. 75–​84. Basel: Karger Press.
Lasker, G. W. 1985. Surnames and Genetic Structure. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Leaf, A. 1973. Getting Old. Scientific American 229: 45–​52.
Lees, F. C. 1975. A Numerical Analysis of the Anthropometrics of Tlaxcalan Populations. 
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
Lees, F. C., and M. H. Crawford. 1976. Anthropometric Variation in Tlaxcaltecan 
Populations. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, 
edited by Michael H. Crawford, pp. 61–​80. University of Kansas Publications in 
Anthropology, vol. 7.
Lin, P. M. 1976. A Factor Analysis of the Dentition of Three Tlaxcaltecan Populations. 
In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, edited by 
Michael H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 93–​119. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications 
in Anthropology.
Lin, P. M. 1984. Anthropometry of Black Caribs. In Current Developments in 
Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 3. Black Caribs, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 189–​214. 
Plenum Press.
Lin, P. M., V. Bach-​Enciso, M. H. Crawford, J. Hutchinson, D. Sank, and B. S. Firschein. 
1984. Quantitative Analyses of Dermatoglyphic Patterns of Black Carib Populations of 
Central America. In Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 3, Black 
Caribs. A Case Study of Biocultural Adaptation, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 241–​268. 
New York: Plenum Press.
Longhofer, J. 1986. Land, Household and Community: A Study of Alexanderwohl 
Mennonites. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Lopes, F. L., L. Hou, A. B. W. Boldt, L. Kassem, V. M. Alves, A. E. Nardi, and F. J. McMahon. 
2016. Finding Rare, Disease-​Associated Variants in Isolated Groups: Potential 
Advantages of Mennonite Populations. Human Biology 88: 109–​120.
MacMahon, B. 1971. A Portrait of Tinkers. Natural History 80: 24–​35, 104–​109.
Malecott, G. 1969. The Mathematics of Heredity. San Francisco: Freeman.
Margulis, L. 1975. Symbiotic Theory of the Origin of Eukaryotic Organelles: Criteria for 
Proof. Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology 29: 21–​38.
Marsh, W. L., R. S. K. Chaganti, F. H. Gardener, P. C. Nowell, and J. German. 1974. 
Mapping Human Autosomes: Evidence Supporting Assignment of Rhesus to the Short 
Arm of Chromosome no. 1. Science 183(4128): 966–​968.
Martin, L. J. 1993. The Genetic and Environmental Components of Thyroxine Variation in 
the Mennonites of Kansas and Nebraska. M.A. thesis, University of Kansas.
Martin, L. I., K. E. North, and M. H. Crawford. 2000. The Origins of Irish Travelers and 
the Genetic Structure of Ireland. Annals of Human Biology 25: 453–​465.
Mazess, R. B., and S. H. Forman. 1979. Longevity and Age Exaggeration in Vilcabamba, 
Ecuador. Journal of Gerontology 34: 94–​98.
McCartney, A. P. 1984. Prehistory of the Aleutian Region. In Handbook of North American 
Indians, Vol. 5: Arctic, edited by D. Damas, 119–135. Washington, DC: Smithsonian 
Institution Press.
McCartney, A. P., and W. Veltre. 1996. Anagula Core and Blade Site. In American 
Beginnings: The Prehistory and Paleoecology of Beringia, edited by F. H. West, pp. 443–​
450. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

References 
185
McComb, J. 1996. The Effects of Unique Historical Events in the Gene Pool of the Altai-​
Kizhi: A Study of Five Variable Number Tandem Repeats (VNTR) Loci. M.A. thesis, 
University of Kansas.
Melton, P. E. 2012. Mennonite Migrations: Genetic and Demographic Consequences. 
In Causes and Consequences of Human Migration: An Evolutionary Perspective, ed­
ited by M. H. Crawford and B. C. Campbell, pp. 299–​316. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Melton, P. E., M. J. Mosher, R. Rubicz, M. Zlojutro, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. 
Mitochondrial DNA Diversity in Mennonites from the Midwestern United States. 
Human Biology 82: 267–​289.
Meltzer, D. J. 2009. First Peoples in a New World Colonizing Ice Age. Berkeley: University 
of California.
Mielke, J. H., and M. H. Crawford, eds. 1980. Current Developments in Anthropological 
Genetics, Vol. 1. Theory and Methods. New York: Plenum Press.
Monmonier, M. 1973. Maximum-​Difference Barriers: An Alternative Regionalization 
Method. Geographic Analysis  3: 245–​261.
Morton, N. E. 1973. Prediction of Kinship from Genealogies. In Genetic Structure of 
Population, edited by N. E. Morton, pp. 89–​91. University of Hawaii Press.
Mosher, M. J. 2002. The Genetic Architecture of Plasma Lipids in the Buryats: As Ecogenetic 
Approach. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Mosher, M. J., P. E. Melton, P. Stapleton, M. S. Schanfield, and M. H. Crawford. 2016. 
Methylation across the Leptin Core Promoter in Four Diverse Asian and North 
American Populations. Human Biology  88(2): 121–​135.
Munoz, L., and M. H. Crawford, eds. 2021. Human Migration: Biocultural Perspective. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Nabokov, V. 1955 Lolita. Olympia, WA: Olympia Press.
Nash, G. 2002. The Tarasov Saga: From Russia through China to Australia. NSW, Australia: 
Rosenberg.
Nava, L. 1969. Transcendencia Historia de Tlaxcala. Mexico City: Editorial Progresso.
Neel, J. V., and F. M. Salzano. 1964. A Prospectus for the Genetic Studies of American 
Indian. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology 20: 85–​98.
North, K. E., and M. H. Crawford. 1996. Isonymy and Repeated Pairs Analysis: The Mating 
Structure of Acceglio, Italy, 1889–​1968. Revista di Antropologia (Roma)  74: 93–​103.
North, K. E., L. J. Martin, and M. H. Crawford. 2000. The Origins of the Irish Travelers and 
the Genetic Structure of Ireland. Annals of Human Biology 27: 453–​465.
Novelletto, A. 2007. Y-​chromosome Variation in Europe: Continental and Local Processes 
in the Formation of the Extant Gene Pool. Annals of Human Biology  34(2): 139–​172.
Nutini, H. G. 1976. An Outline of Tlaxcaltecan Culture, History, Ethnology and 
Demography. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, 
edited by Michael H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 24–​34. Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Publications in Anthropology.
O'Rourke, D. H. 1980. Inbreeding Effects on Morphometric Characters in the Papio 
Hamadryas Colony at Sukhumi. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kansas.
O’Rourke, D. H., and M. H. Crawford. 1976. Odontometric Analysis of Four Tlaxcaltecan 
Communities. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology, and 
Genetics, edited by M. H. Crawford, vol. 7, pp. 81–​92. Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Publications in Anthropology.

186 
References
O’Rourke, D. H., and M. H. Crawford. 1980. Odontometric Microdifferentiation of 
Transplanted Mexican Indian Populations: Cuanalan and Saltillo. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology  53(3): 421–​434.
O'Rourke, D. H., R. M. Baume, J. H. Mielke and M. H. Crawford. 1984. Dental Variation 
in Black Cari Populations. In Current Developments in Anthropological Genetics. Vol. 
3. Black Caribs, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 169–​186. Plenum Press.
O’Rourke, D. H., D. L. West, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. Unangan Past and Present: The 
Contrasts between Observed and Inferred Histories. Human Biology  82(5–​6): 759–​764.
Pakendorf, B., and M. Stoneking. 2005. Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution. 
Annual Review Genomics Human Genetics  6: 165–​183.
Patterson, N., A. L. Price, and D. Reich. 2006. Population Structure and Eigenanalysis. 
PLOS Genetics 2(12): e190.
Pavon-​Vargas, M., M. H. Crawford, R. Barquera, et al. 2019. Genetic Diversity of HLA 
System in Two Populations from Tlaxcala, Mexico: Tlaxcala City and Rural Tlaxcala. 
Human Immunology  81(9): 544–​546.
Phillips-​Krawczak, C. 2012. Origins and Genetic Structure of the Garifuna Population of 
Central America. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Pichler, L., C. Fuchsberger, C. Platzer, et al. 2010. Drawing the History of the Hutterite 
Population on the Genetic Landscape: Inference from Y-​chromosome and mtDNA 
Genotypes. European Journal of Human Genetics 18: 509.
Pollin, T. L., D. J. McBride, R. Agarwala, et al. 2007. Investigations of the Y Chromosome, 
Male Founder Structure and YSTR Mutation Rates in the Old Order Amish. Human 
Heredity  65: 91–​104.
Price, A. L., N. J. Patterson, R. M. Plenge, M. E. Weinblatt, N. A. Shadick, and D. Reich. 
2006. Principal Component Analysis Corrects for Stratification in Genome-​Wide 
Association Studies. Nature Genetics  38(8): 904–​909.
Puppala, S. 2000. Genetic Variation in Blood Pressure in Mennonite Populations of 
Kansas and Nebraska. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Purcell, S., B. Neal, K. Todd-​Brown, et al. 2007. PLINK: A Tool Set for Whole-​Genome 
Association on Population Based Linkage. American Journal of Human Genetics 
81(3): 559–​575.
Raff, J., J. Tackney, and D. H. O’Rourke. 2010. South from Alaska: A Pilot Study of the 
Genetic History on the Alaska Peninsula and the Eastern Aleutians. Human Biology  
82(5–​6): 677–​694.
Rahman, S., H. Hu, E. McNeely, et al. 2008. Social and Environmental Risk Factors for 
Hypertension in African Americans. Florida Public Health Review  5: 64–​72.
Raj, A., M. Stephens, and J. K. Pritchard. 2014. Structure: Variational inference of popula­
tion structure in large SNP data sets. Genetics  197(2): 573–​589.
Read, K. E. 1965 The High Valley. New York: Charles Scribner & Sons.
Reedy-​Maschner, K. 2010. Where Did All the Aleut Men Go? Aleut Male Attrition and 
Related Patterns in Aleutian Historical Demography and Social Organization. Human 
Biology 82(5–​6): 583–​612.
Reich, D., N. Patterson, D. Campbell, et al. 2012. Reconstructing Native American 
Population History. Nature  488: 370–​374.
Relethford, J. H., and M. H. Crawford. 2013. Genetic Drift and Population History of the 
Irish Travelers. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 150: 184–​189.
Renwick, J. H. 1971. The Rhesus Synthetic Group in Man. Nature 234: 475.

References 
187
Roberts, D. F. 1965. Assumption and Fact in Anthropological Genetics. Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute 95: 87–​103.
Roberts, D. F. 1968. Genetic Effects of Population Size Reduction. Nature 14: 2205.
Rogers, L. 1984. Phylogenetic Identification of a Religious Isolate and Measurement of 
Inbreeding. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Rogers, L., and R. A. Rogers. 2000. Mennonite History with Special Reference to 
Alexanderwohl and Related Congregations in Kansas and Nebraska. In Different 
Seasons: Biological Aging among the Mennonites of Midwestern United States, edited by 
M. H. Crawford, 7–​18. Lawrence: University of Kansas.
Rubicz, R. C. 2007. Evolutionary Consequences of Recently Founded Aleut Communities in 
the Commander and Pribilof Islands. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Rubicz, R. C., and M. H. Crawford. 2016. Molecular Genetic Evidence for the Origins of 
North American Populations. In Handbook of Arctic Archaeology, edited by O. Mason 
and M. Friesen, pp. 27–​50. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Rubicz, R. C., P. E. Melton, and M. H. Crawford. 2007. Molecular Markers in 
Anthropological Genetic Studies. In Anthropological Genetics: Theory, Methods and 
Applications, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 141–​186. Cambridge University Press.
Rubicz, R. C., P. E. Melton, V. Spitsyn, G. Sun, R. Deka, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. Genetic 
Structure of Native Circumpolar Populations Based on Autosomal, Mitochondrial 
and Y-​chromosome DNA Markers. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 
143(1): 62–​74.
Rubicz, R. C., K. Melvin, and M. H. Crawford. 2002. Genetic Evidence for the 
Phylogenetic Relationship between Na-​Dene and Yeniseian Speakers. Human Biology 
74(6): 743–​760.
Rubicz, R. C., T. Schurr, P. L. Babb, and M. H. Crawford. 2003. Mt-​DNA Sequences and 
the Origin of the Aleuts. Human Biology 75(6): 809–​835.
Rubicz, R. C., M. Zlojutro, G. Sun, V. Spitsyn, R. Deka, K. Young, and M. H. Crawford. 
2010. Genetic Architecture of a Small, Recently Aggregated Aleut Population: Bering 
Island. Human Biology  82(506): 719–​736.
Ruhlen, M. 1991. A Guide to the World’s Languages. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Ruhlen, M. 1998. The Origin of the NaDene. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA  95: 13994–​13996.
Sagan, L. 1967. On the Origin of Mitosing Cells. Journal of Theoretical Biology 
14(3): 225–​274.
Savinetsky, A., N. K. Kisleva, and B. F. Khassanov. 2010. Paleoenvironments-​Holocene 
Deposits from Shemya Island. In The People at the End of the World: The Western 
Aleutians Project and Archaeology of Shemya Island, edited by D. Corbett, D. West, and 
C. Lefevre, pp. 71–​82. Anchorage: Aurora.
Schanfield, M. S. 1976. Immunoglobin Haplotypes in Tlaxcaltecan and Other Populations. 
In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, vol. 7, pp. 
150–​154. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology.
Schanfield, M. S., R. Brown, and M. H. Crawford. 1984. Immunoglobulin Allotypes in 
the Black Caribs and Creoles of Belize and St. Vincent Island. In Current Developments 
in Anthropological Genetics: Volume 3, Black Caribs-​A Case Study in Biocultural 
Adaptation, edited by M. H. Crawford, pp. 345–​363. New York: Plenum Press.
Schatzl, H., M. Tschikobava, D. Rose, A. Voevodin, H. Nitschko, E. Sieger, U. Busch, K. 
von der Helm, and B. Lapin. 1993. The Sukhumi Primate Monkey Model for Viral 

188 
References
Lymphomogenesis: High Incidence of Lymphomas with Presence of STLV-​I and EBV-​
Like Virus. Leukemia August 7, Suppl. 2: S86–​S92.
Schroeder, K. B., M. Jakobbsson, M. H. Crawford et al. 2009. Haplotypic Background of 
a Private Allele at High Frequency in the Americas. Molecular Biology and Evolution 
26(5): 995–​1016.
Schroeder, W. A. 1974 .Microchromatography of Hemoglobins IV: An Improved 
Procedure for the Detection of Hemoglobins S and C at Birth. Journal of Laboratory 
and Clinical Medicine  86: 528–​532.
Schroeder, W. A., J. Jakway, and D. Powers. 1973. Rapid Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Disease at 
Birth by Microcolumn Chromatography. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine 
82: 303–​308.
Scott, E. C. 2004. Evolution and Creationism: An Introduction. Oakland: University of 
California Press.
Seielstad, M., N. Yuldasheva, N. Singh, P. Underhill, P. Oefner, P. Snen, and R. S. Wells. 
2003. A Novel Y-​chromosome Variant Puts an Upper Limit on the Timing of the First 
Entry into the Americas. American Journal of Human Genetics 73(3): 700–​705.
Smithies, O. 1959. An Improved Procedure for Starch-​Gel Electrophoresis: Further 
Variations in the Serum Proteins of Normal Individuals. Biochemistry Journal  71: 585.
Starikovskaya, Y. B., R. I. Sukernik, T. G. Schurr, A. Kogelnik, and D. G. Wallace. 1998. 
MtDNA Diversity in Chukchi and Siberian Eskimos: Implications for the Genetic 
History of Ancient Beringia and the Peopling of the New World. American Journal of 
Human Genetics  63: 1473–​1491.
Stephens, M., N. J. Smith, and P. Donnelly. 2001. A New Statistical Method for Haplotype 
Reconstruction from Population Data. American Journal of Human Genetics  68(4): 978.
Tamm, E., T. Kivisild, D. Campbell, et al. 2007. Beringian Standstill and Spread of Native 
American Founders. PLOS One 2(9): e829.
Taylor, C. 2012. The Black Carib Wars: Freedom, Survival and the Making of the Garifuna. 
Oxford: Signal Books.
The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. 2015. A Global Reference for Human Genetic 
Variation Nature 526: 68–​74.
Tilford, C. A., T. Kuroda-​Kawaguchi, H. Skaletsky, et al. 2001. A Physical Map of Y 
Chromosome. Nature  409: 943–​945.
Torroni, A., R. I. Sukernik, T. G. Schurr, Y. B. Starikovskaya, M. F. Cabell, M. H. Crawford, 
A. G. Comuzzie, and D. C. Wallace. 1993. mtDNA Variation of Aboriginal Siberians 
Reveals Distinct Genetic Affinities with Native Americans. American Journal of Human 
Genetics 53(3): 563–​590.
Turner, J. H., M. H. Crawford, and W. C. Leyshon. 1975. Phenotypic karyotypic localiza­
tion of the human Rh-​locus on chromosome 1. Journal of Heredity 66: 97–​99.
Turner, J. H., M. H. Crawford, and W. S. Leyshon. 1976. Localization of the Rh-​Trove 
Point in a Tlaxcaltecan Family by Serological-​Banded Karyotype Correlation 
Studies. In The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology, and Genetics, vol. 
7, pp. 155–​160. Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology.
Turner, K. R. 1976. Computer Simulation of Transplanted Tlaxcaltecan Populations. In 
The Tlaxcaltecans: Prehistory, Demography, Morphology and Genetics, vol. 7, pp. 48–​58. 
Lawrence: University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology.
Turner, T. R. 2005. Biological Anthropology and Ethics: From Repatriation to Genetic 
Identity. Albany: State University of New York Press.

References 
189
Turner, T. R., J. K. Wagner, and G. S. Cabana. 2018. Ethics in Biological Anthropology. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology  165: 939–​951.
Uttley, M. 1991. Relationship of Measures of Biological Age to Survivorship among 
Mennonites. PhD dissertation, University of Kansas.
Uttley, M., and M. H. Crawford. 1994. The Efficacy of Composite Biological Age Score 
to Predict Survivorship among Kansas and Nebraska Mennonites. Human Biology  
66: 121–​144.
Vajda, E. 2010. A Siberian Link with Na-​Dene Languages. Anthropological Papers of the 
University of Alaska 5: 33–99.
Voevodin, A., E. Samilchuk, H. Schatzl, E. Boeri, and G. Franchini. 1996. Interspecies 
Transmission of Macaque Simian T-​cell Leukemia/​Lymphoma Virus Type 1 in 
Baboons Resulted in an Outbreak of Malignant Lymphoma. Journal of Virology March 
70(3): 1633–​1639.
Voight, B. F., S. Kudaravalli, X. Wen, and J. K. Pritchard. 2006. A Map of Recent Positive 
Selection in the Human Genome. PLOS Biology  4(3): e72.
Young, K. 2009. The Basques in the Genetic Landscape of Europe. Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Kansas.
Young, K. L., E. J. Devor, and M. H. Crawford. 2012. Demic Expansion or Cultural 
Diffusion: Migration and Basque Origin. In Causes and Consequences of Human 
Migration, pp. 224–​249. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Young, K. L., G. Sun, R. Deka, and M. H. Crawford. 2011a. Autosomal Short Tandem 
Repeat Genetic Variation of the Basques in Spain. Croatian Medical Journal 
52(3): 372–​383.
Young, K. L., G. Sun, R. Deka, and M. H. Crawford. 2011b. Paternal Genetic History of the 
Basque Population of Spain. Human Biology  83(4): 455–​475.
West, D., D. H. O’Rourke, and M. H. Crawford. 2010. Introduction: Origins and 
Settlement of the Indigenous Populations of the Aleutian Archipelago. Human Biology  
82(5–​6): 481–​486.
West, D., A. Savinitsky, and M. H. Crawford. 2007. Aleutian Islands: Archaeology, 
Molecular Genetics and Ecology. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Earth 
and the Environmental Sciences 98: 47–​57. 
Winterhalder, B., and E. A. Smith. 1981. Optimal Foraging Strategies and Hunter-​Gatherer 
Research in Anthropology. In Hunter-​Gatherer Foraging Strategies: Ethnographic and 
Archeological Analyses, pp. 1–​35. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Zlojutro, M. 2008. Mitochondrial DNA and Y-​chromosome Variation of Eastern Aleut 
Populations: Implications for the Genetic Structure and Peopling of the Aleutian 
Archipelago. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Kansas.
Zlojutro, M., R. Roy, J. Palikij, and M. H. Crawford. 2006. Autosomal STR Variation in a 
Basque Population: Vizcaya Province. Human Biology 78(5): 599–​618.
Zlojutro, M., R. Rubicz, and M. H. Crawford. 2009. Mitochondrial DNA and Y-​
Chromosome Variation in Five Eastern Aleut Communities: Evidence for Genetic 
Substructure in the Aleut Population. Annals of Human Biology 36(5): 511–​526.
Zlojutro, M., R. Rubicz, E. J. Devor, V. A. Spitsyn, S. V. Makarov, K. Wilson, and M. H. 
Crawford. 2006. Genetic Structure of the Aleuts and Circumpolar Populations 
Based on Mitochondrial DNA Sequences: A Synthesis. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology 129(3): 446–​464.

 

Abkhasia, site of longevity, 83–​85
Acceglio, northern Italy, 140–​
141, 142–​144
admixture 
Aleuts, 134–​137
Black Caribs (Garifuna), 73–​74
Alaskan populations, 102–​104
Aleuts (Unangan), 3, 118–​119, 121–​125
Project, 167–​168
Alexanderwohl, 87–​89
Altai, Kizhi from Gorno Altai, 114, 117
American Anthropological Association, 
164–​166
AMOVA, analysis of molecular variance, 
97, 159
Anabaptists, 85–​86
anamnestic method, 84
anthropological genetics, 1, 3, 31
history, 160
anthropometrics 
Mennonite groups, 100
Tlaxcaltecan populations, 50, 71
Apraiz-​Gonzalez, Arantza, 154–​155
Arnaiz-​Villena, Antonio, 154
baboons, 27–​28
Papio hamadryas, 150–​153
Balliceaux, 64, 66
Basques, 154–​159
uniparental DNA haplotypes, 157, 158
Baume, Robert, 152
Bay Island 
Roatan, 66
Behavioral Genetics Institute, 21–​22
Belize participants, 70–​72
Belmont Report, 35
Bernstein’s method, 74
BIC, Bayesian Information Criterion, 134
biological aging, 83–​85
assessed through multivariate 
phenotypes, 93–​94
Black Caribs, also known as Garifuna 
quantitative variation, 74–​75
Camelot Affair, 170
Hugo Nuttini, 170
Central America, 2, 6, 31–​53, 62–​82, 161
Chagnon, Napoleon, 165
Chamizal, 47, 48, 49
China, 8–​13
Cortes, Hernan, 32
Crawford 
Herman Charles father of MH 
Crawford, 9
Michael Herman doctoral dissertation, 
23–​24
Crimea, 88–​89
Cuanalan, Mexico, 34, 41, 48–​49
participants, 41–​42
Cuauhtemoc, Mexico 
Old Order Mennonites, 171
Darwin, Charles 
Letter, 173
DDM, demic diffusion model, 156–​157
dentition, Tlaxcala, 52–​53
dermatoglyphics, Tlaxcala, 50–​52
DNA markers, 96–​100
dolgozhitili (long living in Russian), 84
Dominica, 75–​79
ethics (code of Ethics AAA), 165,  
167, 171
evolution 
definition, 4
questions, 1–​5
Index
For the benefit of digital users, indexed terms that span two pages (e.g., 52–​53) may, on 
occasion, appear on only one of those pages.

192 
Index
fieldwork and field research, 1
forces of evolution, 4–​5
founder effect, 5
 
Garifuna, 2. See also Black Caribs
belize, 69
history, 64–​67
participants (researchers involved in the 
study), 63
population fission, 65–​67
gene flow, 5
consequences, 5
genealogy (Academic) of MH Crawford, 
8–​9
genetic discontinuity in the Aleutian 
Islands, 129–​130, 138
genetic distances Irish Travelers, 59
genetic drift, 5
GMs, 68. See also immunoglobulins and 
gamma globulins
Gmelch, George, 54–​57
Goessel, Kansas, 88, 90, 92
Gonzalez, Nancie, 2, 62, 68, 71, 163
 
Halberstein, Robert A (Chick Hall 
pseudonym), 30, 37, 41
Halderman, Mennonites, 85, 87
Harbin, Manchuria, 10
Henderson, Nebraska, 90
HLA (human leukocyte antigen), 40–​
41, 53
HTLV-​1, 152
human experimentation, 35–​36
Hungary, 144–​149
Hutchinson, Janis, 72, 91
 
immunoglobulins, 68. See also GMs
importance of fieldwork, 1
informed consent, 36, 167
Irish participants, 54–​55
Itinerants (Tinkers, Travelers) 
genetic affinities, 58–​59
origins, 55–​56
 
Japanese occupation of Shanghai, 10–​12
 
Kamchatka, Siberia, 130–​132
Kets, 106, 108
kin migration, 127–​128
King Island, Alaska, 104–​105
Kraus, Bert, 18–​19
 
LaMinita, 45, 47
Lapin, Boris, 150
Lees, Francis, 42, 45, 71
Lin, Paul, 52–​53, 62–​63, 71, 73, 91, 92
Lisker, Ruben, 42, 43
Lovstova, Tamara inakentivna, mother of 
Michael Crawford, 9
lymphoma/​leukemia in Baboons, 150
 
macaques (Rhesus), 152–​153
MacMahon 
theories of ethnogenesis of Tinkers, 55
mapping Rhesus blood group, 49
Mennonites, 85–​90
Meridian, Kansas, 89–​90
methodology, 1st phase, 38–​39
Molotschna colony, 89–​90
Mulhare, Eileen, 44
mutations defined, 4
consequences, 4
 
natural selection, 4
neuromuscular traits, 94–​96, 101
NRY (non recombining Y), 115–​117
Nuremberg Code, 164
Nutini, Hugo, 163
 
Oka, Seishi, 36, 37, 38
O’Rourke, Dennis, 44, 45, 53, 70, 151–​152
 
Papio hamadryas (baboon),  27–​28, 150–​153 
participants in Tlaxcala, 36–​38
Poligus, Siberia, 110
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), 
99–​100, 133 
 
Rebich, Ted, dentist, 169
reproductive isolation, 142
research team 
Tlaxcala, 35
Roatan, Bay Island, 64, 80
Roberts, Derek Francis, 20
Romany Gypsies, 55, 58, 60
 
Saltillo, Mexico, 42–​44
participants in project, 44–​45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index 
193
San Pablo del Monte, 33, 35, 38
Savoonga, St Lawrence Island, 102–​103
Scott, Eugenie, 71
Seattle, Washington academic work, 
17–​18
Shanghai, China, 8–​13
Siberia, 102–​120
sickle cell disease, 68–​69
skin color variation, 74
social risks in field research, 170–​171
St. Vincent Island, 72–​73
STLV-​1 (Simian T cell leukemia/​
lymphoma), 152–​153
Sulamai, Ket village, 112–​113
Surinda, Siberia, 109–​110
 
time dimension in Mexican transplanted 
populations, 2
Tinkers (better known as Travelers or 
Itinerants), 54–​61
Tiszahat, Hungary, 144–​148
Tlaxcala 
history, 31–​34
Tubabao, Philippine Islands, 2–​3, 13–​15
 
Unangan (Aleut), 118–​119, 121–​125
University of Kansas, 26–​28
University of Pittsburgh, 25–​26
University of Washington, 18–​20
Uranquinty, Australia, 3, 15–​17
 
Valle Maira, Italy, 142
Voevodin, Alexander, 152
 
Wales, Alaska, 103
Weaver, Thomas, 62
World Congress of Anthropological 
Sciences, 21–​23
 
Young, Kristin, 155–​156, 159
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

