
Creative Problem Solving 
for Managers
Fourth edition
How can managers tackle complex problems? How do you encourage innovation? How do
you implement new solutions? Is creativity the key to management success? In answering
these questions, this accessible text provides a lively introduction to the essential skills of
creative problem solving.
Using extensive case studies and examples from a variety of business situations, Creative
Problem Solving for Managers explores a wide range of problem-solving theories and
techniques, illustrating how these can be used to solve a multitude of management problems.
Thoroughly revised, this new edition retains the accessible and imaginative approach to
problem-solving skills of previous editions.
Coverage includes:
•
advice on overcoming blocks to creativity
•
key techniques, including lateral thinking, morphological analysis, synectics and group
problem solving
•
new PowerPoint slides to aid course leaders
•
a revised and updated chapter on using computers to stimulate creative thought.
As creativity is increasingly being recognized as a key skill for successful managers, this book
will be welcomed as a readable and comprehensive introduction for students and practising
managers alike.
Tony Proctor is Emeritus Professor of Marketing at the University of Chester, UK.

Given the uncertainties of the organisational environment, the ability to creatively approach,
manage and resolve problems that are difﬁcult to describe and structure will be an increasingly
valued business skill. This new edition of Creative Problem Solving for Managers offers 
up-to-date guidance on how to approach and resolve such problems.
Jon Curwin, Senior Learning and Teaching Fellow, 
Birmingham City Business School, UK
You will never again approach creativity and problem solving in quite the same light. Taking
into account both the ‘what’ and the ‘how’, this valuable book provides readers with the
knowledge needed to solve a range of management problems. A masterpiece!
Dr Kim Hua Tan, Reader, The University of Nottingham, UK
Creativity is a fundamental skill for business managers. Tony Proctor’s book provides an
excellent practical guide to this topic. The case studies, creativity techniques and the pragmatic
knowledge and insights within this book make it essential reading for managers, facilitators
and students alike. 
Dr Elspeth McFadzean, Visiting Academic Fellow, 
Henley Business School, the University of Reading, UK
Essential reading for anyone aspiring to enhance organisational creativity and innovation.
Supported by comprehensive and in-depth discussion of theory, this book provides an approach
to creativity that really does work in practice. I have used previous editions as a core text at
undergraduate and postgraduate levels and am inspired by the updates in this fourth edition.
Lots of useful cases and examples to stimulate debate, including the use of technologies in
creativity, brings this edition right up to date.
Dr Pauline Loewenberger, Lecturer, 
the University of Bedfordshire Business School, UK
This is an excellent book for understanding how best to approach complex situations and
come out with creative solutions to the strategic problems that managers face. Grounded in
practice and providing detailed case studies of real business situations, this book gives
readers a solid foundation for developing their own creative solutions to problems.
Paul Hughes, Senior Lecturer, Durham University, UK

Creative 
Problem Solving 
for Managers
Developing skills for decision
making and innovation
Fourth Edition
Tony Proctor
R
Routledge
Taylor &. Francis Group
LONDON AND NEW YORK

First published 1999
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Reprinted 2002 (twice), 2003
Second Edition 2005
Third Edition 2010
Fourth Edition 2014
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2014 Tony Proctor
The right of Tony Proctor to be identiﬁed as author of this work has
been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Proctor, Tony.
Creative problem solving for managers: developing skills for decision
making and innovation/Tony Proctor. – 4.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Problem solving.  2. Decision making.  3. Management.  
I. Title.
HD30.29.P763 2013
658.403 – dc23
2013020152
ISBN: 978-0-415-71402-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-71403-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-88299-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Perpetua and Bell Gothic
by Florence Production Ltd, Stoodleigh, Devon, UK

v
List of illustrations
x
Preface to the fourth edition
xv
1 CREATIVITY AND ITS IMPORTANCE IN BUSINESS
1
Introduction  1
Changing times  2
Some deﬁnitions of creativity  3
Invention and creativity  4
The importance given to creativity in business  6
How creative thinking may be used in management  9
Conditions in which creative thinking is needed most  11
Paradigm shift  14
Questions  15
Cases  16
2
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
20
Introduction  20
The need to be ready for change  21
Mindset  21
When mindset blocks us  22
Other barriers to an individual’s creativity  23
Dealing with an individual’s blocks to creativity  23
Diagnosing whether someone is blocked in their thinking  25
How techniques help to overcome blocks  27
Blocks to organizational creative thinking and ways of dealing 
with them  29
Elements and conditions of creative organizations  30
Questions  31
Cases  32
Contents

3 THEORIES OF CREATIVITY AND THE CREATIVE 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS
37
Introduction  37
Creative thinking  39
The investment theory of creativity  39
The brain as an information processor  41
Convergent and divergent thinking  45
The conditions of creative thinking  45
Origin of creativity  47
The cognitive theory of creativity  49
How we get ideas: the index metaphor  52
Problem-solving mechanisms  54
Analogical reasoning  55
Questions  59
Cases  59
4
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
61
Problem solving  61
Models  63
The problem-solving process  66
The problem-solving process and the creative process  69
Compositional and improvisational creativity  74
Some limitations on formal problem-solving approaches  76
Questions  78
Cases  78
5 FACTORS INFLUENCING PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO 
UNDERTAKE IDEATION 
82
What helps people get ideas  82
The techniques  85
Qualities of a creative person  85
Thinking style  87
Personality  87
Learning style  89
Mood or emotions  89
Problems in groups  90
The range of techniques and their suitability for solving different 
types of problem  91
Conclusion  92
Questions  93
Cases  94
CONTENTS
vi

6 OBJECTIVE FINDING, FACT FINDING AND PROBLEM 
FINDING/DEFINITION
97
Objective ﬁnding  99
Fact ﬁnding and problem deﬁnition/redeﬁnition  101
Dimensional analysis  102
Redeﬁnition approaches  106
Redeﬁnition approaches: laddering  108
Redeﬁnition approaches: goal orientation  109
Redeﬁnition approaches: boundary examination  111
Redeﬁnition approaches: progressive abstractions  113
Redeﬁnition approaches: the ‘why’ method  114
Analytical techniques: decomposable matrices  114
Analytical techniques: cause-and-effect diagrams  117
Questions  119
Cases  119
7 MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS AND RELATED TECHNIQUES
124
Introduction  124
Checklists  125
Attribute listing  128
Morphological analysis  131
Force-ﬁtting triggers  135
Heuristic ideation technique  138
Component detailing  139
Sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix  141
Questions  143
Cases  144
8 BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
148
Introduction  148
Classical brainstorming  149
The process of brainstorming  152
Wildest-idea variant  156
Stop-and-go brainstorming  156
Round-robin brainstorming  156
Gordon–Little variation  156
Trigger method  157
Problems with brainstorming  158
Brainwriting  159
Brainlining  159
Questions  161
Cases  161
CONTENTS
vii

9 LATERAL THINKING AND ASSOCIATED METHODS
167
Introduction  167
Overview  168
Awareness  170
Assumptions  173
Alternatives  174
Provocative methods  178
Metaphorical thinking  184
Analogy  185
The discontinuity principle  187
Six Thinking Hats  187
Questions  188
Cases  189
10 SYNECTICS
193
Introduction  193
Synectics  194
Conducting synectics sessions  199
Synectics in action  205
Questions  208
Cases  209
11 PARADIGM BREAKING TECHNIQUES
215
Introduction  215
Weights for thought  215
Paradigm breaking techniques  218
Disruptive technology  226
Questions  227
Cases  227
12 MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
231
Suggestion box, exhibits and competitions  231
Clichés, proverbs and maxims  232
Storyboarding  234
Scenario writing  235
Scenario day-dreaming  236
Bionics  240
Free association  240
Two words  242
Story writing  243
Mind map  246
TRIZ  251
Vision building  252
CONTENTS
viii

Questions  253
Cases  253
13 EVALUATION
256
Introduction  257
Sorting  258
Evaluation methods  260
The process of choosing  267
Qualitative evaluation: reverse brainstorming  269
Financial evaluation  271
Mathematical evaluation  272
Pay-off tables  273
Decision trees  273
Exercising choice  274
Questions  276
Cases  278
14 IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
286
Introduction  286
Ideas are not readily implemented  288
Sources of resistance to change  289
Role of communication in overcoming resistance to change  290
Putting ideas into practice  291
Reducing resistance to change  293
Climate for change  299
Questions  300
Cases  301
15 COMPUTER-ASSISTED CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING
303
Introduction  303
History of development  303
Structured approach to creative problem solving in computer 
programs  306
Types of computer-assisted stimuli  306
Conventional software  309
Questions  319
Cases  319
Appendix 1: Case example of the creative problem-solving process
322
Appendix 2: Notes on problems
331
References
335
Author index
352
Subject index
355
CONTENTS
ix

x
FIGURES
1.1
Paradigm life-cycle curve
15
2.1
Jones’s blocks to creativity
24
2.2
Perceptual block
25
2.3
Why are 2013 coins worth more than 2007 coins?
28
2.4
Is the aircraft ﬂying towards you or away from you?
28
2.5
The broken clock problem
28
3.1
Overview of the chapter
38
3.2
Brain theories: the Whole Brain Model (Hermann/Wallas)
43
3.3
The conditions of creativity
46
3.4
Semantic network
51
3.5
The index metaphor
53
4.1
Overview of Chapter 4
62
4.2
A model of the problem-solving process
64
5.1
The factors inﬂuencing people’s ability to undertake ideation
83
6.1
Position of the chapter within the CPS process
98
6.2
Overview of objective ﬁnding and problem ﬁnding/deﬁnition
99
6.3
Objective ﬁnding
100
6.4
A toy manufacturer reviews its marketing position and strategies
100
6.5
Fact ﬁnding
101
6.6
Dimensional analysis
104
6.7
Overview of the problem-ﬁnding process
105
6.8
Deﬁning the problem
106
6.9
Problem situation 1
107
6.10 Problem situation 2
107
6.11 Problem situation 3
107
6.12 Problem situation 4
107
6.13 Problem situation 5
108
6.14 Laddering
109
6.15 Goal orientation
109
6.16 Boundary examination
112
Illustrations

6.17 Progressive extractions
113
6.18 The why method
114
6.19 Decomposable matrices
116
6.20 Hierarchical subsystems of a motor car
116
6.21 A decomposable matrix
117
6.22 Cause-and-effect diagram
118
7.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
125
7.2
Which techniques to use
127
7.3
Attribute listing for a torch
129
7.4
Steps in morphological analysis
132
7.5
SCIMITAR
135
7.6
Force ﬁtting process and triggers 1
136
7.7
Force ﬁtting process and triggers 2
137
7.8
Heuristic ideation technique
139
7.9
Component detailing
140
7.10 Sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix
141
7.11 Two-dimensional grid facilitating sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix
143
8.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
149
8.2
Overview of some brainstorming methods
151
8.3
Classical brainstorming steps
153
8.4
Gordon–Little variation
157
8.5
Trigger method
158
8.6
Brainlining
159
9.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
169
9.2
Perspectives
171
9.3
Alternatives
176
9.4
Provocative methods
178
9.5
The nine dots problem
181
9.6
Analogy relating increasing productivity with building a successful 
football team
186
10.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
194
10.2
Personal analogy – a glass of wine
197
10.3
Direct analogy – paths across the marshes
198
10.4
Symbolic analogy -the Scarlet Pimpernel
198
10.5
Fantasy analogy – peace
199
10.6
The synectics process: fantasy excursion method
202
10.7
The synectics process: example excursion method
204
11.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
216
11.2
Mendeleev’s table as published in 1869, with many gaps and uncertainties
217
11.3
Symbolic representation
220
11.4
Symbols can be used in pictures
221
11.5
A problem in symbols
222
11.6
The ringmaster
223
11.7
Different people have different perspectives
223
ILLUSTRATIONS
xi

12.1
Chapter overview
233
12.2
Clichés, proverbs and maxims
233
12.3
Storyboarding
234
12.4
Scenario writing
236
12.5
Scenario day dreaming
239
12.6
Structured free association
241
12.7
Two words
243
12.8
Story writing
244
12.9
Using mind maps to combine checklists with brainstorming
248
12.10 Fishbone diagram
249
12.11 The Lotus Blossom method
250
13.1
Position of the chapter within the CPS process
257
13.2
Overview of the process of sorting and evaluation
259
13.3
Sorting
260
13.4
Mind map of ideas on the use of aluminium foil
261
13.5
Castle technique
263
13.6
Sticking dots method
264
13.7
Example of using sticking dots
264
13.8
Force-ﬁeld analysis
266
13.9
The choice process
269
13.10 Reverse brainstorming
270
13.11 Decision tree
274
13.12 Cognitive mapping of the hierarchy of objectives and goals
276
14.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
287
14.2
Overview of acceptance ﬁnding
288
14.3
Gannt chart detailing project timescales
297
15.1
The stages in CPS covered by this chapter
304
15.2
An overview of the ways in which computers can help in the creative 
thinking process
306
15.3
Concept map
310
15.4
Multiple cause-and-effect map
311
TABLES
7.1
Attribute listing: improving a torch
128
7.2
Morphological analysis: new toy for a child
133
7.3
Coping with seasonal workloads
133
7.4
Extending the footwear range to more specialized products
134
7.5
Aspects of a new newspaper supplement
134
12.1
The TOWS matrix
237
13.1
Advantage–disadvantage table
262
13.2
Plus, Minus, Interesting
262
13.3
Weighted decision matrix
267
13.4
Example DCF calculation
272
ILLUSTRATIONS
xii

13.5
Example of pay-off table
273
13.6
Customer satisfaction rating of the garage
280
13.7
Morphological analysis matrix
283
13.8
Evaluating the ideas
284
15.1
Scenario analysis
317
EXHIBITS
15.1
Visual analogy
312
15.2
Collage of seven photographs
313
15.3
The viaduct
314
15.4
Trafalgar Square
315
ILLUSTRATIONS
xiii

This page intentionally left blank

xv
Interest in creative problem solving never seems to wane. Perhaps this is not too surprising
since the world is constantly changing and presenting new challenges. Pathways to the solutions
of new kinds of problems are always in demand. In a world where nothing is certain and even
long-established businesses can begin to crumble in a matter of months, radical new ways of
looking at problems seem to be the order of the day. Creative thinking is not the ‘universal
antidote’ capable of curing all, but it offers ways of examining problems that force us to
question fundamental issues. It makes us challenge basic assumptions. There are no such things
as ﬁrm foundations – the bedrocks of civilization can crumble into dust while we look on in
awe and trepidation!
I am often asked whether the various approaches I outline in this book really work. The
answer to this, I feel, is really only known by those who use the methods. Moreover, it is
always difﬁcult to know if you would have been able to ﬁnd an answer to a problem you did
not know existed without the aid of the techniques I outline here. Or, indeed, for that matter,
whether you might solve the problem more to your satisfaction by using other methods.
The material contained in this book should appeal to a wide audience. I originally thought
the subject matter was something that would, perhaps, most interest experienced and mature
adults. I discovered that not only was it something that appealed to experienced managers, but
it also held the attention of management students of all ages and backgrounds. One of my most
enlightening experiences has been getting ﬁnal-year undergraduates interested in the subject.
The subject matter of this book will appeal to people who have a variety of different inter -
ests in management. Whether your primary interest is in accounting, personnel management,
marketing, production, research and development, and so on, does not really matter since the
subject matter contained in this book is relevant to all these interests. However, you must
approach the subject with an open mind; and all the methods, no matter how ridiculous they
may seem, should be treated seriously – but not so seriously that they cannot be enjoyed. The
greatest barrier to appreciating the subject matter of this book is scepticism.
I have made quite a lot of changes to the book from its third edition and expanded it from
twelve to ﬁfteen chapters. Here is a brief synopsis of the content of the book.
Chapter 1 looks at the nature of changing times and reviews some deﬁnitions of creativity.
It also explains the nature of invention and innovation, distinguishing in the latter case between
product and process innovation. It highlights the importance of creative problem solving in
enabling business executives to cope with novel or new problems. In examining the importance
Preface to the 
fourth edition

of creativity to business and managers, the chapter picks out those instances where it is most
needed. The chapter ends by explaining the concept of paradigm shift and its relevance to
business, managers and creative thinking.
Chapter 2 argues that the blocks to creative thinking are essentially of two varieties –
individual and organizational. First, it turns our attention to the various personal blocks that
people may encounter when trying to solve problems, think creatively and deal with new kinds
of problems. These blocks are to do with mindset and with factors to do with perception,
emotion, expression and cultural inﬂuences. The chapter then continues by discussing how
these blocks can be diagnosed in individuals and overcome. It then moves on to blocks
encountered in organizational settings and the conditions which are needed to circumvent
them and encourage creativity in organizations.
Chapter 3 argues that creativity is explained best by the neuro-physiological functioning of
the brain. It envisages a connection between the neuro-physiological functioning of the brain
and the cognitive theory of creative problem solving discussed later in the chapter. It then gives
attention to other important contributions to the theory of creative thinking. We look speciﬁcally
at the notion of divergent and convergent thinking, and adopt the suggestion that the conditions
under which ideation takes place are very important. We ﬁnish the chapter by looking at
analogical reasoning, which is a cornerstone of many of the creative problem solving techniques
we encounter later in the book and a building block of everyday thinking.
Chapter 4 concentrates ﬁrst on problem solving and later on the concept of creative problem
solving. General ideas about problem solving and types of problem are discussed and several
models of the process examined. This preludes a discussion later in the chapter which considers
the process of creative problem solving. It looks at insights into problems and how they arise.
Again, different models of the creative problem solving process are examined. The chapter
concludes by discussing limitations that can apply when adopting formal problem-solving
approaches.
Chapter 5 offers an explanation concerning the suitability of the techniques outlined in
subsequent chapters for gaining insights into different kinds of problem. It also puts forward
the idea that different techniques may be perceived differently by different individuals. Not
everyone is likely to feel comfortable using some of the techniques and there are good reasons
for this. In this chapter we examine some of the main thoughts that address these issues. 
We look ﬁrst at how an individual’s characteristics and modes of thinking and learning may
impact on the use of the techniques in the creative problem-solving process (this is also
extended to the group situation). We then look at which techniques are most suitable for
solving different types of problems.
Chapter 6 examines the process leading up to establishing and deﬁning the problem. This
is seen as a multistage process. The ﬁrst stage, objective ﬁnding, essentially involves ‘divergent
thinking to generate a list of problems or problem symptoms’. This is followed by convergence
of thought to identify the most relevant problem areas for further exploration. Next is the fact-
ﬁnding stage, where overall comprehension of the problem is increased by the collection of
relevant information. This also helps new ideas to be generated. The previously identiﬁed
problem(s) may now be seen from a new perspective. There are a variety of problem deﬁnition
mechanisms which we explore in the course of the chapter.
Chapter 7 introduces morphological analysis and related techniques. The techniques we
look at are essentially systematic structuring mechanisms designed to facilitate the gaining of
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
xvi

insights into the problem. A variety of techniques are considered including checklists, listing,
morphological analysis, force-ﬁt triggers, the heuristic ideation process and component 
listing. If the subject of a problem has one or more easily identiﬁable dimension most of these
techniques may be useful tools for helping to generate ideas.
Chapter 8 reviews some of the more popular forms of brainstorming. These include classical
brainstorming, wildest-idea variant, round-robin brainstorming, Gordon–Little variant, trigger
method, brainwriting and brainlining (brainstorming on the Internet). Limitations of
brainstorming as a method are also examined.
Chapter 9 discusses ‘lateral thinking’ under the headings of awareness, alternatives and
provocative methods. The chapter considers each of these aspects in turn. Lateral thinking does
advocate some ideation methods, and these come under the heading of provocative techniques.
They include random stimulus, intermediate impossible, reversals, distortion and exaggeration,
exposure, cross-fertilization and problem switching. These, along with the use of metaphors
and analogies, are also covered as well as thoughts about the discontinuity principle.
Chapter 10 takes a look at the subject of synectics. A method of using synectics is outlined
and discussion given over to considering the various components that make up the synectics
process. The chapter explains the four different types of analogies used and gives illustrations
of each.
Chapter 11 addresses the subject of breakthrough ideation. It starts by examining how a
breakthrough idea was achieved many years ago and tries to draw some lessons from this. This
is followed by examining a number of techniques that have been tried out in recent times to
achieve break-through ideas. Visualization, symbolic representation and rich pictures are all
mechanisms that can support this kind of thinking. Two other mechanisms are also discussed:
wishful thinking and role playing. Finally, we point to the beneﬁts that disruptive technologies
can bring for those who discover and commercialize them. Such breakthroughs reﬂect paradigm
shifts.
Chapter 12 reviews some of the many remaining methods of creative problem-solving
techniques that may be used. Many such techniques are illustrated and discussed on various
websites on the Internet and in books written for the popular press. Most of these techniques
are straightforward and would ﬁt into MacFadzean’s category of paradigm preserving techniques.
Some require more imaginative thinking and could lead to paradigm stretching or even paradigm
breaking.
Chapter 13 looks at methods of evaluation ranging from simple checklists to complex
weighted scoring systems. First, however, it looks at sorting methods before examining
evaluation methods. Many of the ideation methods that will have been examined in the previous
chapters produce a large quantity of ideas. Before we can evaluate these ideas we need to sort
them into categories or themes. This facilitates the process of making comparisons and
evaluations. Finally, we give some thought to exercising choice.
Chapter 14 reviews some of the problems of implementing ideas. First consideration is
given to the various sources of resistance to change. Next we look at the role of communication
in overcoming resistance to change. This is followed by an examination of how ideas might be
put into action. Lastly, the chapter looks at how one might foster a climate for change in an
organization. It also reviews a number of techniques and methods that can assist in the
implementation of ideas.
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
xvii

Chapter 15 mentions the range of computer software that can be used to assist creative
problem solving stretching from purpose-built software to more general-purpose software.
The amount of software available has expanded considerably over the past few years with
recent development of applications that will run on hand-held and mini computers ﬁtted with
touch screens – commonly referred to as ‘apps’. Developments on the Internet have also led
to the setting up of social network sites and these too have facilitated the ideation process.
Conventional computer software may be used creatively. Photographs and videos can act as a
spur to ideation and, with the aid of computers, their use can be made in creative problem-
solving sessions.
Throughout the book there are ample illustrations of the key points. There are speciﬁc case
studies attached to each chapter. The latter invite the reader to make use of all the knowledge
he or she has gained about the creative problem-solving process through reading the book. In
this the fourth edition I have also added new material as appropriate. In view of the additional
material included in the chapters, the Reference section has been substantially added to and
many recent references included. At the same time as adding new material, I have deleted
some of the old material where I thought it was less appropriate.
My thanks to Dr Elspeth McFadzean for her thoughts that techniques might be considered
in the light of whether they are useful in paradigm preserving, paradigm stretching or paradigm
shifting. I am also grateful to anonymous reviewers for comments that led me to include the
new material.
Tony Proctor, 2013
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
xviii

1
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we ﬁrst review the changing times and look at the impact it has on us and on
the need for creative thinking. Next we review deﬁnitions of creativity and highlight the
importance of creative problem solving in assisting business executives to get to grips with
novel or new problems. Next we distinguish creativity from innovation. Creativity in business
is extremely important since it is the means of generating new ideas that are required to deal
with previously unmet situations. It also gives businesses a competitive edge in the market
place enabling them to survive and even stay well ahead of competition. We pick out those
instances where creativity is most needed and noting, in particular, the phenomenon of
paradigm shift. Paradigm shift occurs when a totally new way of doing things becomes
universally adopted. This chapter sets the scene for the next chapter where we discuss some
of the blocks people may encounter in coming up with ideas and how these blocks may be
overcome.
Aircraft pollution
With the advent of the jet engine and advanced navigational instrumentation the airline
industry was born. The death knell was sounded for the transatlantic passenger liners,
and as one product life-cycle drew to a close a new one began. The jet engine heralded
a paradigm shift in civil aviation, and creativity was needed to harness, to exploit and
to market the applications of the newfound technology. Some ﬁfty years on, important
questions are now being raised about the viability of air travel in the long term. High
levels of environmental pollution from aircraft emissions during ﬂight and the
environmental impact of the growth of airports in densely populated areas are only two
of the issues that are becoming a cause for concern. Creative thinking is required to
ﬁnd ways of dealing with both of these issues.
Creativity and its importance
in business
Chapter 1

CHANGING TIMES
The ﬁrst few years of the present century saw technology advancing in line with that experienced
during the last years of the twentieth century. The trend has continued but alongside the
prominence of technology in creating change economic, political and social pressures have
come to dominate the scene. In the past few years the latter have begun to produce problems
that are difﬁcult to solve. In business there is need to obtain insights into such problems.
Questions such as ‘How does one stimulate growth in sales and proﬁts when there is no 
growth to be had?’ may be at the back of managers’ minds. Or even, ‘How can we ensure that
the business will survive?’ They cannot, however, assume, like Dickens’ Wilkins Micawber
that ‘something will turn up’. Challenging assumptions is at the heart of creative problem
solving.
In Chapter 2 of this book we will examine the reasons why people have difﬁculty 
in challenging assumptions and thinking in a creative manner about such problems. In 
Chapter 5 we will explore this topic further and see how and why people have different
approaches and preferences to thinking and how this can impact on their approach to ﬁnding
solutions to some kinds of challenging problems. Of course, it is helpful to understand
something about how people get ideas and how this can be encouraged in individuals and
organizations. In Chapters 3 and 4 we look at the theoretical ideas relating to creativity 
and creative problem solving. The techniques sections of the book are intended as guides 
to help people generate ideas. Of particular interest may be Chapter 11, which features
paradigm breaking approaches and comments on the positive and the negative consequences
of disruptive technology.
Evaluating and implementing ideas is perhaps the hardest part of the creative problem-
solving process. Ideas arise sequentially and what we determine to be the best idea today we
may not prefer tomorrow. In addition, just how certain can we be that our judgements are
sound? Are we really using the right criteria by which to judge ideas? When it comes to
implementing ideas the situation is equally obscure. Moreover, it is all well and good coming
up with what seem to us to be good ideas, but will those who have to put the ideas into practice
hold the same views?
Technology marches steadily onwards developing new, more powerful and convenient
devices to improve people’s lives both inside and outside of work. The Internet has grown like
some giant spider’s web across the vast emptiness of hyperspace providing hubs of activity for
social and business networking and exchange of communications. It provides a mechanism 
for the exchange of creative ideas and insights into intransigent problems. At the same time
technology has not stood still in developing more convenient and sophisticated personal com-
puters and communication devices. Apps are one of the buzzwords of the day and they abound
in huge numbers, some even facilitating the use of creative problem-solving techniques. These
are all developments that we will examine in Chapter 15.
Let us now turn to look at creativity and how people have tried to deﬁne it.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
2

SOME DEFINITIONS OF CREATIVITY
What is creative thinking?
Creativity is a concept that we often come across in our everyday conversation. We hear of
creative people, admire creative objects of art or read creative books. Yet, despite our almost
innate understanding of what it means to be creative, there is much confusion about the nature
of creativity.
Wertheimer ([1945] 1959) suggested that creative thinking involved breaking down and
restructuring our knowledge about something in order to gain new insights into its nature.
Understanding our own cognitive model of reality may therefore be an important determinant
of our ability to think creatively. Kelly (1955) and Rogers (1954) both supported this argument
by maintaining that we can be creative by gaining an understanding of how we think about a
subject. Creativity is something that occurs when we are able to organize our thoughts in such
a way that readily leads to a different and even better understanding of the subject or situation
we are considering.
Maslow (1954) thought of creativity as having two levels. He envisaged primary creativity
as the source of new discovery, real novelty, or ideas that depart from what exists at a given
point in time. He saw secondary creativity as a characteristic possessed by many scientists in
their collective search for discovery achieved by working alongside other people, extending
the work of previous researchers, and exercising prudence and caution in their claims about
new insights or ideas. He envisaged creativity as an aspect of human nature that was to be found
universally in all human beings. In children he felt it to be an easily observable phenomenon
but suggested that it seemed to become lost in adults, surfacing mainly in dreams with the
relaxation of repressions and defences. It was a view that was echoed subsequently by Stein
(1974), who argued that without such an assumption the techniques for stimulating creativity
would have no application.
Torrance (1965) deﬁned creativity as:
The process of becoming sensitive to problems, deﬁciencies, gaps in know ledge, missing
elements, disharmonies, and so on; identifying the difﬁculty; searching for solutions,
making guesses or formulating hypotheses about the deﬁciencies; testing and retesting
them; and ﬁnally communicating the results.
This contrasts with that of Newell et al. (1962). They adopted a criterion-based approach,
which suggests that any problem solving may be creative. Indeed, Haefele (1962) argues that
every one of us must be creative to some degree because we have to ﬁnd new solutions to
newly presented problems.
Rickards (1985: 5) deﬁnes creativity as ‘the personal discovery process, partially unconscious,
which leads to new and relevant insights’. Rickards (1988: 225) also advocates a view of
creativity as a universal human process resulting in the escape from assumptions and the
discovery of new and meaningful perspectives, or as an ‘escape from mental stuckness’. In
broad terms he believes that creativity is to do with personal, internal restructuring.
Creativity is very much concerned with how we imagine things. Although language is a
medium of expressing our creative feelings, our creativity is often gained through images and
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
3

sensations that are difﬁcult to express in words. As Koestler (1964) said: ‘True creativity often
starts where language ends.’
Weinman (1991) considered that creativity is the ability to go beyond the mundane and
obvious and reject the traps of repetition and pre-set categories. Similarly, Gilliam (1993)
deﬁned creativity as a process of discovering what has not been considered – the act of making
new connections.
More simply, creativity can be thought of as ‘the production of novel and useful ideas in
any domain’ (Amabile et al., 1996: 1155) and in a business context: ‘creativity is the production
of new ideas that are ﬁt for a particular business purpose’ (Pryce, 2005).
Parkhurst (1999) points to the lack of consensus regarding the deﬁnition of creativity but
that many researchers agree that creativity may be deﬁned with regard to the terms ‘new and
useful’ (Mumford, 2003), which suggests that a creative product is that which is deemed to
be novel or original and useful or adaptive (Batey, 2012).
These various deﬁnitions seem to agree that creativity involves an ability to come up with
new and different viewpoints. However, any deﬁnition of creativity is complicated because the
concept is multifaceted.
INVENTION AND CREATIVITY
Invention is an act of creativity that results in a device, process or technique that is novel
enough to produce a signiﬁcant change in the application of technology. The application of
creativity is fundamental to invention. The element of novelty has various forms; it may be a
new device or process, or even material, but it may also consist of a combination of existing
knowledge in a manner not previously considered. For example, James Watt added a separate
condensing chamber – a new device – to Thomas Newcomen’s atmospheric engine and created
the steam engine.
We need to differentiate between invention and innovation. One may look on invention as
the formulation of new ideas for products or processes, whereas innovation concerns the
practical application of new inventions into marketable products or services.
It is also useful to differentiate between two types of innovation:
Product innovation: this comprises changes to attributes of product, resulting in a change in
the way the product is perceived by consumers – for example, wireless connectivity to
the Internet as opposed to access by cable.
Process innovation: this relates to changes to a service or product production process. It
usually produces beneﬁts in the production process, i.e. increase in productivity and cost
reduction – for example, emails compared to mail delivered through the postbox.
From a business development point of view and in terms of developing growth strategies
it is suggested that breakthrough innovation should not be the focus of attention. Indeed, the
latter strategy may be too radical for some markets (Treacy, 2004). Evidence points to over
90 per cent failure rate among new products launched into the marketplace and that the
majority of these were based on radical technologies (Christensen et al., 2005). Such evidence
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
4

indicates that, in order to remain competitive, organizations should seek to develop new
products via incremental technologies (Moon, 2005). Adopting a process of continuous
improvement to existing products appears to be a requirement of continued success (Randal
et al., 2005). Adopting such a strategy involves the redesign of existing models/products with
incremental technologies and it produces cost savings in terms of time and money and may
lead to retention of existing customers (Treacy, 2004). Innovative technologies and tools were
crucial for Google to become the world’s most popular search engine and a robust ﬁnancial
enterprise with its market value continuously rising (Vise, 2005).
The two general theories of invention are the deterministic and the individualistic. The
deterministic theory holds that when economic, technical and cultural conditions are ripe, 
an invention will be made by one inventor or another; who does it is just historical accident.
This theory has some support in the numerous instances of simultaneous and independent
invention. It also helps to explain the competing claims that emerged over the invention of 
the steamboat, the electric telegraph, the incandescent lamp and the aeroplane. The theory is
also plausible because timing is unquestionably important in invention. Also, inventors are
likely to focus on projects that are reasonably attainable and for which there is a recognizable
need or demand.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
5
PRODUCT INNOVATION
Digital camera
Not that many years ago, amateur photographers zealously guarded their 35mm cameras.
They took them everywhere when going on holiday and some even engaged in home
printing of coloured photos when they got back home. To get really good photos required
a great deal of skill. Given the cost of prints and ﬁlm it could be an expensive pastime,
too. One might expend a good deal of time, effort and money just to get a few really good
photos.
The advent of the digital camera has changed nearly all that. Skill is still required
to get really good photos, but cost and time have been reduced very substantially to do
so. The modern digital camera enables us to take a photo and print it out on our
computer at home in a matter of minutes. The cameras also offer many more features
and cost much less than the 35mm ones did just ten years ago.
Process innovation
How many examples of process innovation can you think of? Here are four for a
starter:
1
Introduction of a bar-coded goods-tracking system.
2
Introduction of GPS tracking devices for transport services.
3
Implementation of computer-assisted design for product development.
4
Implementation of a new reservation system in a travel agency.

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
6
INVENTIONS, INNOVATIONS OR JUST CREATIVE RESEARCH?
Gene research
In 1988, Rudolf Jaenisch and co-workers succeeded in implanting in mice the gene for
a hereditary disease of humans. It was thought that it would open the way to the study
of such diseases and to improved treatment.
Superconductors
In 1911, Heike Onnes discovered that electrical resistance in mercury disappears when
the mercury is cooled to absolute zero. This phenomenon is known as superconductivity.
It was found subsequently that other metals and alloys also become superconducting
at very low temperatures. Today, superconductors are used in large and powerful
magnets, mainly in particle accelerators and the magnetic-resonance imaging machines
used in medicine. There are other potential applications.
Inﬁnity of non-smooth four-dimensional spaces
In 1987, Clifford Taubes discovered that the inﬁnity of non-smooth four-dimensional
spaces is uncountable (an inﬁnity is countable if each element in it can be matched to
one of the counting numbers).
Quarks
When physicists ﬁrst began to think deeply about quarks they were puzzled because
isolated quarks had not been observed. One idea was that quarks might be the ends of
strings. Assuming that a particle was a string and that quarks were just the ends 
of the string, then it was plausible why one never found a quark without the other. A
string is essentially a one-dimensional object in a space of four dimensions (counting
time as a dimension). Physicists turned to topology, the mathematics of knots and
surfaces, to ﬁnd out what the implications might be of using strings instead of particles
in their calculations. To their surprise, they discovered that strings simpliﬁed the
calculations.
Question
How would you classify each of the above four illustrations in terms of inventions,
innovations or just creative research?
THE IMPORTANCE GIVEN TO CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
In management, problems arise as different or new situations present themselves and they
often require novel solutions. Frequently, it is difﬁcult to see solutions to problems by thinking
in a conventional fashion. Logical thinking takes our existing knowledge and uses rules of
inference to produce new knowledge. However, because logical thinking progresses in a series

of steps, each one dependent on the last, this new knowledge is merely an extension of what
we know already, rather than being truly new. It would seem, therefore, that logical thinking
has only a limited role to play in helping managers to be creative. The need for creative
problem solving has arisen as a result of the inadequacies of logical thinking. It is a method of
using imagination along with techniques that use analogies, associations and other mechanisms
to help produce insights into problems.
Over the past few decades creativity has become a highly fashionable topic in both the
academic and business worlds. That is not to say that creativity did not exist before, but its
importance to the continued success of an organization had yet to be recognized. Many manage -
ment problems require creative insights in order to ﬁnd satisfactory solutions. Nowadays, the
majority of organizations are fully aware of just how vital creativity is to their prosperity. Over
time, considerable research has been undertaken that enables us to obtain a better understanding
of creativity and become more innovative ourselves.
Change is an ever-present phenomenon to which businesses of all kinds are forced to
respond if they want to stand the best chance of survival and prosperity. But how should they
respond? An increasing number of problems have no precedents, and there are fewer tested
ways of approaching them. This poses problems for organizations. Many suggest that creativity
is indeed the answer; and, as Majaro (1991: 1) suggests, ‘It is universally assumed that enhanced
creativity can provide a company with a competitive edge’. A survey sponsored by Porter/
Novelli among 100 executive readers of Fortune 500 in 1993 found that people thought
creativity was essential to ensure success in business. The ﬁnding has been reiterated several
times since in different sources (De Brabandere, 2005; Gogatz and Mondejar, 2005).
A plethora of literature has emphasized the need for creativity in business. Indeed, Oldman
and Cummings (1996: 609) noted that ‘numerous commentators have argued that enhancing
the creative performance of employees is a necessary step if organisations are able to achieve
competitive advantage’.
There are strong arguments to support the view that in the second decade of the twenty-
ﬁrst century the competitive marketplace demands ever-increasing value to customers, which
translates to lowest total cost, highest total quality, fastest total cycle time, and highest total
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
7
CREATIVITY AND INVENTIONS
Christian Doppler gave his name to a well-known principle which he discovered in the
nineteenth century (the Doppler effect). We can observe it any time a motorist sounds
his or her horn while passing us by. As long as the source of the sound approaches us,
the pitch seems higher than when it moves away from us. Sound waves are just one
form of wave subject to this effect.
Can you think of how twentieth-century inventors might have made use of this principle
to come up with commercially applicable inventions?
See Appendix 2 for the solution.

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
8
overall customer satisfaction (Atkins et al., 2002). This in turn supports the argument that
there is a need for creative continuous innovation. In a globally competitive environment
where ﬁrms compete on both quality and cost, then the means of improving operating
procedures and achieving cost reductions also demands creative thinking. As global competition
intensiﬁes, creativity helps to establish and maintain a competitive advantage (Meisinger,
2007).
Why is creativity in management important? The main problem in management, according
to James March (1988), is that: ‘Organisations face a large number of problems of about equal
importance, but only a few solutions. Thus the chance of ﬁnding a solution to a particular
problem is small.’
In order to identify and so solve many of the problems that arise in business it is necessary
to challenge the problem-solving capabilities of those in charge. In many cases the creative
process that is used to approach problems has to be restructured and redeveloped in order to
produce new ideas and perspectives.
Change is an intrinsic necessity for a company that wishes to perform well in the long term.
As John Harvey Jones stated: ‘Unless a company is progressing all the time, it is in fact moving
backwards. It is quite impossible to maintain the status quo’ (Rogers, 1996). Attempting to do
things in the same way as they have always been done in the past can lead to difﬁculties in a
business environment that is experiencing rapid cultural, economic or technological change.
Change is an ever-present phenomenon to which businesses of all kinds are forced to respond
if they wish to stand the best chance of survival and prosperity.
The rapid growth of competition in business and industry is often quoted as a reason for
wanting to understand more about the creative process (see, for example, Van Gundy, 1987;
Rickards, 1990). Many ﬁrms are continually experiencing pressure to enhance old systems and
products. Growth and survival can be related directly to an organization’s ability to produce
(or adopt) and implement new products or services, and processes (Van Gundy, 1987). One
of the key aspects of any organization’s success or failure is its ability to stay ahead of the
competition in a rapidly changing environment. The modern business, with its emphasis on
AN ECONOMIC CLEANING JOB: FINDING A LESS COSTLY WAY OF
PERFORMING A TASK
Tank Refurbishers clean out and reline industrial storage tanks. In an increasingly
competitive market, margins are becoming tighter and proﬁtable business ventures
more difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Nearly all the tanks the ﬁrm refurbishes are cylindrical and vary
considerably in terms of the volume of liquid they contain. The procedure is to remove
the ends, clean and repaint the inside of the cylinder, clean and repaint the end sections
and reweld the pieces after completion of the repainting.
How might the ﬁrm seek to be more competitive in the pricing of its jobs?
See Appendix 2 for the solution.

competition, building larger markets, strategic planning, team working, etc., has created the
need for new problem-solving and decision-making strategies.
Looking at the British economy, for example, there has been repeated criticism of the
comparative lack of innovation in British manufacturing. Porter and Ketels (2003) argue that
managers in British ﬁrms are slow to adopt new management techniques, attributing this to a
combination of low investment in new technology, and to weak employee training and
development policies. They argue that a renewed emphasis on skills development, enterprise
and innovation is necessary if the British economy is to remain competitive.
Another reason is that managers need to discover new and better ways to solve problems
(Ackoff and Vegara, 1988). In particular, an increasing number of problems have few or no
precedents, hence there are fewer tried and tested ways of approaching them with the
anticipation of reaching a successful outcome. To stay in business a company has to respond
creatively to the problems it faces. Problems may exist in both the external and internal
environments. The former poses problems such as how to cope with slow economic growth,
how to deal with new entrants to an industry, how to grow sales at the pace of competition
in high-growth markets, how to deal with new technological developments and how to cope
with shorter product life-cycles. The latter poses problems to do with poor internal
communications, ﬁnancial problems, alienated or poorly motivated staff, and inadequate
planning.
Changes within a company, forced by either internal or external factors, create an unhappy
climate for the company and its workers. Management needs to respond positively to such
situations. Creativity is considered to be a vital asset for any person who is in a leadership role
(see, for example, Bennis and Nanus, 1985; Ekvall, 1988; Banks and Winston, 2008; Carr,
2010). Creative leaders actively hunt for new problems and are especially successful in handling
new challenges that demand solutions outside the routine of orthodox strategies. They often
possess signiﬁcant vision and are able to inspire others by their creative talents.
It has been argued that creativity is an important human resource (Barron, 1988) 
which exists in all organizations. Organizations have to try to make use of this resource by
devising settings that permit creative talents to thrive. Employees’ expertise and skills are 
an important asset in a knowledge-based economy, and have positive impacts on growth 
and jobs in the economy. Of particular importance are those that produce, adapt and diffuse
new tech nical knowledge. Successful innovation depends on the ability to mobilize technical
resources, know ledge and other inputs needed in the innovation process. This includes 
sources of knowledge, such as networks of ﬁrms, concentrations of research and development
(R&D) and business services. When this is available, it enhances the ability to innovate. The
interface between science and society provides a platform for increased competitiveness. It
permits knowledge transfer mechanisms that bring knowledge to the market as com mercialized
products.
HOW CREATIVE THINKING MAY BE USED IN MANAGEMENT
Creative thinking beneﬁts all areas and activities of management. It is required to dream up
better ways of marketing goods, to devise new production methods, to ﬁnd new ways to
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
9

motivate people, and so on. Creativity turns up in every business situation where there is a
chance that things can be done in a more businesslike, more proﬁtable or more satisfying way.
The following are typical of the kinds of problem that require creative thinking:
•
How to make more effective use of a manager’s time.
•
How to improve a product’s appeal to customers.
•
How to improve motivation among staff.
•
How to appeal to customers’ wants and needs.
•
How to cut costs through more efﬁcient/effective production methods.
•
How to identify new and proﬁtable product-market opportunities.
•
How to get skilled and experienced staff to stay with the company without paying them
excessively high salaries.
Problems that require creative thinking are ‘open-ended’ problems – that is, problems for
which there is more than one solution. Executives have to make decisions that require creative
problem solving in planning, organizing, leading and controlling their organizations:
Planning
–
Determining the mission of the organization.
–
Determining the organizational objectives.
–
Identifying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
–
Adjusting the organization behaviour and strategies to competitors’ strategies.
–
Deciding how to implement competitive strategies.
Organizing
–
Deciding what jobs need to be done within an organizational unit.
–
Deciding how various jobs within an organizational unit can be grouped together, etc.
–
Deciding how much authority should be delegated to various organizational positions.
–
Determining how best to train people for their jobs.
Leading
–
Finding ways of increasing productivity in the workplace.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
10
ILLUSTRATIONS OF HOW CREATIVITY MAY BE USED IN
MANAGEMENT
•
To make more effective use of a manager’s time
•
To improve a product’s appeal to customers
•
To improve motivation among staff
•
To appeal to customers’ wants and needs
•
To cut costs through more efﬁcient/effective production methods
•
To identify new and proﬁtable product-market opportunities

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
11
Controlling
–
Deciding what systems of control are needed.
–
Setting standards.
–
Identifying why standards/objectives have not been achieved.
Formulating strategy is another area that can beneﬁt from creative thinking. Mintzberg
(1987) identiﬁed ﬁve activities that describe the strategy process:
1
goal/objective setting;
2
analysis (internal and/or external);
3
development of strategic alternatives and selection;
4
implementation and evaluation.
He went on further to advocate the value of mental models in decision making. These 
models represent commonly held understandings that deﬁne the logic of a system and incorporate
rule-like generalizations about what will and what will not work in a particular system. While
rule- based mental models no doubt can aid problem solving, one should challenge the
assumptions upon which they are predi cated in the event they cease to provide pathways to
solutions. Indeed, challenging assumptions is fundamental to creative thinking.
Morecroft (1992) argues that strategy support tools are useful in terms of helping managers
visualize strategy and its implications. In this latter context Tan and Platts (2003) found support
for the visualization of complicated analysis as an aid to decision making. Furthermore, Dyson
et al. (2007) argued that strategy tools can be used within the strategy development process
to ‘rehearse strategy’ and facilitate creating and testing strategic initiatives, instead of ‘passively
awaiting feedback signals that implementation is off course’.
The environments in which organizations operate produce both opportunities and threats.
Organizations bent on survival and success in the dynamic business environment need to use
suitable management tools that can identify emerging issues that are important for their
businesses. If the cumulative changes in the economic, technological, social, political and
cultural environments remain unnoticed by a company’s managers until it is too late to respond,
the problems they create may be insuperable (Large, 1992).
Greater environmental turbulence, particularly economic uncertainty, demands that new
ways of thinking and behaving are required to enable businesses to survive (Rundh, 2007). 
In particular, innovation is a key differentiator between successful and unsuccessful ﬁrms in
difﬁcult environmental conditions (Tellis et al., 2009). Rundh (2007) argues that to be success -
ful, a company should react quickly to the changing market environment and improvisation
enables this (Moorman and Miner, 1998) (see Chapter 4).
CONDITIONS IN WHICH CREATIVE THINKING IS NEEDED MOST
It is argued that in an organizational sense creative thinking is required most when there is a
lack of consensus regarding goals and also a lack of understanding about cause–effect relationships
(Thompson, 1967). Disagreement often occurs when problems arise that have not been
previously encountered, and when outcomes and goals are uncertain.

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
12
CREATIVITY IN ACTION
Who could have envisaged ﬁfty years ago the retail development complexity of travel
agents or the shopping complexes at airports such as London Heathrow, London
Gatwick, Manchester International, Amsterdam, Kuala Lumpur, Munich, Madrid and
Barcelona – to mention just a few. Indeed, some of the major airport complexes have
developed almost into miniature shopping centres in their own right. The planners of
such development complexes continue to exercise their creative problem-solving skills
in order to ﬁnd more ways of satisfying their customer en route to various destinations.
The airlines themselves have become more creative in their thinking and in the way
in which they approach problems. Not everyone, however, is always happy with the
outcome of such creativity, as was evidenced in the reaction of some distinguished
members of the public to the novel tailﬁn logo adopted by British Airways in 1998. In
recent years airlines have come to pay more attention to the logo on their aircraft,
seeing it as an important way of portraying their brand image.
Traditionally, Air Canada planes were white with bright red lettering and a big red
maple leaf on the tail. However, research showed that the strong image was a real
problem with Canadian users because of its association with government bureaucracy.
Apparently, Canadians adore Canada but are much less favourably disposed to its
government. Canadians tend to attribute a host of hearth-and-home values to themselves
and their country: compassion, friendliness, a progressive outlook and a law-abiding
nature. It was decided to emphasize these associations while de-emphasizing the
government part. The maple leaf was kept but it was rendered in a more natural earthy
red on a new evergreen tail – the reasoning being that the stark red-on-white contrast
was too much associated with the government image. The overall effect makes the new
planes look a lot less like ﬂying Mounties.
British Airways, too, has had its dose of creative thinking. It was revitalized by Sir
Colin Marshall in the 1980s with a particular directive to focus on the customer. An
effective internal marketing programme was based on the notion that employees would
not treat customers better until they themselves were treated better. Marshall established
proﬁt sharing and a two-day seminar at which attendance was compulsory for all
employees. The seminar focused on all relationships that employees might have with
other employees, bosses, customers or even family members. It was felt that the
programme contributed signiﬁcantly to raising staff morale and to better customer
relations. Among the creative ideas to emerge was the installation of TV cameras in
passenger disembarking areas, enabling them to register complaints immediately on
landing. These are then dealt with in a timely manner, and the customer is informed of
what action has been taken.
Changing the image of British Airways was also something to which attention was
given. New uniforms for staff, new exterior paint on planes, new interiors for planes,
new passenger lounges and an expensive advertising campaign were employed to
promote the new image of British Airways. The airline business is immensely

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
13
Such is the nature of the situation created by environmental turbulence that it has been used
as a creative force for change. A research project (Martin et al., 2005) on the changing nature
of leadership showed 84 per cent of the 300 executives and senior managers surveyed believed
that the deﬁnition of effective leadership had changed in the previous ﬁve years as business
challenges grew more complex.
Palus and Horth (2002) argued that managers need to scan information quickly and make
rapid judgements. They observed that when managers are faced with a complex problem, they
tend to spend only 10 per cent of the available time examining a problem and its context, while
90 per cent of their time is spent on generating a solution. Perhaps not surprisingly, the result
is that managers often end up solving the wrong problem. Palus and Horth (2002) suggest
several approaches for breaking free of our habitual ways of seeing in order to become
innovators:
competitive, and all companies have to strive to ﬁnd ways of identifying means of
establishing a competitive advantage for themselves. This is often sought by trying to
improve the quality of service offered in relationship to the price charged or through
the nature of the augmented service offered.
Service quality includes such things as:
1
Tangibles. Do the physical facilities, equipment and appearance of personnel
associated with the service promote conﬁdence in the quality of the service?
2
Reliability. Is there evidence of an ability to perform the promised service properly
the ﬁrst time?
3
Responsiveness. Is there a willingness to help customers and provide prompt
service?
4
Competence. Do the personnel possess knowledge and skill, and have they an
ability to convey trust and conﬁdence?
5
Credibility/trustworthiness. Is the organization trustworthy and does it always
deliver what it promises to deliver?
6
Empathy. Does the provider of the service provide its customers with individual
attention?
7
Courtesy. Do customers perceive the service provided to be a friendly one?
8
Communication. Are customers kept informed about the service offered in the
language they can understand? Do the providers of the service listen to what the
customers have to say?
The augmented service refers to activities or additional services that are tangential to
the physical transportation of customers from the point of departure to their destination.
Question
In what ways might airlines offer an augmented service to customers? Can you think
of any that are not currently offered?

•
Alter perspective radically by changing one’s point of view.
•
Ask for the opinions of others and collaborate with others who have the skills and
perspectives one lacks.
•
Use questions to take aim at the root of the issues faced.
•
Spend time among customers, constituencies and competitors to gain new perspectives.
•
Keep track of ideas.
•
Change the pace of attention to information and knowledge acquired.
These and other suggested approaches are considered in later chapters of the book.
The need for creative thinking often becomes paramount when paradigm shift occurs or is
likely to occur soon.
PARADIGM SHIFT
Kuhn (1970) deﬁned and popularized the concept of ‘paradigm shift’ (p.10). Kuhn argued that
science does not evolve, but rather it follows a ‘series of peaceful interludes punctuated by
intellectually violent revolutions’, and in those revolutions ‘one conceptual world view is
replaced by another’.
A paradigm is a set of rules and regulations that deﬁne boundaries and help us to be
successful within those boundaries, where success is measured by the problems solved using
these rules and regulations. Paradigm shifts are different from continuous improvement.
Examples include going from donkey cart or horse-drawn carriage to car, or travelling long
distances by aeroplane instead of by bus or ocean liner. Paradigm shifts have made it possible
to send complex, accurate messages over great distances; they have facilitated moving from
primitive methods such as shouting, smoke, ﬁre, drum and ﬂag signals, to highly sophisticated
mech an isms such as telegraph, telephone, fax, live video by wire, optical ﬁbre and
communications satellite.
Paradigms have life-cycles, and towards the end of the life-cycle problem solving becomes
more costly, more time-consuming and less satisfactory (Figure 1.1). Solutions no longer ﬁt
the larger context because of changes that have occurred elsewhere. Nowhere is this better
illustrated than in the case of needing to improve parts of the UK motorway network. Widening
sections involves not only millions of pounds of taxpayers ‘money, but also places an additional
unestimated burden on motorists in terms of long delays, excessive fuel consumption while
negotiating the sections involved and psychological stress, which is difﬁcult even to estimate.
The paradigm of widening busy stretches of motorways must surely be in the decline stages of
its life-cycle. A paradigm shift is required urgently.
Towards the end of the life-cycle, problem solving becomes more costly, more time-
consuming and less satisfactory. Solutions no longer ﬁt the larger context because of changes
that have occurred elsewhere.
Paradigm shifts require a change in perspective on the subject. Blinkered thinking associated
with holding too rigorously to a paradigm can lead to missing opportunities and overlooking
threats that may have a critical impact on a business. Two competitors may see the same
opportunity or threat in different ways, and the one that is able to make the best response can
gain a sustainable competitive advantage over its rival.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
14

CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
15
The process of paradigm shift can be encouraged and effected early through the use of
creative thinking. Creative thinking brings into place notions and ideas that would not normally
be contemplated in problem solving. Creative problem-solving methods make extensive use
of techniques and approaches that help to ﬁnd solutions to recalcitrant open-ended problems.
The ability to tolerate ambivalence between opposites or two incompatible subjects is
thought to characterize highly productive creative thinking. Edison’s invention of a practical
system of lighting involved combining wiring in parallel circuits with high-resistance ﬁlaments
in his bulbs, two things that were not considered possible by conventional thinkers at the time.
Because Edison could tolerate the ambivalence between two incompatible things, he could see
the relationship that led to the breakthrough.
QUESTIONS
1 Why should the modern-day manager need to know about creative problem solving?
2 Why is creative problem-solving expertise an important asset for any business executive?
How might executives improve their creative problem-solving skills?
3 What is paradigm shift? How does it relate to creative problem solving?
4 What kinds of surprises do you think the twenty-ﬁrst century might have in store for us
as: (a) workers, (b) consumers, (c) producers, (d) managers?
5 Koestler said: ‘True creativity often starts where language ends.’ How would you interpret
this statement in the context of business?
6 If we tend not to think about what we think we know already, and existing ideas tend to
make us myopic about new possibilities, how can we hope to get new insights into existing
problems?
7 James March argues that ‘Organisations face a large number of problems of about equal
importance, but only a few solutions. Thus the chance of ﬁnding a solution to a particular
problem is small.’ Does this mean that organizations must spend most of the time ‘muddling
through’? Why or why not?
Figure 1.1
Paradigm life-cycle curve
% Problems solved
Time
80
60
40
20
0
Towards the end of the life-cycle, problem solving becomes more costly, more
time-consuming and less satisfactory. Solutions no longer ﬁt the larger context
because of changes that have occurred elsewhere.

8 Growth and survival can be related directly to an organization’s ability to produce (or
adopt) and implement new products or services, and processes (Van Gundy, 1987). How
does one reconcile this suggestion with the fact that many products appear to have been
around for many years (e.g. Mars Bar) while others enjoy a revival (e.g. the Volkswagen
Beetle car)?
9 Why should lack of agreement regarding goals and a lack of understanding of cause–effect
relationships give rise to a need for creative thinking?
10 Differentiate innovation from creativity and invention.
11 Why might many ﬁrms prefer an incremental rather than a breakthrough approach to
innovation?
12 What factors contribute to a lack of innovation in an industry?
13 Indicate what you think are the main drivers of successful innovation.
14 ‘Creativity is not just for problem solving. Very often the most powerful effects of
creativity are seen when we challenge existing ways of doing things that are very satisfac-
tory’ (de Bono, 2006). – ‘Thinking Managers’, available at: www.thinkingmanagers.com/
management/creativity-management.php, accessed 9 April 2013. Discuss.
CASES
Game Enough
Game Enough recently reported a very substantial trading loss for the past twelve month’s
operations. The loss amounted to some £185 million and, as a result, the company reckons it
will have to make some 10 per cent of its workforce redundant. The top management in the
company places the blame ﬁrmly at the feet of deteriorating worldwide economic conditions
and a very uncertain outlook for the future.
The company has enjoyed rapid growth over the last decade and found it easy to make
money in a market where variations on a theme have been very much the name of the game. It
has been a ‘me too’ attitude where anyone who can ﬁnd some new narrative for an ‘old theme’
can make a quick proﬁt. Characters and plots abounded and the same basic mechanics in
constructing games and controlling game play have been employed in a seemingly endless
fashion to tempt would-be gamesters into parting with their cash. Sales of the ﬁrm’s games
have multiplied from small beginnings in a rapidly developing home market to multi-million
pound global sales.
The latest loss has come about as something of a surprise to a company that has traditionally
been earning big proﬁts, and the Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive are
having discussions about what action they should instigate. The Chief Executive blames a
worldwide economic recession and argues that it is simply a case of ‘weathering the storm’.
A leaner organization, he argues, will be better able to come out of the recession ﬁtter and
able to take advantage of the recovery that will ultimately come about. The Chairman, on the
other hand, is less convinced with this argument and feels that there are problems in the
industry as a whole. He is inﬂuenced in his view by the opinions of several of the non-executive
directors of the Board who have wider experience of what happens in other industries.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
16

Question
What do you think are the main reasons behind the ﬁrm’s demise? Can it do any thing about
the situation? Explain.
Keeping prices competitive
John Holmes operates a clothes wholesale distribution business. Competition is strong and
pricing is keen. Rising costs of distribution, however, are a constant problem, and all rival
distributors compete strongly on price. John is looking for ways of keeping prices competitive.
Question
How can John try to minimize price rises in the face of strong competition and at the same
time still maintain proﬁtability? (See Appendix 2 for some suggestions.)
Price and innovation
Sally Major owns a hi-tech company that produces assembled and part-assembled components
for a variety of industrial and consumer goods. Recently, the technical department has achieved
a major breakthrough in the production process that enables the ﬁrm to reduce the cost of
producing all component assemblies and subassemblies by at least 50 per cent. As a general
guideline to setting prices the ﬁrm usually adopts around a 100 per cent mark-up on the
costings subject to this, making the product competitive in the marketplace. Occasionally,
where demand is high and there is no price consciousness, mark-up can be at least 150 per
cent and still be in line with what competitors are charging for similar products. There are
only a handful of products where mark-up is less than 100 per cent and none where it is less
than 80 per cent. In all cases, the ﬁrm makes sure that its pricing is in line with that of
competitors. The ﬁrm adopts the role of market-challenger in all market segments. Market
share varies from between 25 per cent and 40 per cent of the market segment.
Question
What action do you think Sally should now adopt with respect to pricing? (See Appendix 2
for comments.)
Paradigm shift
Paradigm shift in business strategy
In the new world of business, instead of long-term prediction, the emphasis is on understanding
the multiple future worldviews by using techniques such as scenario planning. In this view, the
organization plans for its futures, but does not rely on its plans.
Paradigm shift in design and use of technology
This involves the shift from the traditional emphasis on transaction processing, integrated
logistics and workﬂows to systems that support competencies for communication building,
people networks and on-the-job learning.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
17

Paradigm shift in the role of senior management
It has been suggested that the role of senior management needs to change from command-and-
control to sense-and-respond. The new emphasis should be on building commitment to organizational
vision rather than on compliance to rules and pre-speciﬁed best practices. Senior managers need
to view the organization as a human community capable of providing diverse meanings to
information outputs generated by the technological systems. They also need to make the
organizational information base accessible to organization members. This is important given
the increasingly fast-paced and dynamic business environment that creates disconnects between
the process of decision making at the top and implementation of such decisions at the grass-
roots.
Paradigm shift in organizational knowledge processes
Institutionalization of ‘best practices’ by embedding them in information technology might
facilitate efﬁcient handling of routine and predictable situations. However, greater proactive
involvement of human imagination and creativity is needed to facilitate greater internal diversity
to match the variety and complexity of the changing environment. Often, effective knowledge
management in such an environment may need imaginative suggestions.
Paradigm shift in organization design
While the traditional business logic was based on a high level of structure and control, the
dynamics of the new business environment demands a different model of organization design.
This model is characterized by relative lack of structure and lack of external controls. Differences
in perspective may have a very positive role in innovation that feeds new product and service
deﬁnitions and business models. This view encourages promotion of individual autonomy in
experimentation and learning. Instead of emphasizing ‘best practices’ archived in databases, it
encourages continuous pursuit of better practices that are aligned with a dynamically changing
business environment.
Question
Examine the implications of paradigm shift in the above contexts from the point of view of
creative problem solving. What kinds of problem might they raise for managers in the
twenty-ﬁrst century?
Oil crisis revisited
The oil crisis of the early 1970s brought to everyone’s attention that sources of energy might
not last for ever. One day the availability of oil seemed endless and cars buzzed tirelessly along
the newly built motorways. The next day people were told that oil was a precious commodity
that had to be conserved. Output in the principal producing countries in the Middle East was
restricted to conserve supplies, a 50 mph speed restriction was imposed on the motorways and
the price of oil rocketed on international markets. Businesses and private citizens felt the pinch
on their pickets and inﬂation took on proportions that had not been seen for many years. Since
that time the coming on-line of North Sea oil and the discovery of potential oil deposits in
other areas has taken the sting out of the ‘need to conserve’ argument. Nevertheless, motor
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
18

vehicle manufacturers have taken note of the need to conserve and introduced more efﬁcient
engines and are actively researching for ways of improving fuel consumption requirements
even further. There is also, of course, a drive towards ﬁnding viable alternative fuel sources,
such as that provided by solar power and electrical battery power.
However, it seems inevitable that during the course of the next few centuries oil resources
will eventually dry up. The resources are ﬁnite relative to consumption. It takes much longer
for nature to create oil resources than it does for the human race to consume them.
Question
Imagine the time when oil eventually runs out. What will be the implications of a world
without oil? What substitutes need to be found that will provide for the myriads of uses of
oil – quite apart from fuel and lubrication for the petrol engine?
FURTHER READING
Carr, A. (2010) The most important leadership quality for CEOs? Creativity, Fast Company, 
18 May, available at: www.fastcompany.com/1648943/most-important-leadership-quality-
ceos-creativity (accessed 11 April 2013).
Fillis, I. and Rentschler, R. (2010) Enterprising Culture, 18: 49.
Meisinger, S. (2007) Creativity and innovation: key drivers for success, HR Magazine: on human
resource management, 52(5): 10.
Smith, S. and Paquette, S. (2010) Creativity, chaos and knowledge management, Business
Information Review, 27 June: 118–123.
Tellis, G. J., Prabhu, J. C. and Chandy, R. K. (2009) Radical innovation across nations: the
preeminence of corporate culture, Journal of Marketing, 73(1): 3–23.
CREATIVITY IN BUSINESS
19

20
Blocks to creativity
Chapter 2
INTRODUCTION
Creative thinking and problem solving do not necessarily come naturally to people. In the case
of individuals there are blocks to creative thinking and creative problem solving. The blocks
are essentially of two varieties: individual and organizational. First, we examine the need to
be ready for change and the need to deal with new kinds of problem. Then we turn our
attention to the various personal blocks that people may encounter when trying to solve
problems, think creatively and deal with new kinds of problems. These blocks are to do with
mindset and with factors to do with perception, emotion, expression and cultural inﬂuences.
The chapter then continues by discussing how these blocks can be diagnosed and overcome.
We then move on to blocks encountered in organizations and the conditions under which
creativity may be encouraged in organizations.
Ford Model ‘T’ car: the mindset of Henry Ford
Henry Ford’s model ‘T’ remained unchanged for years while General Motors (Chevrolet)
was making changes – often using new technology. Henry Ford said: ‘We’ll give the
customer any colour he wants as long as it is black.’ It was a statement by a man who
had been on top so long he thought nothing could dislodge him from that position. He
did not perceive the effects that the changing environment would have on customers’
wants and needs, and in particular on their requirements in terms of the motor car.
Increasing consumer afﬂuence, which developed as the American economy grew in the
early part of the twentieth century, meant that people had more disposable income and
hence more capacity to exercise choice. General Motors recognized this, but Ford did
not. In the late 1920s Ford nearly went out of business as a result of this myopic
approach. General Motors (Chevrolet) took over as number one in the USA, and Ford
did not catch up until the late 1980s. Ford’s ability to exercise creative thinking was
impeded by at least two blocks to creativity: inappropriate perceptions and negative
mindset.

In Chapter 5 we will identify other kinds of blocks to creative thinking and in particular
those that may be encountered when trying to use creative problem-solving techniques described
in this book. Before that, however, in Chapters 3 and 4 we will look at some of the theoretical
ideas about creativity and ideation. This will prepare us well for the subsequent material
presented in Chapter 5.
THE NEED TO BE READY FOR CHANGE
Executives must be ready for anything that requires having the necessary tools to combat
change proactively. As Morgan (1989) stated: ‘Many organisations and their managers drive
toward the future while looking through the rear-view mirror. They manage in relation to
events that have already occurred, rather than anticipate and confront the challenges of the
future.’
If we were not at times ‘blocked’ in our thinking, we would not need creative problem-
solving methods. In this chapter we will ﬁrst consider the nature of problem solving within
the information processing paradigm before going on to examine individual and organizational
blocks to creative thinking. In addition, we will look at ways of dealing with both kinds of
blocks. It is the existence of these blocks that gives rise to the need for a structured creative
problem-solving process and for training to help overcome particular mindsets.
MINDSET
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
21
WHERE MINDSET EXISTS
•
We have always done it this way. Why change?
•
There can only be one way to do it properly.
•
It’s experience that counts – it’s the only way to learn.
•
I learned to do it this way and it has never let me down.
•
Toy soldiers are for boys and dolls are for girls.
•
Televisions are for receiving information – not for two-way communication.
Mindset is a condition where an individual is over-sensitized to some part of the information
available at the expense of other parts. Mindset can be useful:
•
It helps us to become sensitized to some important things and serves us well – for example,
red lights act as warnings and alert us to impending danger.
•
As a result of learning from experience, mindset sensitizes us to patterns that remind us
of ways that have enabled us to solve past problems. We do not have to reinvent the wheel
each time we encounter the same problem. For example, if when dealing with an irate
customer we have found an approach that seems to be satisfactory from the point of view
of dealing with the situation, when we subsequently encounter another irate customer we
can deal with the situation using our acquired knowledge.

WHEN MINDSET BLOCKS US
Luchins (1942) showed how mindset under certain circumstances can produce ﬁxation and
stereotyping in problem-solving behaviour. The phenomenon may show itself under conditions
where the individual has discovered a strategy that initially functions well in solving certain
tasks but later blocks the realization of new and simpler solutions to similar problems. The
effect reﬂects a dysfunctional consequence of the normal rational way of approaching problems
that may block the establishment of a new perspective and more important lines of procedure
in task environments that resemble those encountered before. Cyert and March (1963) observed
similar behaviour among practising managers in real-life contexts. Typical managerial search
is seen as simple-minded and as over-emphasizing previous experience by selectively searching
in areas close to where previous solutions have been found.
Duncker (1945) investigated how past experience may block productive problem solving.
He suggested the expression ‘functional ﬁxedness’ to refer to a block against using an object
in a new way that is required to solve a problem. Interesting real-life examples of functional
ﬁxedness are provided by Weizenbaum (1984). According to the latter, the steam engine had
been in use for a hundred years to pump water out of mines before Trevithick had the idea of
using it as a source of locomotive power – it had only been seen as a tool to help pump water
out of mines. The computer had been used for a long time as a calculator before its use as a
general symbol manipulator was envisaged.
It would seem that, while mindset can provide us with substantial beneﬁts, unfortunately
there are times when it can stand in the way of progress. Mindset can create difﬁculties for
executives when they are facing new problems. When stuck on a problem, executives tend to
follow their mindset, and this may be counter-productive as far as previously unencountered
problems are concerned. Mindset is often characterized by one-right-answer thinking, always
looking for reasons why something will not work and an over-regard for logical thinking.
Executives may have learned from past experience that a particular way of dealing with a
problem usually leads to a satisfactory solution. Constant successful application of the approach
reinforces the belief that this is the correct way to approach the problem, and even the only
way to approach the problem. When a new problem arrives that deﬁes solution by the learned
approach executives becomes stuck and do not know what to do.
Negative or ‘yes, but’ thinking arises out of executives’ zeal to cater for contingencies. It
is only natural that they should try to ensure that any project will stand a good chance of being
successful, and good management practice advocates that executives should consider what may
go wrong and make contingency plans. Every suggestion is therefore questioned and critiqued
in order to make sure that the risk of failure is minimized. However, the process of criticism
itself can stiﬂe creativity by inducing a negative mindset. Constructive criticism is required.
Rather than make the comment ‘yes, but’ one should use the phrase ‘yes, and’. For example,
faced with the suggestion of making redundancies, the normal response might be: ‘Yes, but
that will only lead to unrest on the shop-ﬂoor and possible strike action.’ The better response
would be: ‘Yes, and wouldn’t it be useful, since we can then ﬁnd other jobs for those people
within the company.’
An over-regard for logical thinking can also create a barrier to creative thinking. Sometimes
we have to take steps into the dark, as it were, based upon hunch or intuition. We may have
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
22

a feeling that what we are doing is the best course of action even though we cannot justify it
in a traditionally logical way to ourselves. Perhaps the logical justiﬁcation only becomes
apparent post facto – we can see with hindsight that what we did was the right thing to do.
Somehow we cannot perceive beforehand the logical justiﬁcation – we have a perceptual block.
The notion of perceptual blocks is discussed later in the chapter.
OTHER BARRIERS TO AN INDIVIDUAL’S CREATIVITY
Many researchers have attempted to address the phenomenon of barriers to creativity. These
include Arnold (1962), Adams (1974), Jones (1987) and Majaro (1992). All have produced
detailed lists of the various kinds of barriers to creative problem solving.
Some barriers limit individuals’ creative output and are related to the people themselves.
On the other hand, there are those that emanate from the environment in which people
operate. Personal barriers may be subdivided into physiological barriers, such as the perceptual
limitations of the senses or the brain’s data-handling capacity, and psychological barriers related
to the person’s behaviour or attitudes.
Arnold (1962) suggested:
1
Perceptual blocks, which prevent a person receiving a true, relevant picture of the outside
world.
2
Cultural blocks, which result from inﬂuences of society.
3
Emotional blocks, such as fear, anxiety and jealousy.
Adams added a fourth category: intellectual and expressive blocks.
Evidence also supports the view that creative thinking activities are affected by mood (e.g.
Kaufmann and Vosburg, 1997). A positive mood facilitates creative problem solving (e.g.
Forgas, 2000; Schwarz, 2000; Shapiro et al., 2000) and recent theorists relate the state of
happiness to creativity. Argyle (2001), Gasper (2004) and Myers (2002) have all argued that
happy people feel relaxed and can generate many new ideas. Gasper (2004) also found that
people in sad moods were more likely to use restraint when generating ideas, unless given
speciﬁc instructions to compensate for the restraint. Indeed, mood, thinking and even personality
may all be interrelated (Russ, 1999).
DEALING WITH AN INDIVIDUAL’S BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
Jones (1987) initiated a study designed to ﬁnd out more about the factors that inhibit creativity.
In reviewing the literature on the subject he found that several authors included perceptual,
cultural and emotional blocks within their taxonomies while others mentioned such factors as
errors in thinking and personal fears. He identiﬁed four typologies of blocks. These were
derived from cluster analysis of self-reported items. The typologies are:
1
Strategic blocks: ‘one-right-answer approaches’, inﬂexibility in thinking. These affect the
approach taken to solve problems. They include the tendency to rely heavily on past
experience or particular techniques without challenging their appropriateness; focusing
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
23

BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
24
on a narrow range of options for either problem deﬁnition or problem solving; and
adapting an over-serious approach to problems which prevents the emergence of a playful,
imaginative and humorous climate.
2
Value blocks: ‘over-generalized rigidity inﬂuenced by personal values’. These occur when
personal beliefs and values restrict the range of ideas contemplated. Values co-exist, and
failure to reconcile them contributes to difﬁcult personal and organizational dilemmas.
3
Perceptual blocks: ‘over-narrow focus of attention and interest’. These arise from a lack of
sensory awareness at a physical level and therefore contribute to lack of awareness of
implications of situations.
4
Self-image blocks: poor effectiveness through fear of failure, timidity in expressing ideas,
etc. These reduce effectiveness in advancing ideas assertively. They arise from a lack of
self-conﬁdence in the value of one’s own ideas. Individuals may be reluctant to seek help
and talk about personal feelings. This barrier seems to be the greatest impediment to the
successful implementation of new ideas.
Figure 2.1
Jones’s blocks to creativity
Blocks to Creativity
• Strategic
• Values
• Perceptual
• Self-image
Jones’s approach has resulted in training applications that centre on personal feedback and
counselling, including suggestions for the most appropriate mechanisms for developing improved
skills. Strategic blocks can be challenged through creative problem-solving training. Values,
however, are a more difﬁcult problem, but creating an awareness of personal values in the
individual offers some respite. Perceptual blocks can be freed through observation, and self-
image blocks can proﬁt from assertiveness training. Creativity is a fragile business. It is
stimulated by the right environment, self-image and co-workers; it is inhibited by limiting
beliefs, work situations and stresses. Awareness of the obstacles to creativity can help us push
through our creative blocks.
Perceptual block
Look at the statement in Figure 2.2. How many times does the letter ‘f’ occur? See 
Appendix 2 for the answer.

DIAGNOSING WHETHER SOMEONE IS BLOCKED IN THEIR
THINKING
Strategic blocks
An inability to come up with insights, or coming up with ideas that cannot be implemented,
is a sign of blocked thinking. Often individuals may be aware of such blocks themselves, but
this may not always be the case. A negative mindset may also be a tell-tale sign that someone
has a blockage. In particular, the use of ‘yes, but’ responses and ‘only-one-right-answer
thinking’.
Value blocks
One is looking for cues in terms of what people say. If there is a tendency for someone to
argue that they have always done something in one particular way and that has always worked,
it suggests that they are not open to new ideas and that their own particular values dominate
the way in which they tackle problems.
Perceptual blocks
Diagnosing perceptual blocks may be achieved by having several people who are familiar with
a problem take a view on it. There should be some consensus of views such that the views of
the individuals who have perceptual blocks should stand out.
Self-conﬁdence block
This may be difﬁcult to ascertain unless the individuals concerned confess to having it. It may
be apparent from their reluctance to make decisions with respect to the problem in hand.
Alternatively, people who demonstrate an aversion to low risk-taking with respect to solving
a problem may well have a self-conﬁdence block.
We can see creativity at work every day in the media – for example, in cartoons and
comedy-type entertainment shows on the radio and television. Script writers for television and
radio need to think creatively just to do their jobs. John Cleese is both an actor and a writer,
and has useful thoughts on the subject that may help to deal with the problem of blocks to
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
25
Figure 2.2
Perceptual block
Perceptual block 
Following the sinking of the old frigate Ferdinand, Nelson
fought his way carefully around the cape in foul weather in the
hope of meeting his foe again off the far side of the island. By
the close of the day he found his adversary adrift and ﬂoating
perilously close to the infamous granite rocks.

BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
26
MYOPIA IN THE WATCH INDUSTRY
The Elgin watch company has often been quoted as a classic example of a ﬁrm that
exhibited acute symptoms of marketing myopia on its way to eventually going out of
business. The company refused to adapt to the changing demands of the marketplace
and failed to take account of the dwindling number of customers for its long-established
product: the classic high-quality pocket watch with an anticipated long life-span.
Yet the case of Elgin was only one example of myopia in this industry. English
watchmakers dominated watchmaking in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The
English verge escapement dominated world markets for many decades. Even when
technological breakthroughs were sought, it was the English watchmakers who led the
way. Massey’s work at the beginning of the nineteenth century led to the eventual use
of the lever movement in watches, which ﬁnally ousted the time-honoured verge. It also
proved a better movement than the cylinder movements used on the Continent. However,
the English watchmakers did not move with the times, and their demise at the end of
the nineteenth century was largely due to their lack of competitiveness with Swiss and
American-produced watches, which met the needs of consumers better.
It may seem rather obvious to us today that in order to survive in the marketplace
a company should adapt its strategy to meet the changing wants and needs of its
customers. However, the watch industry possesses a number of quirks, and it doesn’t
necessarily always respond in the way one would expect. Nor does the unexpected
always result in total failure.
The Swiss watch industry dominated world markets with its ﬁne clockwork
movements, elegant designs and ‘quality’ image for most of the twentieth century.
Quality, elegance and accuracy are key features that people look for in a watch, and
some people are prepared to pay very high prices in order to obtain what they want.
Up until 1970 watches were powered by clockwork movements, and precision
engineering dominated an industry where a key dimension of ‘quality’ reﬂected accuracy
in time-keeping. An ‘Ofﬁcially Certiﬁed Chronometer’ certiﬁcate handed out by the
Swiss authorities was a sure sign that a particular watch met with speciﬁc time-keeping
standards.Watches carrying such certiﬁcates were eagerly sought after and could
command high prices. Apart from accuracy, features such as self-winding movements,
elegance in design, gold metal casing and sometimes jewel-adorned dials added to the
desirability of a watch.
Firms such as Rolex, Patek Philippe, Jaeger, Breguet and Blancpain were world-
renowned for their ability to produce desirable watches of such a quality that only the
better-off people could afford to own them. A major breakthrough in technology,
however, enabled the Swiss industry to invent the quartz movement that made it
possible for accurate watches to be mass produced by anyone. The Swiss industry did
not use the invention, for fear that it would kill its existing market. However,
watchmakers in the Far East grasped the quartz movement, and in a single year the
sales of Swiss watches dropped by 25 per cent. This is a case where mindset coupled
with paradigm shift spelled disaster for a whole industry.

BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
27
creative thinking. Popova (2012) states what he has to say on the subject, speciﬁcally noting
his ‘5 factors that you can arrange to make your lives more creative’:
Space: ‘You can’t become playful, and therefore creative, if you’re under your usual
pressures.’
Time: ‘It’s not enough to create space; you have to create your space for a speciﬁc period
of time.’
Time: ‘Giving your mind as long as possible to come up with something original’ and
‘learning to tolerate the discomfort of pondering time and indecision’.
Conﬁdence: ‘Nothing will stop you being creative so effectively as the fear of making a
mistake.’
Humour: ‘The main evolutionary signiﬁcance of humour is that it gets us from the closed
mode to the open mode quicker than anything else.’
HOW TECHNIQUES HELP TO OVERCOME BLOCKS
Strategic, value, perceptual and self-image blocks can also be overcome to a great extent by
use of the techniques themselves. All the techniques lend themselves to facilitating the strategic
process of generating ideas. As a result of using the techniques, ideas and insights will be
created where none or few existed before. The techniques act as a stimulus to thinking and
help evoke, construct and reconstruct the knowledge and information we hold as individuals
in our memory. Where participants engage in group creative problem solving sessions, such
as when using brainstorming or synectics, sharing experiences in the group can help build
conﬁdence, lessen the risk of making mistakes as individuals and overcome value prejudices
we may hold as individuals. In addition, it can also help compensate for the perceptual blocks
and biases we may exhibit as individuals. By sharing a problem with someone else we can
appreciate how others might view the same problem and how they might gain insights to the
problem. These may well be perspectives that our perceptual bias causes us to overlook.
There are many blocks to creativity and some are more destructive than others. Unless these
barriers are released, the usefulness of creative problem-solving techniques and approaches will
be lost. The particular blocks that are most destructive are the self-defeating beliefs, which
state that:
(a) Fantasy and reﬂection are a waste of time.
(b) Problem solving is a serious business; no fun or humour is allowed.
(c) Feeling and intuition are bad.
(d) Tradition is preferable to change.
There are many more blocks to creativity, as indicated above, but these barriers need to be
removed, as fantasy, originality, fun and change are deﬁnitely needed when we use the creative
problem-solving techniques. The rejection of conventional lines of thinking is of primary
importance for a successful solution to the problem. Creative problem-solving techniques
require the user to have an open mind, which will allow the user to generate ideas – some of
which will hopefully solve the problem that has arisen.

BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
28
Figure 2.3
Why are 2013 coins worth more than 2007 coins? 
(See Appendix 2 for the answer.)
Figure 2.4
Is the aircraft ﬂying towards you or away from you?
Figure 2.5
The broken clock problem
XII
XI
X
IX
VIII
VII
VI
V
IV
III
II
I

The broken clock problem
A clock face has roman numerals painted on its glass surface (see Figure 2.5). One day the
clock falls on the ﬂoor, and an observer is about to pick up the four pieces when she notices
that on each piece the sum of the roman numerals comes to the same total. Can you work out
what she saw?
A version of the clock problem has been used in creativity training at Manchester 
Business School by Tudor Rickards, and we are grateful for permission to share the puzzle.
See Appendix 2 for an illustrative solution.
BLOCKS TO ORGANIZATIONAL CREATIVE THINKING AND WAYS
OF DEALING WITH THEM
Management structure has a considerable inﬂuence on creativity in an organization. Top-down
management produces centralized decision-making and dissemination of ideas. This can
discourage creativity by enforcing disempowered, non-participatory roles on staff who might
otherwise make creative contributions (Tsai and Beverton, 2007).
By contrast, bottom-up management leads to employee empowerment as a result of
collaboration and shared decision making (Tsai and Beverton, 2007). Arguably, there is also
greater participation among employees and the creation of an environment for learning,
education and collaboration where people can make use of their creative potential (Cafolla,
2007; Violino, 2006). Changing towards a bottom-up approach to management can be an
important step towards removing organizational blocks to creativity.
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
29
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS
People and organizations tend to fall into a variety of traps when trying to become
more innovative.
1
Identifying the wrong problem
2
Judging ideas too quickly
3
Stopping with the ﬁrst good idea
4
Failing to get the support of key personnel in the organization
5
Failing to challenge assumptions
Some of the major blocks are:
•
Emphasis on managerial control – control can stiﬂe creativity since autonomy and a degree
of freedom are critical ingredients of creative thinking. Moreover, traditional ﬁnancial
controls are not appropriate for long-term innovation efforts.
•
Short-range thinking – there is a tendency to give priority to quick returns with ﬁnancially
measurable results.

•
Analysis paralysis – ideas are often over-analysed, and time is lost along with any competitive
advantage.
•
Rigid hierarchical structures – an unpredictable environment requires a responsive
organizational structure, and this is not characteristic of most organizations.
•
Tendency to look for one project that is likely to generate a big pay-off – rather than a number
of smaller projects with small to medium payoffs. Good small projects can thus often be
overlooked.
•
Market- versus technology-driven product planning – there tends to be an over-emphasis on
market research, in line with the marketing orientation adopted by many companies.
While the marketing orientation is very important, it is often implemented at the expense
of good ideas that come out of R&D and which never get off the ground.
•
Pressure to achieve and do more with fewer resources – R&D departments are often penalized
for cutting costs; the more the department saves one year, the less it has to play with the
next. Paradoxically, the more companies have to cut back on expenditure, the more
creative they must become.
•
Lack of a systematic approach to innovation – a lack of real ideas about how to innovate.
•
Belief that some people are creative – others are not.
Ways of dealing with such blocks include:
•
Encouraging prudent risk-taking.
•
Freedom of thought – some degree of autonomy.
•
Linking rewards with speciﬁc performance.
•
Encouraging different viewpoints on problems.
•
Positive involvement of top management.
•
Continual ﬂow of ideas.
•
Responding positively to new ideas.
ELEMENTS AND CONDITIONS OF CREATIVE ORGANIZATIONS
We can divide the characteristics of organizational creativity into four distinct elements (the
four Ps of creativity):
•
People – teams or individuals.
•
Processes – how ideas are developed and innovation accomplished.
•
Place – creative environment.
•
Product – the output of creativity.
We cannot treat each one of the four Ps in isolation from the others. They are interdependent.
Perhaps the one to receive the least attention is ‘place’. An organization concerned with
creating a climate that inﬂuences effective creative activity should provide at least the following:
•
Resources: these should be appropriate and sufﬁcient.
•
Security: adequate salary and security of job tenure.
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
30

•
Trust: allow for mistakes.
•
Reward/recognition: feedback, recognition and reward.
Schein (1984) argues that ‘organisational culture’ is created as part of a complex process in
which the way things are done becomes explicit in terms of symbols, structures and procedures
in the organization, which in turn reinforce the underlying behavioural norms.These may help
or hinder the process of whether an organization functions effectively and/or efﬁciently.
Bessant et al. (2001), for example, suggested that everyone in an organization can in theory
make a contribution to problem-solving innovation. However, they go on to conclude that
most organizations have been operating on beliefs, originating in the ‘scientiﬁc management’
approaches developed at the turn of the century, which see a split into ‘thinkers’ and ‘doers’
and which implicitly prevent this from happening.
Creative activities such as the generation of new ideas and the turning of these ideas into useful
application in practice occur as a result of an interaction between the person and the situation
(Amabile, 1997; Scott and Bruce, 1994). Relevant studies have sought to uncover such things
as the effect of collaborations (Abra, 1994; Bullinger et al., 2004), group interactions (Rickards
et al., 2001; West, 2002), leadership (Amabile et al., 2004; Howell and Boies, 2004) and
organizational structure (Cardinal and Hatﬁeld, 2000; Damanpour, 1996). The importance of
climate has also been examined (e.g. Amabile and Gryskiewicz, 1989; Anderson et al., 2004;
West, 2002). In the latter respect, climate studies have examined people’s perceptions of, or
experiences in, their immediate work environment with respect to dimensions such as support
and autonomy (Mathisen and Einarsen, 2004). The results obtained in these studies tend to
stress the importance of organizational climate.
QUESTIONS
1 Why are people sometimes blocked in their thinking? How can they be helped to overcome
the various blockages that occur?
2 Why do people ﬁnd it difﬁcult to solve previously unencountered problems?
3 Differentiate between individual and organizational blocks to creative thinking. What can
be done to cope with the difﬁculties created by these blocks or even to help prevent these
blocks occurring?
4 Tudor Rickards coined the phrase ‘mental stuckness’.What exactly did he mean by this
phrase and what is its relevance to the use of creative problem-solving methods and
techniques?
5 Morgan (1989) states: ‘Many organisations and their managers drive toward the future
while looking through the rear-view mirror. They manage in relation to events that have
already occurred, rather than anticipate and confront the challenges of the future.’ Assess
the impact that this kind of thinking will have on creative thinking and problem solving in
an organization.
6 ‘If we were not at times “blocked” in our thinking we would not need creative problem-
solving methods.’ What kinds of blockages to creative thinking, as individuals, do we
encounter?
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
31

7 ‘Problems often don’t stay solved, or solutions never quite work out as expected, because
the wrong problem was deﬁned.’ Comment on this apparent truism.
8 ‘The ﬁrst good idea is never the best.’ To what extent would you agree or disagree with
this statement. Explain.
9 Picasso said: ‘Every act of creation begins with an act of destruction.’ How transferable
is this notion to the domain of creative problem solving? Discuss.
10 How might making use of each of the following help overcome blocks to creative problem
solving?
•
watching a magician at work
•
going to the theatre or the cinema
•
family outings
•
visits to junkyards
•
mixing with or talking to different people – perhaps people whose value systems are
different from your own
•
day-dreaming to a sound-effects record
•
free association to music
•
browsing around ﬂea markets
•
scanning old science magazines
•
reading historical accounts
•
reading wants ads
•
indulging in or watching sport
•
studying new subjects through introductory-level books
•
following the news – in the newspapers and on television.
11 Organizations thrive on creative thinking but can be reluctant to reward it. Why do you
think this is the case?
CASES
J.C. losing money
J.C. was unhappy – even worse, he was losing money. His advertising agency had beaten six
other ﬁrms for the right to represent Ruby’s Soap, but what once looked like a wonderful
opportunity was turning out to be a major disaster. J.C. had scrapped Ruby’s old campaign,
which stressed the soap’s cleansing powers, in favour of soft-soap testimonials. The new
approach, which featured the caretakers of schools and churches talking about how wonderful
Ruby’s was, had been received well by everyone.
The advertisements differentiated Ruby’s from its much larger competition. While
competitors were tough on dirt, Ruby’s became the one to use when you needed ﬁnesse, not
muscle. J.C. had been a brand manager with a large fast-moving consumer-goods ﬁrm for
several years and was particularly pleased with this positioning of the appeal. It demonstrated
the kind of know-how and expertise his agency could offer Ruby.
J.C. was constantly on the phone to Ruby’s Soap headquarters suggesting marketing moves,
promotions and possible new products. But all of this time was costing J.C. money. He was
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
32

getting paid just to do Ruby’s advertising. While his ideas might be producing Brownie points,
they weren’t producing proﬁts for his agency. The result was that what had started out as a
terriﬁc account was quickly turning into a loser. J.C. wanted to renegotiate. Jack Ruby hadn’t
asked J.C. to do anything except his advertising. While he valued J.C.’s ideas, he had made
clear from the start exactly what he was buying from J.C.
Question
J.C. was losing money on the Ruby’s account because he negotiated badly in the discussions
that set the level of service the agency would provide. What could he do now?
New Shoe Company
The New Shoe Company, based in the English Midlands, is experiencing a fall in proﬁts. The
company measures proﬁts in terms of the annual pre-tax return on capital employed. The sales
director says that falling proﬁtability is a reﬂection of the current slump in the market. Total
demand in the marketplace is much less than it was twelve months ago, and the company has
struggled to maintain its market share at the previous level as competition has intensiﬁed.
Competition from European manufacturers has been sharpened by changes in the EEC trading
regulations, and Spanish manufacturers in particular have taken advantage of their lower cost
structure to make inroads into the British market. At the same time, the New Shoe Company
has failed to take full advantage of opportunities in Europe. It has not fully developed its
market-niching strategy where it can gain a competitive advantage. The sales director blames
the ﬁrm’s lack of competitiveness on the poor performance of the R&D team and the inability
of the manufacturing departments to control costs.
The technical director claims that the ﬁrm’s products are competitive with any that are
produced worldwide. Indeed, in her view, the ﬁrm’s products are by far the best available at
the price offered. She points to the lack of marketing effort expended by the ﬁrm in the past
year, pointing to the necessity to keep the ﬁrm’s name before the public at all times, especially
when competition is increasing in strength. At the same time, she recognizes that marketing
effort requires ﬁnancing and that this was not adequately provided during the period in
question.
The production director points out that the company has been able to lower its manufacturing
costs substantially through the introduction of new technology into the manufacturing process.
However, he points out that the accounting practices adopted by the ﬁrm distort the true
picture. In his view, proﬁtability has improved, though this is not truly reﬂected in the
company’s management accounts.
The ﬁnance director feels that the drop in proﬁtability is attributable to recent acquisitions
that the ﬁrm has made. Ventures into retailing have not been as proﬁtable as had ﬁrst been
supposed. This might to some extent have been reﬂective of bad timing on behalf of the
company, given the current recession, in making such acquisitions.
The managing director points out that clearly there is a problem and that perhaps one should
pay particular attention to what competitors are doing and how the ﬁrm is responding from a
marketing viewpoint.
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
33

Question
Consider the problems created by functional ﬁxedness in this case. How might the situation
be resolved?
The problem deputy
Bill was new to the job, and it was also his ﬁrst management post. He had taken over a
department of twenty people and, although he had been looking forward to his new post with
great enthusiasm, after two weeks in the job he now had worries and anxieties. His problem
was Kurt. Kurt was the deputy head of department and had been with the organization for
eleven years. He was sixteen years older than Bill and secretly resented Bill’s appointment.
Kurt had not been appointed head of department because the other members of the department
resented his management style, and the boss of the organization had felt that, although Kurt
was an able man, the best interests of everyone would be served by appointing an outsider
rather than conﬁrming Kurt in the position of head of department.
Kurt had very strong views about his colleagues, as Bill soon found out. There was much
evidence to show that most of his comments had substance to them. He spent much of his time
in Bill’s ofﬁce explaining why he thought most people in the department were lazy and needed
‘a good whipping’ to make them work. When Kurt was not running down his colleagues he
would discuss classical music with Bill – an interest that was close to Bill’s heart. Bill was
secretly pleased when Kurt went off to get on with his normal work. While he found Kurt an
interesting and stimulating fellow, he did have reservations about him.
The departmental views of staff on the subject of Kurt were mixed. There was a faction
that hated him and wished he would retire early. Kurt did have one or two friends, however,
who were more sympathetic to his views and explained his aggressive manner away as justiﬁable
frustration and disappointment. Bill was anxious to get off to a solid start in his new job and
recognized that he lacked experience. He also felt that he needed to sort out the business of
who was to be his deputy fairly quickly. Should he continue with Kurt in this role? Should he
appoint someone else? Should he do without a deputy? Bill’s boss wasn’t much help in the
matter.’ Well, you have to manage with what you have,’ he said in a noncommittal way.’ Kurt
isn’t a bad bloke at heart.’ Bill felt he couldn’t think clearly in the matter. Something was
causing a block to his thinking processes, and he could not get to grips with it.
Question
Can you identify the main sources of blocks to thinking in this instance? What should 
Bill do?
Tunnel vision
The drive to complete the project was on – until local resistance was encountered. There
seemed no way of getting round the problem. The locals wanted cash to get out of the way of
the highway which was to be driven through their homes – more cash than the company was
prepared to offer. ‘If we pay up,’ said Joe, ‘everyone will get to know about it and everyone
is going to want a cut. The project has enough on-costs. We won’t pay up.’
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
34

‘I guess we can reroute at little extra cost. It’ll mean an extra couple of miles of highway
and a tunnel, but we won’t have to meet the kind of resistance the locals are putting up here.
It’ll cost extra, more than we’d pay the locals, but heaven knows how much it would cost if
we had to pay out to everyone who stood in our way.’ Tom smiled.
‘Sure agree with that,’ said Joe, drawing on his cigar. ‘Still, we’d better analyse the ﬁgures
in depth. After all, we have to report on the change of plans to the Board in due course, and
they will require justiﬁcation for the change. How long do you reckon it will take to get the
ﬁgures?’
Tom grimaced. ‘Maybe a few days. If we have to get clearance from the Board before we
proceed, that could add on several weeks. Also, of course, we’d have to pay the men while
they were idle. Then there is the rent on the equipment; the interest on loans.’
‘Hey, hang on a minute. This could cost us a lot of money. Can’t you get any rough
estimates at all?’ Joe scowled.
‘Jupiter, Joe, all this takes time.’
‘But we haven’t got time. Before we know it, the locals will have wind of the fact we are
up to something and we’ll have protesters, the government and the police breathing down our
necks.’ Joe wasn’t pleased.
‘Well, we have to go through formal channels. The Board meets once a month. The last
meeting was three days ago – ‘Tom was interrupted.
‘I think this calls for drastic action. There could be a big pay-off here if we just forge ahead
one way or the other. Perhaps we ought just to pay up to the locals and hope for the best,’
Joe shouted.
‘I think we ought to explore the lie of the land. Get more information and ﬁnd out what
the locals are really up to,’ Tom said coolly.
‘Every day that passes we have fewer resources. We cannot afford to do that. Anyway, I
don’t think it is necessary. What if we just let the locals cool their heels for a few days? We’ll
make them sweat. Then we’ll offer them what we said we would. They’ll see sense, I’m sure,’
Joe reﬂected.
Question
How do you think the problem should be resolved? What are the major blocks to its
resolution?
The only one
At tea breaks Sally preferred to sit alone. She was the only female computer programmer in
the building. It wasn’t that she didn’t like her male colleagues, it was just that they always
spoke in a patronizing way to her, talked about football all the time except when the conversation
was interspersed with sexist jokes or sexist remarks. She could complain, she knew, but what
good would it do? She wanted to keep her job.
Sally had taken to bringing the morning newspaper into the ofﬁce so that she had something
to read during the breaks. One day she left the newspaper open on the desk at the situations
vacant pages while she went to the toilet. On her return she was teased by her colleagues about
looking for another job. She thought nothing more of the matter, putting it down to the
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
35

clownish behaviour of her male colleagues. However, it soon became a topic of conversation
among her colleagues, which she could not help but overhear. Sally, they said, was looking for
a new job because she was the only woman in the ofﬁce. It soon became monotonous. Every
day the same remarks would be made and Sally would simply smile, but it began to get on her
nerves, so much so that she began to lose sleep, wakening in the night from dreams in which
she was anxiously searching for jobs while listening to the taunts of her colleagues.
Question
What action should Sally take to deal with this problem?
FURTHER READING
Hemlin, S., Allwood, C. M. and Martin, B. R. (2008) Creative knowledge environments, Creativity
Research Journal, 20(2): 196–210.
Hunter, S. T., Bedell, K. E. and Mumford, M. D. (2007) Climate for creativity: a quantitative review,
The University of Oklahoma, Creativity Research Journal, 19(1): 69–90.
Man, J. ( 2001) Creating innovation, Work Study, 50(6): 229–233.
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY
36

37
INTRODUCTION
Notions about creativity and creative problem solving are complex. There is no one standard
authority on the subject, and information about these processes is therefore scattered and to
be found in different disciplines. In this chapter I try to pull together some of the ideas that
pertain to the subject in the hope of providing some background against which to appreciate
the various steps of the creative problem-solving process which are described in subsequent
The beginnings of television
In 1842, Alexander Bain devised a machine – developed ﬁve years later by Bakewell –
for transmitting drawings by electric wire. In the receiver, electrolytic action was used
to draw the picture. Over ﬁfty years later, the German physicist Arthur Korn modernized
the system by substituting photo-electric action for the electro-chemical. Once photo-
telegraphy was established, the transmission of live pictures seemed a possibility. It was
simply a problem of speed – of scanning the scene to be transmitted, of sending the
impulses to the receiver, and of assembling them there so quickly that the eye would
accept them as an image of a real-life scene. A crude, practical solution of the scanning
problem had been discovered by Paul Nipkow in 1882. Two developments had stimulated
his thinking: the invention of the telephone and the discovery that selenium allows an
electronic current to pass more freely when the sun is shining on it (which later led to
the invention of the photo-electric cell). Nipkow realized that variations of electrical
resistance according to the amount of light falling on selenium pointed to the possibility
of transmitting a scene by electricity. This was the beginning of electronics, and it
prompted other inventors to approach the problem of television from a different angle.
Many of the technological achievements we see today are the product of a chain of
creative thought and problem solving conducted by several different researchers. To
understand how these achievements have been brought about we need to understand the
nature of creative thinking and creative problem solving.
Theories of creativity and 
the creative problem-solving 
process
Chapter 3

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
38
chapters. Figure 3.1 provides an overview of the main thread of the discussion which occurs
in this chapter.
In this chapter we look at general observations about the ideation process. This is followed
by an examination of some of the ideas of those who think that creativity is explained best by
the neuro-physiological functioning of the brain. Whole-brain and two-brain theories exemplify
this latter approach. We shall see a connection between the neuro-physiological functioning
of the brain and the cognitive theory of creative problem solving discussed later in the chapter.
Before looking at problem solving and creative problem solving, however, we give attention
to two other important contributions to the theory of creative thinking. First we look at the
notion of divergent and convergent thinking, and then we consider a suggestion that the
conditions under which ideation takes place are very important. We ﬁnish the chapter by
Figure 3.1
Overview of the chapter
Conditions for
creativity
Other explanations
of creativity:
Association
Chance
Divine gift
Personality
Structure of the brain:
Four quadrants
Fibre connectors
Communication
between
quadrants
Cognitive theory
of creativity:
Creation and
retrieval of
schemas
from memory
Convergent
and divergent
thinking
The index metaphor:
How we get ideas
Searching the
mental book
Cross-references
Stuckness
The need for CPS
mechanisms
Analogical
reasoning

examining ideas about analogical reasoning. Analogical reasoning is a strong feature of some
of the techniques we will look at in later chapters (lateral thinking, synectics and the paradigm
breaking techniques) and needs to be grasped in order to fully understand what they are about.
The theoretical issues raised in this chapter act as a background for appreciating the elements
of the next chapter which introduces creative problem solving.
CREATIVE THINKING
Some observations on ideation
Locke ([1690] 1964) maintained that the source of all ideas is human experience and under -
standing. Ideas, as he saw them, sprang from knowledge, which in turn is derived from
observation of the external world as well as from awareness of our own internal ruminations
on these observations. ‘Knowledge’ remains a somewhat vague notion, but implies more than
remembered observations and includes some form of interpretation of these observations.
Ideas may not merely come into and go out of our awareness like randomly displayed data
elements, but instead can be consciously related to each other in ways that we begin to ﬁnd
useful, interesting, satisfying or even entertaining. Idea processing takes individual ideas and
manipulates, synthesizes and associates them with one another until they form a larger contextual
pattern that we can consciously relate to some human concern or problem.
Idea processing does not rely on either mathematical algorithms or other kinds of structured
logical step-by-step solution methods. Many researchers have observed that the non-speciﬁable
type of idea processing appears to be the more dominant approach of expert high-level 
decision makers. Mintzberg (1976), for instance, contrasts the analytical reasoning process of
management science with the intuitive thought process of the manager and concludes that
analytic planning has had little impact on how top management functions. Isenberg (1984)
reported that ‘thought sampling’ statements describing how senior managers think indicate
that they do not engage in solving isolated problems but deal with interconnected networks of
problems and use what he calls ‘high intuition’ (not guesswork) in which rapid pattern
recognition takes place and solutions are generated and regenerated as new information is
obtained.
THE INVESTMENT THEORY OF CREATIVITY
Sternberg and Lubart (1991, 1995) argue that creativity requires a coming together of six
clear-cut yet interconnected assets: intellectual abilities, knowledge, styles of thinking,
personality, motivation and environment. Let us consider each one of these in turn.
Intellectual skills
Three intellectual skills are identiﬁed:
1
the ability to see problems from different perspectives and to move away from approaches
involving conventional thinking;
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
39

2
the ability to evaluate which ideas are promising and which ones are not; and
3
the ability to persuade others regarding the value of ideas that are worth pursuing.
Being able to combine these skills is the key but one has to acknowledge that simply having
analytic skills alone may simply produce critical thinking, but not creative ideas. Similarly,
having just synthetic skills simply produces ideas that are not evaluated for their usefulness in
addressing problems. Finally, having persuasive ability alone may get ideas adopted not because
the ideas are good, but because the ideas have been presented in a persuasive manner.
Knowledge
Knowledge is essential for any progress to be made. One cannot move forward if one does not
fully understand the point from which one starts. However, one has to appreciate that one’s
perspective on a problem may be hindered or assisted by knowledge of a situation since it may
reﬂect an entrenched perspective reﬂecting the way in which one has seen problems in the
past.
Thinking styles
Thinking styles relate to how skills are employed by people. A preference for thinking in new
ways is a desirable feature of creative thought. This will encompass adopting a global view as
well as an ability to distinguish the wood from the trees and thereby recognize which questions
are important and which ones are not.
Personality
Numerous research studies (Lubart, 1994; Sternberg and Lubart, 1991, 1995) argue for the
importance of certain personality attributes that are associated with creative perfomance.
Willingness to overcome obstacles, preparedness to take sensible risks, propensity to tolerate
ambiguity and self-efﬁcacy feature among desirable attributes.
Motivation
Intrinsic, task-focused motivation is regarded as essential to creativity. Amabile (1983) and
others stress the importance of this and argue that people who love what they are doing and
focus on the work rather than the potential rewards are most productive from a creative
perspective. Finding a way of seeing something as being worthy of one’s interest may be the
factor that stimulates motivation. This may occur spontaneously – love at ﬁrst sight – or occur
out of necessity – because it is essential for one’s self-preservation.
Environment
An environment that is supportive and rewarding of creative ideas is helpful since possessing
the internal means required to think creatively may be insufﬁcient without some environmental
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
40

support (such as a means of putting ideas forward). Business environments do not usually make
putting forward creative ideas an easy task.
Bringing together these six components is the essential task. However, there may be may
be thresholds to be attained for some components (e.g. knowledge) below which creativity is
not possible irrespective of the levels achieved with respect to other components. Nevertheless,
a strength on one component (e.g. motivation) can counteract a weakness on another component
(e.g. environment). Lastly, interactions can occur between components, such as knowledge
and motivation, to produce a high degree of creativity.
Amabile and colleagues (Amabile, 1996; Hennessey, 2003; Hennessey and Amabile, 1988)
lend support to Sternberg’s investment theory approach. They argue that the combination of
a variety of environmental and person variables are essential for creativity. Their research rests
on a three-part conceptualization of creative performance. They suggest that a problem should
be approached with the appropriate domain skills (background knowledge), creativity skills
(willingness to take risks, experiment, etc.) and task motivation. Under the best conditions
the conﬂuence of these three factors produce what Amabile (1997) refers to as the ‘creative
intersection’. Arguably, through teaching and learning creativity skills can be acquired, but it
is how the environment helps to shape motivational orientation that is less predictable. We
will revisit these ideas again in Chapter 5.
THE BRAIN AS AN INFORMATION PROCESSOR
The brain has two cerebral hemispheres – a left and a right. The primary mental processes of
these hemispheres include vision, hearing, body senses, reasoning, language and non-verbal
visualization. Within each hemisphere is to be found one half of the limbic system. This is a
control centre that governs such things as hunger, thirst, sleeping, waking, body temperature,
heart rate, blood pressure and emotions. The limbic system plays an important role in
transferring incoming information into memory. The two cerebral hemispheres and the two
halves of the limbic system make up the four quadrants of the brain. The upper quadrants
represent the cerebral hemispheres while the lower quadrants represent the two halves of the
limbic system.
Fibres connect the two cerebral hemispheres, and these ﬁbres carry communications both
within and between the two hemispheres. When solving complex problems or other intricate
work, different thinking methods are required. The brain switches signals back and forth very
rapidly between different areas within the two hemispheres via the ﬁbre links. Switching
thinking modes within the cerebral hemispheres (within each of the two upper quadrants) is
simple, but switching between the two lower or upper quadrants is more difﬁcult. Diagonal
switching is most difﬁcult because there are no ﬁbre connections between diagonally opposite
quadrants of the brain.
Left and right sides of the brain
During the 1960s, research on the brain caused scientists to conclude that both hemispheres
are involved in higher cognitive functioning. It was found that each half of the brain produced
different modes of complex thinking. The main argument to develop was that there appear to
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
41

be two modes of thinking, verbal and non-verbal, which tended to be conducted separately by
the left and right hemispheres respectively. This in turn led initially to a number of ‘brain’-
related theories concerning creative thinking, notable among which was Roger Sperry’s Left
Brain/Right Brain theory (see Le Boeuf, 1994). According to this theory, the left brain is used
for logical thinking, judgement and mathematical reasoning, while the right brain is the source
of dreaming, feeling, visualization and intuition.
The Whole Brain/Four-Quadrant Model
Herrmann (1990) showed that it is possible to build a model of the human brain with two
paired structures, the two halves of the cerebral system and the two halves of the limbic
system. This permits one to differentiate between not only the more popular notions of
left/right brain, but also the more sophisticated notions of cognitive/intellectual which describe
the cerebral preference, and visceral, structured and emotional which describe the limbic
preference.
Herrmann’s Whole Brain Model also made use of the concept of dominance. Evidence indicates
that, wherever there are two of anything in the body, one of them is naturally dominant over
the other. For example, we may be right- or left-handed. We can also be thought of as
predominantly right- or left- ‘brained’. The implications of this for the way in which we prefer
to do things are important. Indeed, sometimes our preferred way of doing things may well be
counterproductive. Predominantly left-brained thinkers may experience more difﬁcult
relationships with colleagues than right-brained thinkers because they are not as sensitized to
other people. On the other hand, it may be that predominantly right-brained thinkers need to
have goals and a schedule set for them to help them be more efﬁcient.
The Whole Brain Model (Figure 3.2) presents four distinct thinking styles:
1
The upper (cerebral) left
A analytical, mathematical, technical and problem solving
2
The lower (limbic) left
B controlled, conservative, planned, organized and administrative in nature
3
The lower (limbic) right
C interpersonal, emotional, musical, and spiritual
4
Upper (cerebral) right
D imaginative, synthesizing, artistic, holistic and conceptual modes
Among other things:
•
Predominantly A quadrant thinkers prefer organizing information logically in a framework,
listening to lectures and reading textbooks, studying example problems and solutions,
thinking through ideas, doing scientiﬁc/academic research, judging ideas based on facts,
criteria and logical reasoning, dealing with reality and current problems.
•
Predominantly B quadrant thinkers like ﬁnding practical uses for knowledge learned,
planning projects, practising new skills, writing practical guides about how to do something.
•
Predominantly C quadrant thinkers like to be very organized and precise in their work.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
42

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
43
•
Predominantly D quadrant like to take an overall view of new topics (not the detail), to
take the initiative, ponder on possible outcomes of actions, use visual aids, solve open-
ended problems, enjoy wild ideas, experiment, rely on intuition rather than on logic,
synthesize ideas, approach a problem from different angles.
From the point of view of undertaking creative problem-solving activities, type D thinkers
seem to have the most favourable frame of mind for this activity.
Wallas’s model of the creative process
Graham Wallas (1926) set down a description of what happens as people approach problems
with the objective of coming up with creative solutions. He described his four-stage process
as follows:
1
In the preparation stage we deﬁne the problem, need, or desire, and gather any information
the solution or response needs to account for, and set up criteria for verifying the solution’s
acceptability.
2
In the incubation stage we step back from the problem and let our minds contemplate and
work it through. Like preparation, incubation can last minutes, weeks, even years.
3
In the illumination stage, ideas arise from the mind to provide the basis of a creative
response. These ideas can be pieces of the whole or the whole itself, i.e. seeing the entire
Figure 3.2
Brain theories: the Whole Brain Model (Hermann/Wallas)
A
Analytical,
mathematical,
technical,
problem solving
D
Imaginative,
synthesising,
artistic, holistic,
conceptual
B
Controlled,
conservative, planned,
organised,
administrative
C
Interpersonal,
emotional,
musical,
spiritual
Incubation
and
illumination
Preparation
and
verification

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
44
concept or entity all at once. Unlike the other stages, illumination is often very brief,
involving a tremendous rush of insights within a few minutes or hours.
4
In veriﬁcation, the ﬁnal stage, we carry out activities to demonstrate whether or not what
emerged in illumination satisﬁes the need and the criteria deﬁned in the preparation stage.
The ﬁrst and last stages are left-brain (quadrants A and B) activities, whereas the second and
third stages belong to the right brain (quadrants D and C).
It should be noted that Wallas’s theory comes under criticism from Weisberg (1986),
particularly with respect to incubation. He details studies to substantiate his claim and believes
that the role of incubation in creative problem solving is ambiguous and may, in fact, have little
function. Research quoted by Weisberg suggests that none of the four stages can be said to
have any supporting evidence. He argues that it is the conscious mind that is creative. However,
recent research on incubation by Segal (2004) suggests that a break in the attentive activity
devoted to a problem may eventually facilitate the solution process. This gives rise to a new
hypothesis based on analysis of the structure of insight problems and their solution process.
According to this hypothesis, no activity takes place during the break. The break’s only function
is to divert the solver’s attention from the problem, thus releasing her mind from the grip of
a false organizing assumption. This enables the solver to apply a new organizing assumption to
the problem’s components upon returning to the problem. Moss (2003) argues that the process
may be inﬂuenced by the impact of environmental clues. When a problem is abandoned, a
solution may subsequently and unexpectedly emerge. The intervening period, known as
incubation, has sometimes been ascribed to opportunity assimilation. According to this theory,
impasses to a problem create failure indexes, which ensure that random stimuli in the
environment are detected and utilized.
Cropley’s stages model
Cropley (1997) added various stages to Wallas’ model. First, he argued that there was a need
to recognize or ‘ﬁnd’ a problem about which the person can be creative (this is the Preparation
stage). Second, he considered there was a need to communicate the creative outcome to others
(this he referred to as the Communication stage). Third, he envisaged it was necessary to have
the outcome judged by people with the relevant cultural background (this he referred to as
the Validation stage). The Preparation stage makes the process of problem ﬁnding more
explicit. Creative ideas can be produced without Communication and Validation but they
cannot receive ‘socio-cultural validation’ (Cropley and Urban, 2000). This may explain why
management may sometimes come up with an idea which they think will be good for the
workforce only to ﬁnd that the workforce has a completely different view of it!
SOLVING A PROBLEM BY GAINING SUDDEN INSIGHT
Visualize a standard chessboard with any two white squares removed. Is it possible
to place 31 dominoes of size 2 × 1 so as to cover all the remaining squares?
See Appendix 2 for the answer.

CONVERGENT AND DIVERGENT THINKING
Guilford (1967) claimed and cited evidence to support the view that divergent thinking
processes, as opposed to convergent thinking processes, are related to creativity. Divergent
thinking involves a broad search for decision options with respect to a problem for which there
is no unique answer. In the divergent processes, the generation of alternatives involves ﬁnding
many combinations of elements that may provide many possible answers. Fluency of thinking
and originality characterize a divergent search for alternatives, rather than a rigorous adherence
to prescribed steps and criteria for ﬁnding some uniquely ‘correct’ result. In a convergent
search, the opposite is true; that is, it is a unique solution to meet the prescribed criteria that
is sought. As Guilford (1975) points out, however, these two modes are not necessarily used
in isolation and can be intermixed in so far as a divergent approach can be used on the way to
a convergent solution. The extent to which the whole process can be characterized as divergent
or convergent is relative rather than absolute and depends on the degree of limitations imposed
on the answer. We might thus conclude that both divergent and convergent thinking contribute
to the gaining of creative insights.
Guilford, as discussed by Dacey (1989), argues that a major impediment to effective
convergent thinking lies not in the use of a problem solving paradigm but in the selection of a
good one. Dacey (1989) has referred to Edward de Bono’s theories of divergent thinking,
which combine vertical and lateral dimensions. De Bono states: ‘vertical thinking digs the same
hole deeper; lateral thinking is concerned with digging a hole in another place’ (Dacey, 1989).
Seemingly, if that hole is in the wrong place, no amount of logic is going to put it in the right
place. Therefore, although the Creative Problem Solving Method (CPSM) requires these dual
thought processes, the model will not be constructive unless the ‘digger’ is on the right track.
It is argued that the function of divergent thinking is to ‘broaden out’ the thought process
and thus reject mindset and disregard constraints on problem solving. Convergent thinking
applies a greater degree of judgement and narrow focus. The argument is, however, the subject
of some criticism. Weisberg (1986) considers that divergent thinking is not, in fact, an
important aspect of creativity and that studies have shown that creative ability is not related
to divergent thinking ability. He argues that novel solutions to problems can, in fact, be
achieved without it. He feels that creative problem solving does always require a fresh
perspective. Weisberg is critical of creative problem-solving methods. However, one should
bear in mind that his evidence for such a claim is based upon only two illustrations.
THE CONDITIONS OF CREATIVE THINKING
Mary Henle (1962) outlined what she considered to be the necessary conditions for creative
thinking (Figure 3.3).There were ﬁve such conditions: receptivity, immersion, seeing questions,
utilization of errors, and detached devotion.
Receptivity
The generation of creative ideas requires us to hold a certain attitude. It is thought that
receptivity involves detaching oneself from one’s current activities and simply paying attention
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
45

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
46
to the ideas that arise. The attitude is present in those who have experienced and reported
mystical or near-mystical experiences.
Immersion
Newton arrived at the law of gravitation by always thinking about it, and similar feelings 
were reported by Poincaré (1952). Wertheimer ([1945] 1959) writes that Einstein tried 
for years to clarify the relation of mechanical movement to electromagnetic phenomena.
Moreover, as Humphrey (1948) indicates, Gauss had been trying in vain to prove a theorem
for four years when the solution suddenly came to him. In general, the mathematician tends
to get good ideas in mathematics, the musician in music, the psychologist in psychology.
Creative thinking arises more easily in ﬁelds and in relation to problems that we know a good
deal about. However, there is a paradox here, for our knowledge may work against our
creative thinking – we tend not to think about what we know. Existing ideas tend to blind us
to new ones, and it seems that creative ideas do not occur to us unless we spend a great deal
of time and energy engaged in just the activity which makes their emergence most difﬁcult.
The paradox is not easy to solve.
Seeing questions
It is argued that a question requiring an answer can, in fact, limit creative thinking since 
it is unlikely that in our thinking we will go beyond the question before us (Langer, 1942).
Figure 3.3
The conditions of creativity
Utilisation of errors
Conditions of
creativity
Reception
Seeing questions
Immersion
Detached devotion

While a question often limits the kind of answer we obtain, it may be argued also that 
the really creative aspect of problem solving may be more precisely to pose a question 
than to answer one. Alternatively, the task may be viewed to revise a problem with which 
we are confronted in order to see it in a new way or in a broader context. As Wertheimer
([1945] 1959) said: ‘Often in great discoveries the most important thing is that a certain
question is found.’
Utilization of errors
While the goal of problem solving may well be correct solutions, we must recognize the role
of error in helping us to arrive at better solutions. In science wrong hypotheses increase our
knowledge just as much as correct ones. Error can present a new problem and thus stimulate
thought.
Detached devotion
Creative work is full of paradoxes, and none more than the need of the creative thinker to be
both immersed in the problem yet at the same time sufﬁciently detached from it to see it
consistently afresh. One must recognize that very intense motivation to solve a problem may
well impede the problem solving process. Concentrating on the goal to the exclusion of other
relevant aspects of a problem often prevents solution of a problem. The creative thinker must
stand back from the problem so that it can be critically examined and evaluated. It is possible
that a function of the incubation period suggested by Wallas (1926) enables one to achieve that
sufﬁcient detachment.
ORIGIN OF CREATIVITY
There are a number of schools of thought as to the origin of creativity (Henry, 1991): grace,
accident, association, cognitive, personality.
Grace
Creativity is something of a mystery, drawing forth images of wonderful insights, imagina-
tive efforts, illumination and intuitions that come from nowhere. It seems the work of 
magic. The idea of genius may add force to this notion since creative artists, musicians, etc.,
seemed to be endowed with superhuman potential. Creativity in this sense is seen as a 
divine gift.
Accident
This is the opposite of it being a divine gift. It rises by chance. Holders of this view offer 
various types of accidental discovery such as that of immunization arising from an interrup-
tion in work, radioactivity from the wrong hypothesis, and the smallpox vaccination from
observation.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
47

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
48
ACCIDENT AND THE GAINING OF CREATIVE INSIGHTS
After the death of Niépce, his collaborator in research, Daguerre, a decorator and
diorama showman, worked on alone in the search for ways to capture images obtained
through cameras permanently. By the autumn of 1837 he had realized that silver
compounds such as silver nitrate, and particularly silver iodide, possessed the kinds of
properties for which he and Niépce had been searching.
He had put a few plates, which he thought were spoiled because he had not exposed
them long enough, into an old cupboard. After a few weeks he took them out with the
intention of washing them and using them again. To his complete surprise, the pictures
on them were clearly visible. What had occurred? How could the plates have developed
by themselves? He cleared out everything he had stored in the cupboard until it was
empty. There was nothing there to provide any explanation. His curiosity was piqued,
however, and he argued to himself that there must have been something in the cupboard
to account for the apparently inexplicable phenomenon.
Getting down on his hands and knees, he explored the recesses of the cupboard in
detail. There he discovered, in the narrow ﬁssures at the bottom of the cupboard, a
number of glittering balls of mercury which had escaped from a broken bottle.
Immediately he recognized what must have occurred. The silver iodide plates had been
developed by the chemical reaction of the mercury vapour.
Daguerre tested his theory by exposing a new plate for a short time and heating it
over a bowl of mercury in a dark room. The picture appeared as if by magic. Fixing
the plate in sodium sulphate, which dissolved the silver halides, he peered at the ﬁrst
‘daguerreotype’.
Question
‘Accident’ obviously had its role to play in this discovery, but there were other factors,
too. Can you identify these other factors?
Discoveries
Velcro is a Swiss invention dating from 1948. Returning from a day hunting, the
engineer Georges de Mestarl noticed that burdock seedheads clung to his clothing.
Under the microscope he discovered that each of these heads was surrounded by minute
hooks allowing them to catch on to fabrics. It then occurred to him to ﬁx similar hooks
on fabric strips which would cling together and serve as fasteners.
Eight years were needed to develop the basic product: two nylon strips, one of which
contained thousands of small hooks, and the other even smaller loops. When the two
strips were pressed together, they formed a quick and practical fastener. The invention
was named Velcro: from the French velours (velvet) and crochet (hook).

Association
This is the most popular and suggests that applying procedures from one area to another gives
rise to novel associations, and that such associations form the bedrock of creative ideas. The
notion was popularized by Koestler under the term ‘bisociation’, and it underlies the justiﬁcation
for many divergent thinking techniques, such as lateral thinking and brainstorming.
Cognitive
Many inventors work at a problem for years. Research has concluded that ten years of intense
preparation is needed for signiﬁcant creative contributions. Deep thinking about an area over a
long period leaves the discoverer informed enough to notice anomalies that might be signiﬁ cant.
Highly creative people are strongly motivated and seem able to concentrate over a long period.
Personality
Creativity is a state of mind that can be learned. Some people seem to have a facility for it
while others do not, but they can improve with practice. Mental barriers to creativity have to
be removed to allow innate spontaneity to ﬂourish. Creative acts are not isolated acts of
perception; they require an emotional disposition, too, for any new idea replaces and in effect
destroys the previous order. It takes courage and persistence to brave the resistance that any
change seems to engender.
The ﬁve perspectives make some valid points. While not disclaiming the relevance of grace or
personality here, we pay particular credence to accident, association and cognitive theories in
suggesting the framework for creative problem solving, which we develop in this book.
THE COGNITIVE THEORY OF CREATIVITY
Cognitive processes have been a much disputed topic for many years. Various schools of
psychology, the Psychoanalytical, Gestalt and Associative, all have their various perspectives
on the subject. When reading the following it is important to bear in mind the earlier sections
of this chapter which looked at the neuro-physiological structure of the brain and its relationship
to thinking modes.
At the core of the thinking process is memory. It is thought that there may be both long-
term and short-term memory. Short-term memory can hold only a small amount of information
at any one time. Long-term memory, on the other hand, has a vast information-storage
capacity. If we paid attention to all the things our senses are reporting at any particular moment
and took them all into consideration, it would be very hard for us to decide what to do. We
can only hold a few items in our short-term memory, and that is what enables us to focus on
what is important and to act quickly.
Long-term memory may be thought of as being ﬁlled with all the images, sounds, odours
and other types of sensory data in an assembled form and which we hold as a symbolic picture
of our remembered information. Information itself is learned from our experience and stored
in chunks (‘chunking’) along with clues associated with the information.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
49

We can often recall the wanted material by recalling the unwanted accompaniment. The
learned material and the cues form complex networks of information. Thus, when we are
trying to think of objects that might resemble ‘red faces’ we might ﬁnd it easier not to
concentrate our minds upon ‘faces’ but rather to make connections with similar images –
beetroots, the setting sun, etc. From a creativity point of view, it is how we make the
connections along and across the networks that is of interest.
According to the connectionist or parallel distributed processing model proposed by
McClelland (1981), information about people, events and objects is stored in several
interconnected units rather than in a single location. The strength of the connections between
these units increases as a result of learning. Subsequent retrieval of information about a
particular person, event or object involves, gaining access to one or more of the relevant units,
followed by a spread of activation to other relevant units.
One of the general characteristics of connectionist or parallel distributed networks is that
they provide an explanation of the fact that we seem to possess both episodic (or
autobiographical) memories and semantic (or knowledge-based) memories. By way of
illustration, we possess information about several cars with which we are familiar and we also
have knowledge of the general concept of the car. According to McClelland and Rumelhart
(1986), the stimulus word ‘car’ leads to the activation of several units referring to speciﬁc cars,
and averaging process indicates the typical features of cars in general.
The brain as a human information-processing system
The process of thinking effectively means accessing very large volumes of information in long-
term memory via a bottleneck memory space, which takes the form of short-term memory.
While the speed of access to long-term memory is extremely rapid, it appears possible to
consider only small amounts of information at a time. Bottlenecks are symptomatic of inefﬁcient
operation and usually result in a slowdown or cessation of operation if they become overloaded
or choked. This view of the human information-processing system points to limitations in
terms of its efﬁciency. In problem solving or trying to think creatively, we immediately come
up against these limitations. Creative problem-solving aids need to help us circumvent these
difﬁculties if they are to be useful aids to thinking.
Not only is the efﬁciency of the human information-processing system constrained by its
own structure; it is also affected by how people use it. It is thought that through a process of
selective perception or ﬁltering we pay attention to only certain features of things we sense.
The concept of a perceptual ﬁlter is important because of the factors that constrain it – for
instance, beliefs, attitudes, etc. Mindsets may occur because of the various beliefs and attitudes
we hold and the impact they have on our perceptual ﬁlter.
How knowledge is stored in memory
Understanding how knowledge is thought to be stored in human memory enables us to
appreciate how long-term memory may be organized and how the search of long-term memory
may be conducted. Among the earliest ideas on representation were those of Quillian (1968),
who introduced the notion of the semantic network (Figure 3.4). This maintained that
knowledge can be represented by a kind of directed, labelled graph structure in which the basic
structural element is a set of interrelated nodes.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
50

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
51
Semantic network theory has a place in the structure of representation, but it does not allow
one to structure knowledge into higher order representational units. Nevertheless, externalizing
this form of representation can be employed effectively in facilitating creative thinking.
Schemas
It is the major function of schemas to add a structure that allows for the encoding of more
complex relationships among lower level units (see Rumelhart and Norman, 1983). Schemas
are learned as a result of experience and reside in memory to be called upon at any time.
Schemas are packets of information in which there is a ﬁxed part, representing those
characteristics that are always true of exemplars of the concept, and a variable part, which need
not always be true. The schema for the concept of ‘elephant’ would contain constant parts
such as ‘elephant has a trunk’ and variable parts such as ‘elephant can be found in a zoo’.
Variables have default values if the incoming information is unspeciﬁed. Thus, the concept of
‘pensioner’ might have as its ﬁxed part ‘is retired from his or her former occupation’, but
unless the variable ‘age’ is speciﬁed this would default to ‘old’. Schemas can also be embedded
within one another so that a schema consists of a conﬁguration of sub-schemas and so on.
According to schema theory, schemas inﬂuence the way that new information is processed.
The schema that is currently activated guides the selection of what is to be encoded and stored
in memory, so that information relevant to that schema is more likely to be remembered than
non-relevant information. The schema provides a framework within which the information can
be stored and which can be used at retrieval to guide search processes.
Figure 3.4
Semantic network
swim
have fins
food
lobster
water
live in
fish
has
enable it to
can
cat
eats
is an
animal
lives in
is a
is a
is an

Scripts, deltacts and MOPS
Workers in the area of Artiﬁcial Intelligence have made important contributions to cognitive
science. This perspective suggests that we make use of special types of schemas known as
scripts and deltacts (Schank and Abelson, 1977) in dealing with problems. Scripts allow people
to make inferences about a situation and are assembled from smaller data elements called
MOPS (memory organization packets). MOPS serve to organize experiences around essential
similarities, enabling people to recognize old situations in new guises and to draw conclusions.
Scripts are stereotyped responses based on experience. It is argued that, in trying to cope
with a new situation or problem, people try to recall previous ways in which they have dealt
with similar problems – they try to recall a script. A script is an organized memory structure
that describes a suitable sequence of activities to deal with a particular problem or situation.
Scripts guide what people do, think and say. Retrieving an appropriate script from memory
allows people to deal with a situation or a problem in an effective manner.
Schank and Abelson (1977) suggested that people undertake ‘goal directed behaviour’ to
cope with problems or situations where a relevant script cannot be retrieved (i.e. because they
have never learned one in the ﬁrst instance). Discovering the goal may be part of the process,
and sometimes the goal may have to be implied from several aspects of a description. In
addition, one has to ﬁnd a set of ways in which to satisfy the main goal. These take the form
of subgoals and associated plans, which Schank and Abelson (1977) termed ‘deltacts’.
Schank and Abelson (1977) argued that higher level structures, which they termed themes,
serve as nuclei around which goals, plans and scripts are organized. In trying to solve a problem
it is suggested that we organize our thoughts around a theme. For example, imagine that the
boss has decided to remove the opportunity of earning extra money from people working in
an ofﬁce. There are various possible responses that workers could make to this action, but one
theme that could emerge is that of challenging the boss’s authority to prevent people earning
extra money. Scripts, deltacts, etc., would be organized around the theme of ‘challenge
authority’ and, as a consequence, solutions to emerge might be such things as ‘appeal to a
higher authority in the organization’ or even, if it were possible, ‘ﬂout the boss’s authority’.
HOW WE GET IDEAS: THE INDEX METAPHOR
Building on the concept of schemas, scripts, deltacts and themes, we can develop a metaphor
to show how ideas may be generated and the role that creative problem-solving aids can play
in helping the ideas to emerge. This is the index metaphor (Figure 3.5). The index metaphor
supposes that we store all our information, knowledge and experience in a huge ‘mental book’
which has an index and cross-referencing facilities. How we deal with a problem is inﬂuenced
by our perception of it. We take our perceived problem, identify the main theme and look it
up in the index of the ‘mental book’. The index provides us with a number of references to
entries regarding the information we have related to the subject of the problem (schema or
script). It may also be that we do not have any references with respect to the particular
problem. Assuming in the ﬁrst place that there are such references, we look up each of these
references in turn to see whether it provides us with the kind of information that we require
to solve the problem. Sometimes we may be lucky and ﬁnd that a reference (the schema or
script) enables us to ﬁnd an exact solution to the problem. This is either because we have
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
52

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
53
previously successfully tackled and solved the same problem or because we have, at some time,
learned and stored information on how to solve this particular kind of problem.
At other times, when an exact ﬁt cannot be found, there may be cross-references under
various headings (MOPS) in the mental book which enable us to put together sufﬁcient
information (a new schema or script) to solve the problem. The new information (schema or
script) subsequently becomes embedded in memory for future reference. In order to make use
of the cross-references (MOPS) and formulate the new approach (script or schema) we need
to be absolutely clear what it is we are trying to achieve in terms of solving the problem (the
main goal) and what constraints (deltacts) we are working under.
The huge mental book is, of course, being constantly updated with new material and
adjustments made to the index. New cross-references (MOPS) are also entered. A cross-
Figure 3.5
The index metaphor
Problem
Look up the THEME
of the problem in
the INDEX
Stuckness
CPS help
REFERENCES
Possible
cross-references
exist
Solution
found?
Solve
CHECK THEME
IN REFERENCES
Yes
Yes
No
No

reference (MOP) may be entered every time two apparently unrelated, weakly related or
unrelated events seem to have a particular bearing on a particular matter. The cross-references
(MOPS) may fade with time if they are not subsequently reinforced with evidence to support
their usefulness.
Working through the ‘mental knowledge book’ enables us to solve many of the problems
we encounter. Moreover, the speed of access through the index can be very rapid. However,
there are occasions when the use of the ‘mental knowledge book’ may fail us. In the ﬁrst
instance we may be unable to ﬁnd any entry in the index which is helpful. Second, the
complexities of the cross-references may be so large that they exceed the capabilities of our
information processing capacity. In either case we may become stuck on a problem.
It is at this point that creative problem-solving aids can be extremely useful. They force us
to look up entries in our ‘mental knowledge book’ which we would not normally consider
relevant in the search of the index. For these entries there are no existing recognizable cross-
references or, alternatively, the cross-entries are so far down the line of ‘looking up’ that it
would take an immense amount of time and effort to ﬁnd them.
PROBLEM-SOLVING MECHANISMS
A schema develops because it is a useful and efﬁcient mechanism for solving problems. If there
is no problem to be solved, there is no need to give conscious attention to the processing of
information and consequently little need to establish memory links among salient features of
the current experience. A schema is a goal-orientated cognitive mechanism. The goal is to
solve the problem.
A problem can take on a vast number of shapes. It might be a standard problem of the type
one commonly observes in educational settings (ﬁnd this or ﬁnd that). It might be an internally
created problem (‘How can I get to the grocery store, the bank and the cleaners before 5
pm?’). For each problem some action needs to be taken, and in many instances a set of goals
or subgoals needs to be established and procedures need to be identiﬁed for achieving them.
Obviously, some problems are more difﬁcult than others and will require elaborate interfacing
of multiple schema.
The problem-solving function of a schema is supported by the componential structure of
the storage mechanisms. As reported by various researchers, there are many aspects to problem
solving, and these include recognizing the problem, making a mental model that ﬁts the
problem to some internal representation, forming plans for solving the problem and carrying
out the solution. To solve a problem one must ask several questions, such as:
•
What exactly is the problem?
•
Do I have a frame of reference for it?
•
Is it unique?
•
Have I solved any problems that are similar to it?
•
Have I noted all of its critical features?
•
What will I do ﬁrst to solve it?
•
Do I know how to solve it?
•
How will I know when I have found a good solution?
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
54

ANALOGICAL REASONING
Blevins and Blevins (2009) argue that people are constantly looking for patterns in what they
observe and, once they are identiﬁed, they are then related to other patterns they have observed
and employed to predict further patterns and similarities. The analogical reasoning that
underpins them demands the recognizing of structural similarities between what are perceived
to be dissimilar elements. Similarities may be highly abstract, involving functional and causal
relationships.
Gentner and Colhoun (2010) illustrates an example to explain cell metabolism by analogy
with a ﬁre: ‘A ﬁre consumes fuel using oxygen, thereby producing energy; it releases carbon
dioxide and water. Likewise, a cell’s mitochondria obtain energy from glucose using oxygen,
in a process called oxidation.’ In this analogy Gentner ‘highlights the common relational
structure that cell metabolism can be seen as the burning of fuel, and ﬁre as a species of
oxidation. It also invites the (correct) inference that cell metabolism releases water and carbon
dioxide.’ Here a familiar situation, a ﬁre burning, is used as an example by which to understand
and produce inferences regarding an unfamiliar situation, i.e. cell metabolism.
Gentner (2010) posits that there are ﬁve steps one has to follow when undertaking analogical
thinking.
1
Retrieval: accessing a prior similar or analogous example for comparison with the problem
in hand from long-term memory.
2
Mapping: aligning the representational structures to derive the commonalities and projecting
inferences from one analog to the other.
3
Evaluation of the analogy and its inferences.
4
Abstraction of the structure common to both analogs.
5
Re-representation: adaptation or of one or both representations to improve the match.
Retrieval is the most challenging step in the process. There is considerable evidence that
similarity-based retrieval, unlike the mapping process, is more inﬂuenced by surface similarity
than structural similarity. Strong surface similarity and content effects seem to dominate what
is recalled. Thus, too often, analogies may be extracted from long-term memory which are
inappropriate for the problem in hand, while others in long-term memory are overlooked. It
is suggested that one remedy for poor relational retrieval is to make greater use of analogy
during learning and reasoning (Gentner, 2010).
Looking at the creative problem-solving techniques illustrated in this book, it is possible to
recognize that many of them directly employ analogical thinking in one way or another. It can
be appreciated from the foregoing that an appropriate choice of analogy for a problem is critical
to whether the technique is likely to produce any useful insights into a problem. The hope is
that the facilitator in a group session will give some relevant guidance to group members by
suggesting avoidance of analogies that are likely to lead nowhere.
Two systems have been theorized to exist within a person’s cognitive structure (Daugherty
and Mentzner, 2008):
(a) the symbolic system; and
(b) the associative reasoning system.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
55

THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
56
It is argued that individuals store schemata and employed them in both of these cognitive
systems. In the symbolic system we reason about abstract real- world problems and try to solve
them with the aid of symbolic representations and rules. Correspondingly, in the case of the
associative reasoning system we grapple with problems by making associations with other
experiences and information we can recognize or recall. Analogical reasoning is carried out by
the latter reasoning system.
In order to make use of the abstractions and prior instances that make up a schema, the
individual typically must engage in analogical reasoning. An elemental requirement for using
analogical reasoning is that the pieces must ﬁt together in a cohesive pattern. Thus, the cohesion
and connectivity of the schema must come into play.
Analogical reasoning allows the individual to map the current experience on to a template
that has been derived from previous experiences. This template develops as part of the
elaboration knowledge of the schema. The abstractions that are part of the schema make up a
basic part of this template, and the individual either consciously or unconsciously will attempt
to match each of these with some aspect of the current experience. If the abstractions are not
well developed, some or all of the mappings may occur between the memory of a speciﬁc
previous problem, rather than the more general abstract details, and the current problem.
AN ARTIST’S VIEW OF CREATIVITY
‘The method of awakening the Mind to a Variety of Inventions . . . a new kind of
speculative invention, which though apparently triﬂing and almost laughable, is
nevertheless of great utility in assisting the genius to ﬁnd variety for composition. By
looking attentively at old and smeared walls, or stones and veined marble of various
colours, you may fancy that you see in them several compositions, landscapes, battles,
ﬁgures in quick motion, strange countenances, and dresses, with an inﬁnity of other
objects. By these confused lines the inventive genius is excited to new exertions.’
Leonardo da Vinci, A Treatise on Painting
Using analogies in creative problem solving assumes that a problem can be solved with the
help of an already existing solution of another problem. Such a process involves the identiﬁcation
of an analogy and the mapping of knowledge from this on to the current problem. The process
requires the identiﬁcation of both surface similarities and structural similarities between the
focal problem and the analogue problem. Surface similarity describes the resemblance of the
focal problem to the analogue problem while structural similarity may be found if relations
between elements of the analogue problem are similar to relations between various elements
of the focal problem.
Structural similarity is essential if the analogy is to have any value in helping to solve a focal
problem (Blanchette and Dunbar, 2000). The creativity potential of an analogy reﬂects how
dissimilar the knowledge base of the analogy is from that of the focal problem (Dahl and
Moreau, 2002). An analogy taken from a distant domain is much more likely to produce
paradigm stretching or breakthroughs than one from the domain relating to the problem itself.

Substantial paradigm breakthroughs in road transportation, for example, may be more likely
to occur from studying the structure of phenomena in unrelated domains (provided they are
relevant) than they are from looking within the current knowledge domains relating to existing
forms of transportation.
Finding relevant analogies is not always easy. Moreover, even if relevant knowledge is
available, problems may not be solved simply because it is not realized that the existing
knowledge is relevant in the context of the focal problem (Hargadon, 2003). Remote analogies
in apparently unrelated ﬁelds may be difﬁcult to identify because they usually lack surface
similarities that would aid their identiﬁcation. Discovering relevant remote analogies is a
complex search problem and can best be aided by the breadth of experience and knowledge
of those concerned in the problem-solving process.
The importance of ‘relevance’ is made in clear if we look at the logical arguments applied.
A schema for the logic behind analogical inference may be as follows:
•
Objects of type 1 have properties A, B, C, etc.
•
Objects of type 2 have properties A, B C, etc.
•
Objects of type 1 have property X.
•
Therefore: objects of type 2 have property X.
However, to reach such conclusions one has to assess the extent to which the properties 
in the premises are relevant to the property in the conclusion. For example, if one 
assumes that a relevant metaphor for grooming management trainees is ‘caring for young 
plants and encouraging them to blossom into full-grown strong plants’, then one has to 
consider the strength of the analogical argument. Analogical inference may be faulty in several
ways, e.g.
1
One has to be exact about the meaning of ‘relevant’.
2
The logic schema is stated in terms of objects and their properties, hiding the fact that the
helpful analogies need to contain causal relations (Holyoak and Thagard, 1995) and that
these often determine what is relevant.
3
Analogical inference demands a holistic assessment of a potential conclusion with respect
to all relevant information.
Modern opinion about creative thinking suggests that it makes use of knowledge or expertise
(e.g. Rich and Weisberg, 2004) and effective application of both (e.g. Scot et al., 2005). There
are at least three distinct forms of knowledge that might be applied in creative thought:
1
Schematic knowledge (e.g. Ward et al., 2004)
Schematic knowledge reﬂects concepts acquired from past experience (e.g. Sakamoto and
Love, 2004). Concepts comprise categories where each category serves to organize a set of
exemplars of principles or features (e.g. Estes and Ward, 2002) – for example, ﬁsh swim and
have scales. Schematic knowledge also involves the construction of relationships linking different
categories or concepts.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
57

2
Associational knowledge (e.g. Gruszka and Necka, 2002)
Associational knowledge reﬂects regularities in experience based on probabilistic linkages
among stimuli and response event nodes (Estes, 1991) – for example, attending a party is
associated with having fun. These event nodes are organized in a network structure such that
activation of one node serves to activate other related nodes (Boucher and Dienes, 2003).
3
Case-based knowledge (e.g. Scott et al., 2005)
Case-based knowledge entails formation of a mental model describing critical aspects of past
performance events (e.g. Kolodner, 1997) – for example, planning a shopping trip. Thus,
case-based knowledge can be viewed as a form of contextual knowledge that provides a model
for action when people encounter similar situations (Hershy et al., 1990). These cases, as a
form of mental model, represent a complex entity including information about goals, key
actions, outcomes, contingencies, restrictions and potential opportunities (Hammond, 1990).
These cases are held to be stored in a library, which includes both prototypic cases and
noteworthy deviations from this prototype, with cases being indexed against situational
attributes indicating relevance to the situation at hand. The manipulation and rearrangement
of the components of activated cases in this library is, in turn, held to give rise to novel problem
solutions (e.g. Spalazzi, 2001).
How different forms of knowledge might operate together to make creative thought possible
is addressed by Hunter et al. (2008). They argue that previous studies have indicated that
multiple knowledge structures, schema, associations and cases are involved in creative thought,
but few studies have examined how these different knowledge structures operate together in
idea generation and creative problem-solving. They report on a study where they found that
prompting use of a single knowledge structure, speciﬁcally schema or associational knowledge,
resulted in the production of more high quality ideas. However, prompting use of multiple
knowledge structures, speciﬁcally combining either schema or associations with cases, resulted
in the production of higher quality and more original problem solutions. They concluded that
different knowledge structures appear to contribute to creative thought in different ways
depending on whether idea generation or solution formation are under consideration. More
speciﬁcally, when the criterion of concern was idea generation per se, associational or schematic
knowledge appeared more useful than case-based knowledge or various combinations of
knowledge structures.
Apparently, people generate ideas most easily when they can work with a single knowledge
structure that provides a variety of connections or relationships that are not bound to a
particular performance setting. When one considers the quality and originality of solutions to
social innovation problems, however, a rather different pattern of ﬁndings emerged. Although
activation of case-based knowledge did not promote idea generation, it was found to contribute
to the production of original, high quality problem solutions. Solution generation, moreover,
in contrast to idea generation, appeared to beneﬁt from the application of multiple knowledge
structures – speciﬁcally, joint activation of associational and case-based knowledge, and joint
activation of schematic and case-based knowledge.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
58

Analogical reasoning is based on how directly the given problem corresponds to the problem
solver’s schemata (Akin, 2001). Where a problem is ill-deﬁned, the problem solver’s constant
restructuring of the problem is required in the search for an appropriate solution.
QUESTIONS
1
‘There are no theoretical underpinnings to the creative problem solving process.’ Discuss.
2
Explain how the whole brain theory of creativity is linked to the four stages of gaining
creative insights suggested by Graham Wallas.
3
What is meant by receptivity, immersion, seeing questions, utilization of errors and
detached devotion as being the conditions necessary for the gaining of creative insights?
4
How would you reconcile the different theoretical perspectives – grace, accident,
association, cognitive and personality – on creative problem solving?
5
How is the index metaphor a reﬂection of the cognitive approach to creative problem
solving?
6
Differentiate between divergent and convergent thinking. What role do both play in the
creative problem solving process?
7
Critically evaluate Mary Henle’s conditions of creative thinking. Are they supported
anywhere else in other theoretical perspectives? Explain.
8
How relevant is analogical reasoning to creative problem solving? Explain.
9
How relevant are Graham Wallas’s thoughts on the concept of incubation in the context
of modern thinking on how insights are obtained?
10 Explain the investment theory of creativity
11 How would one try to make sure that an analogy one wants to use is ﬁt for the purpose
of gaining insights into a speciﬁc problem?
CASES
Where did they get their ideas from?
While searching for a way to hear the sounds of the heart, Laennec found his answer when he
noticed two boys playing in an unusual way with a see-saw. One was hitting one end of the
wooden see-saw with a stone while the other listened with his ear pressed close to the other
end. The idea of the stethoscope leaped to Laennec’s mind. Westinghouse discovered the idea
of the air-brake when he casually read in a journal that compressed air power was being used
by Swiss engineers in tunnel building. Kekule gained his clue to the nature of the benzene ring
from his dream of a snake swallowing its own tail. Rutherford used the solar system to
understand the structure of the atom. He viewed the electrons as revolving around the nucleus
in the same way that the planets revolve around the sun. Einstein’s theories came from thinking
about about riding on light beams and travelling in lifts.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
59

Question
How might one or more of the theories we have discussed in the chapter explain how the
above insights were obtained?
Paranoia produces progress
Producing the right kind of culture to allow innovation to take place is essential. This is
something that Andy Grove excelled at during his time with Intel. He saw experimentation
and readiness for change as needing to be at the forefront of his managers’ minds at all times.
Indeed, he saw paranoia about these matters as drivers of innovative activity and became known
for his guiding motto: ‘Only the paranoid survive.’ He even wrote a management book with
the same title (Only the Paranoid Survive (1996), Doubleday, p. 65). In his view, ‘Business
success contains the seeds of its own destruction,’ inferring that ‘Success breeds complacency.
Complacency breeds failure. Only the paranoid survive.’ (Jeremy Byman (1999). His message
to senior executives is to allow people to test new techniques, new products, new sales
channels, and new customers, to be ready for unexpected shifts in business or technology
(Industry Week, 15 December 1997, Technology Leader of the Year Andy Grove: Building An
Information Age Legacy, IndustryWeek.com).
Question
How does Andy Grove’s approach ﬁt in with Mary Henle’s ﬁve conditions of creativity?
FURTHER READING
Gentner, D. (2010) Bootstrapping the mind: analogical processes and symbol systems, Cognitive
Science, 34(5): 752–775.
Glausiusz, J. (2009) Distraction, Psychology Today, March/April, 84–91.
Jalil, P. A. (2007) Working memory, cerebellum, and creativity, Institute of Academic Development
and Training, Creativity Research Journal, 19(1): 39–45.
Mostert, N. M. (2007) Diversity of the mind as the key to successful creativity at Unilever, Creativity
and Innovation Management, 16(1): 93–100.
Raichie, M. (2010) The brain’s dark energy, Scientiﬁc American, March, 44–49.
THEORIES OF CREATIVITY
60

61
The chapter concentrates on problem solving issues before going on to look speciﬁcally at
creative problem solving itself. The chapter presents a model of problem solving which is put
together on the basis of searching the literature on the subject. It then goes on to look at the
three types of problems that are encountered and points to how these are tackled in practice.
Ill-structured problems in particular are highlighted since it is these types of problems that are
best suited to creative problem solving. In addition to being ill structured they are often very
complex in nature. After reviewing a common- sense approach to problem solving, the chapter
explains the ideal approach put forward by Bransford and Stein. This background to general
problem solving is then followed by an introduction to the creative problem solving process.
Speciﬁcally, the six-stage process and the nine-stage process of creative problem solving are
examined and the latter illustrated with an example. The chapter then moves on to look at the
important trend towards improvisational creative problem solving, discussing practical and
theoretical issues. Lastly, consideration is given to some of the limitations on formal problem-
solving approaches.
PROBLEM SOLVING
Van Gundy ([1981] 1988: 3) believes ‘a problem can be deﬁned as any situation in which a gap
is perceived to exist between what is and what should be’. Based on this deﬁnition, a problem
solving process is one whereby a situation that is not as it should be is changed into one that
is as it should be.
However, it should be noticed that not all problems require the use of a creative problem-
solving (CPS) process. Indeed, in some cases a CPS process would not be as useful as an
existing routine or ready-made solution. These kinds of solutions generally exist for recurring
problems, and when it is possible to use one it is often much quicker and more practical.
A problem exists when an individual has a goal and a choice of means by which it might be
achieved, but does not know how to proceed immediately. The psychology of problem solving
deals primarily with intellectual problems: those that can be solved mentally or by manipulating
symbols. It uses three principal methods: (1) examining what scientists, mathematicians and
others have said about their own activities; (2) presenting test problems to experimental
subjects, noting the effect of various conditions on the likelihood that the problems will be
Problem solving and
improvisation
Chapter 4

PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
62
solved; (3) asking individuals to ‘think aloud’ as they solve problems, and devising theoretical
models to explain the sequence of steps that typically appears in such reports.
The testimony of scientists and others indicates that the processes of problem solving are
not entirely open to consciousness. One may begin by reasoning consciously and deliberately,
but the solution often comes in its own time, suddenly and ‘out of nowhere’. As noted earlier,
Graham Wallas (1926) described such a problem solving sequence as consisting of four stages:
preparation, in which the individual deﬁnes the problem for himself or herself and explores
various possibilities; incubation, when attention is turned to other things, and the problem
disappears from consciousness; illumination, when the solution suddenly appears; and veriﬁcation,
in which the new solution is checked to see if it will work. Of course, this sequence does not
apply in every case. Moreover, Duncker (1945) noted that every phase of a solution is essentially
a productive reformulation of the original problem.
The mathematician Gyorgy Polya introduced the idea that there are general techniques for
solving problems, which he called ‘heuristics’ – procedures that often help though they cannot
guarantee success. One useful heuristic is working backward from the solution: if the answer
were known, what characteristics would the problem possess? Another important heuristic is
to establish subgoals: think of some situation from which it might be easier to obtain the
solution, and work towards that situation ﬁrst. Still another is means–end analysis: establish
lists of methods that are useful for attacking various kinds of goal or subgoal and work through
the list systematically.
Figure 4.1
Overview of Chapter 4
Problem solving
The problem-solving
process
The problem-solving
process and the
creative process
Models
A common sense
approach to
problem solving
Some limitations on
formal problem-solving
approaches

PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
63
Recent research on problem solving has involved computer programs that enable a computer
to solve difﬁcult problems. If the sequence of steps taken by the machine is similar to the
sequence reported by human subjects who think aloud, the program itself can be regarded as
a theory of the problem solving process. The programs developed go through the same
sequences of steps (and make the same sorts of errors) as people who are thinking aloud; thus
they probably incorporate many of the principles that govern human problem solving.
MODELS
It is useful to put together a general model of problem solving as a prior step to looking at the
process of creative problem solving. Problem solving occurs in a multitude of domains and it
is perhaps not surprising therefore to note that numerous models appear in the literature to
describe the process. In addition, the decision-making literature is also replete with models
reﬂecting interest in the subject in different domains. I have put together the model below
(Figure 4.2) to reﬂect some of the various thoughts and ideas that exist on the matter.
The model indicates that individuals or organizations are constantly scanning their
environments. During the scan process they may detect a problem which they feel merits
attention. The problem can be any one of a number of types.
Types of problems
There are three types of problem.
1
Well-structured – straightforward, familiar to the decision maker, and the goal is clear, the
information about it is complete.
2
Ill-structured – new/and information about such is ambiguous or incomplete.
3
Programmed – where the solution is a repetitive decision that can be handled by a routine
approach (procedure, rule, policy).
The next step is to properly deﬁne the problem before going on to specify and operationalize
the goal that needs to be achieved in order to solve the problem. It is anticipated that there
may be a number of possible solutions to the problem and one will need to have established
decision criteria to enable choice to be made among them. However, it will be necessary ﬁrst
to undertake a search to enable the alternative solutions to be identiﬁed. Search may be made
on an internal or external basis and may be local or distant in nature. Internal search implies
searching people’s memories while external search implies looking further aﬁeld and consulting
papers, books, journals and even consultants. In the case of internal search there is a tendency
to search at a local level or in the area of the problem in the ﬁrst instance since this will produce
solutions quickly if any are to be found. More distant search means looking away from the
immediate problem to see if one can locate anything in another domain that may give an insight
into the problem.

The search should generate alternatives and may be aided by the creative problem solving
techniques in this book in the case of ill-structured problems or by the use of heuristics in the
case of programmed problems. In the latter case there are many different kinds of heuristics
that may be used (see Kahnemann, 2012). Three major heuristics that are used are as follows.
Representativeness
The more object X is similar to class Y, the more likely we think X belongs to Y. People predict
future performance mainly by similarity of description to future results. For example, when
seeking to appoint a new employee’s predicting future performance as a manager based on a
single reference or interview with the person concerned.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
64
Figure 4.2
A model of the problem-solving process
Define the
problem
Specify
goal
Detect a
problem
Scan the
environment
Weight the
criteria
Operationalise
goal
Specify decision
criteria
Undertake
search for
alternatives
Generate
alternatives
Monitor
and
evaluate
the
outcome
Judge
how well
each
alternative
will
produce a
solution
Select most
satisfactory
alternative
Apply
solution
Well-structured,
ill-structured,
programmed
Use logical,
creative, heuristic
approach
Internal
search
Start
Memory/
experience
Documents,
journals,
books,
experts
External
search
Does a solution
exist?
continue to
local/distant
no
yes

Availability
The frequency of a class or event is often assessed by the ease with which instances of it can
be brought to mind. For example, when reviewing the number of expense claims and looking
for ways to reduce them one may more easily recall large claims when these are very much in
the minority and have little impact on the overall total of expenses claimed.
Anchoring
People often estimate by adjusting an initial value until a ﬁnal value is reached. The approach
may characterize wage settlements.
The next step in the process is to judge the most satisfactory solution to the problem,
implement it and monitor how well it serves to provide a solution to the problem. If a
satisfactory solution cannot be identiﬁed, then further search has to be undertaken and the
latter part of the process repeated.
A common-sense approach to problem solving
Common sense would seem to dictate that a systematic approach is by far the best thing to do.
One really has to approach with an eye on the context since the same problem may require 
a different approach in another situation. One only has to think of how one tackles one’s
colleagues about different issues to realize that problem solving is contingency based – that is,
it varies from situation to situation.
Another important point is that one should never rush to conclusions. Although some
problems may seem to require urgent attention it is better to weigh up alternative causes and
outcomes before rushing headlong in. However, if a decision has to be made there and then
at that moment in time, delay may not be possible. Where one has to time to reﬂect for a
period of time before needing to implement a solution it is often quite surprising how what is
done may differ from the initial diagnosis of the problem.
There are usually a number of steps one has to follow when taking a common-sense approach
to solving a problem.
The ﬁrst step is to ensure that one has correctly identiﬁed the problem. This may seem
unnecessary yet too often mistakes may be made because the problem has been wrongly
diagnosed. In the ﬁeld of medicine we sometimes hear of wrongly identiﬁed breast cancers and
subsequent operations which are totally unnecessary. The results of such actions are commonly
quite devastating for the patients. So this is a critical step and needs a great deal of care and
attention.
Sometimes one may see multiple problems in a situation. These may vary in terms of
importance from critical to relatively minor and having only low priority as far as the owner
of the problem is concerned. It is essential to solve the right problem and one should avoid
trying to solve a problem that is seen as low priority or unimportant.
One should seek to identify the problem by asking the right sort of questions or making
best use of one’s own powers of observation. Alternatively, there may be special tools,
procedures, or even skills that one may need to call upon to ensure that no mistakes are made
at this point. In the course of medical diagnosis, for example, GPs conduct initial interview
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
65

and examinations of patients and where they consider it necessary they will refer patients to
specialists who can make expert diagnosis of a problem. The experts in this instance may make
use not only of hi-tech apparatus but also their specialized experience gained through years of
research and previous encounters with similar cases. In a more general sense it is usually
important to explore with the owner of the problem what is leading them to feel there is a
problem. One needs to ascertain whether it is something speciﬁc, or whether it is an intuitive
sense that things aren’t as they should be. Getting the owner of the problem to deﬁne the
problem – with help if necessary – is reassuring for all concerned.
The next step is to analyse the problem. One needs to ascertain how often the problem
occurs. Does it happen regularly or only occasionally? Just how inconvenient or severe is the
problem? Can one identify the circumstances when the problem arises? Is there anything about
these circumstances which is unusual? Answers to these questions might give one a clue
regarding what might be the causes of the problem. Knowing how long it has been going on
and whether it has become worse may also assist in making a correct diagnosis of the problem.
Problems often affect other processes or people, so exploring this angle can also often be
productive in helping to make a correct diagnosis of the problem.
Once these steps have been taken, a decision may need to be made about dealing with the
problem. If there seems to be more than one way of dealing with the problem, then it may be
necessary to identify the alternatives and then specify decision criteria. Where a number of
criteria have to be satisﬁed it will be important to decide how to weigh the criteria.
It is important to have thought through more than one solution to a problem where this is
possible. Terminating the search procedure at the ﬁrst solution that is identiﬁed may be good,
but much better solutions may still exist.
When one is conﬁdent that one has reached a point where there are diminishing returns to
be had from further search it is necessary to evaluate the options that have been identiﬁed.
One needs to assess the advantages and disadvantages of each option carefully.
Finding an optimal solution to a problem may be elusive. In many cases is difﬁcult to
determine with any real degree of certainty whether one has found an optimal solution. Often
it is a case of selecting the most satisfactory solution. This is referred to as satisﬁcing. Such a
solution generally meets all or most of the criteria one has previously set up and scores higher
than any of the other alternatives.
Lastly, one has always to allow for contingencies. Despite one’s best efforts and selecting
a good solution, it may not solve a problem for some reason that one has overlooked. It is
therefore important to have several back-up solutions as well – just in case.
Various approaches of the problem solving process have been proposed and one of these is
shown next.
THE PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS
Bransford and Stein (1993) proposed a model for improving problem-solving skills. It is based
on research in the ﬁeld of problem solving by such people as Wertheimer ([1945] 1959), Polya
(1957), and Newell and Simon (1972). The components of the approach are represented by
the acronym IDEAL, where
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
66

I = Identify problems and opportunities.
D = Deﬁne goals.
E = Explore possible strategies.
A = Anticipate outcomes and act.
L = Look back and learn.
Identifying problems and opportunities
The argument is that one should identify potential problems and treat them as opportunities
to do something creative. It is just as important actively to look for problems as simply to
respond to them when they become critical or when they are noticed. Actually identifying
problems and then treating them as opportunities in the dimension of strategic management
can lead to the establishment of a strong competitive advantage.
Bransford and Stein (1993) quote the example of a friend who for years had never questioned
the fact that he often got splattered with grease when he fried bacon. One day while looking
through a mail-order catalogue he found a device that protects cooks from hot, splattering
grease – effectively a ﬁne wire mesh with handle to place over the frying-pan during cooking.
What impressed their friend more than anything else was not the invention itself but the fact
that someone had actually identiﬁed the problem in the ﬁrst place and viewed it as an
opportunity. The friend had never thought explicitly about the fact that splattering grease
signiﬁed the existence of a problem that, once identiﬁed, might be solved.
Deﬁning goals
Different goals often reﬂect how people understand a problem. For example, the problem of
lack of strategic direction in the business could be identiﬁed. All concerned might agree that
it could represent an opportunity to do something creative. However, people could disagree
on what the goals should be. Some people might argue that the objective of the business should
be growth in one direction while others might argue for growth in another. In each instance
the goals clearly reﬂect how different groups perceive the same problem. Deﬁning the goal is
thus a crucial step in moving towards a solution to a problem.
In practice, people often do not consider alternative goals but move straight to the exploration
of strategies. Under these circumstances, strategies may well be generated which lead to the
solution to a given problem, but deciding which one to choose then becomes a difﬁcult
problem. Moreover, if goals have not been speciﬁed, solution strategies that are generated may
not provide acceptable answers to a problem. A simple illustration is found in the case of a
small ﬁrm wanting to appoint a replacement secretary for the owner of the business. The
former incumbent of the position decided to retire after many years of service. The problem
identiﬁed itself to the owner and he placed an advertisement in the local newspaper for a
replacement secretary. This was done, and in due course six candidates with good secretarial
qualiﬁcations were interviewed for the position. None of them could be appointed because
none of them appeared to be able to do what the managing director was looking for. What he
wanted was someone who could really deputize for him when he was away on business –
clearly not the job for a secretary but, because of years of experience and a willingness to take
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
67

responsibility, one that the previous holder of the post had taken on. What he really wanted
was a deputy and a secretary. Had he deﬁned the goal as having someone who could deputize
for him while he was absent, the solution would have been obvious.
Exploring possible strategies
This involves re-analysing goals and considering options or strategies that might be employed
to achieve those goals. In many instances it is easy to consider all the relevant information
without experiencing a strain on short-term memory capacity. As problems increase in
complexity, this becomes more difﬁcult to do. Experienced problem solvers often keep track
of information by creating external representations. Rather than trying to keep all the
information in their head, they write it down on paper – or in some other medium. This allows
them to think more freely about the problem they want to solve. There are many ways of
recording and analysing a problem: graphs and Venn diagrams are examples; see also mind
maps in Chapters 9 and 10.The most effective way to represent information depends on the
nature of the problem. Hayes (1989) and Halpern (1989) suggested that some problems are
more readily solved if one uses verbal representation whereas others may be better represented
visually or even mathematically. Other additional general approaches, which are good examples,
include: working a problem backwards, or focusing on a simpler, speciﬁc situation, building
scale models or performing experiments that simulate certain characteristics of a real-world
environment.
Although there are general strategies for solving problems, specialized knowledge is often
necessary in some cases. For example, we may know how to set about gathering market-survey
data, but the actual designing of a questionnaire that will enable the data to be collected
requires expert knowledge and skill to construct.
Anticipating outcomes and acting
Following the selection of a strategy, contingency plans should be drawn up and the strategy
implemented. Often, an active role in testing strategies has to be taken before possible outcomes
can be anticipated. The building and testing of a prototype, for example, can often help
anticipate the outcomes of particular strategies.
Looking back and learning
The last component of the IDEAL model is to look at the effects of the particular strategy and
learn from the experience. When trying to solve a problem the emphasis should be on ﬁnding
the ﬁrst step rather than on trying to ﬁnd a complete solution immediately. Having tried out
the ﬁrst step and learned from the experience, one can then proceed to work through subsequent
steps. Test marketing is a case in point, where the launch of a new product is done on a gradual
basis. Any aspects of the introduction that are less than satisfactory are corrected before the
next stage in the roll-out process. Writing and debugging computer programs follows a similar
process.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
68

New insights customarily emerge as a product of various pieces of knowledge becoming
connected for the ﬁrst time (Geschka and Reibnitz, 1983). It tends to be an evolutionary
process where two or more pieces of retained knowledge meld together and then form new
insights. This is also true with breakthrough ideas. The knowledge may reside with different
people and it is only when they come together and share the knowledge that insights arise.
Although an innovation can be based on a new scientiﬁc or technical discovery, the recombining
of knowledge of the nature of innovations is more common (Hargadon, 2002, 2003).
However, ﬁnding a way of melding existing knowledge in the hope of discovering a
breakthrough may require very extensive search. Human mental processes use bounded
rationality, reﬂecting limited cognitive ability, so the ﬁeld of search and extent of search 
is limited (Simon, 1957, 1982, 1996). Since search tends to be local and in the area of the
problem, ﬁnding and retrieving material from very distant domains of knowledge is often
constrained by established thinking patterns. The majority of people have difﬁculty in thinking
outside of their area of original expertise, because this usually requires them to use a different
way of thinking and a different technical language than they are used to (Terninko et al., 1998).
THE PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS AND THE CREATIVE PROCESS
We have suggested earlier in this chapter that problems that are ill-deﬁned or where the route
to ﬁnding a solution is not obvious it may require a creative approach to be taken (Finke et al.,
1992). Clarifying how to resolve a problem involves gaining insight (Mayer, 1995). However,
what is insightful for one individual may not be insightful for another (Davidson, 1995).
Moreover, a problem that is solved creatively by one person may be solved more routinely by
another if the problem solver has had experience with similar problems (Davidson, 1995). It
all depends on the cognitive processes used by the problem solver (Davidson, 2003). When a
problem needs insight it means that the problem solver has to change his or her customary
mode of thinking in order to make sense of it. While such problems may not be commonplace
they tend to have confusing characteristics that make it difﬁcult to access and use prior
knowledge that is relevant to the ﬁnding of a solution. Indeed, their very ambiguity often
produces inappropriate assumptions in interpreting them.
One way of theorizing about problem solving is to see it as involving processing information.
Conceptualizing problem solving in this way, Newell and Simon (1972) argued that it is a
three-stage process.
1
Recognizing the task environment. First, one perceives the events, interprets these events and
recognizes the nature of the task – e.g. notice disquiet in the ofﬁce and see that the task
is to identify how the disquiet can be resolved.
2
Transformation into the person’s problem space. Next one views the task in a speciﬁc way. Here
one has to be quite speciﬁc about the goal – what has to be done, where one stands in
relation to the goal, and what kinds of action are needed in order to reach the goal. For
example, from experience one will know that one cannot jump to any quick conclusions
about the source of the disquiet in the ofﬁce but will know how to set about ﬁnding the
source of the disquiet.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
69

3
Processing the data and moving towards the goal. Depending on how the problem space has
been conceived, one uses various kinds of information given with the problem or drawn
from memory to process the data so as to move towards the problem solution. For
example, in the illustration one will have had experience of diagnosing problems of unrest
in the ofﬁce and will be able to call upon this experience along with information noted
which is speciﬁc to the current situation.
In the course of working through the above steps – called ‘following the programme’ – the
problem solver will notice whether any of the steps or series of steps he or she makes reduces
the distance to the goal – i.e. resolving or solving the problem. If this seems to be the case,
then the problem solver will continue with that line of enquiry. If the steps do not seem to be
productive, then alternative steps will be followed. Progress and search for solutions are
related to constant feedback of information obtained from people and objects in the problem
situation. If the entire search programme fails to achieve the objective, then the problem solver
either quits, or modiﬁes the programme, or changes the problem space.
The conclusion that might be drawn from the analysis offered by Newell and Simon is that
problem solving involves the search for the most successful programmes. However, as Minsky
(1974) argues, successful problem solving may not so much be a search for a successful
programme as a search for the best problem space. It would seem, however, that both are
required to increase the likelihood of ﬁnding good solutions to problems.
Success in ﬁnding solutions to problems will be enhanced by:
1
Correct perception of the task environment – positive mindset.
2
Correct speciﬁcation of the problem space – creative problem solving techniques may help
with this.
3
Having sufﬁcient but not too much information to assimilate. More or better information-
gathering procedures or the use of creative problem solving methods may assist in this
case, too.
Insights and how they arise
One might, indeed, think of ideas as ‘the sentences of thought’. Ideas are mental phenomena
that somehow drift into the mind, wander through and often vanish into obscurity, never to
be recalled again. Making notes on ideas as they arise is extremely important. Graham Wallas
(1926) tells the story of a man ‘who had so brilliant an idea that he went into his garden 
to thank God for it, and found on rising from his knees that he had forgotten it, and never
recalled it’.
In terms of problem solving we might prefer to think of ‘insights’ rather than ideas. The
gaining of insights into a problem can lead to a restructuring of that problem and the development
of further insights into the solution of the problem. There may not be a perfect solution to a
problem that requires creative thought but only different solutions, more acceptable solutions
and, often, only further insights into a problem.
Many ideas seem to occur by chance. Fleming discovered the effects of penicillin quite by
accident – it was blown in from an open window and killed bacteria in a saucer that contained
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
70

a strain he was investigating. However, generating ideas is not just a chance process. Ideas
appear to arise by chance only when people are actually looking for ideas. It does not happen
to people who are not curious or enquiring or who are not engaged in a hard search for
opportunities, possibilities, answers or inventions.
It is also widely recognized that immersion in one’s subject matter can be an important
factor in gaining creative insights. Newton, for example, arrived at the law of gravitation by
being preoccupied with the problem all the time. It is also known that Einstein tried for years
to clarify the problem of the relation of mechanical movement to electromagnetic phenomena.
Creative insights appear to be easiest to gain in ﬁelds where we have considerable prior
knowledge and experience. Nevertheless, there is a paradox here, for we tend not to think
about what we think we know already. Existing ideas tend to make us myopic about new
possibilities. The paradox reveals itself in that it appears that creative ideas do not come to us
unless we spend much effort engaged in just the activity which makes their emergence most
difﬁcult.
Motivation also plays an important role in our ability to be creative. Again there is a
paradox, for creative work demands both a passionate interest on the part of the thinker and
a certain degree of detachment from the work and ideas. Creative thinking, however, does not
appear to occur where the individual’s interest in the subject matter is relatively low. There
seems to be a delicate balance whereby the creative thinker has to remain sufﬁciently detached
from the work.
Byrne et al. (2009) argue that creative work can occur in any job that involves a particular
kind of task. They suggest that task must present complex, ill-deﬁned problems where successful
performance depends on the generation of novel, useful solutions. In this context the capacity
to identify problems and opportunities is one of the most important steps in the creative
process. The art of deﬁning and redeﬁning one’s goals is particularly important since different
goals suggest different lines of thought and have a powerful effect on the solution strategies
that are considered. The anticipate-and-act phase of the IDEAL model can help us uncover
inappropriate assumptions that may be limiting the creativity of our thinking. Functional
ﬁxedness and mindset prevent people from solving a problem because they assume it requires
routine thinking. Long-term efforts to enhance creativity will not be successful unless one
looks at the effects of one’s actions and tries to learn from them.
It is generally accepted that the creative problem solving process can be broken down into
six stages. These six stages are:
•
Objective ﬁnding – deﬁne the problem area.
•
Fact ﬁnding – gather information.
•
Problem ﬁnding – deﬁne the problem correctly.
•
Idea ﬁnding – generate solutions to the problem.
•
Solution ﬁnding – evaluate and choose between possible solutions.
•
Acceptance ﬁndings – implement chosen ideas correctly.
(Parnes, 1992)
Each of these stages involves activities that require ﬁrst divergent thinking and then convergent
thinking. When thinking in a divergent way, the task is to generate as many ideas and solutions
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
71

PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
72
as possible. There should be no limits to the ideas that are formed at this stage. Once a
satisfactory level of ideas has been reached, convergent thinking must take place. The purpose
of this thinking is to focus on obtaining solutions to the problem based on the ideas from 
the divergent thinking. These activities can be thought of as ﬁlling a funnel with ideas that 
go through a ﬁlter. Plenty of ideas are poured in, but only those that are useful and relevant
come out.
The six-stage process may be extended by the addition of further stages:
•
constantly analysing the environment;
•
specifying assumptions;
•
controlling to ensure that objectives are achieved post-implementation.
THE SIX STAGES OF THE CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING
PROCESS
The six stages are ‘objective ﬁnding, fact ﬁnding, problem ﬁnding, idea ﬁnding, solution
ﬁnding, acceptance ﬁnding’. Within each stage both divergent and convergent thought
processes are used: essentially this is the search for data and then the narrowing down
of data. During the convergence, ‘one looks for material which is either very close to
the point of issue or close enough to warrant further consideration’. Speciﬁc items that
are identiﬁed as important or relevant to a particular stage are known as ‘hits’.
Clusters of ‘hits’, which are related to one another, are known as ‘hotspots’.
The objective-ﬁnding stage essentially involves divergent thinking to generate a list
of problems. Convergence is then used to identify the most relevant problem areas for
further exploration. ‘Hits’ and ‘hotspots’ are identiﬁed by questioning ownership (is
one motivated to solve it), priority (how important is the problem) and critical nature
(how urgent is it to solve this problem).
Next is the fact-ﬁnding stage, where overall comprehension of the problem is
increased by collection of relevant information. This also helps new ideas to be
generated. ‘Hits’ and ‘hotspots’ can assist convergence here. The previously identiﬁed
problem(s) may now be seen from a new perspective.
Problem ﬁnding essentially uses the previous-stage ‘hits’ to identify the most
productive problem deﬁnition possible.
Idea ﬁnding helps to structure the search for potential solutions. Mainly divergent
activity is used to generate many ideas using a variety of idea-generation aids.
Solution ﬁnding is basically the choice of ideas that can be transformed into
workable solutions.
The ﬁnal stage of acceptance ﬁnding is primarily a divergent activity that helps to
implement solutions successfully via:
1
listing potential implementation obstacles and ways to overcome them;
2
developing both preventive actions and contingency plans;
3
generating an action plan to implement a solution.

The extended process is shown above.
It is not always necessary to execute the entire process. Each stage is individual, and in many
circumstances some of the stages need not be implemented. For instance, it is very often the
case that we are presented with a problem without having to look for one, or sometimes the
best solution is easily apparent without the need to evaluate all the ideas.
Example of the nine stages approach
1
Salesmen of ﬁrm X regularly feed back information regarding competitors’ activities in
the marketplace.
2
New competitor is reported to be operating in some areas. Salesmen report that some
action may be necessary to prevent the loss of substantial numbers of customers to the
new entrant to the market.
3
Further reports indicate that the new competitor is a large multinational company wanting
to muscle in on the rapidly expanding demand from customers for the ﬁrm X’s main line
of business.
4
Further research shows that the new entrant is likely to be able to offer the products at
substantially lower prices than it costs ﬁrm X to make them.
5
Firm X executives assume that the new competitor may seek to undercut ﬁrm X on price
by around 5 per cent.
6
Firm X executives decide not to compete on price since they feel a price war would be
disastrous under the circumstances. Alternative courses of action are:
(a) Do nothing.
(b) Offer larger discounts for big orders and/or early settlement of invoices.
(c) Seek to differentiate the product through marketing communications via distributors
stressing the difference of ﬁrm X’s product from that of the new competitor in being
able to satisfy customer wants and needs.
7
Combination of options (a) and (b) above selected as the most satisfactory solution.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
73
A NINE-STAGE PROCESS FOR CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING
1
Constantly analysing the environment to ﬁnd potential problems.
2
Objective ﬁnding – deﬁne the problem area.
3
Fact ﬁnding – gather information.
4
Problem ﬁnding – deﬁne the problem correctly.
5
Specifying assumptions.
6
Idea ﬁnding – generate solutions to the problem.
7
Solution ﬁnding – evaluate and choose between possible solutions.
8
Acceptance ﬁnding – implement chosen ideas correctly.
9
Controlling to ensure that objectives are achieved post-implementation.

PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
74
8
Informing salesmen and distributors of the proposed strategy and securing their cooperation
to implement the response.
9
Monitoring how successful the chosen response is in the light of subsequent performances
by ﬁrm X and the new competitor in the marketplace.
COMPOSITIONAL AND IMPROVISATIONAL CREATIVITY
The idea of ‘emergent’ strategy was put forward by Rosabeth Moss Kanter (1983). Based on
empirical research she promoted the ‘improvisational’ model whereby improvisers invent
strategy by exploring new possibilities they create as they interact with their audience. Speedy
response is more important than early perfection. Many problems that occur do require instant
and immediate attention. Under these circumstances an immediate response is required. An
aggressive and frustrated customer exhibiting threatening behaviour is a case in point. Usually,
most organizations will have set procedures laid down for dealing with such situations and
similar ones as well. However, there may be times when problems that arise are totally
unexpected and not anticipated. In such situations one may be called upon to improvise a
solution. By and large organizations will try to anticipate as many of these situations as possible
and will have set down set procedures for dealing with them. However, even in anticipated
situations something may arise that had not been foreseen. Disasters involving nuclear power
statins are a case in point. Terrorist attacks on buildings are another example. But even in the
run-of-the-mill operation of business the unexpected may raise itself without prior notice.
Such situations may require new insights to be generated very rapidly. Improvisation facilitates
problem solving when time is of the essence (Vendelo, 2009), or when it is essential to
implement solutions quickly (Leybourne and Sadler-Smith, 2006).
Nor are emergencies the only occasion where improvisational creativity can prove useful.
Indeed, quick innovative decisions enable ﬁrms to be competitive (Tellis et al., 2009). While
being market oriented and designing products and services that are well researched and
information based is extremely important, a combination of planning and improvisation is even
more so. The speed of getting new products and other product innovations to market can be
of the essence in establishing a competitive advantage. While the test marketing of new ideas
is traditionally advocated to safeguard against avoidable commercialization blunders, ﬁrms
often bypass this activity fearing competitors’ use of reverse engineering to quickly produce
competitive offerings themselves. Competitors are quick to improvise and imitate each other’s
offerings in the marketplace.
Improvisational creativity is a strategic tool that can be employed widely in business to good
effect. Its use in exporting is a good example of this. A study (Nemkova et al., 2012) argues
that export improvisation is extremely common and used to advantage when implemented in
conjunction with planning. This study suggests that this is commonplace within export
departments, and that exporters have potentially much to gain from understanding improvisation
and using it alongside traditional export planning.
Fisher and Amabile (2008) distinguish between compositional creativity and improvisational
creativity. The former is conceptualized as being the standard view on creativity and reﬂects
the manifestation of creativity in organizations in the form of such processes as new product

PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
75
PROBLEM SOLVING AND DECISION MAKING IN A CRISIS
In real life we ﬁnd that the identiﬁcation of one problem often leads to the need to identify
others that are associated with it. We ﬁnd that we may have not just to solve one problem
and make one decision but we have to deal with the other associated problems and
decisions, too. Moreover, the problems are often interdependent and how we try to solve
one will affect how we try to solve the others. Consider the following situation.
Oldenborough is a city of some 600,000 people in the north of England. It is
surrounded by moorland punctuated by valleys that cut into the hillsides of the moors.
In the past the rivers that run through several of the valleys have been dammed to create
reservoirs for the expanding city. All the reservoirs lie within four miles of the city
centre. The dams are regularly inspected to ensure that they are structurally sound and
that the sluice gates work effectively.
John Broadhurst is in charge of the inspection team and on this occasion around
9.00am one day in January is inspecting the large Olden Valley dam, which holds over
600 million gallons of water. There have been some very heavy gales overnight and
waves on the surface of the water have been whipped up very high. As he reaches the
centre of the dam he notices a crack about 5in wide running horizontally for about 15yd
along the surface of the dam some 20ft below the top of the dam wall. Since it is the
middle of winter he assumes it has probably been caused by frost – it has been an
exceptionally cold winter.
His assistant, Lucy Braid, suggests that it might be worth opening the huge sluice
gates at the bottom of the dam to lower the level of the water in the dam just as a
precaution while he has time to make a better assessment of the crack that has appeared.
John agrees and orders other member of his team to get across to the dam as soon as
possible to do this. The weather is brewing up for a storm and heavy rain is expected
to fall locally within the hour. By 9.15am the sluice gates are fully open and water is
starting to pour out through them. At 9.30am heavy rain starts to fall, and weather
forecasters predict that it will be a strong, slow-moving storm, which will produce heavy
rain.
John puts one of his men on the dam to watch for and report any problems. The man
sees water pouring a good 3ft over the overﬂow channel. By 1.00pm, 6in of rain have
fallen over the previous three and a half hours. The water level in the dam has fallen
but the crack John noticed earlier has now doubled in length and seems to be around
7in wide. Several other smaller cracks have also now appeared. John estimates that the
reservoir is still holding over 90 per cent of the volume of water it had at 9.00am.
Questions
• What do you see as the central problem?
• What decision points did you identify in the case study?
• How might early decisions affect later decisions?
See Appendix 2 for author comments.

creation. In other words, where there is a planned process whereby an idea is taken through
step- by-step stages of development. Improvisational creativity, on the other hand, occurs more
spontaneously and usually in response to crises and unexpected opportunities. It is reﬂective
of the musical situation where improvisation differs from composition. The development of
improvisational creativity in the organizational context is seen to be aided by having available
the relevant expertise, creativity relevant processes (such as responsiveness to temporally
proximate stimuli and risk orientation), intrinsic motivation (seeing it as a positive opportunity)
and a work environment that favours ﬂexibility and experimentation.
As noted above, improvisational creativity requires expertise (Weisberg, 1999). This implies
having knowledge acquired from experience or in some other way that can be quickly accessed
to provide the required skills to improvise quickly in a situation. Having the knowledge and
an efﬁcient and effective means of accessing the knowledge are thus key elements of the
process. Clearly, these are also important characteristics of compositional creativity, too, but
in the case of improvisational creativity time constraints and perceptual acuity may constitute
effective barriers to its effective exposition. In other words, time pressures and the inability
to respond to critical considerations may stymie the development of potentially beneﬁcial
opportunities that can be capitalized on by improvised creative thinking.
Greve (2008) argues that creativity depends on opportunities that arise from a conjunction
of social networks and knowledge development that create opportunities to create technologies.
Set networks are seen to open opportunities for creative minds to interact with others and
combine resources to create new technologies. In a more general setting, Castells (2000)
argues that modern societies are inﬂuenced both by new forms of communicating and networking
provided through the Internet and traditional cultural, religious, social, economic and political
factors. He argues that modern society is a network society comprising social networks that
process and manage information using electronic-based technologies and face-to-face encounters.
The creative problem solving techniques suggested in this book, along with the notions of
approaching management problems with a creative outlook as suggested in Lateral Thinking
for Management by Edward de Bono (see Chapter 8), may help managers to take advantage 
of situations that can beneﬁt from improvisational creativity.
SOME LIMITATIONS ON FORMAL PROBLEM-SOLVING 
APPROACHES
As we have seen in this chapter, problem solving techniques specify a series of steps that have
to be taken in order to arrive at a solution to a problem or to generate insights into it. The
steps follow the pattern of:
•
Deﬁne the problem.
•
Determine what factors inﬂuence the observed dysfunction.
•
Specify possible options that will provide a solution.
•
Decide what options will be acted upon.
•
Determine the preferred contingency plan.
•
Carry out the chosen action.
•
Monitor the results.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
76

In practice, however, problem solving is not usually quite so linear in nature. It is
commonplace for there to be detours, dead ends, reiterations, jumps and so forth in the path
from problem to solution (Isaksen et al., 1994). Such occurrences are almost inevitable and
are to be expected – they are a normal part of the process. Formal techniques need to be
adapted to be ﬂexible enough to cope with such diversions. Indeed, in an organizational setting
formal methods can be an excellent tool to employ. Many problems situations seem initially
so complex and difﬁcult to get a handle on. The formal approach enables one to get on with
problem solving straight away. In modern organizations where working in groups is the norm,
formal methods enable everyone to follow what is going on and how much progress is being
made.
The context of problem solving
Where the problem solving process seems to fall down is that the most frequent cause is not
in the problem solving effort itself, but rather in the critical steps that lead up to the problem
solving (Talley, 2013). The critical steps concerned involve:
(a) identiﬁcation of what issues are to be considered as ‘problems’ to solve;
(b) exploring and ﬁnally deciding on how to think about the problem;
(c) assigning responsibility, naming the team, allocating resources, setting the schedule
and naming key stakeholders;
(d) the actual effort to solve the problem, understand its cause, design some corrective
action, and implement the solution.
(Talley, 2005)
Talley (2013) states that after observing hundreds of problem solving efforts in a wide
variety of settings he has found the most common ‘problem solving discussion’ is actually a
debate over proposed solutions. One has to be aware of the hazards faced in such a situation.
These are aptly summarized in the phenomenon of the Abiline Paradox and Other Meditations on
Management (Harvey, 1996) where groups in organizations take actions in contradiction to what
they really want to do and therefore defeat the very purposes they are trying to achieve.
Symptoms of the paradox include the inability to manage agreement and not the inability to
manage conﬂict. This is reﬂected in organization members individually agreeing in private
about the nature of the situation or problem facing the organization and what steps would be
required to cope with the situation or problem. However, the group members do not accurately
communicate their desires and/or beliefs to one another, thereby leading one another into
misperceiving the collective reality. Under such circumstances group members make collective
decisions that lead them to take actions contrary to what they want to do.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
77

QUESTIONS
1
Using the common-sense approach to problem solving, show how you would deal with
the following situations:
(a) Major ﬁre on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of a ﬁve-storey ofﬁce block.
(b) Discovery of irregularities in expense claims of several of the ﬁrm’s travelling sales
staff.
(c) Several cases of sexual harassment in the ofﬁces by departmental managers.
(d) Finding new ofﬁces for an expanding back ofﬁce of employees.
2
How does the procedure recommended by the Bransford and Stein model differ from the
common-sense approach?
3
Repeat the exercise in question 1 using the nine-stage process for creative problem 
solving. What differences do you notice?
4
The formal problem solving process seems to be too simplistic a view of what actually
takes place in reality. Can you account for this? Explain.
5
How can managers improve their improvisational creativity to deal with the 
unexpected?
Write about a problem that illustrates the points regarding where the problem solving
process often appears to fall down.
6
Suggest how improvisation may be used to advantage in implementing business 
strategies.
7
Why should a debate over proposed solutions to a problem be a source of difﬁculty?
CASES
Pink skirts
A manufacturer has had to stop production of skirts because there is no place to store them.
The problem is caused primarily by the fact that there is a large stock of unsold pink skirts that
have been in the warehouse for a considerable amount of time taking up costly space. The ﬁrm
has considered ﬁnding extra premises for storage but this does not really solve the problem.
The pink skirts – 350,000 of them – cost around £5 each to produce. This means that not only
is the ﬁrm having critical storage problems but it has around £1.75 million tied up in stock.
The problem is so acute that immediate remedying of the situation is essential.
Question
What action should the ﬁrm take?
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
78

Ideas wanted
Large companies may tighten payment terms and order small suppliers to give a rebate from
the value of invoices when business is generally not buoyant. This can create hard feelings and
create bad press. Can you think up alternative ways of dealing with hard times that large
companies can adopt to avoid having to act in this way?
Ideas wanted
How might town centres develop ‘personalities’ of their own to attract shoppers away from
retail parks and large purpose-built, out-of-town shopping centres?
Ideas wanted
It is well known in some circles that small children often enjoy playing with the boxes that
toys and games are packaged in just as much as with the toys themselves. Suggest ways in which
manufacturers might capitalize on this.
Ideas wanted
Luxury brands and high street chains are investing in e-commerce and are building a presence
on sites such as Twitter, Pinterest, Tumblr and Facebook. A number of large well-known
retailers are also doing this. Suggest ways in which small businesses might may good use of the
Internet to build up their businesses.
Ideas wanted
It is believed by many that if staff believed their ideas for improving their businesses were
properly considered by management, this would have a substantial positive effect on the
growth of a country’s economy. Suggest how businesses might set about engaging better with
their workers to bring this about.
Ideas wanted
It is thought that 75 per cent of families throw away the equivalent of a meal every ﬁve days
by preparing too much. Suggest ways of dealing with this problem.
Ideas wanted
A new report from IKEA has ﬁgures showing that more than half-a-million UK homes 
have three generations living under one roof, a substantial rise in just ﬁve years. Suggest what
ramiﬁcations this might have for business and society in general.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
79

Ideas wanted
Patients often ﬁnd out-patient clinics difﬁcult to navigate. Passing through the system, they
may see different members of staff in a number of locations. This leaves some people isolated
or confused, contributing to a poor patient experience. Suggest ways of dealing with these
issues.
Assignment
Use one of the approaches suggested in the chapter to come up with possible ideas.
The ofﬁce
Costs in the ofﬁce were getting out of control and the company appointed a new ofﬁce manager
to identify and sort out the problems. Her task was to put together a report for senior
management outlining how she thought the ofﬁce could be made a more cost-effective unit.
The company had recently equipped the ofﬁce with a network of computers to facilitate more
efﬁcient operations but software problems and difﬁculties in transferring information from the
old to the new system had been been a regular occurrence.
The new ofﬁce manager asked for a breakdown of costs involved in running the ofﬁce and
identiﬁed that most of the costs in the department were attributable to staff salaries. Over the
past ﬁve years there had been an upward trend in the total salaries bill brought about by more
junior full-time members of staff receiving incremental payments as they moved up the salary
scale. Several members of staff were near retirement age and it occurred to the ofﬁce manager
that if these staff were to take early retirement, then more junior replacements might be found
and this in turn could have a substantial impact on the salaries bill and hence on the costs of
running the ofﬁce.
The volume of work passing through the ofﬁce showed evidence of building up substantially
over the past couple of years and it was anticipated that this would increase well into the
foreseeable future. The company was expanding its sales and the knowledge possessed by the
ofﬁce was considered an asset to the company in performing good customer relationship
management.
People in the ofﬁce worked a 35-hour week and the company prided itself on being able to
offer a family friendly employment contract to all its employees where this was required and
operated a company-wide policy of ensuring that staff could have ﬂexible working hours. It
also employed teleworking and hot-desking as mechanisms for employing part-time and
specialist staff who worked very short numbers of hours.
Question
What do you think the new ofﬁce manager could have done to tackle the problems that
exist?
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
80

FURTHER READING
Byrne, C. L., Mumford, M. D., Barrett J. D. and W. B. Vessey, (2009) Examining the leaders of
creative efforts: what do they do, and what do they think about? Creativity and Innovation
Management, 18(4).
Fisher, C. and Amabile, T. (2008) Creativity, improvisation and organisations. In T. Rickards, 
M. A. Runco and S. Moger (eds) The Routledge Companion to Creativity, London: Taylor &
Francis.
Vendelo, M. T. (2009) Improvisation and learning in organizations – an opportunity for future
empirical research, Management Learning, 40(4): 449–456.
PROBLEM SOLVING AND IMPROVISATION
81

82
Use of the techniques outlined in this book needs some explanation as to their suitability both
for people and problems. Not everyone is likely to feel too comfortable using some of the
techniques and there are good reasons for this. In addition, some of the techniques are more
suitable for speciﬁc types of problems than others. In this chapter we examine some of the
main thoughts that address these issues. We look at:
(a) How an individual’s characteristics and modes of thinking and learning may impact on
their use of techniques in the creative problem solving process. This is also extended to
the group situation.
(b) Which techniques are most suitable for solving different types of problems.
We note that divergent thinkers are more likely to be able to participate in sessions making
use of paradigm stretching and paradigm-breaking techniques, and that convergent thinkers
will be less at home in doing so. The chapter makes use of the ideas on Thinking Style put
forward by Michael Kirton, Learning Style put forward by David Kolb, and the general theories
relating to personality developed by Carl Jung, and further developed and used by Katherine
Cook Briggs and Isabel Briggs Myers. We also note that within the context of ill-structured
problems there are those that can be approached by using paradigm methods, those that beneﬁt
from paradigm-stretching methods and those that beneﬁt from paradigm-breaking approaches.
The situation, however, is complex and there are some overlaps in suitability among the
approaches. Group dynamics are also important and attention needs to be given to whom to
include in group problem-solving techniques since this can have a considerable inﬂuence on
the outcomes of the interaction that takes place. This chapter sets us up to examine each of
the stages in the creative problem solving process that are developed in the following chapters
in the light of how individuals might react to the methods explored in them.
WHAT HELPS PEOPLE GET IDEAS
People who are good at intelligence tests have been shown to have large working memories.
This does seem to lead to the suggestion that they are also better at coping with complex
problem solving and handling the more sophisticated techniques. However, measures of
intelligence do not explain creative ability. Efforts have been made to establish the links
Factors inﬂuencing 
people’s ability to 
undertake ideation
Chapter 5

PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
83
between measures of intelligence and highly productive creative thinking, but measures of
intelligence themselves are insufﬁcient to explain it. Psychologists reached the conclusion that
creativity is not the same as intelligence. A person can be far more creative than he or she is
intelligent, or far more intelligent than creative. Highly productive creative thinkers form
more novel combinations than the merely talented and they seem to possess the ability to make
juxtapositions between dissimilar subjects. It is a facility to see things to which others are blind.
Most people, given data or some problem, can work out the conventional response.
Typically, people think reproductively – that is, on the basis of similar problems encountered
in the past (see Chapter 3 for the development of this notion). When confronted with problems,
we make use of previous experiences and apply a method or approach that has worked before.
If there is more than one such approach, we select the most promising and work within a
clearly deﬁned direction towards the solution of the problem. This can lead us to become too
certain of the correctness of our conclusion and to develop mindsets (see Chapter 2).
Experience indicates that highly productive creative thinking is generated by thinking
productively, not reproductively. When confronted with a problem, people thinking in this
fashion look at a problem from many perspectives and search for many different ways of solving
the problem. They come up with many different ideas, some of which are quite unconventional
and often unique.
With productive thinking, the aim is to generate many different approaches. The least
obvious must be considered as well as the most likely approaches. It is the willingness to
Figure 5.1
The factors inﬂuencing people’s ability to undertake ideation
Size of working
memory
State of
concentration
Happiness
Sadness
Anger
Anxiety
Mood or
emotions
Personal
characteristics
Personal interaction
with others 
Improvisation
ability
Beliefs,
attitudes, perceptions,
learning, motivation
Individual
Innovator
Adaptor
Paradigm
preserving
Paradigm
breaking
Paradigm
stretching
Type of
problem
Suitability for
solution by approach
suggested see
Ross
Availability of
people for ideation
Circumstances
What factors
influence ability to
undertake ideation
Group
Time
pressure
Thinking/
learning style
Constructive
criticism
Debate and
dissent
Make up
of group
Sharing information
across diverse fields
Politics, dominance,
cohesion, etc.
Kirton, Kolb and
Myers Brigg

explore different approaches that is important, even after a promising one is discovered.
Reproductive thinking, on the other hand, can produce too rigid thinking. This can produce
an inability to solve a problem that resembles past experiences only in some ways. Interpreting
such a problem through past experience will, by deﬁnition, not be productive. Reproductive
thinking produces solutions that we have employed before and not original ones.
It is important to appreciate how highly productive creative thinkers generate so many
alternatives and conjectures, and why many of their ideas are so rich and varied. Highly
productive creative thinking is often generated by ﬁnding a new perspective that no one else
has taken. The ﬁrst step is to restructure a problem in many different ways. The ﬁrst way one
looks at a problem may be too biased by the way in which one usually views matters.
Restructuring takes place by looking at a problem from one perspective and then moving on
to another perspective and then still another. With each move, understanding deepens and one
begins to understand the essence of the problem. In order to ﬁnd creative solutions, one may
have to abandon the initial approach that stems from past experience and reconceptualize the
problem. By adopting more than one perspective, highly productive creative thinkers solve
existing problems and even identify new ones.
It would be useful to understand the thinking processes that were involved in producing the
Mona Lisa, as well as the ones that produced the theory of relativity. It would be more than
useful to appreciate what characterizes the thinking strategies of people such as Einstein,
Edison, Leonardo da Vinci and Mozart. It is possible that highly productive creative thinkers
form more novel combinations than merely talented individuals. If one particular style of
thought stands out about highly productive creative thinking, it is the ability to make connections
or associations between dissimilar subjects. It is a facility to see things to which others are blind.
Leonardo da Vinci forced a relationship between the sound of a bell and a stone hitting water,
enabling him to make the connection that sound travels in waves. Samuel Morse was trying to
work out how to produce a telegraphic signal strong enough to be received coast to coast. One
day he saw tied horses being exchanged at a relay station and forced a connection between
relay stations for horses and strong signals. The solution involved giving the travelling signal
periodic boosts of power. Nickla Tesla forced a connection between the setting sun and a
motor that made the AC motor possible by having the motor’s magnetic ﬁeld rotate inside the
motor just as the sun (from our perspective) rotates.
The ability to tolerate ambivalence between opposites or two incompatible subjects is
thought to characterize highly productive creative thinking. Edison’s invention of a practical
system of lighting involved combining wiring in parallel circuits with high-resistance ﬁlaments
in his bulbs, two things that were not considered possible by conventional thinkers at the time.
Because Edison could tolerate the ambivalence between two incompatible things, he could see
the relationship that led to the breakthrough.
This may result in the belief that some people are creative and others are not. However, in
reality it may simply be a sign of blocked thinking which can be thought of as a strategic block
(see Chapter 2).
Moreover, growth and survival can be related directly to an organization’s ability to
undertake innovative management. To accomplish this, the modern organization has a need
for creative thinking in its approach to problem solving and decision making. Put simply,
creativity in management involves coming up with new perspectives and insights. However,
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
84

this may not be as simple as it might seem. As we noted in Chapter 2, an over-emphasis on
managerial control can stiﬂe creativity since autonomy and a degree of freedom are critical
ingredients of creative thinking. There may also be a tendency to over-analyse ideas to the
extent that nothing is ever properly resolved into a satisfactory outcome or decision. However,
sometimes executives may experience an inability to come up with insights, or coming up with
ideas that cannot be implemented.
THE TECHNIQUES
One of the earliest forms of creative problem solving seems to have been brainstorming
(Osborn, 1953). Its origins are somewhat obscure but in modern times it appears to have been
used as a means of focusing attention on ﬁnding new insights into problems and decisions at
business meetings. A lack of structure and focus in such meetings when it came to making
decisions and dealing with problems seemed to suggest that an interesting alternative approach
that would evoke participant curiosity and interest might produce beneﬁcial results. During
the course of the last half century or so many different forms of brainstorming have become
popular and the idea of a structured approach to creative problem solving has spawned a large
variety of techniques (e.g. Morphological Analysis, Lateral Thinking, Synectics, TRIZ, Rich
Pictures Vision Building, and many others). Indeed, one has only to review the plethora of
techniques that are discussed today in popular management books and on a growing number
of Internet websites to appreciate the breadth and depth of these techniques ( see van Gundy
1981, 2005; Higgins, 2005;de Bono 2008; Sternberg, 1999; Koberg and Bagnall, 2002;
O’Dell, 2000; Trefﬁnger et al., 2006; Henry, 2006; von Oech, 2008).
In some ways it seems to be an anomaly that approaches to structured creative thinking and
problem solving should be labeled ‘creative’. Creativity is associated with a freedom from
thinking in vertical and logical ways, so putting a structure on to the process seems to be the
very antithesis of what the creative process is all about. Thus, to the sceptical mind it might
suggest that one should take a closer look at the techniques that are becoming a popular
approach to trying to stimulate the creative process.
QUALITIES OF A CREATIVE PERSON
Creativity is a quality that exhibits itself in the way in which people conduct their lives. People
who exhibit creative behaviour:
•
challenge the status quo
•
confront assumptions
•
exhibit curiosity
•
like to investigate new possibilities
•
tend to take the initiative in most matters
•
are highly imaginative
•
are future-orientated
•
tend to think visually
•
see possibilities within the seemingly impossible
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
85

•
are not afraid of taking risks
•
are prepared to make mistakes
•
are adaptable to different work environments
•
are adaptable to changing circumstances
•
see relationships between seemingly disconnected elements
•
distil unusual ideas down to their underlying principles
•
synthesize diverse elements
•
are able to spot underlying patterns in events
•
are able to cope with paradoxes
•
look beyond the ﬁrst right idea.
As noted earlier by Osborn, arguably people can be taught, encouraged and coached or
counselled to be more creative. Four basic creative strengths and skills can be easily taught:
1
Fluency: the ability to produce numerous ideas (many of which may be fairly similar or
have the same kind of theme).
2
Flexibility: the ability to produce a varied mix of ideas (none or few of which are similar
or share the same kind of underlying theme).
3
Elaboration: the ability to add detail, depth, mixtures of viewpoints or perspectives.
4
Originality: the uniqueness, novelty, newness, creativeness (new) or innovativeness
(improvement of existing).
Fluency can be developed by holding creative thinking sessions at which ideas for a hundred
different uses for everyday objects (sponge, toothpick, eraser, brick, paperclip, etc.) should
be generated. After reaching this number, move on to work-related objects.
Flexibility can be improved by listing ﬁfty different kinds of uses for everyday objects and
then moving on to work on related challenges.
Elaboration can be developed by describing something (hobby,TV show, tree, cat, athletic
event, etc.) in considerable detail, using all the physical senses.
Originality can be learned by picking one common object and listing many new uses for it.
Regular practice in each of the above activities can lead to the acquisition of improved creative
skills.
Creativity skills include:
•
Imagination (visual, auditory and kinaesthetic creativity allows you to express ideas and
feelings by applying your imagination to produce unique creations).
•
Literary (writing a poem, a short story or a play).
•
Social (imagining a new way to have a group process go better or improve a programme
that provides services to others).
•
Innovation (using information from a variety of different sources to create unique solutions
to a problem).
•
Aesthetics (using a sense of beauty to judge something).
•
Visualizing (creating a mental image of an object or idea).
•
Designing (creating plans for a new project or product).
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
86

PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
87
•
Judgement (using discrimination skills in sound, colour and shape to determine differences).
•
Energetic, persistent work-style.
•
Orientation towards risk-taking and independence.
However, it has to be considered whether individual differences may be an important
consideration when considering people’s ability and motivation to learn. Indeed, a person’s
general style of thinking, their personality and preferred approach to learning may determine
their attitudes and behaviour towards creative problem solving. There are a number of
important research programmes that have addressed this issue.
Creativity is just connecting things. When you ask creative people how they did
something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’t really do it – they just saw
something. It seems obvious to them after a while. That’s because they were able to
contact experience they’ve had and synthesize new things.
Steve Jobs, Wired, February 1996
Available at: www.brainyquote.com/quotes/keywords/creativity/html (accessed 28
March 2013).
THINKING STYLE
On the basis of considerable research, Michael Kirton (1976) came to the conclusion that
people exhibit two broad creative thinking styles. First there are people who have a preference
for taking ideas and improving on them. Such people err on the side of caution, are practical
in nature and like to use standard approaches in the way they go about things. They prefer
incremental innovation and doing things better rather than seeking to ﬁnd the very best way
of doing things – Kirton referred to such people as Adapters. By contrast, there are also people
who prefer to ﬁnd new ideas by challenging and changing accepted ways of doing things. These
he labelled Innovators. Kirton believes that Adapters are no less creative than Innovators – it
is just that they see and approach things from a different perspective. Kirton emphasizes that
Adaptors and Innovators are not two totally different types of individuals. It is simply that
people are more adaptive or more innovative. Kirton has devised an inventory to measure
where individuals may stand along this continuum. One might reasonably anticipate that
Adapter types are likely to be less enthusiastic about paradigm stretching and paradigm-
breaking techniques than Innovative types. However, on this kind of differentiation among
people we might ﬁnd that Adapter types show some afﬁnity towards techniques that use
existing paradigms.
PERSONALITY
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI; Brigg and Myers, 1976; Kroeger and Thueson, 1988;
Myers and McCaulley, 1985; Myers and Myers, 1980) is a self-report measure designed to

assess individuals’ preference for different types of information processing. Individuals are
rated in terms of the following dimensions: introversion‚ extroversion, intuitive‚ sensing,
think ing‚ feeling, perceiving‚ judging. In terms of these dimensions, most closely associated
with creativity are: introversion, intuitive, thinking, perceiving (Houtz et al., 1981, 1994,
2003). Building on this, investigations into the relevance of Jung’s theory of individuals’ prefer -
ences (e.g. Lawrence, 1982,; Myers and McCaulley, 1985) suggest a number of implications.
Introverted personalities need time to think and clarify their ideas, while extraverts are
happy to talk over their thoughts with others in order to clarify them. Moreover, introverts
focus on their own understanding of concepts and ideas, while extraverts are more concerned
about the viability of their ideas in practice. Sensing individuals focus on facts, details and
reality, showing a preference for solutions that have worked in the past. Intuitive types concern
themselves with the meaning of facts, how they are interrelated and what the implications of
all this are. They have a preference for developing new, original solutions rather than using
what has worked previously. Individuals with a ‘thinking’ preference try to use logic and
analysis during problem solving. They also value objectivity and like to be impersonal in
drawing conclusions. Such people expect solutions to make sense in terms of the facts, models,
and/or principles under consideration. On the other hand, people with a ‘feeling’ preference
rely on their values and feelings. The latter tend to be subjective in their approach and
concerned about how solutions or decisions can impact on other people. In terms of the
‘perceiving-judging’ dimension, ‘judging’ types prefer structure and organization and will
want the problem solving process to demonstrate closure. ‘Perceiving’ types prefer ﬂexibility
and adaptability and are more concerned that the problem solving process considers a variety
of techniques and provides for unforeseen change.
From the creative problem solving perspective, the following seems to be implied for the
various types discussed above:
•
Extrovert – like group brainstorming, thinking aloud, psychodrama, talking through problem
in group.
•
Introvert – like brainstorming privately, incubation, want to reﬂect.
•
Sensing – like inductive reasoning, random word technique.
•
Intuitive – like to classify, categorize, deductive reasoning, challenge assumptions, imagining,
visualization, synthesizing.
•
Thinking – like to classify, categorize, analysis, solutions make sense based on fact.
•
Feeling – like to share personal values.
•
Judging – like to follow procedures, Plus Minus Interesting technique, looking for single
solutions.
•
Perceiving – like a variety of alternatives to be considered, brainstorming, random word,
outrageous provocation, taking another perspective.
On the whole, most personality types should have a positive attitude to the use of the
creativity techniques advocated in books and on the Internet. Perhaps the types who will be
least happy with the experience will be ‘judging’, ‘introverts’ and ‘thinking’ types.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
88

LEARNING STYLE
Learning styles present another perspective from which to understand how people may approach
the process of creative problem solving and approach using the various techniques. Kolb (1976,
1981) developed the Learning Style Inventory to evaluate the way people learn and work with
ideas in day-to-day life. Using this framework he identiﬁed four different types of preferred
learning styles:
1
‘Divergers’ who perceive information concretely, process reﬂectively, are imaginative,
believe in their own experience, are insight thinkers, thrive on harmony and personal
involvement, seek commitment, meaning and clarity, and have high interest in people and
culture.
2
‘Assimilators’ who respond to information presented in an organized, logical fashion, and
beneﬁt if they are given time for reﬂection. Their characteristic question is ‘What?’ To be
effective, the instructor should function as an expert. Assimilators perceive abstractly,
process reﬂectively, devise theories, seek continuity, need to know what experts think,
love ideas and are detail oriented.
3
‘Convergers’ respond to having opportunities to work actively on well-deﬁned tasks and to
learn by trial and error in an environment that allows them to fail safely. Their characteristic
question is ‘How?’ They perceive abstractly, process actively, integrate theory and practice,
are pragmatic, dislike fuzzy ideas, value strategic thinking, are skill oriented, like to
experiment, and seek results and applications.
4
‘Accommodators’ like open-ended questions and to discover things for themselves. Problem-
based learning is their ideal situation. They perceive concretely and process actively, learn
by trial and error, are interested in self-discovery, are enthusiastic about new things, are
adaptable and ﬂexible, like change, are risk takers, and people are important to them.
Divergers and accommodators are likely to be most at home with the creative problem solving
techniques. Convergers and assimilators may be less happy with the techniques.
MOOD OR EMOTIONS
Notwithstanding the foregoing, individual moods and emotions can impact on the ability to
participate in the creative problem solving process. Both anger and anxiety can have a negative
effect on a person’s ability to contribute effectively. It is generally considered that being in a
happy state of mind is essential. While many of the great poets wrote their most powerful and
best remembered poems in a state of sadness, we do not feel that we have any evidence to
argue for it.
Beliefs, attitudes, experience, motivation and perceptions have a strong impact on a person’s
ability to be creative and to successfully participate in the creative process. In deﬁning the
problem, perceptions may be strongly inﬂuenced by prior beliefs, attitudes, experience or
motivation. The person having such perceptions may be totally unaware of this and the bias it
brings with it. Attitudes towards participating in the use of the techniques have to be positive.
Motivation to ﬁnd insights into a problem is essential. Moreover, a person’s experience will
temper whatever ideas arise as a result of any ideation that takes place.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
89

For the individual trying to get insights into a problem there is the danger that over-
concentration can block the ability to solve the problem. Moreover, being able to gain a sudden
insight into a problem – that is, to improvise – will depend on the individual’s ability to recall
patterns and use them in a meaningful and systematic way. In addition, interaction with other
people and sharing highs can be very productive.
PROBLEMS IN GROUPS
The foregoing indicates that there are potential problems associated with using creative problem
solving techniques that are associated with a variety of attributes associated with the individual’s
psychological make-up. However, since most, if not all of the techniques can be used in a group
situation as well as by individuals working on their own, a solution to the foregoing may be
found in using the creative problem solving process in a group situation. Arguably, two or
more heads are better than one, but experience has shown that getting a group of people to
discuss a problem and come up with ideas in an unstructured manner often ends in chaos with
no satisfactory outcome. Techniques such as brainstorming were thought up to deal with just
such a problem. Other techniques too, as we shall see in the ensuing chapters, are amenable
to use by groups of people as well as individuals on their own. Nevertheless, while brainstorming
in particular produces ideas and possible solutions, it does not seem to produce very good ones.
Indeed, Lehrer (2012) recommends that critical appraisal, debate and differences of views are
more likely to produce good results. Constructive criticism and critical thinking can be even
more effective. However, one should not overlook group dynamics whatever method of
ideation is undertaken in a group situation. Of particular importance is the make-up of the
group. If members have worked together many times, they may be too familiar with each
other’s points of view (Lehrer, 2012). This may then prevent the emergence of good ideas.
On the other hand, expecting groups to generate ideas when they are almost unknown to each
other can be as equally a bad strategy and produce poor results. What is required is a group
that lies somewhere between these two extremes in terms of how familiar they are with each
other.
Politics, dominance and collusion can be problematic when working in a group situation.
In particular, the major coalition or more senior members may exert undue inﬂuence on
outcomes. The creative problem solving techniques can be open to manipulation and this is
something of which to be very much aware.
One of the key features of group creative problem solving is the sharing of information
across diverse ﬁelds. Getting outsider views on a problem can often be extremely productive
and lead to the solving of what seem quite intractable problems. Indeed, one can take this
outside of the arena of using creative problem solving techniques. Innocentive is a website that
has been set to get outsiders help solve scientiﬁc problems. The website owners recognized
that many companies have scientiﬁc problems that they struggle to solve but that often lay
people may offer valuable suggestions as to where the solution might lie. The website acts as
an interface between the two and outsiders who come up with good ideas are suitably rewarded
by the ﬁrms with the problems (Lehrer, 2012).
The Internet provides a useful service in providing a means of assembling people who
otherwise might not be able to work together on a problem. Circumstances can deny the
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
90

PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
91
availability of people for ideation. Since it is argued that the make-up of a group is important,
it may be difﬁcult or impossible to get together a group with the desired characteristics.
THE RANGE OF TECHNIQUES AND THEIR SUITABILITY FOR
SOLVING DIFFERENT TYPES OF PROBLEM
The availability of such a plethora of techniques tends to lead to a confusion in people’s minds
about which techniques are suitable for which problems (Ross, 2006). McFadzean (1998a,
1998b, 1998c) offers a plausible approach based on different degrees of paradigm shift required
to solve a problem. Taking the notions of paradigm preserving, paradigm stretching and
paradigm breaking, she classiﬁes techniques according to how well they ﬁt in with this
classiﬁcation.
Paradigm-preserving techniques include such things as classical brainstorming, morphological
analysis and listing, and also many of the straightforward techniques not requiring analogical
reasoning. This category might include such things as obtaining ideas on how to improve
products or services by listing their features or dimensions and thinking of alternative ways in
which these might be provided.
Paradigm-stretching techniques largely require some degree of analogical reasoning and
include such things as synectics and the use of metaphors. In this case, one might identify
features and dimensions of an analogous problem for which solutions are known and then relate
these back to the given problem in order to gain appropriate insights. One might argue that it
is a preferred approach if the paradigm-preserving mechanisms fail to yield any useful insights.
These two classiﬁcations identiﬁed by McFadzean seem to be appropriate since the use of
DANGER OF GROUPTHINK
Janis (1982) argued that groupthink takes place when people working in highly
cohesive groups strive for concurrence to such an extent that it undermines their ability
to seek and use information, and to consider alternative explanations. Such a situation
produces complacency, and shared misperceptions prevent the consideration of
alternative interpretations of available information.
Signs of groupthink are:
(a) group members sharing a feeling of invulnerability, which leads to optimism and
a willingness to take risks;
(b) group members being close-minded, collectively rationalizing or discounting
aberrant information, and maintaining stereotyped views of threats or rivals;
(c) group members sticking together in their views and discounting or ignoring
dissenting views.
These things lead to perceptions of invulnerability and solidarity. Decision making
becomes defective as information received that runs contrary to the group’s beliefs is
dismissed as irrelevant or wrong.

metaphors and analogical reasoning takes one away from viewing problems in their customary
context and facilitates the stretching of existing paradigms into new domains. Despite the
comments above, it is less clear when one speciﬁc technique is to be preferred to another, or
even perhaps when one needs to undertake paradigm stretching as opposed to working within
an existing paradigm other than in the case of the pragmatic considerations noted above.
Paradigm-breaking techniques lead to gaining brand-new insights into problems. The
invention of the jet engine, discovery of the benzene ring, creation of the Internet, television
and even radio, all led to radically new ways of understanding or facilitating human activities.
While none of these things may have been facilitated by the paradigm-breaking techniques of
vision building, wishful thinking, rich pictures or role playing envisaged, such aids can help
participants to develop fantasies that may help them to generate novel ideas. While the use of
synectics was discussed in the last section, it is possible that the ‘fantasy analogy’ mechanism
employed in one variation of synectics could lead to paradigm shifts. Two of the techniques
involve working with visual images (visualization and rich pictures). Clues may be presented
in the form of pictures and these are remembered more easily than words (Berry et al., 1997)
and allow access to semantic memory more easily than words. There is plenty of empirical
support for the notion that images are associated with creative thought (LeBoutillier and
Marks, 2003). Do and Gross (1995) describe how in the course of creative and conceptual
designing, architects often look to books, magazines and other collections of images to ﬁnd
forms they can adopt and adapt in designs. They argue that a more direct visual, graphical
reminding scheme based on sketches can help designers recall interesting references from
various domains. Their paper describes ‘Drawing Analogies’, a shape-based reminding program
that uses hand-drawn sketches to index and query visual databases. Given this kind of evidence,
it is logical to explore pictures as clues for solving problems requiring insights (Schwert, 2007).
In summary, while the classiﬁcation system makes sense and covers the idea of managing
the use of paradigms, it is not altogether clear when one technique is more appropriate than
another, and there is certainly no guarantee that using the techniques alone will lead to new
insights. Other inﬂuences are involved and these are notably to do with the people seeking to
use the techniques.
CONCLUSION
The use of creative problem solving ideation tools seems to be full of crevices to trap and
stymie the individuals whose curiosity has been raised to indulge in the use of such tools. For
example, one should not overlook the point made in Chapter 3 that when using analogical
thinking, retrieval of suitable analogies from long-term memory may itself produce unsuitable
analogies while missing altogether those that would be highly relevant.
In reviewing the comments made in this chapter the reader should view them as constructive
thoughts upon which to consider using the tools rather than as reasons for dismissing them
from consideration. There are people who are very good at getting ideas and who may not
beneﬁt greatly from using creative problem solving tools. Highly divergent thinkers may be
able to come up with ideas apparently without any structured thinking at all. After all, the
great inventions made by individuals working alone in the past were produced in such a fashion.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
92

Nevertheless, others may not have such propensities and a structured framework for ideation
may be helpful. Certainly, group problem solving seems to offer a potential way of overcoming
the weaknesses of the individual. In a group situation there is scope to use divergent thinkers
and convergent thinkers alike. However, the make-up and atmosphere within the group may
be critical to its success in gaining insights using these techniques and it could be that constructive
critical thinking about the problem in hand is a more effective mechanism. As to the ﬁtness for
purpose of the techniques in terms of dealing with speciﬁc problems then this is still something
which merits further investigation and a worthwhile topic for research.
Despite the possible limitations that may be encountered in using any of the techniques,
like most management decision-support techniques those related to creative problem solving
provide a structuring framework within which to examine problems and facilitate group
interaction to explore matters relating to important problems. In addition, they can often
provide new perspectives on problems, although the ultimate manner in which the problems
are resolved may require further reﬁnements before they can be implemented. Indeed, we
must remember that creative problem solving techniques can at best only provide insights into
problems or suggested solutions. Putting ideas into practice can only be achieved if they are
practically feasible and supported by those who will have to implement them or even ﬁnance
their implementation. Creative problem solving is only part of the process of the management
of change and needs to be appreciated within its broader context.
QUESTIONS
1
How do an individuals’ characteristics inﬂuence his or her ability to undertake ideation (a)
without the use of creative problem solving tools; (b) with the aid of using creative
problem solving tools?
2
Explain the relationship between different types of problems and the suitability of different
kinds of creative problem solving tools that may be applied to them.
3
How might the circumstances under which people attempt to generate ideas inﬂuence
their likely success in coming up with ideas? How might this vary according to whether
or not they make use of creative problem solving tools that are suited to the problems in
hand?
4
Discuss how thinking and learning styles may inﬂuence how people may interact with
creative problem solving techniques. How may this be inﬂuenced by whether or not they
are working on their own or as part of a group?
5
Constructive criticism is a much better way to get new perspectives on a problem than
using creative problem solving tools. Discuss.
6
How do beliefs, attitudes, perception, learning and motivation inﬂuence the ability to
come up with new ideas with or without the use of creative problem solving tools?
7
What steps can an organization take to minimize the occurrence of ‘groupthink’?
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
93

CASES
The think-tank
Bolden Pharmaceutical, employing over 2,000 workers of all grades, welcomed its new Chief
Executive, Tim Hodges. Hodges had spent years working for petroleum companies anxiously
exploring new avenues to extend their product-market scope. Hodges felt that Bolden needed
the same kind of treatment and that in addition to looking for new product-market opportunities
it needed to review its current operations and look for increased efﬁciency and savings that
would help to cover the cost of new ventures.
As a ﬁrst step Tim decided to set up a think-tank. The works was located close to open
moorland on the Yorkshire–Lancashire border close to one of the many small towns that nestle
in the valley bottoms. As part of the complex, but at a distance of roughly 400 yards from the
main works, the ﬁrm owned an old house – at one time a rectory – which possessed fair-sized
gardens and an open aspect over the nearby moors. Tim thought that the building would
provide an admirable place to locate the think-tank.
The building was quickly refurbished to provide ample accommodation for a think-tank
team. The building allowed for the creation of a well-ﬁtted out conference room with overhead
projector facilities, ﬂip charts and an on-line desktop computer. In an open-plan ofﬁce, created
by knocking down the wall between two adjacent ﬁrst-ﬂoor rooms, there was desk space for
four people. A telephone, which could take both internal and external calls, was placed on
each desk, along with an up-to-date PC and the basic ofﬁce-type software which goes with such
equipment. Tim Hodges also agreed to ﬁnance any additional special-purpose software that
the team might require – up to a cost not exceeding £10,000 per annum. Secretarial support
was provided by two part-time secretaries who between them covered the week 9–5 each day,
Monday to Friday.
Four members of the middle-management staff were seconded to the think-tank for a
twelve-month period initially. It was agreed that at the end of this period the situation would
be reviewed and anyone wishing to return to their previous job would be able to do so.
Temporary appointments were made to cover the work of the seconded executives during the
year-long trial period. It was made clear that the seconded executives would not be available
for their usual duties during this period but that they could be consulted from time to time by
the temporary staff covering their work.
The team of four who made up the think-tank comprised one person with a background in
the marketing operations of the company, one person from the ﬁnance and accounting area,
one person from the R&D/operations area and a member of the personnel team. The job of
coordinating the team was to be rotated on a three-monthly basis, with each person taking his
or her turn at the helm.
The team were given no speciﬁc instructions as to how they should proceed with the task
they had been given. Tim Hodges made it clear, however, through an internal memorandum
to all members of staff – workers and managers – that the team would expect to receive full
cooperation from staff at all levels in the organization and that requests for help or information
should be treated in the same way as if he himself had requested it.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
94

Questions
1
What kind of hindrances do you think the team would be likely to encounter?
2
Given that think-tanks were at one time discarded as an outmoded way of thinking up
new ideas, do you think that the team has any real chance of success? Explain.
An innovative ﬁrm
J. J. Smith is a ﬁnancial services business. It has decided that in order to step up its innovation
activity, the company will have to change its work environment. The traditional ofﬁce layout
is not conducive to encouraging collaboration and exchange of ideas – two aspects that are
fundamental building blocks for successful innovation. The company has decided to change the
design of the workspace so that ‘bumping into each other’ and working together happens
naturally. One suggestion has been that the physical work environment might be transformed
into something like an indoor theme park with cobblestone look-alike carpet, town square
clock, café and restaurant. No decision has been taken as yet and the company is keen to
consider other ideas, too.
A consultant has been hired to help come up with ideas. The consultant expects to make
use of one or more creative problem solving techniques using staff from the company to help
generate ideas that the ﬁrm might like to consider.
Questions
What kind of problems do you think the consultant is likely to encounter in doing this? How
might the consultant tackle such problems?
Can you come up with ideas that the ﬁrm might consider?
FURTHER READING
Eysenck, H. J. (2003) Creativity, Personality and the Convergent-Divergent Continuum Critical
Creative Processes, Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, pp. 95–114.
Fuchs, G. L., Kumar,V. K. and Porter, J. (2007) Emotional creativity, alexithymia, and styles of
creativity, Creativity Research Journal, 19(2–3): 233–245.
Kaufmann, G. (2003) Expanding the mood’s creativity equation, Norwegian School of Eco-
nomics and Business Administration, Bergen, Norway, Creativity Research Journal, 15(2/3):
131–135.
Martinez, O. L. and Brufau, R. M. (2010) Creative intelligence and thinking styles, Anales de
Psicologia, 26: 254–258.
Pannells, T. C. and Claxton, A. F. (2008) Happiness, creative ideation, and locus of control,
Creativity Research Journal, 20(1): 67–71.
Simy J. and Kolb, D. A. (2009) Are there cultural differences in learning style?, International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 33: 69–85.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
95

Staw, B. (2009) Is group creativity really an oxymoron? Some thoughts on bridging the cohesion–
creativity divide. In E. A. Mannix, J. A. Goncalo and M. A. Neale (eds) Creativity in Groups
(Research on Managing Groups and Teams), 12: 311–323.
Stum, J. (2009) Kirton’s adaption-innovation theory: managing cognitive styles in times of diversity
and change, Emerging Leadership Journeys, 2(1): 66–78.
PEOPLE’S ABILITY TO UNDERTAKE IDEATION
96

97
Objective ﬁnding, fact 
ﬁnding and problem 
ﬁnding/deﬁnition
Chapter 6
Establishing and deﬁning the problem is probably the most important stage of the creative
problem solving process, for unless the problem is correctly deﬁned it is unlikely that a truly
satisfactory solution to it can be found. The objective ﬁnding stage essentially involves ‘divergent
thinking to generate a list of problems one is facing’. Convergence is then used to identify the
most relevant problem areas for further exploration. ‘Hits’ and ‘hotspots’ are identiﬁed by
questioning ‘ownership’ (is one motivated to solve it); priority (how important is the problem);
Creating more problems
The town council was keen to tackle the problem of lack of parking spaces in an effort
to encourage more shoppers to come to the town to take advantage of new shopping
facilities that had been developed. These included a large supermarket, which provided
limited car parking facilities, and a small mall which also had limited parking facilities.
The town possessed three other very small car parks. It was generally agreed that the
car park facilities in the town were very limited and the possibility of allowing land to
be developed for multi-storey car parking was not an option. The town had two one-
way systems at its heart and was recognized as a bottleneck for trafﬁc plying north–
south and east–west. A by-pass to the town had been shelved many times and it still
remained the only route between several large conurbations in the region. In a bid to
solve the car parking problem the council decided to permit limited on-street parking
along the main route from west to east at the point where the one-way system became
a two-way system. While this action produced an extra two dozen parking places in
the town, it exacerbated the bottleneck problem making it difﬁcult for vehicles to pass
one another and adding to the trafﬁc congestion problem at rush-hour times. Moreover,
when subsequently it was discovered that the town’s water mains required substantial
maintenance work and that this involved digging up large sections of the road in the
vicinity of the on-street parking sections, it brought the whole town to a virtual
standstill. The above experience raises the issue of clearly identifying objectives and
deﬁning a problem before embarking on solutions that, while solving one problem, may
create even more irksome problems.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
98
and critical nature (how urgent is it to solve this problem). Next is the fact-ﬁnding stage, where
overall comprehension of the problem is increased by collection of relevant information. This
also helps new ideas to be generated. ‘Hits’ and ‘hotspots’ can assist convergence here. The
previously identiﬁed problem(s) may now be seen from a new perspective. There are a variety
of problem deﬁnition mechanisms. They can be considered as either redeﬁnition approaches
or analytical approaches. First we look at redeﬁnition approaches. The techniques we consider
here include laddering, goal orientation, boundary examination, progressive abstractions and
the ‘why’ method. Under the heading of analytical methods we look at decomposable matrices
and cause and effect diagrams. In the next ﬁve chapters we will look at different approaches
to ideation that can be used.
Stressing the importance of objective ﬁnding, fact ﬁnding and gaining different perspectives
on a problem can itself sometimes alleviate blocked thinking. The problem we start off with
is not necessarily the one that we should try to solve. It is quite possible that if we try to solve
the problem as we initially perceive it, then either it won’t be solved to our satisfaction or the
solution we implement will only provide temporary relief to the problem. Quite often we are
apt to treat symptoms rather than getting to grips with the real problem itself.
Figure 6.1
Position of the chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Problem finding
Fact finding
Acceptance finding
Idea finding
Solution finding

OBJECTIVE FINDING
Constant environmental analysis and problem recognition
Executives and managers have to be constantly on the lookout for problems and might be able
to identify them in one of a number of ways:
1
By comparing current experiences with past experiences.
2
By comparing current experiences with current objectives or plans.
3
By comparing performance with models of desirable outcomes.
4
By comparing performance with that of other organizations or sub-units.
(Pounds, 1969)
Pounds noted that the most commonly used approach was the ﬁrst and that the third and fourth
were rarely used. Some business problems require extensive study because they seem likely
to uncover the possibility of producing proﬁtable marketing opportunities or, conversely,
sizeable losses. Some will require immediate attention while others may be less urgent.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
99
Figure 6.2
Overview of objective ﬁnding and problem ﬁnding/deﬁnition
Make use of
current and past
experience
Scan the
environment
for problems
Compare
performance with
desirable levels
and what others
are achieving
Ascertain
people’s
major concerns
Scan documents,
reports and
attend meetings
Obtain different
perspectives on
the problem
through
redefinition
Establish acts
relating to
the problem
Identify
objectives
Undertake
SWOT
analysis
Ask Who? What?
Where? When? and
Why? questions
Define/redefine
the problem
Use a variety of
redefinitional
techniques: e.g.
laddering,
boundary
examination, goal
orientation, 5 W’s
and H’s,
progressive
abstractions, ‘Why’
method, etc.
Consider using
analytical
techniques – such
as: decomposable
matrices,
dimensional
analysis, cause-
and-effect
diagrams, etc.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
100
One possible approach involves using SWOT analysis. One ﬁrst identiﬁes various strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities and threats. One then looks at various combinations of strengths–
opportunities, strengths–threats, weaknesses–opportunities and weaknesses–threats to identify
potential objectives.
In Figure 6.4 a toy manufacturer is reviewing its marketing position and strategies. A more
general approach to objective ﬁnding involves asking the group to defer judgement and list
some major concerns in the company or business.
Figure 6.3
Objective ﬁnding
Identify strengths,
weaknesses,
opportunities
and threats
Take combinations of
strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and
threats to identify
objectives and enter
on the matrix
Construct matrix
and enter SWOT
Figure 6.4
A toy manufacturer reviews its marketing position and strategies
Strengths (S)
1 Strong existing contacts
with outlets
2 Well established company
name and image
How to win major toy
contracts using outlets and
company name (O1, S1, S2)
How to use the company
name to develop electronic
toys to appeal to ‘techno’
kids (T2, S2)
Weaknesses (W)
1 High production costs
2 Seasonal sales
How to advertise products so
that they will sell all the year
round (O2, W2)
How to reduce costs to
compete with threats from
foreign competition (W1, T1)
Opportunities (O)
1 Film spin-offs
2 Holidays approaching
Threats (T)
1 Competition from abroad
2 Kids now want electronic
gizmos

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
101
Next one identiﬁes ‘hits’. This is a subjective process and varies from company to company
and from person to person. Clusters of hits can be grouped into hotspots and more generic or
succinct objectives formulated. To do this they use the criteria of ownership, priority and
critical nature. After reviewing the hits and applying the criteria, decide on the problem
statement. One is then ready to move on to the next stage – fact ﬁnding.
FACT FINDING AND PROBLEM DEFINITION/REDEFINITION
Six honest serving men
The six honest serving men method (Parnes et al., 1977) is perhaps most useful in the fact-
ﬁnding stage, although it can be applied usefully at other stages. The technique involves asking
such questions as:
•
Who will be . . .?
•
What will they . . .?
•
Where will they . . .?
•
When should it be . . .?
•
How will they. . .?
•
Why will they. . .?
The steps are as follows:
1
State the problem in the format . . . In what ways might . . .? (IWWM . . .?).
2
Write down separate list of Who? What? Where? When? Why? and How? questions
relevant to the problem.
Figure 6.5
Fact ﬁnding
State problem as
in what ways might
… IWWM
Record relevant Who?
Why? When? Where? How?
Who
Use answers
to create
redefinitions
Select best
redefinitions

3
Examine responses to each question and use as a stimulus to generate problem redeﬁnitions.
4
Record problem redeﬁnitions generated in (3) above.
5
Select the best redeﬁnition for ideation purposes.
Much of this kind of information can be obtained from scanning documents and reports and
attending meetings. In addition, many of those involved in problem solving will have this
information in their heads. It is necessary to get the information out into the open.
Example
The problem concerns low staff morale in a supermarket chain.
1
IWWM we improve staff morale?
2
–
Who are the people concerned?
Shop service counter staff.
–
What is low morale?
Lack of motivation to do a good job and present a friendly interface with the
customer.
–
Where does the problem seem to persist?
In all city centre locations.
–
When is the problem most in evidence?
At weekends.
–
Why should one try to raise morale?
To improve the customer-service interface and encourage more customers to shop
at weekends.
–
How can morale be heightened?
By ﬁnding out how best to satisfy the wants and needs of staff.
The foregoing might produce the following problem redeﬁnitions:
–
IWWM we satisfy the wants and needs of weekend retail counter staff in city centre
stores?
–
IWWM we seek to improve the friendliness of the customer service interface?
DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS
This is a useful method for producing a checklist for use during pre-problem solving (Jensen,
1978). It also acts as a general guide for prefacing the use of some other analytic method.
Deﬁning the limits or boundaries and dimensions of a problem are important. The method
examined here considers a problem from ﬁve different dimensions: substantive, spatial,
temporal, quantitative and qualitative. The following steps should be followed:
1
State the problem.
2
Write down separate descriptions of the problem in terms of What? Where? When? How
much? How serious?
3
Answer questions relating to each of the ﬁve dimensions.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
102

4
Assess the answers provided in terms of their signiﬁcance for solving the problem.
5
Select those areas most pertinent to the problem for further analysis.
Example
1
Shop-ﬂoor productivity is declining.
2
–
What aspects of shop-ﬂoor productivity in particular are declining?
–
Where is the decline in productivity occurring (most)?
–
When is the productivity declining (most)?
–
How much decline in productivity is involved?
–
How serious is the decline in productivity?
3 
(a) Substantive
(i)
Commission/omission – does something need to be done, stopped or modiﬁed?
(ii)
Attitude or deed – is the decline due to attitudes or observable behaviour?
(iii)
Ends or means – is it a cause or an effect? Is it a symptom of an underlying
problem?
(iv)
Active or threatening – is it threatening or just irritating?
(v)
Visible or invisible – is the real problem apparent?
3
(b) Spatial
(i)
Local/distant – is it limited to a speciﬁc location?
(ii)
Isolated or widespread – how extensive is it?
3
(c) Temporal
(i)
Long-standing or recent – how long has the problem existed? If solved will it
lead to more problems?
(ii)
Future implications – can it develop into something more serious?
(iii)
Persistent nature – is there a pattern in its incidence of occurrence?
3
(d) Quantitative
(i)
Single or multiple – are the causes one or many?
(ii)
Many or few people – how many people are involved?
(iii)
General or speciﬁc – does it apply generally or only to certain subgroups?
(iv)
Simple or complex – does it comprise only a single element or is it made up
of many interlocking elements?
(v)
Afﬂuence or scarcity – is it due to a scarcity of something?
(e) Qualitative
(i)
Deep-rooted or surface problem – is the problem deep-rooted?
(ii)
Survival or enrichment – is it a matter of survival or does it merely bring into
question the quality of a situation?
(iii)
Primary or secondary – is it perceived to be of primary importance?
(iv)
What values are being violated – what is wrong?
(v)
To what degree are values being violated – is it serious or trivial?
(vi)
Proper or improper values – should the values be honoured?
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
103

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
104
Problem ﬁnding/deﬁnition
The problem-ﬁnding stage encourages one to consider a variety of problem perspectives.
Restating the problem might unlock a new viewpoint that can lead to many creative solutions.
To create these viewpoints, the group examines the information obtained during fact ﬁnding
to generate possible problem redeﬁnitions. A systematic approach to problem deﬁnition can
help and direct staff in their efforts to obtain relevant information. In addition, it is also
informative to all those people in the organization who will be affected by the ﬁndings and
recommendations.
Problem deﬁnition must take into account the situation of the company and its ability to
take sound action. Poorly thought out decisions can cause major problems, sometimes with
Figure 6.6
Dimensional analysis
Write down
different descriptions
of the problem
as questions
State the problem
Answer listed
questions
Select areas most
relevant to the
problem for
further analysis
Consider implications
of answers given
for solving the
problem
THE DELIVERY COMPANY THAT COULD NOT DELIVER
A private parcel-delivery company had many hundreds of parcels reported missing by
angry customers. Most of these parcels turned up within a few days, but none of the
delays did much to promote the efﬁcient next-day-delivery image of the company. The
ﬁrm undertook to appoint one of its senior managers to investigate the matter and to
report to the directors of the company on his ﬁndings.
After much information gathering the manager reported that there seemed to be
too many people working on the sorting of the parcels and that many of them did not
seem to know what to do. This, he felt, was producing considerable confusion with the
result that some packages were being put on to the wrong vans while others were
temporarily stored in corners of the sorting room because staff did not know what to
do with them.
1
Suggest perspectives on this problem.
2
What action do you think might be taken to solve the problem?
See Appendix 2 for the solution.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
105
Figure 6.7
Overview of the problem-ﬁnding process
Does it involve
changing perspective
in terms of strategic,
conceptual or
operational levels?
Use laddering or
progressive
abstractions or the
‘Why’ method
Start
Are you quite happy
about the
assumptions you
are making?
Use goal
orientation
Use boundary
examination
Are the facts of the
problem clear?
Are you clear about
goals, obstacles and
constraints with
respect to the
problem?
Can you view the
problem subject
as a complex
hierarchical
phenomenon?
Are you clear about
cause-and-effect
relationships
in the problem?
Finish
Use cause-and-
effect diagram
Use decomposable
matrices
Use 5 W’s and H
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
106
disastrous consequences. Many things can go wrong, and many opportunities can be missed.
The executives in the ﬁrm need to anticipate and prevent as many of these as possible, and in
each case the ﬁrst action should be a precise deﬁnition of the problem (see Figure 6.8).
Problems arise all the time in business. Some are vitally important problems and concern
sales, proﬁts and the general welfare of the business. A well-planned statement of the problem
has to be thought through. Since different executives may have different perspectives of the
problem, and hence different views as to its precise nature, there is a need to consult everyone
concerned before the problem is ﬁnally fully speciﬁed. Each individual must contribute his or
her thoughts to the problem deﬁnition before a valid, useful study of the problem can be
properly undertaken.
REDEFINITION APPROACHES
A number of methods come under this heading. The main idea behind these approaches is to
enable the problem solver to gain new perspectives on the problem.
Getting perspectives on a problem
Two useful approaches to problem deﬁnition are suggested by Rickards. The ﬁrst involves the
practising of getting different perspectives, while the second, a technique called ‘laddering’,
provides a useful method for gaining perspectives on actual problems.
Practising perspective getting
Generate a wide variety of scenarios which are readily ‘visible in the mind’s eye’. Try to make
the scenarios ambiguous in nature. Describe the scenario in three or four sentences and then
get people to suggest some possible problem perspectives.
Example
• Sam is early for work.
• He is searching his desk.
• The desk is very untidy.
• He repeatedly examines the drawers.
Figure 6.8
Deﬁning the problem (see Appendix 2 for the answer)
SSUEPVEERNMALRETKTEETRS 
In the above line cross out seven letters so that the remaining
letters, without changing their sequence, will spell out a
well-known English word. 

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
107
Figure 6.9
Problem situation 1
Figure 6.10
Problem situation 2
Figure 6.11
Problem situation 3
Figure 6.12
Problem situation 4
?
Possible problem perspectives:
• How to ﬁnd whatever is missing.
• How to tidy the desk.
• How to arrange things in the ofﬁce so nothing gets mislaid.
An alternative approach, suggested by the author, is to use pictures where the situation is
ambiguous and ask people to identify problem perspectives. Have a go at the ones in Figures
6.9–6.13.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
108
REDEFINITION APPROACHES: LADDERING
Perspectives can come in varying degrees of complexity. One can think of them as occupying
different heights on a ladder. It is often useful to consider where you are on a ladder and
whether it would be worthwhile going up to higher levels of generality or down to levels of
speciﬁcs. The ladder can have many rungs, but we can think of the ladder as having a top
portion, a middle portion and a bottom portion. At the top we ﬁnd the strategic or conceptual
level, in the middle we ﬁnd the operational and managerial level, while at the bottom we ﬁnd
the immediate and ﬁx-it-quick level.
For any situation with which one is familiar it should be possible to ﬁnd all three levels on
the ladder. Asking the question ‘Why?’ moves one up the ladder while asking the question
‘How?’ helps one to move down the ladder.
Figure 6.13
Problem situation 5
6
1
- 5
+ o
6

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
109
Figure 6.14
Laddering
State problem
in terms of
How to …
Consider various
redefinitions for
their usefulness
Use question
Why? to move up
the ladder and
How? to move
down the ladder
Example
Consider some perspectives faced by a sales manager trying to expand sales:
•
How to improve sales techniques (high level).
•
How to provide sales training (middle level).
•
How to produce a sales manual (low level).
Laddering is useful for exploring and resetting perceived boundaries of a problem investigation.
It helps to avoid too narrow a band of perspectives.
REDEFINITION APPROACHES: GOAL ORIENTATION
Goal orientation is a redeﬁnitional technique that assists us in obtaining a correctly deﬁned
problem. It has ﬁve stages, the ﬁrst of which is to work out a general outline of the problem.
Suppose that the problem with which we are confronted relates to falling sales experienced
Figure 6.15
Goal orientation
General outline of
the problem
What are the
needs, obstacles
and constraints?
Redefine original
problem

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
110
THE PYJAMA COMPANY
A pyjama manufacturer faced resistance from employees to frequent
changes to job and work methods that developments in the product and
in production methods had forced on them. To tackle this problem the
company decided to make use of the creative problem solving process.
The stages of the process are: objective ﬁnding, fact ﬁnding, problem
ﬁnding, idea ﬁnding, solution ﬁnding, acceptance ﬁnding. Here we shall
review how the company set about the ﬁrst three of these stages.
Objective ﬁnding involves stating what the company wanted to achieve.
Here the company wanted to overcome the resistance from employees to
new methods of operation. The problem concerned employee satisfaction
and grievances. The problem of resistance needed to be solved in order
to increase the motivation of employees and thence productivity and
efﬁciency.
Fact ﬁnding involves stating the facts of the situation. Here output
standards had been set for all the jobs in the factory. Each employee’s
output was calculated daily, and the performance of all workers published
in a daily list. The best performers were at the top of the list and the
worst performers at the bottom. A bonus was paid according to each
person’s productivity. High output led to better ﬁnancial rewards and
higher status with management. Most of the employees’ grievances related
to the fact that as soon as they learned a particular job and started to
earn high bonus payments that came with experience they were transferred
to another job. Management was thus resented by the workforce since
workers were constantly frustrated by their loss of earnings.
Problem ﬁnding is concerned with identifying the problem. Many
problems seemed to be apparent: lots of complaints about pay rates,
absenteeism, high turnover of personnel, low standards of efﬁciency,
marked aggression against management, etc.
Redeﬁning the problem: the boundary-examination technique was used
to restructure the assumptions of the problem and produce a new
perspective on it. It involved the following steps:
1
The problem was initially considered to be ‘In what way might the
company overcome resistance to new tasks?’
2
To overcome this resistance, further ways of rewarding workers in
addition to ﬁnancial incentives needed to be found. This could have
resulted in employees being more favourably disposed towards
transfers between tasks/jobs.
3
The problem was redeﬁned as: ‘How might employees be encouraged
to be more positive towards the transfers?’

after the entrance of a new competitor into the market. In this case we might accept this as
the general statement of the problem. The second step is to work out what the goal is: where
the organization wants to be after solving the problem. This might be to regain the previous
level of sales. The next steps are to work out what obstacles and constraints the organization
must face in order to reach the goal. An obstacle might be that only limited funding is available
from within the ﬁrm to put an idea into practice. A constraint might be that the existing prices
of products need to be maintained since cuts or rises in prices are not considered to be practical
considerations for competitive reasons. The ﬁnal stage is to come up with a new problem
statement. This might be:
‘How to get more people to buy our products without reducing or raising prices or being
reliant on funds from within the ﬁrm’.
Once the problem is correctly deﬁned, we can move on to the next stage of the process –
idea ﬁnding.
REDEFINITION APPROACHES: BOUNDARY EXAMINATION
Boundary examination (de Bono, [1970] 1971) encourages one to take a fresh look at the
assumptions one is making with respect to a problem. Through re-examining the assumptions
one can gain a new perspective on a problem. The process is as follows:
1
One writes down an initial statement of the problem.
2
Important words and phrases in the statement are highlighted and examined for any hidden
assumptions.
3
Important connotations of assumptions are identiﬁed, without considering the relevance
of assumptions.
4
Any new problem deﬁnition that is implied is recorded.
Example
A ﬁrm wants to reduce costs of producing and marketing its goods so as to be more
competitive in the marketplace.
1
In what ways might the company reduce costs of producing and marketing its goods so
as to be more competitive in the marketplace?
2
In what ways might the company reduce costs of producing and marketing its goods so
as to be more competitive in the marketplace?
3
(a) company reduce costs – assumes that the ﬁrm can reduce costs and it is necessary
to do so.
(b) producing and marketing – assumes that the focus of the problem is production and
marketing.
(c) more competitive in the marketplace – assumes that the ﬁrm is not competitive
enough in the marketplace.
4
(a) company reduce costs and (b) producing and marketing were taken as the key
assumptions. It was felt that the real problem lay not in reducing costs or in more efﬁ -
cient production and marketing but in making the product more attractive to customers.
This led to the redeﬁnition: how to make the product more attractive to customers?
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
111

Boundary examination can produce thought-provoking problem deﬁnitions. However, there
are no clear guidelines for indicating how boundary assumptions should be examined.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
112
Figure 6.16
Boundary examination
Write out problem
Highlight key
words/phrases
Identify important
connotations
Suggest new
definitions
EXERCISE
Try to formulate new perspectives on the following problems by using the boundary
examination technique:
•
A ﬁrm wants to get ofﬁce staff to work weekends to reduce the backlog of unﬁlled
orders, but staff are reluctant to do so.
•
A ﬁrm is considering relocating its distribution depot to another site and hiring
new staff because of the problems caused by wildcat strikes at the present site.
•
Absenteeism is creating nursing shortage problems in an NHS Trust hospital.
•
Trains on intercity journeys are persistently late in arriving at their destination.
•
Demand for holiday travel to a particular destination is falling year by year.

REDEFINITION APPROACHES: PROGRESSIVE ABSTRACTIONS
The method was suggested by Geschka et al. (1973) and allows one to make different problem
deﬁnitions by employing progressively higher levels of problem abstraction until a satisfactory
deﬁnition of the problem is attained. It is similar to the laddering technique mentioned earlier
in the chapter. In essence, it relies on repeatedly trying to identify the essential problem
through a series of abstractions from problem redeﬁnitions. The steps are:
1
Write down a general statement of the problem.
2
Generate possible problem solutions by asking the question: What is the essential problem?
3
New problem deﬁnitions are developed from the answers produced at (2).
4
(2) and (3) are repeated until the solutions begin to exceed existing skills and technological
resources and/or until the solutions are outside one’s sphere of inﬂuence.
5
Select a satisfactory problem deﬁnition for the purpose of generating ideas.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
113
Figure 6.17
Progressive extractions
Identify the
essential problem
Use to develop
new problem
definition
Repeat process
until redefinition is
inappropriate to
needs of the
situation
Example
1
How to improve meetings.
2
IWWM we improve meetings?
(a) have at the most convenient times;
(b) circulate agendas well in advance;
(c) have better structured meetings.
3
IWWM we schedule meetings at the most convenient times for people?
(a) use diary facilities on email to ﬁnd times when people have other recorded
commitments;
(b) invite only people for whom the meetings are highly relevant.
4
IWWM we invite only people for whom the meetings are highly relevant?
(a) keep a detailed list of people’s interests and update regularly on the network.
The abstractions are continued until either a working solution or a number of solutions 
can be found or until answers seem to be impractical. In the above example it will be noted
that only a part of the possible progressive abstractions have been illustrated. At stage (3), 
for example, one could ask ‘IWWM we have better structured meetings?’, and of course 
there are also other possible progressive abstractions at stage (1) than the one selected for
illustration.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
114
REDEFINITION APPROACHES: THE ‘WHY’ METHOD
This method really reﬂects the ‘why’ dimension of the laddering technique mentioned earlier
in the chapter. The method again relies on changing the level of abstraction and was suggested
by Parnes (1981). As we noted earlier, changing the level of abstraction leads to new
perspectives. The method is useful for broadening a problem and exploring its various
boundaries. It also helps the user to appraise basic goals and objectives. The steps below should
be followed:
Figure 6.18
The why method
Specify the
problem
Redefine answer
given as
new problem
Ask why one
should do
whatever the
problem states
Repeat the
process until
the redefinitions
are no longer
appropriate
1
State the problem.
2
Ask why it is that one wants to do whatever is stated in the problem.
3
Answer the question posed in step (2).
4
Use the answer to redeﬁne a new problem question.
5
Repeat stages (2) and (3) until a high level of problem abstraction is achieved.
Example
IWWM we improve the performance of car tyres?
Question: 
Why do we want to improve the performance of car tyres?
Answer: 
To improve tyre road-handling under adverse conditions.
Redeﬁnition: IWWM we improve tyre road-handling under adverse conditions?
Question: 
Why do we want to improve tyre road-handling under adverse conditions?
Answer: 
To make cars safer to drive.
Redeﬁnition: IWWM we make cars safer to drive?
Question: 
Why do we want to make cars safer to drive?
At this point we have gone too far with the level of abstraction. We could redeﬁne the problem
as: how can we improve the performance of car tyres to make cars safer to drive?
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES: DECOMPOSABLE MATRICES
If it is possible to view the subject of a problem as a complex hierarchical system, then this
form of analysis can be employed (Simon, 1969). It involves breaking down the system under
study into its various subsystems. The method employed is as follows:

1
Establish that the subject of the problem can be viewed as a hierarchical set of subsystems
– organizations, groups of people, the human body, many different products, production
processes, marketing strategies, etc. can be viewed as such systems.
2
List the major subsystems and their components.
3
Enter the subsystems and their components into a diagonal matrix such that it is possible
to identify cells representing the interaction of one subsystem with another.
4
Use a ﬁve-point scale to represent the importance of the interaction or strength of the
relationship between and within the subsystems.
5
Select the highest weighted interactions for further analysis or generation of ideas.
Example
Problem: how to improve the design/performance of a motor car.
1
Motor car is suitable for this form of analysis – it is a complex hierarchical system
comprising a number of subsystems.
2
The major subsystems and their components are:
The ﬁnished product:
(a) economy
(e) road handling
(b) comfort
(f) durability
(c) reliability
(g) carrying capacity
(d) acceleration
Power subsystem:
(a) engine
(b) transmission
(c) fuel
(d) gearbox
Lubrication subsystem:
(a) oil and grease material speciﬁcation
(b) servicing requirements
Electrical subsystem:
(a) alternator
(f) doors
(b) battery
(g) radio
(c) ignition system
(h) instruments
(d) lighting system
(i) wing mirrors
(e) windscreen wipers
Chassis subsystem:
(a) body
(d) interior ﬁnish and ﬁttings
(b) seats
(e) wheels
(c) windscreen
(f) tyres
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
115

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
116
Note: all the subsystems form part of the hierarchy but not all the subsystems form part of
the same branch of the hierarchy. Finished product, power and lubrication form a branch,
for example, but electrical forms part of another branch incorporating ﬁnished product and
power. It is useful to draw a tree diagram to identify the hierarchies (Figure 6.20).
Figure 6.19
Decomposable matrices
Use a problem
that has
sub-systems
Use a problem
that has
sub-systems
Construct matrix
of sub-systems
and their
components
Using a scale,
weight the
interaction
between the
sub-system
components
Select the highest
weighted
interaction for
further analysis
or ideationy
Figure 6.20
Hierarchical subsystems of a motor car
Lubrication
sub-system
Electrical
sub-system
Power
sub-system
Finished product
Chassis
sub-system

3
Matrix
Here, for reasons of space, we shall consider interactions between the ﬁrst three subsystems
only: ﬁnished product, power and lubrication.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
117
Notes: FP = ﬁnished product
P 
= power
L 
= lubrication
Figure 6.21
A decomposable matrix
Finished product
Power
Lubrication
F
P
P
L
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
b
a        b       c        d       e        f
g        a        b       c       d       e        f        g
a       b
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2
2
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
5
2
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3
4
1
4
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1
2
1
1
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
4
4
1
4
4
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
5
3
5
5
3
5
5
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
4
3
5
5
5
5
3
5
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
5
1
2
5
2
5
2
5
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
4
1
5
5
2
4
2
5
5
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
1
2
5
2
2
4
2
3
2
1
1
–
–
–
–
–
2
1
5
1
4
5
4
4
2
1
1
–
–
–
–
–
1
2
5
1
4
5
3
5
5
1
5
1
1
–
–
–
4
1
4
3
1
5
1
5
5
1
5
1
1
1
–
–
4
1
5
2
1
5
1
5
5
1
5
1
1
1
5
–
Where high scores at the interface between subsystems occur, these will be seen as of great
interest and key areas for further exploration. For example, gearbox (power subsystem d)
and oil and grease material speciﬁcation (lubrication subsystem a) and servicing requirements
(lubrication subsystem b) are picked out as very important.
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES: CAUSE-AND-EFFECT DIAGRAMS
The problem ﬁrst identiﬁed here is the high absenteeism rate. We look for causes, effects and
associations, and produce a map or diagram (Figure 6.22). The next stage involves picking out
those causes and effects that seem to be central to the problem under study. If something is
too far removed from the central problem, it is discarded. In Figure 6.22 the boxes relating
to orders and repeat sales are peripheral to the central problem and so are discarded. The
remaining boxes, however, may be taken either as suitable redeﬁnitions of the original problem
or as starting points for further exploration.

PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
118
A note of caution
While people should be encouraged to understand a problem before generating ideas, if they
do this too thoroughly they run the risk of corrupting any potential ideas they may generate.
Problem deﬁnition is a catch-22 situation, ending in a paradox.
Greater analysis of a problem leads to greater understanding of it. This may produce fresh
perspectives but it may inhibit getting unique ideas. Knowing too much can lead to conventional
solution proposals.
To overcome this problem Gordon (1961) suggested describing a general, abstract problem
without revealing the ‘real’ problem. This abstract problem should have the general principle
underlying the real problem. The participants should then be asked to generate ideas for the
abstract problem. The process should then be followed by repeating it for a slightly less
abstract, more speciﬁc version of the real problem. This process may be repeated again with
an even more speciﬁc version of the real problem. Finally, the real problem should be revealed
and ideas for the two abstract problems used as stimuli for new ideas.
It is suggested here that since the process is a fairly long one it might be reserved for
situations where over-analysis and familiarity with the problem are an issue. Moreover, it is
an approach that users may ﬁnd more suitable to use with some creative problem solving
techniques than others, e.g. brainstorming.
Figure 6.22
Cause-and-effect diagram
Work is
boring
Work is
repetitive
Productivity
is low
Absenteeism
is high
Orders are late
in delivery
Staff morale
is low
Repeat sales
are falling

QUESTIONS
1 Why is problem redeﬁnition important? Describe two different mechanisms that can help
with the task of deﬁning and redeﬁning problems.
2 ‘The solution to a problem lies in its deﬁnition. ‘To what extent would you agree or
disagree with this statement? Why?
3 A ﬁrm is concerned with improving productivity in the ofﬁce. Illustrate how two different
problem redeﬁnition methods can help bring about new perspectives on such a problem.
4 How can one try to make sure that one has correctly deﬁned a problem?
5 Why is it often desirable to undertake problem redeﬁnition when trying to ﬁnd solutions
for a problem? Take any management problem you consider has many possible solutions
and outline two methods that might be used to help redeﬁne the problem.
6 A civil engineering project involves constructing a road through a crocodile-infested
swamp. Experience to date shows that the crocodiles present a considerable hazard to
human life and threaten the completion of the project within the time schedule. Failure
to complete within the scheduled time period will incur penalties of the order of £1
million per day. Suggest different perspectives on the problem using the laddering
technique.
7 In order to deﬁne a problem it is ﬁrst necessary to recognize that a problem exists, to
identify objectives and establish facts relating to the problem. Illustrate how you would
do this with regard to a problem of your choice.
8 Show how dimensional analysis might be used to deﬁne the limits, boundaries and
dimensions of a problem relating to inroads being made into your markets by competition.
9 Using a management problem of your choice, show how you might use the following
methods to help with deﬁning the problem:
(a) goal orientation
(b) boundary examination
(c) progressive abstractions
(d) ‘why’ method
10 Illustrate with a suitable example how you might use decomposable matrices.
11 Consider how you might use cause-and-effect diagrams in dealing with previously
unencountered problems. What are the main difﬁculties you might expect to encounter?
CASES
Keeping up with demand
A ﬁrm was faced with the problem of keeping up with the demand for its products. It had only
limited resources available in terms of workforce and machinery, and demand for its products
was far in excess of what it could produce. In order to try to generate some insights into the
problem the ﬁrm felt that it might be a good idea to try to get a different perspective on the
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
119

issues involved. Accordingly, it decided to use the ﬁrst stages of the creative problem solving
process for this purpose. The steps it took are outlined below:
1
How to increase production in order to keep up with demand?
2–3 What are the factors of production? In what ways can we reduce production times? In
what ways can we encourage the workers to work faster? In what ways can we increase
the possible capacity of production? In what ways can we speed up the production process?
4
Could be redeﬁned as: how can we reduce production times?
The problem has now been redeﬁned as a more precise problem. The focus is now on the
production time rather than on just production itself. The problem has been identiﬁed and
deﬁned in a precise enough way that the next stage can be carried out.
The second stage is that of fact ﬁnding. It is during this stage that the overall comprehension
of the problem is increased.The idea is to collect all relevant information that may help one
to see the problem from a new perspective.
Production times are made up of two main different factors: employee performance and
machine performance. These two factors can be broken down again into more factors.
Employee performance is related to experience, time of day, time of week, training,
machine using. The more experienced and more trained the employee, the quicker he or she
works. At the beginning of the week or day, employee performance is at its lowest; at the end
of the day or week, it is at its highest. The quality of the machine the employee uses affects
how motivated he or she is. The better the machine, the more motivated the employee.
Machine performance is related to age of the machine, make of the machine and type of
machine. The older the machine, the slower it is and the more frequently it breaks down.
Some of the machines are of an inferior make to other machines. These machines are also
slower and more prone to failure. Different machines are used for different parts of the
production line. The more complex the process, the more complex the type of machine, the
slower the production rate.
The location of the production plant and its available space are such that expansion of the
production line is not possible. However, excess storage space is available for ﬁnished goods
and raw materials. The factory runs on a daily single 9–5 shift for ﬁve days a week.
A new competitor has recently started building a production plant within the local area.
The area suffers from a lack of a skilled labour pool, and the competitor will be looking to
employ workers from the local area as it has no workers yet. After the fact-ﬁnding stage, the
information revealed is used at the problem-ﬁnding stage. In this, the third stage, this newly
revealed information is used to develop the best product or problem deﬁnition possible.
At the end of the fact-ﬁnding stage, the problem can be redeﬁned as: ‘How can we increase
the daily production levels?’
Question
Critically evaluate what the ﬁrm did. Can you reach different conclusions by using a different
approach? Illustrate and explain.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
120

Quillian Pens
Quillian Pens carried out the following SWOT analysis on its products:
Opportunities
1
Growth in developing markets
2
Growing number of pen collectors
3
Increasing interest in high-tech pens
4
Small but growing corporate gift market in many countries
Threats
1
Increasing competitive activity at lower price points
2
Imitation of own products by competitors
3
Competitive brands achieving strong consumer identity
4
Growth in secondary brands and own brands
Strengths
1
High consumer awareness
2
Brand names
3
Global recognition
Weaknesses
1
Too many old products in the range
2
Lack of innovative products
3
Somewhat ‘boring’ image
4
Insufﬁcient range of pens in the low price category
Question
Identify the problem objectives to which the Quillian company might seek answers.
Catalogue selling
The management team of catalogue sales has problems with ﬁlling the increasing amount of
orders sent to them and hence are beginning to fail to satisfy all their customers. Clearly, the
company wants to ﬁnd ways of ﬁlling orders and hence satisfying customers. Increasing
productivity is an obvious area for investigation.
Until now the management team has been making rapid progress. Over the past twelve
months sales have risen steadily, and so has net proﬁt. The marketing team has done its job,
and the company is awash with fresh orders. However, in the past few weeks the company has
found that weather-related delays and overruns in the cost of building new warehouse facilities
will preclude the possibility of expanding inventory storage or taking on more staff for at least
six months.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
121

Question
Using the ﬁrst three stages of the creative problem solving process, suggest how the problem
may be redeﬁned for the purpose of generating insights into the situation.
Reducing wear and tear
Motorways wear out with use. The wearing-out process is gradual and uneven. At regular
intervals resurfacing becomes necessary and this involves costly repair work which can create
huge trafﬁc jams in high density use areas.
As a ﬁrst step to ﬁnding ways of reducing the costs, creativity consultants have been called
in to gather information relating to the problem and to obtain different perspectives on it so
as subsequently to facilitate ideation.
Question
What redeﬁnitions of the problem might they consider?
Production problems
The Ebonite Company produces car batteries. Recently it has been experiencing production
problems. The ﬁrm operates a standard production line, and the operations manager has for a
long time been considering introducing an alternative method of working. However, both
bosses and employees appear to be resistant to the new idea. As things stand, the operations
manager has noted the following trouble-spots:
–
many defective items
–
high staff absenteeism
–
low productivity
–
raw materials and ﬁnished inventory levels too high.
Question
Consider the kind of fact-ﬁnding activities that the operations manager needs to undertake
in order to deﬁne the real problem or problems in this instance.
Airport development
A large city has three major airports. One is to the north while the other two are to the east
and west of the city respectively. The airport to the west is by far the largest in terms of the
trafﬁc that use its facilities. It is also the nearest to the city lying only 6 miles from the city
centre. The other airports are further out and lie 15–20 miles away. The airport to the west
has virtually reached its maximum capacity and cannot handle additional trafﬁc without the
building of another runway. There are already two runways in constant operation and ﬂights
leaving along these runways create a huge amount of noise and pollution problems for many
thousands of local residents. Plans to build a third runway face a huge amount of opposition
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
122

from local residents and they have gained considerable support for this from members of
parliament. The new runway can only be built with the agreement of parliament.
The other two airports would be quite happy to have extensions to their facilities built and
there would be much less opposition from local residents in both these cases. However, they
are not as well connected to the city as the airport in the west, which has its own metro-rail
link direct into the city and its suburbs. In addition, airline companies operating through the
three airports differ considerably in the amount of ﬂights they are able to mount. Both the
northern and southern airports also take a large amount of unscheduled holiday trafﬁc while
the western airport takes mostly regular scheduled ﬂights.
One idea is to build a new airport to the east of the city. Suitable land is available and it
could be developed with minimal disruption to local residents. Such a project would involve
raising an enormous amount of funds and it is unlikely that the amount required would be
forthcoming in the short term. Even if funds were to be available, it would take much longer
and be much more expensive than simply adding a third runway at the western airport.
There are several large conurbations much further north in the country and all of these boast
substantial international airports. The largest of these lies some 200 miles to the north and
when the new high-speed rail link between this conurbation and the city to the south is in
operation in ten years’ time, the journey time is expected to be around one hour. This is little
more than the time it takes to get from the airport in the west to the centre of the city at the
present time. The airport, which serves the conurbation in the north of the country, is very
keen to expand and is looking for backers for its ambitions.
Questions
Can you come up with some ideas that give some perspectives on the problem and how a
satisfactory outcome might be achieved?
FURTHER READING
Chand, I. and Runco, M. A. (1993) Problem ﬁnding skills as components in the creative process,
Personality and Individual Differences, 14: 155–162.
Roberto, M. A. (2009) From Problem-solving to Problem-ﬁnding: Great Leaders Know How to
Detect Smoke, Not Just Raging Fires, Pearson Education, 12 October.
PROBLEM FINDING/DEFINITION
123

124
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter the techniques we look at are essentially systematic structuring mechanisms
designed to facilitate the gaining of insights into the problem. A variety of techniques are
considered including checklists, listing, morphological analysis, force-ﬁt triggers, the heuristic
ideation process and component listing. If the subject of a problem has one or more easily
identiﬁable dimensions, most of these techniques may be useful tools for helping to generate
ideas. The techniques examined here are essentially paradigm preserving techniques and do
not require the use of analogical thinking. Most people should ﬁnd these techniques extremely
easy to use. While the techniques are essentially structuring mechanisms and at ﬁrst sight
appear to be at variance with the nature of creativity, they do afford the facility to undertake
unassisted ideation within the structures that they offer.
Combining products into a single product offering
Recognizing the needs of people to have both a small highly portable camera and a
tape recorder/dictating machine, Olympus introduced the W-10 digital voice recorder.
All material, visual and auditory, could be downloaded with ease on to a PC. The
equipment represented the state-of-the-art technology in 2003.
Since 2003 there have been advancements in terms of combining similar types of
products. Mobile phones, for example, have been combined with Internet browsing
capacity and high-resolution camera and video camera facilities. They have even been
developed so that it is possible to project images onto a screen from them.
The combination of product ideas such as those indicated above is something that
the technique of Morphological Analysis can help to suggest. Other product improve -
ments can be suggested by the use of the other creative problem solving mechanisms
illustrated in this chapter. While leading to new ideas and insights they are all paradigm
preserving techniques.
Morphological analysis and
related techniques
Chapter 7

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
125
CHECKLISTS
This is the use of questions as spurs to ideation. The simplest checklist comes from the six basic
questions:
1
Why is it necessary?
2
Where should it be done?
3
When should it be done?
4
Who should do it?
5
What should be done?
6
How should it be done?
Figure 7.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
General outline of
the problem
General outline of
the problem
General outline of
the problem
General outline of
the problem
General outline of
the problem
General outline of
the problem

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
126
Example
How to create a friendly atmosphere at work:
Why?
To make it easier to communicate with colleagues and get work done.
Where? Especially in meetings where staff of all grades are present.
When?
Prior to the meetings taking place.
Who?
The departmental manager.
What?
Tell all staff how a meeting should be conducted and what is expected of them.
How?
A booklet or leaﬂet circulated to all staff for guidance.
The following questions might also be usefully applied to problems in general:
•
Adapt?
•
Minimize/eliminate?
•
Modify?
•
Rearrange?
•
Substitute? 
•
Reverse?
•
Magnify/maximize? 
•
Combine?
Example
A desk.
Adapt? 
Make it convenient for different sizes of people.
Modify? 
Make it portable.
Substitute? 
Make it of metal instead of wood.
Magnify/maximize?:
Make the drawer space larger.
Minimize/eliminate?:
Get rid of protruding handles.
Rearrange? 
Rearrange the location of the drawers and integrated trays.
Reverse?
Have a detachable/reversible glass/plastic top to the desk.
Combine?
Combine with chair into an integrated unit.
The following might also be applied:
•
Add/subtract something.
•
Vary shape.
•
Change colour.
•
Change size.
•
Vary materials.
•
Modify design or style.
•
Rearrange parts.
Example
A wrist-watch.
Add/subtract something: Add a compass.
Change colour: 
Have multicoloured cases.
Vary materials: 
Make cases out of ﬁbreglass.
Rearrange parts: 
Have the hours running from 12 to 1 instead of 1 to 12 and make
the watch hands move backwards.
Vary shape:
Triangular, hexagonal, octagonal, square, round, etc.
Change size:
Have many different sizes.
Modify design or style:
Have frequent updates on style and have designer-type labels linked
to well-known fashion houses.

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
127
Figure 7.2
Which techniques to use
Do you simply
need to ask a 
series of
question to  spur
ideation?
Can you identify
two or three
dimensions to
a problem?
Use Sequence-
Attribute
Modification
Matrix
Start
Use Checklists
Yes
No
No
Do you need a
stimulus to
provoke thought?
No
Do you want to
ensure that all
aspects of the
problem have
been covered
very thoroughly?
Use Force-fit
Triggers or
Heuristic Ideation
Process or
Component
Listing
Use Listing
Yes
Use Morphological
Analysis
Yes
Yes
Does the problem
involve a series
of steps
No
Yes
Start

The technique facilitates idea generation by having one prepare a list of items related to a
problem and checking the items against certain aspects of the problem. It can be used both as
a problem-delineation list and as a solution-ﬁnding list. The purpose of the former is to provide
a direction for the idea search, to make sure that no ideas have been overlooked, and to
evaluate the applicability of ideas borrowed from a previous problem. Checklists used for
possible solutions are concerned with developing new ideas. The most common use of checklists
involves identifying new product ideas by making alterations to existing products.
Example
The problem encountered in a knitwear garment business is that, because the market is a
seasonal one, in summer it is not appropriate to produce thick jumpers or cardigans. The
business is therefore looking to design a new product or modify an existing one that utilizes
the same system of production as the thick jumpers and cardigans. The problem is thus how
to develop a new product by modifying an existing one that will be suitable for summer sales.
The checklist considers such things as:
1
Producing short-sleeved jumpers and cardigans instead of long-sleeved ones.
2
Using synthetic materials instead of wool.
3
Using thinner materials.
4
Using lighter material and not wool.
Problem-solution checklists are a simple method of preventing the oversight of obvious solutions
to a problem. They also enable previous solutions to be adapted to current problems. In order
to be effective the technique is best used as a supplement to more open-ended techniques.
ATTRIBUTE LISTING
Attribute listing is a good technique for ensuring that all possible aspects of a problem have
been examined. Attribute listing involves breaking the problem down into smaller and smaller
bits, and seeing what can be discovered as a result.
Example
Let’s say you are in the business of making torches. You are under pressure from your
competition and need to improve the quality of your product. By breaking the torch down
into its component parts – casing, switch, battery, bulb and the weight (the attributes of each
one) – you can develop a list of ideas and you can improve each one (Table 7.1).
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
128
Table 7.1 Attribute listing: improving a torch
Feature
Attribute
Ideas
Casing
Plastic
Metal
Switch
On/off
On/off/low beam
Battery
Consumable
Rechargeable
Bulb
Glass
Plastic
Weight
Heavy
Light

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
129
Attribute listing is a very useful technique for quality improvement of complicated products
and procedures for services. It is a good technique to use in conjunction with some other
creative techniques, especially idea-generating ones like brainstorming. This allows you to
focus on one speciﬁc part of a product or process before generating a whole lot of ideas.
Example
Saw.
Attributes:
•
central blade unit
•
constant cutting speed
•
vertical cutting process
•
cuts light metals and light to medium woods
and plastics
Improvements to central blade unit:
•
possible alterations to the diameter of the blade
•
alter the number of teeth of the blade
•
different types of blade for cutting different materials
Improvements to vertical cutting process:
•
horizontal cutting
•
circular trimming
•
circular cutting
Improvements to constant cutting speed:
•
automatic variable speed
•
cutting speed controlled by locking device
•
manual variable speed
Material to be processed:
•
wood
• 
steel
•
plastic
Figure 7.3
Attribute listing for a torch

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
130
EXERCISE
Take each of the ﬁve methods of positioning mentioned above and assume that the
producer of the goods in each case wishes to reposition the product for one or other
of the four reasons mentioned. Using attribute listing, identify features, beneﬁts,
associated applications, or competition-related factors – as appropriate – to suggest
ways of repositioning either the products listed in the examples or other products of
your own choice.
COMPETITIVE REPOSITIONING OF A PRODUCT
There are a number of different ways of positioning a product in the mind of the
consumer in order to differentiate it from competitive offerings. The positioning may
be based on:
1
Product features – such as the low-calorie content of some foods.
2
Product beneﬁts – e.g. a particular model of car as ‘the most economical way to
get to work by car’.
3
Associating the product with a use or application – e.g. ‘the wine you have on
special occasions’.
4
User category – associating the product with a user or class of users – e.g. ‘the
car for the business executive’.
5
With respect to competition – e.g. ‘an IBM-compatible microcomputer’.
In addition to the ﬁve methods of positioning highlighted above there are also many
less common ways.
A product or service will require its positioning adjusting from time to time. This
is referred to as repositioning and can become necessary if:
(a) a competitor’s new product or service has been positioned next to the brand and
this is having an adverse effect on the product or service’s share of the market;
(b) consumer preferences with respect to the product or service have changed;
(c) new customer-preference clusters have been pinpointed that suggest promising
opportunities;
(d) the original positioning was incorrect.
Example
A ﬁrm wants to change the style of its toffee-apple sticks. The attributes of the sticks are:
•
made of wood
•
used to hold toffee apples
•
need to be disposed of properly once the product has been consumed

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
131
Once the list has been fully completed, each attribute is studied in turn. The information
obtained was processed as follows:
Made of wood:
•
Could it be made of other materials?
•
Would other materials be more reasonable to purchase and work with, thus reducing
the production cost?
•
Could the material used be a substance that can be recycled – or even a biodegradable
substance?
Usage:
•
Currently hand-held, could it be changed to a free-standing toffee apple?
•
Could it be ﬂavoured to produce more taste for the consumer?
Disposability factors:
•
Could the stick be made edible so that it would obviate the need to dispose of it and
avoid the potential creation of litter?
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
The technique originated in the complex technological world of astrophysics and rocket
research in the 1940s and was the work of a Swiss astronomer, Fritz Zwicky (1948). It is only
in recent years that Zwicky’s analytical technique has emerged from the depths of research
establishments and been recognized as being applicable to a wide range of situations. Zwicky
made use of this method of analysis in areas such as the classiﬁcation of astrophysical objects,
the development of jet and rocket propulsion systems, and the legal aspects of space travel and
colonization. In the more recent past, morphological analysis (MA) has been used in the ﬁelds
of policy analysis and futures studies (e.g. Rhyne 1981, 1995a, 1995b; Coyle 1994, 1995;
Coyle and Yong, 1996). In 1995, advanced computer support for MA was developed at the
Swedish Defence Research Agency (for a description, see Ritchey, 2003b). This has made it
possible to create non-quantiﬁed inference models, which signiﬁcantly extends MA’s
functionality and areas of application (Ritchey, 1997, 1998, 2002, 2003a, 2004, 2005a, 2005b,
2006a, 2006b). Since then, some eighty projects have been carried out using computer-aided
morphological analysis, for structuring complex policy and planning issues, developing scenario
and strategy laboratories, and analysing organizational and stakeholder structures (Richey,
2009).
Morphological analysis is a tool that can help generate a vast number of ideas. It works best
as a visual aid. However, this can prove difﬁcult in circumstances where the problem is
complex. Ideally, the problem should have two or three dimensions to permit the construction
of two-dimensional or three-dimensional grids.
First, possible dimensions are listed that describe the problem or system being studied. No
more than three dimensions can be represented diagrammatically, and they must be relevant
and have a logical interrelationship. For example, if an organization decides to alter its product
in response to changing requirements, it may consider product shape and the material out of

which the product can be made as two such dimensions. In this case the dimensions would be
represented on a two-dimensional grid (or on a cube for three dimensions), and a list of
attributes is then generated under each dimension. Free-wheeling and off-beat ideas are
encouraged.
The next step is to examine combinations of attributes across the dimensions, however
unusual or impractical they may seem. For example, a cross may be put in a box if the
combination is used at present and a nought if it is a potential one worth pursuing. Promising
ideas are then subsequently evaluated for their suitability.
The technique may be used by an individual or a group. If it is used by a group, then, ideally,
the group should consist of six to eight experienced people who each record their own ideas.
There should be a leader who collects the ideas and who must be able to communicate
enthusiastically while keeping a steady momentum going. A warm-up session is customary
prior to problem solving, and this provides an opportunity to select and discuss the dimensions
of the problem. It is helpful to express the problem in generic terms, to make much use of
imagination, and to ensure that the dimensions and attributes are independent.
A session begins with the problem being revealed and placed where it can be seen easily.
Each member of the group is asked to deﬁne its dimensions and then to read them out. A
discussion then ensues on which dimensions should be used. Each member is then given a
diagram on which he or she has to complete the items, and then, as with the dimensions, to
read them out. The same process is then repeated with a larger diagram. Once this has been
completed the leader has to try to collate all the items on to an overhead-projector transparency.
Having agreed on a ﬁnal joint diagram, the group can carry out other activities such as listing
the ﬁve most exciting ideas, or identifying the ﬁve worst and trying to improve them.
When considering more than three dimensions, a variation called morphological forced
connections may be applied. This uses a two-dimensional grid with the dimensions written across
the top columns and the attributes, or ways that they can be accomplished, written in the cells
beneath. A combination is represented by a line linking a cell from each column.
Morphological analysis is ideal for generating a large number of ideas of an opportunity-
seeking or exploratory nature in a logical way. It is also a powerful tool for broadening an
individual’s horizons with respect to a problem. However, it is unsuitable for problems 
where one must focus on a narrow band of options or where a problem only has a single
dimension.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
132
Figure 7.4
Steps in morphological analysis
List the
dimensions of the
product or
problem
Generate a list of
attributes under
each one of the
dimensions
Take
combinations of
attributes as
stimuli for new
ideas

Example
Suppose a ﬁrm wants to generate ideas for a new educational toy for toddlers. The ﬁrst stage
is to identify suitable categories of ideas to use as axes of a matrix, bearing in mind that one
is seeking to discover opportunities rather than come up with an immediate solution.The
chosen dimensions must be relevant to the problem and have some logical interrelationship.
However, the items listed under each dimension can be as offbeat as one wants. The
morphology identiﬁes the dimensions which describe the toy and then identiﬁes lists of
attributes under each dimension (see Table 7.2, for example).
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
133
Table 7.2 Morphological analysis: new toy for a child
Material
Where used
Educational purpose
Felt
Cot
Alphabet
Rubber
Pram
Numbers
Plastic
Play pen
Shapes
Wood
Beach
Sounds
Transparent perspex
Car
Colours
Wool
Bath
Textures
Metal
Garden
Coordination
Inﬂatable plastic
Holidays
Smell
Luminescent
Construction
In the example given in Table 7.2, the attributes of each dimension can be combined with
each other, thus giving 9 × 8 × 9 (648) possibilities. Sometimes it may be necessary to consider
three or even four dimensions, but this makes the task of evaluating ideas laborious, so the two
or three most important dimensions are usually chosen.
Example
Suppose the problem is how to cope with seasonal workloads. Let us assume there are two
dimensions to this problem: time and money (Table 7.3). Under each of the two headings we
might list attributes as they apply to the problem. There are 3  3 = 9 combinations we can
consider, and we consider every combination. For example, we can take ‘insufﬁcient time’
and ‘cheap to hire temporary staff’ as an example. This, in fact, suggests one possible way
of solving the problem.
Table 7.3 Coping with seasonal workloads
Time
Money
Irregular hours
Expensive to pay overtime
Unsociable hours
Cheap to hire temporary staff
Insufﬁcient time
Lack of positive cashﬂow

Example
A footwear manufacturer wants to extend its range into more specialized and unusual
products. In this case the axes used were type (the type of footwear worn by people) and age
group (the age range that might use the footwear) (Table 7.4).
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
134
Table 7.4 Extending the footwear range to more specialized products
Type of footwear
Age
Boot
Slipper
Trainer
Sandal
Casual
Work
High
Dance
range
shoe
shoe
heels
shoe
Baby
Toddler
Pre-school
Child
Adolescent
Adult
Retired
Example
The problem is how to encourage new readers to a newspaper by producing a supplement
that will be funded by advertisers. Chosen dimensions are the intended market, the type of
articles and the type of advertiser (Table 7.5).
Table 7.5 Aspects of a new newspaper supplement
Type of article
Intended market
Advertisers
Sport
Pet owners
Cosmetic surgery
Cooking
Housewives
Music clubs
Cartoons
Business women
Book clubs
Cars
Female teens
Dating agency
Holidays
Male teens
Records/music
Make-up
Children
Perfume
Problems
Business men
Clothes
Horoscopes
Pensioners
Sports goods
Stories
Families
Make-up
Puzzles
Gardeners
Toys

The SCIMITAR system
Somewhat allied to the concept of morphological analysis is the SCIMITAR system developed
by John Carson (Figure 7.5). In the 1980s, Carson developed a method for searching for new
products (Carson and Rickards, 1979). Its idea-generation mechanism is a three-dimensional
model of the company which is systematically searched to ﬁnd multiple answers to the question:
market needs + corporate means = ? The three dimensions are markets, processes and raw
materials.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
135
Figure 7.5
SCIMITAR
Markets
Products
Raw materials
SCIMITAR has been used widely in many ﬁrms and has never failed to yield valuable new
product ideas.
FORCE-FITTING TRIGGERS
Providing visual stimuli to help spark off ideas in people’s minds can be a very useful technique.
Here the idea is to force-ﬁt combinations of attributes that one associates with an unrelated
object to the problem with which one is preoccupied. All one needs is a set of trigger cards
on which are depicted pictures or drawings of well-known objects and a ﬂip chart on which
one records the attributes generated and the subsequent implications for the problem itself.
The procedure is as follows:
1
Choose three different trigger cards showing pictures like those shown in Figure 7.6 and
draw a column for each on a ﬂip chart (three columns).
2
Ask the assembled group of individuals to call out in turn the ﬁrst thing that comes to
mind when they think of the item on the trigger card. Fill each column on the ﬂip chart
with these ideas.
3
Describe the problem to be solved. Get the group to ﬁnd solutions that make use of at
least one word from each of the three columns.
4
Move from less sensible to sensible solutions.

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
136
Imagine that one is working on the problem of improving interdepartmental communications
and that the three pictures in Figure 7.7 have been selected to help come up with ideas. First
one lists attributes or associations for each picture:
Bull:
•
Spain
•
ﬁghting
•
dangerous
•
powerful
•
has horns
•
steer
•
part of the food chain
Aircraft:
•
jet powered
•
uses a lot of fuel
•
fast
•
ﬂies high
•
takes people on holiday
•
creates atmospheric pollution
•
has a pilot and crew
Figure 7.6
Force-ﬁtting process and triggers 1

Mother and child:
•
safe and secure
•
loving relationship
•
warm
•
friendly
•
daring
•
lasting relationship
(1) Has horns + ﬂies high + warm and friendly
Stress the powerful effect and importance of making sure that all organizational units
communicate with one another in a warm and cordial manner.
(2) Steer + has a pilot and crew + lasting relationship
Need to provide written guidelines or training to enable employees to develop durable and
lasting good-practice methods of interdepartmental communication.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
137
EXERCISE
Using combinations of three of the trigger cards shown in Figure 7.7, suggest insights,
ideas or solutions for each of the following problems:
1 How to get greater
commitment to the
organization from
employees.
2 How to deal with
difﬁcult customers.
3 How to recruit high-
calibre management
staff.
4 How to increase
productivity on the
shop-ﬂoor.
5 How to reduce thefts
from supermarkets.
6 How to close a sale.
Figure 7.7
Force-ﬁtting process and triggers 2

HEURISTIC IDEATION TECHNIQUE
This technique provides an interesting variation in the approach to suggesting new product
ideas. In principle, the technique reﬂects those suggested by Tauber (1972). The approach
breaks down the structure of existing products into lists of factors or attributes. A desktop
computer, for example, could be broken down into such items as monitor, mouse, keyboard,
processor, etc. The next step is to take another product and to break that down into its
elements as well. Lists of the two sets of components are then arrayed next to one another
and different combinations (one from each list) are taken as stimulation for thought.
Example
An out-of-town holiday hotel is looking for ideas for augmenting its service to guests; a
hospital is used as the other product:
Hotel (factors: accommodation, entertainment, eating facilities, transportation).
Hospital (factors: nurses, doctors, diagnostic equipment, operating theatres, ambulances).
Various combinations are listed and numbered:
1 accommodation: nurses
2 accommodation: doctors
3 accommodation: diagnostic equipment
4 accommodation: operating theatres
5 accommodation: ambulances
6 entertainment: nurses
7 entertainment: doctors
8 entertainment: diagnostic equipment
9 entertainment: operating theatres
10 entertainment: ambulances
11 eating facilities: nurses
12 eating facilities: doctors
13 eating facilities: diagnostic equipment technique
14 eating facilities: operating theatres
15 eating facilities: ambulances
16 transportation: nurses
17 transportation: doctors
18 transportation: diagnostic equipment
19 transportation: operating theatres
20 transportation: ambulances.
All kinds of possibilities are suggested by these combinations. For example, combinations 1
and 2 suggest a resident doctor and nurse. Combination 3 suggests the installation of different
kinds of diagnostic equipment (of a non-medical nature) to help guests with their problems
– e.g. an information desk, a computer terminal with an expert system to help with the most
common queries, etc. Combination 5 suggests a free daily transportation system into the
town, returning later in the day at speciﬁc times to pick up guests and return them to the
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
138

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
139
hotel. There are many more interesting possibilities that can be found by looking at the
various combinations and using a little imagination.
The method presents a systematic way of generating a relatively large quantity of ideas. Careful
attention, however, has to be given to ensure that all the relevant important factors are
included.
COMPONENT DETAILING
This method, suggested by Wakin (1985), makes use of some of the features of both attribute
listing and morphological analysis. It is a technique suitable for use with a group of
investigators.The procedure is as follows:
1
The major components of the problem are listed.
2
The attributes of each component are noted and listed.
3
Different problem components are allocated to different group members for study.
4
The components and their attributes are studied and noted in detail.
5
A picture is drawn of each component, including as much detail as possible.
6
Drawings are collected and displayed where they are visible to all those involved in the
exercise.The pictures should be displayed, paying attention to their logical ordering.
7
The collage is reviewed for possible ideas.
Figure 7.8
Heuristic ideation technique
List factors or
attributes of two
products
Generate ideas
based upon the
stimuli provided
Take a factor
from each list
and consider
combinations
as stimuli for
new ideas

The method is useful when one is looking for ways to improve a product service or process.
The technique helps people to see a problem from new perspectives by using drawings that
vary in size and drawing style. While it is obviously most useful for dealing with tangible
products or processes, most services do have tangible aspects, and these might be depicted
pictorially. Abstract representations can also be effective and provide interesting and thought-
provoking insights.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
140
Figure 7.9
Component detailing
Each member
takes different
problem component
Draw a picture
of component
List the major
components of
the problem
List the attributes
of each
component
Examine
component
in detail
Use collage as
stimulus for ideas
Collect drawings
and display in
logical order

SEQUENCE-ATTRIBUTE MODIFICATION MATRIX
This is a useful method to adopt when examining a problem that comprises a logical sequence
of steps. It makes use of aspects of attribute listing, checklists and morphological analysis (see
Brooks, n.d.). It also requires the user to apply forced relationships in order to stimulate ideas.
The steps involved are as follows:
1
Enumerate the logical steps involved in the problem under consideration.
2
Indicate ways in which the process can be altered (e.g. eliminate, substitute, rearrange,
reverse, combine, increase, decrease, magnify, etc.).
3
Construct a two-dimensional matrix such that the steps appear vertically along the left-
hand edge of the matrix and the modiﬁcations horizontally along the top of the matrix.
4
Examine the matrix cells for instances where change seems to be promising or where
further study would be productive.
5
Suggest ways of introducing the changes identiﬁed.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
141
Figure 7.10
Sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix
Suggest ideas for
making changes
Write down logical
steps in the process
Construct
two-dimensional
matrix
Examine the
matrix for
possible changes
List the ways in
which one can
alter the process

MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
142
Example
Problem: poor record of recruitment of sales ofﬁce staff. Staff turnover high and average
length of stay less than three months. Personnel and the line manager recruit and appoint
staff.
1
Steps followed in the process:
(a) Keep records of all jobs in the sales ofﬁce and their job speciﬁcations.
(b) Update and modify job speciﬁcations from time to time.
(c) Place advertisement in the media when a vacancy arises.
(d) Send out details of job speciﬁcations to all applicants for posts.
(e) Short-list suitable applicants for interview.
(f) Conduct face-to-face interviews with applicants.
(g) Take up references for those who appear to be interesting.
(h) Send out offer to successful candidate.
2
Substitute, rearrange, combine, increase, decrease, improve, eliminate.
3
Construct matrix using the following abbreviations for steps in the process:
(a) Keep records.
(b) Update records.
(c) Place ads.
(d) Send job details.
(e) Short-list.
(f) Interview.
(g) References.
(h) Offer.
4
Construct a two-dimensional grid (see example on facing page).
Observations
•
The way in which job descriptions are kept and the frequency with which they are updated
might be improved. More frequent updates and a review of the kind of information
included in the job descriptions might be productive.
•
When jobs are advertised in the media they might be combined with other job vacancies
so that a bigger display can be purchased in the press. This might catch the attention of
more prospective employees. It could be good policy also to increase the number of
outside media in which a job is advertised and to advertise it internally as well. The
number of times an advertisement appears might also be increased. Generally, the quality
of the advertisements needs to be looked at.This will be particularly the case if the switch
to advertising more than one type of job in the same advertisement is adopted. Professional
advice of an advertising agency would be useful in this matter.
•
The quality of the information given out to prospective applicants also needs to be re-
examined. After all, such material is part of the internal marketing operations of the
company and it needs to sell itself to prospective employees. Good applicants may be
deterred from applying if they are not convinced that the job represents a really good
opportunity.

•
The policy of how many candidates to interview needs to be reviewed. It is possible that
the ﬁrm should consider short-listing more applicants than has been the practice in the
past.
•
A single interview lasting half an hour may not be adequate for this type of post. Other
selection and screening methods need to be considered. Prospective applicants could 
be invited to meet staff in the ofﬁce over coffee and to spend some time in the ofﬁce in
order to get some idea of the kind of work that is being undertaken. This could be
combined with the formal half-hour interview.
•
When it comes to making offers the current practice is to make an offer on the day. 
It might be better practice to ring the successful candidate on the day following the
interview. If there is a good alternative candidate and the ﬁrst candidate declines 
the offer, then an appointment can still be made without incurring additional cost or
missing out on an opportunity altogether.
QUESTIONS
1
What are the principles that lie behind morphological analysis? Illustrate how you might
use the technique on a problem of your choice.
2
Evaluate the use of checklists from the point of view of aids to ideation.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
143
Figure 7.11
Two-dimensional grid facilitating sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix
Keep
records
Update
records
Place
ads
Send job
details
Shortlist
Interview
References
Substitute
Rearrange
Combine
Increase
Decrease
Improve
Eliminate
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Offer

3
How would you use a checklist to ﬁnd improvements for the following products?
(a) hair rollers
(b) washing powder (clothes)
(c) shoes
(d) new edition of a textbook.
4
Suggest how you might use attribute listing to ﬁnd improvements for the following:
(a) desktop computer
(b) wedding
(c) funeral
(d) checking in at an airport
(e) fun fair.
5
Use the force-ﬁt images in the text to ﬁnd insights into the following problems:
(a) how to improve the customer service level in a bank;
(b) how to make money on the stock exchange;
(c) how to reduce scrap level when producing machine parts/components;
(d) how to reduce employment turnover of staff.
6
Use a method that would enable you to come up with ideas about adding utilities to a
comb.
7
Illustrate how the heuristic ideation technique might be used to come up with ideas for
improving the level of customer service in restaurants.
8
Illustrate how you might use component detailing to tackle the problem outlined in
question 7 above.
9
Illustrate how you might use the sequence-attribute modiﬁcation process on a problem of
your choice. What are the limitations of this method?
CASES
Super-liners
The ‘queens’ were the largest and heaviest ships ever built. Their working lives were curtailed
by the advent of jet-powered air passenger services across the Atlantic. It was not the end of
large passenger ships, however, for a new type of holiday became fashionable – the cruise
holiday. Smaller, though very substantial ships were built to ply cruise routes around the
Mediterranean, the Caribbean and other attractive holiday areas of the world. Modern-day
cruise liners are like ﬂoating hotels, offering many different forms of entertainment,
accommodation and ranges of prices to suit the needs of customers.
Recently, a new breed of cruise liner has appeared on the scene. These are super-liners,
larger than the old ‘queens’ and designed to be much more spacious. They even boast golf-
courses! These are mini ﬂoating cities, not just ﬂoating hotels. Even larger super-liners are
planned and there seems to be no limit to how large these vessels can be.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
144

Question
How might the new super-liners be suitably equipped to make best use of their size to
provide entertainment and other facilities for customers?
Getting more involvement in church affairs
The local church is looking for ways of encouraging parishioners to be more involved in church
matters. It always seems to be the case that the same few people do most of the organizing of
events while the large majority participate by attending whatever has been organized for them.
The vicar feels that some creative thinking is called for, and someone mentions to him that
there is a creative problem solving technique called morphological analysis which might help
them to come up with some ideas.
Question
Identify what you consider to be the main dimensions to this problem and generate a list of
attributes under each heading. Which combinations, in your opinion, seem to be pertinent
to the vicar’s needs in this case?
Delta Engineering
Delta Engineering manufactures circuit boards for use in desktop personal computers. At
present it supplies one standardized board – without any subassemblies or attachments – to a
number of different producers of desktop computers.
The ﬁrm is looking to expand its product-market scope and recognizes that tailor-made
circuit boards or other partly assembled boards may be possible avenues for exploration.
However, it also recognizes that circuit boards are used in many other products and may well
differ in terms of speciﬁcation for different market segments. In addition, there are obviously
other factors that have an important bearing on what the ﬁrm might do.
Question
Assess the usefulness of morphological analysis in this case in terms of assisting the ﬁrm to
come up with ideas or insights into the problem.
Kay’s café
Northport is to get a facelift. Many millions of pounds, donated by the EU, are to be spent on
turning a reasonably prosperous seaside resort into a trendy, desirable location for families,
singles and even the aged.
Kay’s café is halfway along a side-street which leads directly on to the main promenade.
Some 100 yards further inland is the more prosperous Noble Street, tree-lined and populated
with high-class retailers for many different products, as well as some dozen or so high-class
cafés and restaurants. Kay’s café is run by Gemma along with Nora and Stoker (the waitress
and waiter, respectively). Gemma spends all her time behind the till, while Nora and Stoker
take it in turns to wait on tables or rustle up the food and drink.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
145

The café has been there for more than twenty years and attracts a regular clientele of
passersby as well as some seasonal trade from holidaymakers in the spring and summer. Tea,
coffee, fruit drinks, sandwiches and cakes make up the menu. With the exception of the
sandwiches and the coffee and tea, which are made on the premises, the other items are bought
in. Cakes are delivered each morning to the shop by a local baker.
The promised change to Northport was reported at length in the local newspapers, along
with the notice that retailers might be able to qualify for a grant to modernize and revamp
their premises if they could argue a sufﬁcient case with the holders of the money. Gemma, the
proprietor of the café, was most enthusiastic about this possibility and immediately went into
raptures about how they would proﬁt well from this development. Stoker, in his usual guarded
way, pointed out, however, that they would need to come up with some pretty good ideas if
they were to stand any chance of qualifying for the money. ‘After all,’ he said, ‘it will take
more than home-made sandwiches and plastic seats and table-cloths to show that the café is
going to be one of the star attractions of the new Northport.’
Question
Illustrate how morphological analysis, or one of the other techniques described in this
chapter, can help Gemma and her colleagues to come up with good ideas for how they might
develop the café.
Flat panels
While it would be foolish to speculate about trends far into the next millennium, it does seem
clear that during the ﬁrst ten years the ﬂat panel display (FPD) industry should experience
growth rates well in excess of broad-based industrial averages and the more mature segments
of the electronics industry. Two factors could drive this growth. The ﬁrst is increased penetration
of the computer monitor market, following on the successes achieved in notebook computers,
which were enabled by the development of high-resolution multicolour liquid crystal displays
(LCDs). During the last few years, the number of LCDs sold as desktop monitors has grown
tenfold, but penetration of this market is still less than 5 per cent. Dominance of the computer
monitor market will be followed by an assault on the digital television market. This growth
will be achieved almost entirely through sustained incremental development of the leading
technology, active matrix liquid crystal displays (AMLCD), controlled by thin-ﬁlm transistors
(TFTs) made from amorphous silicon on a glass substrate.
The second opportunity for growth is through the emergence or maturation of other
markets, such as electronic books and Internet appliances. There are opportunities for disruptive
technologies, developed by companies that are not now market leaders but are willing to
develop emerging technologies especially suited to new applications.
While the last ten years have seen continued battles between leading Asian manufacturers
for market share in the production of LCDs, this business has yet to yield steady proﬁts –
enough to justify the large investments made by manufacturers and their suppliers. Cycles have
been particularly vicious, with over-investment in good times leading to over-supply and deep
discounting to keep lines operational. The major challenge in the next decade will not be just
to achieve further increases in revenue, but to do this in a fashion that allows for proﬁtability
for participants at all levels in the supply chain.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
146

Question
Suggest marketing opportunities for ﬂat panel displays.
SMS texting and the council
A proposed project involves the use of text messaging in conjunction with Natural Language
Processing (NLP) technology to interpret and direct communications to appropriate sources
for decoding and providing communicator-satisfying responses. It represents an innovation in
service enquiry and provision. People making use of such a system may be either external
customers enquiring about the use of the city council’s services or the council’s own employees
(internal customers) needing to ﬁnd out more about council-related matters. The government
is committed to a fundamental reform of public services, and people and businesses must be
able to deal with government when they want, where they want, how they want. People must
also be conﬁdent that they will receive high-quality services that they can trust. The government
aims to make all its services available electronically by 2005 and it has made progress in this
direction since more than 50 per cent of services are now available electronically. The Ofﬁce
of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM) has also established an £80 million programme of Local
Government Online (LGOL) National Projects.
The goal of NLP is to design and build a computer system that will analyse, understand and
generate natural human languages. Applications of NLP include machine translation of one
human-language text to another; generation of human-language text such as ﬁction, manuals
and general descriptions; interfacing to other systems such as databases and robotic systems,
thus enabling the use of human-language type commands and queries; and understanding
human-language text to provide a summary or to draw conclusions. This is an emergent
technology which is able to theme, analyse and process large amounts of data received from
multiple sources, and output the results of this analysis in the form of natural language
responses.
Question
Suggest possible communication applications for the system both between the council and
members of the public and other organizations, and, within the council itself, between
departments and individuals.
FURTHER READING
Hussain, N., Garvey, B. and Ritchey, T. (2013) SWOT analysis using general morphological analysis:
application to the specials sector for new business drivers, European Journal of Industrial
Pharmacy, 15, December (download PDF).
Ritchie, T. (2011) Wicked Problems – Social Messes: Decision Support Modelling with Morphological
Analysis, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, available at: www.springer.com/cda/content/
document/cda_downloaddocument/9783642196522-c1.pdf?SGWID=0-0-45-1173250-p1741
06575 (accessed 15 April 2013).
Voros J. (2009) Morphological prospection: proﬁling the shapes of things to come, Foresight 11(6).
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
147

148
INTRODUCTION
The chapter reviews some of the more popular forms of brainstorming. These include classical
brainstorming, wildest idea variant, round-robin brainstorming, Gordon–Little variant, trigger
method, brainwriting and brainlining (brainstorming on the Internet). Limitations of
brainstorming as a method are also examined. Brainstorming is perhaps the most popular of
the creative problem-solving techniques. It essentially encourages people to work within
existing paradigms, though the introduction of wild ideas may on occasion lead to paradigm
stretching by moving the thought processes of participants away from the problem in hand. It
is a technique that should appeal to most participants irrespective of whether they are essentially
divergent or convergent thinkers. In a group situation, having a mixed range of thinking styles,
learning styles and personalities can be advantageous, and in addition one should bear in mind
the caveat regarding group dynamics mentioned in Chapter 5.
Underproductive meetings
How many times do we have meetings, raise issues and problems, and then go away
without any real conviction that what we have decided to do is really the only possible
way of tackling a problem? Often there is a feeling that there might have been a better
approach to dealing with a particular problem if only we could have come up with an
idea that we feel was lurking at the back our mind. Indeed, it could be several months
later that we suddenly realize that another way of tackling the problem would have
produced a better solution! If only we had thought of it at the time!
Brainstorming is a paradigm-preserving approach to creative problem solving that
enables us to gain insights into problems that otherwise we might overlook. It enables
us to bring to mind those other solutions that somehow always seem to evade us when
we most need them.
Brainstorming and 
its variants
Chapter 8

BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
149
CLASSICAL BRAINSTORMING
A form of brainstorming was practised in Asia over 3,000 years ago; however, in modern times
its popularization has been attributed to Alex Osborn in the 1940s and 1950s (Rickards, 1988).
Most brainstorming techniques fall into two categories: unstructured and structured. Unstruc -
tured brainstorming is not guided by any agreed-upon set of procedures. The result is often
an unproductive session. A good example of structured brainstorming is classical brainstorming.
It is based upon a few major principles and was originally recognized and used from the early
1950s.
Osborn (1953) advocated the virtue of ‘deferment of judgment’ as an aid to creativity. Later
work at Buffalo in the United States by Parnes (1963) supported Osborn’s claims that, through
the deferment-of-judgement principle, more and more good ideas could be produced in unit
time. Osborn had four basic rules for brainstorming:
Figure 8.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

1
Criticism is not permitted – adverse judgement of ideas must be withheld.
2
Free-wheeling is welcome – the wilder the idea the better. One should not be afraid to
say anything that comes into one’s mind. This complete freedom stimulates more and
better ideas.
3
Quantity is required – the greater the number of ideas, the more likelihood of winners.
4
Combinations and improvements should be tried out. In addition to contributing ideas of
one’s own, one should suggest how ideas of others can be improved, or how two or more
ideas can be joined into a still better idea.
Brainstorming can be used to help ﬁnd solutions to many different kinds of open-ended
problem – for example, trouble-shooting problems (how to reduce downtime on the production
line; how to reduce shoplifting in the store) and problems where a large number of ideas are
required (identifying new product concepts; new market/segment concepts; names for products
or companies). Unsuitable problems might include those that require technical or professional
expertise beyond the capability of the members of the group or those that have only one answer.
The term ‘brainstorming’ has become a commonly used word in the English language as a
generic term for creative thinking. The basis of brainstorming is generating ideas in a group
based on the principle of suspending judgement – a principle that scientiﬁc research has proved
to be highly productive in individual effort as well as in effort. The generation phase is separate
from the judgement phase of thinking.
Good brainstorming is part of a creative cycle of expansion and contraction. The ﬁrst phase,
expansion, relies on unleashing one’s creativity. The second, contraction, demands the use of
judgement to focus on the best or most relevant ideas.
Rules of brainstorming
Brainstorming is a tool to generate ideas, and some ground rules are needed to maintain order.
Following four rules will maximize productivity:
•
Evaluate later
•
Encourage wild ideas
•
Go for quantity
•
Build on other ideas
Evaluate later
One does not have to defend or explain ideas. Evaluating or explaining interrupts the process
and can make it hard to generate ideas. All ideas put forward are equally valuable, and people
are apt to hold back their ideas if they feel they may be ridiculed.
Go for quantity
The generation of many ideas opens up a wide range of possibilities. This quantity has two
dimensions: ﬂexibility and ﬂuency.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
150

BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
151
Flexibility reﬂects a range of different classes of ideas. Imagine one is brainstorming for
frozen items to sell in a store. The list might include ice cream, microwave dinners, concentrated
fruit juice and desserts. This shows ﬂexibility; the variety of types of products is high.
Fluency reﬂects a variety of ideas clustered around a common theme. Returning to the frozen
food, the list may contain several kinds of ice cream, including Raspberry Ripple, Rum and
Raisin, and Vanilla and Chocolate. The ﬂuency of ice-cream-related ideas is also high.
Figure 8.2
Overview of some brainstorming methods
Cannot get
everyone together
in the same place?
Have you a team
of suitable
brainstormers?
Use classical
brainstorming
Yes
Can’t get people
to come up with
wild ideas?
Use wildest idea
technique
Yes
Need more time
for brainstormers
to reflect?
Use stop–go
brainstorming or
Brainwriting
Yes
Not everyone will
participate fully?
Use round-robin
brainstorming
Yes
Unlikely to come
up with ideas that
are not obvious
Use Gordon–Little
variation
Yes
Need something
to stimulate
thought?
Use trigger
method
Yes
Yes
Use classical
brainstorming

Encourage wild ideas
Everyone can think of wild ideas. For example, one should look beyond trying to satisfy the
customer. One should try to create ideas that can:
•
dazzle customers
•
leave them feeling breathless.
Build on other ideas
Ideas that are shared during brainstorming can inspire even more ideas. Osborn believed that
modifying or combining ideas could lead to new and even better ones. These ideas come from
people with the creative skill of elaboration. They are able to expand an idea or take it in a
new direction. Elaboration may happen spontaneously. Combining two ideas that might not
seem closely related can produce a better idea. It will certainly produce a wild one.
Brainstorming is a traditional approach to creative thinking. The whole idea of brainstorming
is that people’s thoughts act to stimulate one another and produce a chain reaction of ideas.
There are many variants to brainstorming.
THE PROCESS OF BRAINSTORMING
A brainstorming session needs to be well planned, and those who take part as group members
need to be well briefed beforehand on how the sessions are to be conducted and on the rules
they will be expected to apply. The brainstorming group should comprise 10–12 people: a
leader, a scribe, and 8–10 regular and guest members. Ideally, it should take place away from
the everyday place of work. The room needs comfortable chairs, ﬂip charts, Blu-Tack and
marker pens.
There are a number of stages to brainstorming. A formal statement of the problem is 
given by the client. The brainstorming group then attempts to interpret the goals or objec-
tives of the situation. A good technique for understanding goals is to use the ‘how to’ 
approach. For example, when looking for good new product ideas the problem might be
variously deﬁned as:
1
The client should be asked to state the problem and clarify any aspects that appear confusing
to the group members.
2
The problem is recorded along with any redeﬁnitions produced by the group.
3
The client picks the most useful redeﬁnitions, which are then used for idea generation.
4
Ideas are then generated.
A formal statement of the problem is given by the client. The brainstorming group then
attempts to interpret the goals or objectives of the situation. A good technique for understanding
goals is to use the ‘how to’ approach. For example, when looking for good new product ideas
the problem might be variously deﬁned as:
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
152

BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
153
•
How to introduce new products which are winners (problem as given).
•
How to identify winning new products (sub-problem).
•
How to satisfy customers’ wants and needs (looking at the problem in a new way).
•
How to get the horse ﬁrst past the post (metaphorical approach).
The client is invited to indicate the most useful redeﬁnitions, and redeﬁnitions continue
focusing on what the client has indicated as a fruitful direction. Finally, the client selects one
or more redeﬁnitions for ideation purposes and the group then begins to generate ideas for
each one of the selected problem redeﬁnitions in turn.
Figure 8.3
Classical brainstorming steps
Redefine problem
in terms of
How to …
Pick out two or
three redefinitions
for ideation
Have client select
most appropriate
ideas
Put statements
up for everyone
to see
Steps of classical
brainstorming
Have the client
state and answer
questions about
the problem
Generate ideas
for each How to …
using a similar
approach as that
for problem
definition and
redefinitiong
Have client
identify most
relevant
statments from
time to time
Example 1
Problem as given:
•
How to decrease production times.
Redeﬁnitions:
•
How to increase the use of computers.
•
How to improve the efﬁciency of the workforce.
•
How to generate ﬂexibility.
•
How to replace batch production with continuous production.
Problem taken:
•
How to improve the efﬁciency of the workforce.
Ideation stage:
•
Job sharing between departments.
•
Introduce performance-related pay.

•
Encourage social outings.
•
Give workers super powers.
•
Get rid of lunch breaks.
•
Discuss how to achieve common goals.
•
Bring in organizational consultants.
•
Replace workers with computers.
Example 2
Problem as given:
•
How to make the manufacture and marketing of cartons more proﬁtable.
Redeﬁnitions:
•
How to identify new and proﬁtable uses for a carton.
•
How to satisfy customer wants.
•
How to be the early bird and catch the worm (gain entry to new markets).
Problem taken:
•
How to identify new proﬁtable uses for a carton.
Ideation stage:
•
shoe boxes
•
boards for notices
•
folders
•
video-cassette and tape box
•
components for picture-frames
•
egg holder
•
advertising material
•
envelopes
•
hardware packaging
•
wrapping material
•
pencil cases
•
chocolate packaging
•
theatre stage decor
•
perfume box
•
dress models
•
paper bin
•
drawing and painting pads
•
desk organizer
Example 3
Problem as given:
•
A clothes manufacturer is facing resistance from employees to the frequent changes
to job and work methods that developments in the product and production methods
have forced upon them.
Redeﬁnitions:
•
How to make employees more enthusiastic to new methods.
•
How to make new methods more welcome.
•
How to make the rewards more appealing.
•
How to determine what kinds of rewards to give.
•
How to achieve the appropriate balance between new methods and rewards.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
154

First redeﬁnition taken:
•
How to make employees more enthusiastic to new methods.
Ideas:
1
Give them incentives.
2
Make them cooperate.
3
Ask them what would please them.
4
Make the new methods appear challenging.
5
Introduce beneﬁts with each new method introduced.
6
Reduce negative responses towards new tasks.
7
Train the employees to become more ﬂexible.
8
Alter the inspection routines.
9
Show them that cooperation will be to their beneﬁt.
Second redeﬁnition taken:
•
How to make rewards more appealing.
Ideas:
1
Ask the employees themselves.
2
Look at a crystal ball.
3
Give them non-monetary rewards.
4
Make them offers they cannot refuse.
5
Offer holiday trips and parties.
6
Tell them what they will lose if they do not co-operate.
7
Ask someone who knows.
8
Show them the punishments.
The answer seems to lie in reducing or eliminating the hostility towards the new ways of
performing jobs or tasks. Employees may be persuaded to have a more positive attitude if
some kind of reward is offered with each new method that they learn. This way new methods
will appear challenging rather than threatening. For example, learning a new method might
be rewarded with token points. After collecting a certain number of points, employees might
be offered a special reward such as three days’ additional paid leave.
Brainstorming is used most frequently to generate as many solutions to a particular problem
as possible because quantity is favoured over quality. The product of a brainstorming session
is ideally a wide range of possible ideas that can be presented to a client. The basic assumption
is that ‘two heads are better than one’ and that together, in groups, innovative solutions can
be found.
Most of the problems faced by organizations are not well structured. They do not have any
obvious steps or parts, and there is no obviously right or wrong answer. Such problems are
referred to as ‘poorly structured’. Creative thinking is required to make decisions on poorly
structured tasks. For example, a company deciding how to use a new ingredient in its consumer
products is facing a poorly structured problem. Other poorly structured problems might
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
155

include coming up with a new product name, image or logo, or ﬁnding new or original uses
for familiar objects like a coat-hanger, paper-clip or brick.
WILDEST-IDEA VARIANT
Getting really good insights into a problem can often be greatly assisted by participants
introducing wild ideas into the proceedings. It is the leader’s responsibility to ask the participants
to make this kind of contribution. Wild ideas may not be productive in themselves but they
can spur others on to think of more practical ideas.
Sometimes, however, the group may experience difﬁculty in generating wild ideas – this is
often the case with less experienced groups. In such an instance the leader may suspend the
normal session and introduce a variant of brainstorming that encourages people to speculate.
When this is done, members of the group are actually asked to write down a fantasy or dream-
like solution to the problem. Next, the various suggestions are collected and written on the
ﬂip chart. Each fantasy idea is then brainstormed until a realistic idea is found.
Example
PROBLEM: 
Reducing the amount of paperwork in the ofﬁce.
FANTASY SOLUTION: 
Do without all the paperwork in the ofﬁce.
PRACTICAL SOLUTION: 
Use email for everything, except where paperwork is absolutely
essential.
STOP-AND-GO BRAINSTORMING
The procedure here is similar to classical brainstorming except for the fact that the session is
divided up into segments. Rest periods are introduced every 3–5 minutes or so to allow
participants to gather their thoughts and peruse the ideas that have been recorded up to that
point.
ROUND-ROBIN BRAINSTORMING
Here again the rules are the same as those for classical brainstorming, but, instead of the
participants being encouraged to shout out ideas at random, each person in turn is asked to
make a contribution. The ‘round’ is repeated several times until it appears that ideas have dried
up or until a ﬁxed period of time has elapsed.
GORDON–LITTLE VARIATION
This variation was suggested by William Gordon while he was working for the Arthur D. Little
organization. Gordon noted that participants in brainstorming sessions often look for ideal or
obvious solutions and once these have been found suspend their really creative thinking. To
obviate this problem he suggested a procedure that initially avoids presentation of the problem
to be solved. Instead, the leader guides the group in focusing on the underlying concept or
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
156

BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
157
principle of the problem. Only gradually does the leader reveal more and more information
as different ideas are developed.
The steps involve the following:
1
Introduce the problem in an abstract form and ask participants to suggest ideas for solving
the problem in this abstract form.
2
In the course of the ideation process the leader introduces key pieces of information
associated with the problem. As a result of this information the problem is progressively
reﬁned to a less abstract level.
3
The leader eventually reveals the original problem to the group.
4
Using previously generated ideas as stimuli, the group generates ideas with regard to the
speciﬁc needs of the original problem.
Example
Suppose the real problem is to do with implementing change in the workplace:
1
The problem is ﬁrst introduced in an abstract form – e.g.how to get something off the
ground. Suggestions might include ‘attaching it to a balloon’.
2
After ideas have been exhausted at this level the leader might suggest that the problem
involves getting a new project off the ground. Suggestions at this stage might include
‘extensive consultation with everyone involved in the project’.
3
When the problem is eventually revealed, the suggestions at stages 1 and 2 might be
usefully modiﬁed to produce novel insights into the real problem.
The Gordon–Little variation is an interesting one, but one of its drawbacks is that it doesn’t
readily allow for problem deﬁnition – unless, of course, the method itself is used to deﬁne the
problem. Using it in the latter way will unfortunately preclude its use for generating ideas for
the same problem.
TRIGGER METHOD
The trigger method is often used in conjunction with classical brainstorming (see Bujake,
1969). The procedure adopted is as follows:
Figure 8.4
Gordon–Little variation
Use ideas
generated as
stimulus for
practical solutions
to the problem
Progressively
redefine problem
to less abstract
level
Introduce problem
in abstract form
Reveal original
problem to group

BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
158
PROBLEMS WITH BRAINSTORMING
There are problems with brainstorming. It is ‘still hopelessly misunderstood and badly executed
by managers who assume that any discussion of ideas is automatically brainstorming’ (Rickards,
1985: 55). The term is frequently used incorrectly, and success depends on the experience
and skills of the group leader. Moreover, brainstorming is a thought-skimming technique and
not always enough to help staff grappling with ‘stuckness’ on an issue, or with strategic
decisions (Rogers, 1993).
According to Hicks (1991), brainstorming as a creative problem solving tool has its
limitations. While it is useful for acquiring large numbers of ideas, it is better suited to
conceptually simple problems, as opposed to the more complex development of those ideas.
Brainstorming also relies on random association and therefore does not always produce original
solutions. Brainstorming is not a suitable technique for a number of situations, including those
with a high technical content, people motivation and problems requiring the consideration of
written material.
Figure 8.5
Trigger method
State problem
Each member of the group
reads out ideas, and these
are discussed by group. 
Further ideas noted
Individual members of
group record their ideas
1
Read out a statement of the problem to the group.
2
Ask each member of the group to record ideas in silence (allow ﬁve minutes for this).
3
One member of the group is then asked to read out his or her ideas to the rest of the
group.
4
The ideas read out are then discussed by the rest of the group for about ten minutes with
the objective of developing variations on the ideas or even new ideas.
5
The procedure continues until all ideas have been discussed.

BRAINWRITING
Brainwriting is used by individuals or a group to put ideas in writing. Each person writes their
ideas down on index cards, self-adhesive notes or slips of paper. Large groups ﬁnd it helpful
because everyone gets to express their ideas completely and quickly. Individuals can write their
ideas down in a private, quiet place and share them later. To use it by oneself is easy:
1
Get a stack of index cards, self-adhesive notes or slips of paper.
2
Pick or be asked a question that requires a new, fresh answer.
3
Sit down, relax and write down every idea on a separate card and initial it. One uses the
rules of brainstorming and the skills needed to make them work.
BRAINLINING
Brainstorming over the Internet became known as ‘brainlining’. The word combines the 
words ‘brainstorming’ and ‘online’, which describes fairly well what is meant by brainlining.
The word also refers to live, real-time, online sessions, incorporating special techniques, and
focused on generating ideas for solving speciﬁc problems.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
159
Figure 8.6
Brainlining
Moderator announces
the problem and makes
a Suggestion
Any Brainliner makes an
Opposing Suggestion
All Brainliners pitch in with
Opposing Suggestions and
continue until the Moderator
calls a stop to the game

With the growth of online services, the process of exchanging and building upon the ideas
of groups of people has occurred spontaneously. Online forums, for example, can be thought
of as on-going brainstorming sessions to the extent that they allow for the free ﬂow of ideas.
Brainlining sessions can make use of games designed for the peculiar dynamics of online idea
generation. Brainlining games stimulate the ﬂow of ideas, encourage humour and make the
process fun.
Brainlining is extremely efﬁcient. It allows all participants to enter ideas simultaneously.
All ideas are visible, everybody can see every idea, and all ideas are recorded and available to
all participants after the session has ended.
Brainlining also introduces the leadership of a trained moderator who conducts each session
and introduces special stimulants during the session – the kind used in top-level live brain -
storming sessions, but designed speciﬁcally for brainlining.
The most important feature of brainlining is cross-pollination. Brainlining sessions increase
in effectiveness to the degree that they enlist people of divergent interests and expertise.
General rules
1
The Moderator is in charge; one has to follow the Moderator’s directions.
2
Only the Moderator types in ALL CAPITALS and only when giving directions.
3
The games are played with intensity, mutual support and fun.
Alphabet soup game
1
The Moderator states the problem and announces a letter of the alphabet.
2
All Brainliners make suggestions using the given letter.
3
Play continues until the Moderator gives a new letter or stops the game.
Example (hypothetical illustration)
Moderator: HOW DO WE GET MORE PEOPLE TO BRAINLINE? THE LETTER IS ‘M’.
Jazz: 
Do it to music.
Classic: 
Offer more free time on the Net.
Pop: 
Stress the magic of it.
Rock: 
Show them it is a way of meeting people.
Jazz: 
Magnify their need to join.
Rock the boat game
1
Moderator announces the problem and makes a Suggestion.
2
Any Brainliner makes an Opposing Suggestion.
3
All Brainliners pitch in with Opposing Suggestions and continue until the Moderator calls
a stop to the game.
Example
Moderator: HOW DO WE MAKE SURE WE ARE NEVER LATE FOR APPOINTMENTS?
Make sure we don’t go to meetings.
Jazz: 
Make sure we always go to meetings – early.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
160

Rock: 
Make sure meetings don’t start before we arrive.
Classic: 
Ask for meetings to be held up until we can attend.
Hot potato game
1
Moderator announces the problem, makes a Suggestion and names a Brainliner.
2
The Brainliner named builds on the Moderator’s Suggestion, names another Brainliner,
and continues to build and name.
3
Moderator and all named Brainliners continue to build and name other members until the
Moderator calls a stop to the game.
Example
Moderator: HOW DO WE MAKE MONEY ON THE STOCK MARKET? ANALYSE
MARKET TREND. JAZZ.
Jazz: 
Predict future trends. Rock.
Rock: 
Only for shares that have upward trends at current time. Moderator.
Moderator: Get information from experts. Classic.
Classic: 
Find out who are the experts. Pop.
Pop: 
Approach a ﬁnancial consultant. Jazz.
QUESTIONS
1
What advantages and disadvantages do the different variants of brainstorming have in
comparison to conventional brainstorming?
2
A department is experiencing problems with getting some of its members to participate
fully in departmental activities. How might brainstorming be used to come up with
possible
solutions to such a problem? Illustrate your answer.
3
Show how you might use the Gordon–Little variation to redeﬁne a problem of your
choice.
4
Suggest ideas of your own about how brainlining might be developed.
CASES
Reducing wear and tear
The problem has been deﬁned as how to compensate for the fact that vehicles tend to 
travel in each other’s ‘tracks’ and cause excessive wear at certain points on the surface of 
a motorway.
Question
Suggested solutions to this problem (see Appendix 2).
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
161

Inefﬁcient ofﬁce juniors
Most departments in the ﬁrm always employ an ofﬁce junior to help with the routine chores
of the ofﬁce. The ﬁrm feels that it is showing a degree of social responsibility by providing
employment for people who might otherwise be unemployed. At the same time it reckons that
it is also providing on-the-job training for people so that they can gain experience and take on
more responsible jobs in due course. Ofﬁce juniors are usually school-leavers, although
occasionally older staff are appointed to such positions; juniors can be of either sex.
The ofﬁce junior has the lowest status of any white-collar job in the business and is generally
poorly paid. Incumbents of these positions are at the beck and call of all members of a
department and are generally treated as skivvies or messengers. They seldom have the
opportunity to develop skills that will enable them to progress to more responsible posts in
the organization.
Generally, ofﬁce juniors are treated as being something of a nuisance by their colleagues.
There is a feeling that one has to give them something to do otherwise they will become bored
and hang about the ofﬁce and cause minor disruptions to the important work that is being
undertaken. Moreover, as one person in the accounts department put it: ‘You have to give
them something to do to keep them out of trouble. But if you give them something to do they
will probably get it wrong and you will have to do it all over again. It is best to give them
things to do that they cannot possibly get wrong. This usually amounts to running errands for
you.’
It is not surprising, therefore, that there is a high turnover in ofﬁce juniors. If an ofﬁce junior
stays for more than a couple of months, that is considered to be good going.
Question
Use brainstorming or one of its variants to come up with ways in which this problem might
be resolved.
Sorting out acquisitions
A large company has grown to its present size through a series of acquisitions. This has enabled
the ﬁrm to diversify considerably from its initial product-market scope. So far the procedure
following an acquisition has been to leave the acquired ﬁrm still in the hands of the previous
managers and simply treat it as a subsidiary of the main ﬁrm.
These subsidiaries have their own board of directors and have unfettered power with respect
to policy making. The main company, however, does own the majority of the shares in them
and therefore has effective control via the medium of voting power at shareholder meetings.
Recently, some subsidiaries have shown inefﬁciency in setting their marketing policies, with
the result that loss of market share and fall in proﬁtability have ensued. In addition, there has
been some degree of cannibalization taking place as a result of some of the subsidiaries, whose
product-market scope is not too different from one another, putting new products into the
market that compete with one another in the same market segments. Then there is, of course,
the not unusual problem of duplication of facilities offered by the subsidiary companies.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
162

Question
What options might the main company pursue to resolve all the identiﬁed difﬁculties? What
other difﬁculties do you think there are? Use brainstorming or one of its variants to come
up with some ideas.
Coolers
The Coolers company produces home refrigerators and has successfully marketed these products
for a period of ten years. In recent years, however, the refrigerator business has become more
and more competitive, with new entrants from abroad making sizeable inroads into the market.
Not only has Coolers’ market share been substantially eroded, but its return on capital
employed has also begun to slide downwards. Its pre-tax return fell from an all-time high of
27 per cent just over three years ago to 18 per cent in the last ﬁnancial year.
Some of the competitors have patented improvements to refrigerator design that the
company cannot duplicate. The ﬁrm has not tried to reposition its products in the minds of
customers; but, even if it did, it feels that it might be difﬁcult (though not impossible, of
course) to do so. However, the ﬁrm does not know which direction repositioning might take
or what the consequences of such action might be. It is becoming more and more difﬁcult to
get business, and there is considerable under-utilized capacity in the industry at home.
The company is considering diversifying its product-market scope through acquisition or
some form of strategic alliance. In the course of considering this line of action, the following
questions have become apparent:
•
What business is the ﬁrm really in?
•
What customer wants and needs are really being met by the ﬁrm?
•
How are the current trends in the marketplace likely to inﬂuence the developments of the
markets in which the ﬁrm is currently operating?
•
What products are likely to be required by customers in the markets currently served by
the ﬁrm?
•
What other product-market opportunities exist?
•
What products should the ﬁrm seek to add to its product lines?
Question
How can brainstorming techniques help in this case? Use brainstorming or one of its variants
to come up with some ideas on how to solve some of the above problems.
Computers Incorporated
The chief executive of Computers Incorporated believes that there must be a market for
portable personal computers that are used on the move in remote locations for long periods
of time.
‘There are many itinerant professionals and similar people who travel all over the world,
operate in remote regions and need a portable computer to help them with their work,’ he
says.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
163

Most of the executives in the ﬁrm agree with this point of view; but, as the technical director
points out, computers need power, and batteries have limited capacity and need frequent
recharging. As long as there is an electricity supply close by, there is no problem. However,
travellers in remote regions often do not have access to such power.
The company feels that this is a problem which requires further investigation and 
decides to:
(a) try to establish the true extent of the potential demand for a suitable product;
(b) come up with some ideas for providing a technical solution to the problem of powering
portable computers under such operating conditions.
Question
Use brainstorming or one of its variants to come up with solutions to problem (b) above.
More quality from work?
Management was concerned about work performance on the shop-ﬂoor. Output was down on
previous years, and there were more rejects than ever on the production line. The operations
manager decided to hold a brainstorming session with the foremen. The following summarizes
what took place.
PROBLEM AS GIVEN: Employee output down and more rejects on production line.
PROBLEM RESTATEMENTS: How to . . .
1 increase performance levels
2 get a better trained workforce
3 improve work quality
4 make employees work harder
5 motivate workers to higher performance
6 reward good performance
7 improve working environment
8 achieve job enrichment
9 get hold of improved machinery
10 encourage workers to work longer hours
Restatement 5 was take as the basis for idea generation, and the following ideas were illustrative
of those produced:
1 increase wages
2 vary job routines
3 provide on-the-job training
4 improve housekeeping
5 give workers more responsibility
6 better incentives
7 performance-related pay
8 give feedback on individual or group performance
9 competitions
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
164

A couple of wild ideas were thrown into the session as well:
1
eliminate the need for work
2
offer employees millions of pounds as an incentive
Questions
1
What use, if any, could the above ideas be in helping to solve the problem?
2
Can you build on the ideas produced in any way so as to improve them?
3
Try using some of the other problem restatements to produce insights into the problem.
Thoughts on back-stabbing
‘Why aren’t there more murders in business?’ John asked.
There was silence in the room.
‘I mean, everybody has it in for someone at some time in their life, and there is a lot of
metaphorical “back-stabbing” going on in most organizations. I am sure the thought of
committing murder must go through many people’s minds.’
‘Are you being serious?’ Sally asked, looking up from her work and resting her pen on the
end of her nose.
‘Of course,’ John replied. ‘And, anyway, most crimes are never solved – or do not even
come to light. So perhaps there are lots of murders taking place every day in the business
world.’
‘Oh, don’t be absurd!’ Jayne interjected.’You really do have the weirdest ideas.’
‘Well, what do you think people do about people they can’t deal with?’ John asked.
‘I really have never had time to consider it, ‘Jayne retorted.’ I know people get pretty angry
with one another at work sometimes, but never enough to want to murder one another.’
‘So what do they do?’ John asked.
‘They keep quiet about it, for one thing,’ Sally interjected impatiently.
‘Yes, perhaps they do,’ said John thoughtfully.
Question
Imagine someone was creating a lot of problems for you at work. Perhaps they saw you as
a threat to their own prospects for advancement in the organization. How would you deal
with threats of this nature? (Hint: brainstorm the kinds of problem that they might create
for you. Next brainstorm how you might deal with such problems.)
FURTHER READING
Brown V. R. and Paulus P. B. (2002) Making group brainstorming more effective: recommendations
from an associative memory perspective, Current Directions in Psychological Science December,
11(6): 208–212.
Furnham, A. (2000) The brainstorming myth. Article ﬁrst published online 6 January 2003, Business
Strategy Review, 11(4): 21–28, December.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
165

Isaksen, S. G and Gaulin, J. P. (2005) A re-examination of brainstorming research: implications
for research and practice, Gifted Child Quarterly, 49(4): 315–329 (Fall).
Paulus P. B. and Brown, V. R. (2007) Toward more creative and innovative group idea generation:
a cognitive-social-motivational perspective of brainstorming. Article ﬁrst published online 
5 September 2007. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 1(1): 248–265, November.
Putman, V. L. and Paulus, P. B. (2009) Brainstorming, brainstorming rules and decision making,
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 43: 23–39.
BRAINSTORMING AND ITS VARIANTS
166

167
INTRODUCTION
The chapter intersperses a variety of additional mechanisms suggested by various writers with
the main ideas expressed by de Bono about lateral thinking. Lateral thinking can be categorized
under the headings of awareness, alternatives and provocative methods. The chapter considers
each of these aspects of lateral thinking in turn. Lateral thinking does advocate some ideation
methods, and these come under the heading of provocative techniques. They include random
stimulus, intermediate impossible, reversals, distortion and exaggeration, exposure, cross-
fertilization, problem switching and the use of the term po. An introduction to thinking in
terms of metaphors and analogies is also presented as well as thoughts about the discontinuity
prin ciple. Lateral thinking covers a wide variety of ways of thinking and approaching problems.
Some of these approaches are suitable for paradigm stretching problems while others may be
more appropriate for paradigm preserving. The use of metaphors and analogies are more likely
A way of stretching the imagination
Some problems seem to be very difﬁcult to solve; no matter how long we spend using
brainstorming methods we simply access our existing paradigms, and these somehow
do not seem to produce the desired insights into the problem. We are left with the
feeling that the paradigm almost produces a solution, and if only we could stretch it
just a little bit more, then we might ﬁnd a viable solution. Take, for instance, the case
of shoe fasteners. First there were buttoned shoes, then laced shoes and then slip-on
shoes using just elastic. Each of the fastening methods was an improvement on the
previous one in some way; but, of course, each one had its own problems and limitations,
too. Then someone hit on the idea of extending the velcro fastening method to shoes.
This involved stretching existing paradigms to cover a new application. There are many
techniques which can help us to stretch existing paradigms, and some of these we
consider in this chapter. They involve challenging assumptions, looking for analogous
situations and trying to apply ideas that seem to have worked in one situation or
another. Metaphors and similes can assist in the process.
Lateral thinking and
associated methods
Chapter 9

to appeal to divergent thinkers and occasionally they may even lead to paradigm breaking
discoveries.
Edward de Bono coined the term ‘lateral thinking’ and has been actively promoting it 
for the past thirty years.1 Essentially, lateral thinking is not just one technique but a number
of different ways of opening oneself to creative thinking and problem solving. On closer
examination it will be seen that lateral thinking has many overlaps with synectics (see 
Chapter 9) and several other well-known methods. Edward de Bono has written extensively
about the process of lateral thinking – the generation of novel solutions to problems. The point
of lateral thinking is that many problems require a different perspective to be taken in order
to solve them successfully.
The chapter intersperses a variety of additional mechanisms suggested by various writers
with the main ideas expressed by de Bono about lateral thinking. Lateral thinking can be
categorized under the headings of awareness, alternatives and provocative methods.The chapter
considers each of these aspects of lateral thinking in turn.
Awareness concerns the way in which people look at a problem; under this heading we review
such things as dominant ideas, tethering factors, polarizing tendencies, boundaries put around problems
and assumptions. With respect to the last of these we also look at a number of techniques to
help us get to grips with the assumptions we hold. We consider assumption smashing, challenging
assumptions and assumption reversal.
Alternatives refers to alternative ways of viewing a problem, and we look at such things as
avoidance devices, rotation of attention, change of entry point, quota of alternatives, concept
challenge, keyword omission and fractionalization and bridging.
Lateral thinking does advocate some ideation methods, and these come under the heading
of provocative techniques. They include random stimulus, intermediate impossible, reversals, distortion
and exaggeration, exposure, cross-fertilization, problem switching, and the use of the term po, an
introduction to thinking in terms of metaphors and analogies is also presented as well as
thoughts about the discontinuity principle.
OVERVIEW
Lateral thinking is about moving sideways when working on a problem to try different
perceptions, different concepts and different points of entry. The term covers a variety of
methods, including provocations to get us out of the usual line of thought. Lateral thinking is
cutting across patterns in a self-organizing system, and has very much to do with perception.
The term ‘lateral thinking’ can be used in two senses:
•
Speciﬁc: a set of systematic techniques used for changing concepts and perceptions, and
generating new ones.
•
General: exploring multiple possibilities and approaches instead of pursuing a single
approach.
LATERAL THINKING
168
1 For an appreciation of the contributions of Edward de Bono see ‘Thinking outside the box Edward
de Bono’s lateral thinking’, Sandra Dingli in Tudor Rickards, Mark A. Runco and Susan Moger (eds),
The Routledge Companion to Creativity, Routledge, Oxon: Abingdon, 2009, pp 338–350.

LATERAL THINKING
169
Lateral thinking is a way of thinking that requires people to look at things in an unconventional
manner and requires them to be aware of the limitations of their normal frame of reference.
For example, the assumptions people make are not always justiﬁable under given circumstances,
and there is a tendency to view situations as having either this solution or that solution, with
no other alternatives. Lateral thinking also demands that we should be aware of the other ways
in which a situation can be viewed.
De Bono identiﬁes four critical factors associated with lateral thinking:
1
recognizing the dominant ideas that polarize perception of a problem;
2
searching for different ways of looking at things;
Figure 9.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

3
relaxation of rigid control of thinking;
4
use of chance to encourage other ideas (this last factor has to do with the fact that lateral
thinking involves low-probability ideas which are unlikely to occur in the normal course
of events).
Lateral and vertical thinking
Differences between lateral and vertical thinking:
•
Vertical thinking is selective; lateral thinking is generative.
•
Vertical thinking is analytical; lateral thinking is provocative.
•
Vertical thinking is sequential; lateral thinking can make jumps.
•
With vertical thinking one has to be correct at every step; with lateral thinking one does
not have to be.
•
With vertical thinking categories, classiﬁcations and labels are ﬁxed; with lateral thinking
they are not.
•
Vertical thinking follows the most likely paths; lateral thinking explores the least likely.
•
Vertical thinking is a ﬁnite process; lateral thinking is a probabilistic one.
De Bono ([1970] 1971) envisages lateral thinking as a description of a mental process leading
to new insights. For him the twin aspects of lateral thinking are, ﬁrst, the provocative use of
information and, second, the challenge to accepted concepts. Lateral thinking involves viewing
problems from a new perspective in order to create more innovative solutions and move away
from conventional ideas. In contrast to logical or vertical thinking there are no paradigms to
follow. Vertical thinking involves continuity, whereas one of the characteristic features of
lateral thinking is discontinuity.
In general, people are predisposed to vertical thinking, therefore the transition towards
illogical thought patterns does not come naturally. However, the skill can be developed, and
by looking at a problem from different perspectives new ideas can be generated rather than
just variations on old ideas. The new ideas may well seem impractical in the ﬁrst place, but if
explored further a viable solution can often be found.
Three major activities go into making up lateral thinking:
1
Awareness
2
Alternatives
3
Provocative methods
AWARENESS
Here the concern is to redeﬁne and clarify current ideas. It is argued that, before old ideas can
be discarded or new ones adopted, current ones must be fully appreciated in terms of their
good points and limitations. Current ideas can be examined from ﬁve different perspectives
(Figure 9.2).
LATERAL THINKING
170

LATERAL THINKING
171
Dominant idea
Whether we like it or not, we are likely to have predispositions or dominant thoughts and
ideas about a problem when we ﬁrst approach it. We have to take steps to recognize the
dominant ideas in our mind so as not to limit the scope of the kind of solutions to the problem
which we will entertain. This is in line with the suggestions of Rogers and Kelly as indicated
in the opening paragraphs of Chapter 1. Knowing oneself and one’s biases, attitudes, values
and expectations is very important, for they inﬂuence one’s perception of problems and the
factors relating to them.
For instance, if we are looking at why the ﬁrm’s products are not as proﬁtable as they might
be, and the dominant idea in our mind is cost, then it is quite possible that we may overlook
or pay insufﬁcient attention to the other factors that inﬂuence proﬁtability. Encouraging other
people to give us their perspectives on a problem can be extremely helpful, for they may see
Figure 9.2
Perspectives
Tethering
factors
Boundaries
Polarising
tendencies
AWARENESS
Assumptions
Dominant
idea
PUZZLE 9.1
Relative assumptions
–
Four women each have three daughters.
–
They are celebrating one of the daughter’s birthday around a large dining table.
–
There are thirteen chairs around the table.
–
All four women and their daughters are seated around the table.
Question: How is this possible?

things as being important which we have marginalized in our own mind. The dominant idea bias
is similar to mindset explored in Chapter 2 and also to perceptual blocks, which were discussed
in the same chapter.
Example
Imagine for a moment that your male boss has sent around a message saying that he has
noticed that people are coming in late from the lunch-break and that he assumes that it is
because they are doing their personal shopping. How would you react? Depending upon
whether you are male/female, married/single, old/young, have a family/have no family may
very well inﬂuence your immediate response to such a communication.
Tethering factors
Tethering factors are really assumptions – that is, factors that are assumed to be included in
the problem and which are overlooked. If the ﬁre alarm sounds from time to time, and we
come to learn that it is just a false alarm or simply random testing of the alarm, we come to
believe that this is always the case. When a real emergency occurs we may not respond as
quickly as we should to the alarm. We need to be very much aware of these tethering factors
so that we are not caught out because of them.
Example
Workers have threatened to strike over a job demarcation issue. There has been no history
of strikes in the factory, so management acts in accordance with the principle that the
workers are blufﬁng. This is a tethering factor, for the workers may well come out on strike
– we cannot assume that what has occurred in the past will as a matter of certainty continue
into the future.
Polarizing tendencies
This is reﬂected in an ‘either/or’ situation. Emotions may run high when a problem arises that
involves the contrasting perspectives of individuals or groups of people. The emotions may
lead to a polarizing situation where neither party wants to step down from the way in which
it views matters. Such a situation, of course, vastly reduces the number of possible solutions
to such problems. Compromise is the order of the day.
Example
Trains are invariably held up for one reason or another. If passengers have to ‘like it or lump
it’, they develop very unfavourable attitudes to the providers of the rail service and eventually
may ﬁnd alternative means of travel. This means lost custom as far as the railway company
is concerned. By providing compensation to customers when trains are late or cancelled the
railway company creates good will; and, although the customer may be disgruntled, he or
she will not be put off entirely from travelling with the railway company in future.
LATERAL THINKING
172

Boundaries
The boundaries we put around a problem limit the amount of space that is available to solve
it. Some problems may not be capable of solution unless we look beyond the currently deﬁned
boundaries. At the very best the solutions put forward may only be variations on old ideas,
and these may not function too well. If we think of the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-
century writers such as H. G. Wells, while their ideas concerning space travel are now a
reality, it was not something that could have been achieved with the technology at the time
the works were written. It required the pushing back of the boundaries of science and
technology for more than half a century before it was possible to do what Wells envisaged.
Indeed, if we look at the work of more recent science ﬁction authors, we are still a long way
from realizing the fantasies that they propose.
De Bono suggests the technique of the intermediate impossible as a mechanism that can help
us to go beyond the boundaries of a problem. This is discussed later in the chapter in the section
on provocative methods.
ASSUMPTIONS
We have already given attention to assumptions under the heading of tethering factors. However,
it is important to repeat it here. All ideas relating to the solution of a problem make use of
assumptions. We need to be aware of the assumptions we are making when we are looking
for solutions to problems since the assumptions will limit the number of possible solutions that
we can consider. If we assume, for example, that, while wood will ﬂoat on water, metals such
as iron and steel will not ﬂoat on water under any circumstances, we might naturally only think
of building sea-going vessels out of wood and not out of metal. New insights into problems
can often be made by challenging basic assumptions. There are several techniques that can help
us to do this.
Assumption smashing
A useful technique for generating ideas is to list the assumptions of the problem, and then
explore what happens as you drop each of these assumptions individually or in combination.
Example
When customers purchase software, they are encouraged to purchase support agreements for
a cost of 15 per cent of the software value. The revenue from this maintenance funds the
support personnel who answer telephones.
The assumptions of this situation are:
•
Customers purchase maintenance agreements.
•
Customers pay 15 per cent of the software’s worth for support.
•
Support is a product and should therefore be sold.
•
The software vendor provides helpful, timely support.
Now think about the situations as each attribute is dropped.
LATERAL THINKING
173

1
What happens if support is free? Maybe the software price should be increased and the
support given away, creating the impression of free support.
2
Don’t offer support. The vendor doesn’t have to support it, so doesn’t have to employ
support staff.
3
If anyone rings for help, put the person off! This could lead to customers forming their
own support groups (user groups) or turning to other areas such as the Internet, bulletin
boards, newsletters, independent support specialists, and so on.
Assumption reversal
Not only can you drop or smash assumptions but you can also reverse them (Grossman, 1984).
Where something involves a logical paradox this method may be appropriate. Doing more with
less is a logical paradox. The method involves:
1
listing all the major assumptions about the problem, including the obvious
2
reversing each assumption in any way you want – anything goes
3
using the reversals as stimuli to generate new ideas
Example
Suppose you are keeper of a museum containing a wide variety of everyday domestic and
personal artefacts in use from the ﬁfteenth century to the present day. One of the problems
you encounter is having enough exhibits to show people and having enough variety to change
the exhibits from time to time in order to get people to visit the museum more frequently. In
addition, you have less money to spend on the acquisition of such artefacts than you had the
previous year.
First you list all the major assumptions. One of these assumptions might be that museums
buy artefacts for everyone to see. Reversing this assumption leads to the statement that
museums don’t buy artefacts for everyone to see. This statement then might be used as a
stimulus to suggest a museum is a place to which people bring their own artefacts to be
displayed free of charge and for a limited period – i.e. they are loaned for a ﬁxed period of
time and then subsequently a new set of loaned objects are displayed.
ALTERNATIVES
This is concerned with searching for as many different ways of looking at a problem as possible.
Different perspectives provide different insights into the problem. There are a variety of
approaches, as is indicated in Figure 9.3.
Avoidance devices
Avoidance devices consist of developing a frame of mind in which one tends to ignore old ideas
and be open to new ways of looking at things. The essence of this approach is summarized in
the well-known saying ‘Prevention is better than cure’.
LATERAL THINKING
174

LATERAL THINKING
175
CHALLENGING ASSUMPTIONS: 
WHAT CAN WE TAKE FOR GRANTED?
A well-known international ﬁrm started losing money for the ﬁrst time in many years.
A new chief executive took over the running of the company and set about trying to
remedy the situation. He had learned in the past that good control over costs could
reverse the fortunes of an ailing ﬁrm. His main assumptions were:
1
If it seemed cheaper to buy components than to produce them, the ﬁrm should buy
them.
2
Making a resource work more is synonymous with more effective utilization and
hence should improve proﬁtability.
3
Inventory should always be viewed as an asset.
4
Product cost is the main base for determining selling price.
His ﬁrst job was get cost estimates for each of the many thousands of parts made by
the ﬁrm, along with the alternative cost of buying them. Every part that cost more to
produce than to buy from outside was then outsourced. This was done, and the result
was that total costs increased.
A further review of the situation showed that many more parts could now be bought
from outside more cheaply than they could be produced. So the decision was then made
to outsource all component parts and not to produce any parts at all.
The ﬁnancial results still proved to be poor, so the chief executive decided to look
at the operation of the assembly plants. He found that plants were only operating ﬁve
days a week and for two shifts. His next ploy was to get them to operate for seven days
a week and for three shifts, thereby making full utilization of capacity. The result was
that the inventory of stocks built up and the ﬁrm seemed to be making a larger net
proﬁt. After twelve months in the job he seemed to have turned around the ailing ﬁrm.
The directors of the company were pleased with his performance, and he received a
bonus. His very next step, however, was to resign and leave the company.
Questions
1 Can you explain why he left the company?
2 What do you think happened to the company’s fortunes after he left the company?
(a) given a substantial increase in worldwide demand for the company’s product?
(b) given no change in the current worldwide level of demand for the company’s
product?
(c) given an overall decrease in the worldwide demand for product?
3 Can you identify inadequacies in any of the assumptions that the chief executive
may have made during his short stay with the company?
See Appendix 2 for suggestions.

LATERAL THINKING
176
Rotation of attention
Rotation of attention involves moving away from the core of the problem and shifting focus to
the surrounding factors. It is natural to focus attention on the core of a problem, but this may
not lead to creating new ideas. An example of rotation would be that, if the core of the problem
seemed to be reducing manufacturing costs, another aspect of such a problem might relate to
stafﬁng costs or administrative costs.
Change of entry point
The change of entry point is a method which entails identifying the starting-point for viewing the
problem. People think in sequence, therefore by changing the point at which that sequence is
started different outcomes can be achieved. For example, the problem may concern improving
the viewing ﬁgures for a television network. Initially, the problem might be redeﬁned in terms
of there being insufﬁcient funds invested in its programmes. Another starting-point, however,
would be to consider a more effective way of scheduling its programmes.
Quota of alternatives
Setting a quota of alternatives involves keeping only a few decidedly different options for
consideration. This makes it easier to distinguish between ideas that may have too much in
common and make it difﬁcult to appreciate their fundamental differences.
Figure 9.3
Alternatives
Rotation
of
attention
Avoidance
devices
Change
of entry
point
Quota of
alternatives
Fractionalisation
and bridging
Concept
change/
challenge
Keyword
omission
ALTERNATIVES

Concept changing and challenging
Concept changing aims to prevent a problem being viewed from a ﬁxed point. A barge, for
example, might equally be considered as a mobile home or a holiday vehicle.
Concept challenging involves considering in depth any important statement usually taken for
granted and challenging it in all ways possible. This assists with suspension of judgement and
helps one to escape from habitual thinking patterns.
Example
The problem might be one of trying to ﬁnd ways of reducing the need for telephone calls.
The statement might be:
‘Maintaining communication with business contacts without the aid of a telephone is
impossible.’
The idea is to think of ways of communicating with business contacts without the aid of a
telephone.
Challenging a concept usually taken for granted can lead to questions such as ‘Why does a
product have to have certain properties or be made of a certain material, or be formed in a
particular shape? For example, why do cars have to have doors on each side?’ Another concept
challenge might be ‘Why does a company need a marketing manager?’
Keyword omission
Keyword omission enables fresh ideas to be generated. In examining ways to improve productivity,
wages and salaries may be dropped from a discussion and other terms may be used in their
place – for example, payments to employees or work service payments. This may lead to ideas
on how to increase job satisfaction and therefore get more productive work from employees
for the same wage.
Fractionation and bridging divisions
Fractionation and bridging divisions are two opposite concepts. The former involves separating a
problem into its parts without any regard to logical subdivisions, while the latter involves
bringing the parts of a problem together. For example, a problem may be seen as how to
increase attendance at meetings. The problem may have arisen because people often have other
commitments and do not always feel that the contents of the meetings are of particular value
or interest to themselves. The problem may be subdivided into scheduling meetings so that
they are convenient for people to attend and providing some motivation for people to attend.
Bridging divisions causes the problem to be redeﬁned as to how to schedule meetings so that
they will be of interest to the most appropriate people.
LATERAL THINKING
177

LATERAL THINKING
178
PROVOCATIVE METHODS
In order to gain insights into a problem, de Bono advocates the use of a number of ideation
techniques. These, along with a number of associated techniques, are discussed below.
Figure 9.4
Provocative methods
Reversals
Analogues
Metaphors
Exposure
Problem
switching
Distortion
and
exaggeration
Random
stimuli
Intermediate
impossible
Cross-
fertilisation
Discontinuity
PROVOCATIVE
METHODS
Po
Random stimulus
Random stimulus suggests that one should sample any rich set of random stimuli and seek a
relationship between the object and the problem under consideration. De Bono argues that
this restructures perceptions away from preferred patterns and enriches the content of the
solution set.
Example
Imagine a position where two key members of the ofﬁce are leaving at the same time and
suddenly resources are very depleted. The random stimulus might be a ‘ball’. How can we
relate the concept of a ‘ball’ to the problem? Well, of course, the word ‘ball’ can be a ball
as used in a game of cricket or football or it could conceivably be a gathering associated
with a dance. The latter might lead on to the idea of having a ‘party’ to which lots of friends
and acquaintances from other ofﬁces are invited. At such a gathering a temporary solution
to the problem might well be found. There may well be suitably qualiﬁed and experienced
people who can help out with the work for a while until suitable replacements can be found.

Random word interjection in problem solving brings about a discontinuity – that is, a change
that does not arise as part of the natural development of the situation. The method involves
trying to link a randomly generated word to the problem in some way. For example, the
problem may be how to increase proﬁts or sales and the random word chosen may be ‘snooker’.
Ideas may then be generated about aiming for pockets and achieving targets, not getting
snookered into one position, scoring points with customers, taking the correct marketing
angle, and so on.
Example
Assume that in a toy company there is absenteeism from the workplace. The problem is how
to reduce it. The process starts by taking a random word. Suppose that it is the word
‘butterﬂy’.
The properties of a butterﬂy are listed:
•
starts as a caterpillar then blossoms only lives for a short while
•
is very pretty to look at
•
is therapeutic to watch
•
has wings
From these, a number of interpretations can be made:
•
starts as a caterpillar then blossoms
This could show that the method implemented may commence slowly and that people may
resist the changes. However, the company should persist with the plans as they will come
together in the end.
•
only lives for a short while
Can be compared to the staff interest level. How do we improve the interest levels of the staff
so that they do not get bored or lose interest?
•
very pretty
•
therapeutic
We have to improve the working environment – people are more relaxed and comfortable in
a pleasant working area. We need to make them feel that they are not actually going to work.
If most people are feeling happy and seem to be enjoying work, then it may make the remainder
follow suit.
How can we create a friendly fun atmosphere to avoid sickness due to stress or dullness?
This might be done through group activities.
•
has wings
Wings are ﬂexible; adopt ﬂexible working practices. Or again the use of ‘butterﬂy’ with
another problem: how to get people to attend meetings.
LATERAL THINKING
179

•
short-lived
•
ﬂutter around from place to place
•
caterpillar – chrysalis – butterﬂy
Make meetings as short as possible.
•
ﬂutter around from place to place
Consider different venues for meetings.
•
caterpillar – chrysalis – butterﬂy
Consider multilevel meetings – meetings at which all the same people need not attend.
Example
How to ensure people adopt a new system of working. Randomly selected object: video-
recorder (the ﬁrst column in the list below gives the ‘property’ of the video-recorder; the
second, the implication of the property with regard to the solution of the problem).
Record:
Establish a means of monitoring how well the new system is working.
Fast forward:
Provide training in stages to allow some to progress at faster speeds than
others.
Rewind:
Additional training or refresher training for those who need it.
Timer:
Automatic monitoring devices to identify additional training needs.
Change channels: Ensure that old and new systems run concurrently, initially to prevent
total system collapse if the new one fails or has too many hiccups.
Remote control:
Make sure that all concerned are involved in the training process and no
one is considered to be too remote from the system for inclusion in the
programme.
Intermediate impossible
The nine dots problem (Figure 9.5) has much in common with the concept of the intermediate
impossible. In the ﬁgure you have to connect all the dots with four straight lines – and without
taking your pen off the paper (see Appendix 2).
Intermediate impossible is associated with the idea expressed in lateral thinking that one 
should go beyond the traditional boundaries of a problem or situation if one is to ﬁnd new
insights into that problem. The technique involves thinking up an ideal but impossible solution
to a problem and adapting it to make it a viable option. For example, the problem may be how
to improve food in the canteen, the ideal solution to which may be to hire a top television
chef; this may lead to the possible solution of sending the problem current chef on a training
course.
LATERAL THINKING
180

LATERAL THINKING
181
The process is as follows:
1
The problem is clearly stated.
2
Absurd or impossible solutions are welcomed and all are recorded.
3
One of the wild ideas is taken forward and is then broken down so that more practical
solutions can be found.
4
If no practical or suitable solutions can be found, another of the absurd solutions can be
chosen.
Example
How to stop sales staff from making personal calls using the company’s telephones.
Impossible solutions:
•
Record all outgoing calls.
•
Remove all telephones from the ofﬁce.
•
Anyone who is spotted making a personal call is sacked.
•
Hire detectives to work undercover in the ofﬁce.
•
Make staff pay for all calls made and give them their money back for conﬁrmed business
calls.
The idea of using detectives was selected for further development.
•
Use an electronic private eye to monitor telephone activities.
•
As above, but employ members of staff to spy on each other.
The company chose to introduce a system whereby any sales member who observed another
abusing the company’s trust could tip off the managers in conﬁdence. They were encouraged
to do this with rewards, and the culprit would be observed closely and further action taken.
Example
Returning to the ‘reducing the need for telephone calls’ problem we might suggest the
impossible solution of shouting messages from the windows of the ofﬁce instead of using the
telephone.
Figure 9.5
The nine dots problem

LATERAL THINKING
182
This might lead to the idea of messages having to be delivered in person to people whose
ofﬁces are not too far away, which in turn leads to the idea of messengers calling regularly on
business clients who are based within a relatively small radius.
Example
How can we sell more televisions in slack periods of the year? Give them away.
This may suggest a buy-now-pay-later offer whereby the customer effectively gets the television
free for a period of time before a payment is made.
Reversals
Reversals suggests that one should take a problem or a threat and seek various ways of refocusing
so that the threat becomes an opportunity. The method:
•
State the problem.
•
Make the statement negative – for example, if you are dealing with customer service issues
list all the ways you could make customer service bad.
•
Doing what everybody else doesn’t – for example, Apple Computers did what IBM didn’t,
Japan made small, fuel-efﬁcient cars – something the Americans wouldn’t consider at the
time.
Example
Let us consider again the two members of staff who are leaving the ofﬁce at the same time
and leaving it somewhat depleted of resources. While this constitutes a threat to the smooth
running of the ofﬁce it also constitutes an opportunity to ﬁnd other ways of dealing with the
workload of the ofﬁce. For instance, perhaps it is not replacement staff that are required but
additional labour-saving devices in the form of ofﬁce equipment.
Distortion and exaggeration
This involves taking the problem to extremes. If there are many faulty goods being returned,
rather than investigating what is causing the faults, the method suggests that we should consider
what we should do if all the goods were faulty. The solution would then be to redesign the
product. The technique produces fairly radical solutions to problems.
Exposure
This is a technique which makes use of the force-ﬁt method that we have encountered elsewhere
in the book (see pp. 135–137). Laennec’s idea for the stethoscope (see Chapter 1) and similarly
obtained ideas ﬁt in with the principle involved here. It is suggested that we should try to force-
ﬁt together a stimulus that might be observed in the outside world to the problem with which
we are concerned.

Cross-fertilization
Here stimulation for an idea is provided by people working in different jobs or having different
skills. One simply invites someone who is an expert in their ﬁeld to say how they would
approach a problem on which one is working, using the skill and knowledge they have achieved
in their own ﬁeld.
Recent developments in microsurgery have involved controlling the movement of
instruments via movement simulation on a computer screen. In this case expert players at
virtual reality computer games might be able to provide some assistance to surgeons regarding
how to control movements on the computer screen with the aid of computer-input devices
such as joysticks, keyboards, mice, etc.
Problem switching
Insights that we gain from working on one problem may well give rise to new insights into
another. The method advocates switching from one problem to another – or even interspersing
problem solving with other activities – in the belief that this will enable new insights to be
obtained. Interestingly, the method and the theory behind it have something in common with
Graham Wallas’s ideas about incubation.
Po
This is a symbol to indicate that the principles of lateral thinking should be applied. In the same
way that no is used to reject an idea in the context of vertical thinking, po is used to indicate
LATERAL THINKING
183
REVERSAL
A large electronics distributor had 38 locations with about 1,300 employees, half of
whom were sales people. The ﬁrm sold and packaged goods of over a hundred suppliers
to meet the needs of over 30,000 customers. Until the early 1990s, it employed MBO-
based compensation plans. It was very proud of its elaborate system of incentives for
everyone in the ﬁrm. Then the CEO and other senior managers in the company were
exposed to the ideas of a creativity consultant who pointed out the disadvantages of
MBO. They began to realize that the MBO system they were so proud of was actually
a barrier to innovation as it discouraged full cooperation between business team
members and increased suboptimization.
Over a one-year period, the company eliminated all individual incentives, including
sales commissions and all supplier-sponsored promotions. As a result, it set up an
environment that has created a doubling in sales and earnings, a reduction in employee
turnover of over 50 per cent and the achievement of an ISO 9002 certiﬁcation in every
warehouse and value-added operation in less than six months, without using outside
consultants.

LATERAL THINKING
184
that a new patterning system is to be introduced through discontinuity. The symbol po is often
used in conjunction with the intermediate impossible. It indicates that one should not reject
or accept an intermediate idea which is unacceptable, but that judgement should be suspended
for the time being.
METAPHORICAL THINKING
A metaphor is a thinking technique connecting two different universes of meaning. Examples:
food chain, ﬂow of time, ﬁscal watchdog. The key to metaphorical thinking is similarity. The
human mind tends to look for similarities.
In making use of metaphors in creative problem solving, one starts by stating the problem,
then selecting a metaphor and ﬁnally using the metaphor to generate new ideas.
Example
PROBLEM: How might employees be encouraged to work more effectively to increase
productivity?
PROBLEM SWITCHING
One of my students told me of the following experience he had undergone while thinking
about a particular problem. A puzzle set by a friend stated that a 200lb man had to
get across a long rope bridge with three bags of gold, each weighing 1lb. However, the
bridge was beginning to collapse and would only hold a total of 202lb. The man only
just had time to cross the bridge once, so how did he manage to get across the bridge
with all the gold?
The student struggled with the problem for a while, trying to think of ways to get
the gold across. First, he thought the man could throw the gold across, but the bridge
was too long. Then he thought that the man could remove his shoes and go across, but
he could not be sure that this would lead to an overall weight of less than 202lb.
Another idea was to go halfway across the bridge with one of the bags, throw it the
remainder of the way and then go back for the other bags.
However, as stated, the man only just had time to get across once. Finally, accepting
defeat, the student said that the man would just have to settle for taking 2lb of the
gold across.
The student then said that he forgot about the problem and went back to reading
his book. While reading the book, he suddenly realized, completely out of the blue, that
the man could get across the bridge if he could juggle the bags of gold as he walked.
Doing this would mean that the man would only ever have two bags of gold in his hands
at any one time. As the student pointed out to me, it showed him that by taking someone
away from the problem at hand and undertaking a seemingly unrelated task it is
possible to relax the mind and think in a more open manner.

METAPHOR: The human body is composed of different organs. For the whole body to
function properly each organ must operate individually and all the organs together must work
harmoniously. Some organs are more important for the human organism than others (e.g.
heart, brain) and if they cease functioning for a long period the human body will die. Other
inner parts of the body have relative importance. Blood ﬂows through inner parts of the
human body.
INTERPRETATION: An organization is made up of different departments. For an organ -
ization to work effectively, each of the departments must operate properly and all of the
departments must work together harmoniously. Some departments are more important for
the correct functioning of the organization than others (e.g. ﬁnance and marketing
departments), and without their proper operation the survival of the business may be
threatened. If something goes wrong in any of the departments, the whole company will be
adversely affected. All must function smoothly for the smooth operation of the whole
enterprise.
Cooperation between employees within the departments and between the departments is
essential for the efﬁcient operation of the whole business. This may be achieved by holding
meetings at which departmental representatives can discuss departmental and interdepart -
mental problems. Communication is the lifeblood of the organization.
ANALOGY
The purpose of using analogies and metaphors is to raise sensitivity to a level that enables long-
term common sense to prevail. Domestic situations are ideal – such as comparing cashﬂow to
a plumbing system and staff development to gardening (Rogers, 1993).
The analogy is a statement of similarity between two different things. An example of one
would be: ‘The noises produced were like those of a cat on a hot tin roof.’ In many situations
the use of analogies facilitates new problem perspectives without which the solutions to
problems may never be found. They provide the problem owner with a possible escape from
‘mental stuckness’. In practice, analogous situations are examined and compared with the 
real problem to see if any new insights emerge. Suppose, for example, an organization wants
to improve its productivity and chooses as its analogy the building up of a successful football
team.
The football team analogy will be familiar to many people, and each stage of its develop-
ment has an organizational equivalent that may raise questions that might otherwise be
overlooked.
Forced analogy
Forced analogy is a very useful method of generating ideas. The idea is to compare the prob-
lem with something else that has little or nothing in common and gain new insights as a result.
You can force a relationship between almost anything, and get new insights – companies and
whales, management systems and telephone networks, or a relationship and a pencil. Forcing
relationships is one of the most powerful ways to develop new insights and new solutions. 
LATERAL THINKING
185

LATERAL THINKING
186
A useful way of developing the relationships is to have a selection of objects or cards with
pictures to help you generate ideas. Choose an object or card at random and see what
relationships you can force.
Figure 9.6
Analogy relating increasing productivity with building a successful football team
Building a successful football team 
Bringing in good players
Choosing the correct playing formation 
Having enough players to cope with injury
problems 
Striking the right pay deal
Creating team spirit and high morale
A team that is well managed and coached,
with a rigorous training system
Increasing productivity
Recruiting experienced and well-qualiﬁed staff 
Establishing efﬁcient work groups 
Having enough slack to cope with absenteeism.
Train people to be multi-skilled
Performance-related pay
Developing the social side of work
Having an effective operations system and
ensuring its smooth running
TASK: HOW TO ACHIEVE A SUCCESSFUL PRODUCT LAUNCH
Analogy – booking a holiday
1
Stipulate criteria (e.g. hot weather, beach, water sports, scenic, quiet).
2
Consult brochures and travel shops.
3
Consider budget.
4
Check availability.
5
Book holiday.
Interpretations could include:
1
Stipulate target market (e.g. geographic, demographic, psychographic, behavioural,
etc.).
2
Look at previous product launches or consult specialist agencies, etc.
3
Consider the budget set aside for the product launch.
4
Check availability of media (e.g. air-time, poster space, print runs, etc.).
5
Commit to product launch, taking into account the above.

Example 
Corporation as a matchbox:
Matchbox attributes
Corporation
–
Striking surface on two sides
–
The protection an organization needs against
strikes
–
Six sides
–
Six essential organizational divisions
–
Sliding centre section
–
The heart of the organization should be
‘slidable’ or ﬂexible
–
Made of cardboard
–
Inexpensive method of structure – disposable
THE DISCONTINUITY PRINCIPLE
The more you are used to something, the less stimulating it is for thinking. When you disrupt
your thought patterns, those ideas that create the greatest stimulus to your thinking do so
because they force you to make new connections in order to comprehend the situation. Roger
von Oech calls this a ‘Whack on the Side of the Head’, and Edward de Bono coined a new
word, po. This is a symbol to indicate that the principles of lateral thinking should be applied.
In the same way that no is used to reject an idea in the context of vertical thinking, po (provocative
operation) is used to indicate that a new patterning system is to be introduced through
discontinuity. Programming interruptions into your day, changing working hours, getting to
work a different way, listening to a different radio station, reading some magazines or books
you wouldn’t normally read, trying a different recipe, watching a TV programme or ﬁlm you
wouldn’t normally watch are all examples of this. Provocative ideas are often stepping stones
that get us thinking about other ideas. Putting ideas next to each other, such that their friction
creates new thought-paths, is a technique that ﬂourishes in the East but causes discomfort in
Western thinking.
SIX THINKING HATS
The Six Thinking Hats method (de Bono, 1985) it is a way to ‘try on’ different viewpoints.
This can be very useful as a planning activity. Below is an outline that explains how to incorp -
orate a critical thinking activity into the planning process.
Thinking hats – how it works
This involves people working on a problem in a group and each member of the group 
adopting a different viewpoint or modes of thinking about the problem. A variety of hats are
used to represent the different types of thinking as outlined below. These may be made or 
cut out of different coloured paper. Each hat is a different colour and represents a different
type of thinking. The key is to have a visual that represents the different types of thinking. 
The group needs a facilitator or at least someone who can collect thoughts and ideas that are
generated during ensuing discussions.
LATERAL THINKING
187

Procedure
1
The group of six has to be provided with six different thinking hats. The six styles of
thinking should be written down on a sheet of paper or a card and should be placed on
each group’s table as a reference. Each group member should be asked to familiarize
themselves with each type of thinking.
2
Each one of the group should then select a hat or type of thinking. Having donned a hat
(either literally or ﬁguratively) they should then be asked to discuss the problem from the
thinking viewpoint of the hat they have chosen.
3
Hats may be exchanged during the session to facilitate role changes or thinking approaches
of group members.
4
Making use of what is contributed by group members one should then try to develop a
solution for the problem.
QUESTIONS
1 Lateral thinking is more than a set of creative problem solving techniques. Discuss.
2 ‘Creative thinking is really analogical thinking.’ To what extent would you agree or
disagree with this statement? Explain.
3 Suggest how analogies might be used to help suggest ways of helping to improve time-
keeping.
4 What is lateral thinking? Illustrate how it might be useful to executives trying to ﬁnd ways
of introducing improvements in organisational procedures into their companies.
5 ‘Lateral thinking is not just a set of techniques but a way of thinking.’ Critically evaluate
this statement.
6 Illustrate how lateral thinking might help managers ﬁnd ways of introducing improvements
in staff motivation in their companies.
7 ‘There is nothing original in lateral thinking. It is simply a synthesis of the contributions
of a few of the many writers on the subject of creative problem solving.’ To what extent
would you agree or disagree with this statement? Explain your viewpoint.
8 Suggest some problems to which the technique of assumption reversal might be usefully
applied.
9 A ﬁrm is looking for ways of improving productivity on the shopﬂoor. Suggest how it
might be done, using each of the following as an aid to creative thinking:
(a) a metaphor
(b) an analogy
(c) a forced analogy
10 Use the intermediate impossible technique to ﬁnd ways of preventing shoplifting in a large
department store.
11 Use the random word technique to ﬁnd ways of improving interdepartmental
communications.
LATERAL THINKING
188

12 Show how the ‘keyword omission’ method can help to ﬁnd a possible solution to the
problem of absenteeism in the workplace.
13 An airline wants to improve its proﬁtability. How can fractionalisation and bridging divisions
be used to good effect in helping to solve such a problem?
14 How does the Six Thinking Hats approach aid assist in the process of creative problem
solving?
CASES
Business books
Edwina Publishers were looking for ways of ensuring the successful launch of a new series of
business books. ‘What is required’, said John, ‘is a new approach. There are so many titles
and series in the marketplace nowadays that readers, students and lecturers have too much
choice and cannot easily make their mind up which books best suit their purposes. I think the
choice process they must go through is a bit haphazard.’
Jane suggested that it might be more to do with how the product was launched, and the
kind of budgeting and marketing operations that went into launching a product.’Look here,’
she said, ‘let us approach the problem from a creative problem-solving perspective. A book I
have recently looked at suggests that we might consider analogous situations when we are
trying to get insights into a problem. It ﬁrst suggests that we should deﬁne the problem. In
this particular case I think that is fairly obvious – i.e. how to achieve a successful product
launch. It goes on to suggest that we next look for an analogy for the problem. In this particular
case, one such analogy might be ‘booking a holiday’. It then suggests that we consider what is
involved in working with the analogous problem. This might mean such things as:
1
Stipulate requirements (e.g. good weather, good beach, water sports, scenic, quiet, etc.).
2
Consult brochures and travel shops.
3
Consider budget.
4
Check availability.
5
Book holiday.
‘Interpretations could include:
1
Stipulate target market (e.g. geographic, demographic, psychographic, behavioural, etc.).
2
Look at previous product launches or consult specialist agencies, etc.
3
Consider the budget set aside for the product launch.
4
Check availability of media (e.g. leaﬂets, direct mail shots, print runs, etc.).
5
Commit to product launch, taking into account the above.’
‘Well,’ said John, ‘I think we do those kind of things already. However, I like the
idea of using an analogy. It might be worth spending some time exploring the approach
in more detail.’
LATERAL THINKING
189

Question
How might John and Jane develop the analogy approach in this instance? Provide illustra -
tions. What do you see as the drawbacks, if any, to using this particular approach in this
instance?
Finding out more about candidates for interview
‘Another one having a nervous breakdown,’ said Jenny, closing the ﬁle and putting it in the
pending tray.
‘Yes, that’s the third one this month,’Arnold replied, hardly stopping from his task of
keying data into the database. ‘Something will have to be done about it.’
‘I think the application forms and interview procedures need a shake-up,’ said Sarah.
‘Interviewers are making too many wrong assumptions when they read the application forms
and conduct the interviews.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Jenny.
‘Well,’ replied Sarah,’do we really know whether application forms are ﬁlled in by the
candidates themselves? Can we be sure that the work experience candidates say they have is
really true? Are references provided by referees really valid in the context of a candidate’s
application?’
‘Some people are also better at selling themselves,’Arnold interjected.’They just give the
right impression.’
‘Well,’ said Sarah, ‘perhaps we ought to write down all the assumptions we make about
how people ﬁll in application forms and all the assumptions we make when interviewing
people.’
‘What then?’ Jenny asked.
Questions
List the various assumptions that short-listers might make about candidates for jobs when
the latter are completing application forms. Do the same for assumptions made about
interviewees by interviewers. How would you proceed to use this information to gain further
insights into the problem? Illustrate your answer.
Rose
Using the random word technique to come up with ideas for getting customers to buy a new
brand of perfume, the following list of associated words and phrases for a rose were obtained:
•
petals
•
perfume
•
bright
•
colourful
•
stem
•
fresh
•
thorns
LATERAL THINKING
190

•
needs room to grow
•
needs good soil and plenty of sunshine and rain to grow
•
attracts insects
Questions
1
Illustrate how the list of associations might be used to come up with insights into the
problem.
2
Suggest other associations for ‘rose’ and interpret these into insights into the problem.
3
Take another word as the stimulus, list associations and generate insights into the
problem.
4
Compare and contrast the various insights that have been generated.
Cash problems
A company had to generate a certain amount of cash in order to settle various loans by speciﬁed
dates. Unfortunately, the business plan that provided the cashﬂow was too optimistic, and the
ﬁrm was in the unenviable position of being unable to generate the cash required to pay off
the loans. Sales were falling well short of expectations and, although proﬁt was on target,
insufﬁcient cashﬂow would be generated.
Questions
Illustrate how lateral thinking methods might help gain insights into this problem.
An inventive clerk
•
Pricing is based on estimating the amount of square footage that has to be covered.
•
Jonathan viewed the plans with some disdain. How on earth was he to work out the square
footage associated with the painting of the structure? The shape of the structure was very
complex and although the drawings were very precise in terms of the scale there were
still considerable difﬁculties to overcome when estimating the areas of the shape of the
structure.
•
Jonathan had never received training in calculus and had no knowledge of polynomials so
trying to solve the problem by mathematical means was beyond his experience!
•
However, he was quite creative and had recently studied Lateral Thinking Methods so
ﬁnding a solution to the problem was not completely beyond his capabilities. He sat and
puzzled over the problem for some time, thumbed through his course notes and then
suddenly hit upon a way of solving the problem.
Question
What do you think he did?
LATERAL THINKING
191

Female preferences
The university has been experiencing difﬁculty in attracting females to study engineering and
science. Girls seem quite keen to study Arts subjects and Social Sciences at the university but
less so anything that has a mathematical aspect to it. The university has decided to go on a
recruitment drive to attract more students to its science and engineering courses and wonders
what is the best way to set about this.
Traditionally, the university invites students to open days when potential new entrants can
meet with departmental and faculty staff. It has highlighted this as a prime opportunity to
engage with potential newcomers but feels that to date it is somehow not getting enough
female potential students to attend the open days in the ﬁrst instance.
The university wonders how one might best address this problem.
Question
How might a creative problem-solving technique help the university to gain some insights
into how best to challenge this problem?
FURTHER READING
Serrat, O. (2010) Wearing Six Thinking Hats. Washington, DC: Asian Development Bank.
Sloane, P. (2003) The Leader’s Guide to Lateral Thinking Skills: Powerful Problem-solving
Techniques to Ignite your Team’s Potential, London; Sterling, VA: Kogan Page.
Stephen A. Butler, (2010) Solving business problems using a lateral thinking approach, Management
Decision, 48(1): 58–64.
LATERAL THINKING
192
, 48(1): 58–64.

193
INTRODUCTION
The chapter looks at the subject of synectics. A method of using synectics is outlined 
and discussion given over to considering the various components that make up the synectics
process. The chapter explains the four different types of analogies used and gives illustrations
of each. The use of analogical thinking in synectics demands some degree of divergent thinkers
and is therefore most likely to appeal to those who enjoy thinking in a divergent manner.
Synectics facilitates paradigm stretching and can lead to the discovery of new paradigms. One
needs to have a sound appreciation of the use of analogies in problem solving, as outlined in
Chapter 3, to get the best out of this technique. Ensuring that the surface and deep structures
of analogies used suit the problem in hand is important. Having a well-informed facilitator for
the synectics session is of paramount importance.
An excursion in the mind
Take a problem and question the person presenting the problem until all aspects of the
problem are understood. No brainstorming or solution gathering occurs at this time.
Second, get away from the problem entirely, take a mental holiday. Someone suggests
a fantasy or place to go, mentally, emotionally or spiritually – e.g. the top of Mount
Everest, a rock concert or rave, an imaginary tour through the valves of the heart. Get
as far away from the original problem as possible. Everyone present contributes to the
fantasy, and someone takes notes of the excursion or mental ‘holiday’. Examine
elements and aspects of the ‘holiday’ and use them as an analogy to the problem
solution. Practise ‘force ﬁtting’ the vacation analogy as a metaphoric solution to the
problem. For instance, what clues can the top of Mount Everest give us about promoting
a brand of vodka? Obvious! Use the pureness of the atmosphere to stress the purity
and medicinal qualities of the vodka! Or show someone being reinvigorated by it after
having climbed to the top of a high mountain.
Synectics facilitates the stretching of existing paradigms to facilitate the creation of
new insights.
Synectics
Chapter 10

SYNECTICS
194
Nolan (2003) identiﬁes the origins of synectics with a group of inventors, who tape-recorded
their meetings to research their creative process, and the resulting beneﬁts and weaknesses.
He argues that synectics today is a set of process tools that can be used successfully in a variety
of situations, either in a speciﬁc sequence (as in the original invention model) or individually
according to the needs of the situation. The result is a variety of meeting models and techniques
for enhancing personal effectiveness.
SYNECTICS
Synectics is the most highly reﬁned and universally applicable of all the creative problem-
solving techniques. Like brainstorming, it is a complete problem-solving process and is
particularly useful for problem identiﬁcation and idea development. The main aim is to use
two operational mechanisms to make the strange seem familiar and to make the familiar strange in
Figure 10.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

order to produce ﬁve psychological states that are necessary to achieve creative responses.
These states are involvement and detachment, deferment of premature solutions, speculation, autonomy
of object and hedonic response.
Synectics encourages the use of analogies to make the familiar strange: the personal, direct,
symbolic and fantasy analogies. Synectics is perhaps the most difﬁcult to perform of all the
ideation techniques. Skill and experience need to be acquired before attempting to perform
synectics. The origins of the technique are rooted in brainstorming. Synectics aims to open up
a problem to new insights. It is the process of combining unrelated factors to allow problem
solvers to view a problem from a different perspective.
Synectics was developed by William J. Gordon (see Gordon, 1961) as a result of research
undertaken at the Arthur D. Little organization into creative individuals and the creative
process. He associated the creative process with certain psychological states, believing that if
these could be induced, then creative breakthroughs would increase their occurrence. He
emphasized the need to make the familiar strange and vice versa:
To make the familiar strange is to distort, or transpose the everyday ways of looking and
responding . . . it is the conscious attempt to achieve a new look at the same old world,
people, ideas, feelings, and things.
(Gordon, 1961: 54)
This, he anticipated, would enable a problem to be viewed from different perspectives and
thus support ideation based upon these various perspectives. Gordon encouraged the use of
metaphors and analogies to aid the idea generation process. George Prince (who developed
synectics, making it more efﬁcient and productive – see Prince, 1970) joined William Gordon,
and together they established Synectics Incorporated in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in the
USA. In 1960, Gordon left the company, and he and Prince each developed their own version
of the technique; the key difference between them is terminology. Synectics is a method for
inventing new solutions to problems. No attempt is made to deﬁne the problem. The client’s
statement of the problem is taken as the starting-point; he or she gives a brief explanation of
the background, as he or she sees it, and the group and client proceed to restate or paraphrase
the problem in a language of ‘how to’ statements. These can be as speculative, unrealistic,
wishful or challenging as the group feels inclined to produce. Their purpose is to open up the
whole problem area and give the client an opportunity to get away from conventional ways of
looking at the problem.
The synectics slogan – ‘stay loose till rigour counts’ – expresses a basic feature of the
process. Rigour, precision, accuracy and realism are necessary and valuable in their place, but
they are not the material of which creativity is made. We have to make a conscious effort to
suspend normal acceptable intellectual standards if we are to give free rein to speculation,
imagination and originality.
Conventional treatment of ideas makes two assumptions about the nature of ideas: ﬁrst,
that they are monolithic entities and, second, that their value is binary – good or bad. Our
experience is that both these assumptions are incorrect and destructive. An idea is not
monolithic; it has many facets. There is always something good about an idea.
SYNECTICS
195

A synectics group is made up of 6–8 people, plus a leader, and all the people in the group
need to be trained in the use of the technique. Ideally, the group members should not be
acquainted with the problem situation. No attempt is made by the problem owner to deﬁne
the situation; however, ‘initial solutions’ held by the group members should be offered up in
order that those that have not already been tried can be recorded as viewpoints. During the
next stage, group members paraphrase the problem using ‘how to’, wishful thinking and
fantasy statements. Having completed this, analogies and metaphors are used to take the group
on an excursion. Ideas generated on an excursion, or if necessary in a series of them, are next
related to the original problem in the hope of converting them to a practical application. Often
expert guidance will be required to transform these ideas into ﬁnal solutions.
There are various types of excursion that can be used, depending upon which the leader
deems to be most suitable: personal analogy, direct analogy, symbolic analogy and fantasy
analogy.
Personal analogy
Personal analogy is the use of emotions and feelings to identify an individual with the subject of
a problem.
The problem may be how to vary a food product such as a ﬁsh ﬁnger. It may feel pain, be
boring and may have a ﬁshy odour which may not appeal to people. This may lead to some
new element such as a tomato sauce ﬁlling being added to the product to negate the undesirable
characteristics.
Personal analogy can involve:
(a) describing the object by listing its basic characteristics and relating these to the problem
(b) describing the emotions the object might have in a given situation
(c) describing how someone feels when using the object
(d) describing what it feels like to be the given object
Based upon such an approach, it might then be possible to develop solutions to the problem.
Example
Imagine that the problem is ‘how to market a bottle of wine’. The personal analogy could be
to imagine what it feels like to be ‘the bottle of wine’. Some suggested feelings might be:
•
‘I feel wanted’
•
‘I feel important’
Alternatively, of course, we could consider the characteristics of the wine – clear, fruity, etc.;
the emotions that the wine might have in given situations, etc. – happy at dinner, friendly at
parties; or what one might feel like when using the wine – sophisticated, tired, etc.
We might then look at ways of how we could try to incorporate these feelings into the
promotion of the product (or, where negative, compensate for them in our promotional
messages). It is through such a technique that we are able to release ourselves from looking
at a problem in terms of its previously analysed elements.
SYNECTICS
196

SYNECTICS
197
•
Characteristics
—
clear
–
fruity
•
Emotions
–
happy at dinner
–
friendly at parties
•
Feeling when using
–
sophisticated
–
tired
•
Object feelings
–
wanted
–
important
Direct analogy
The direct analogy compares the problem with homogeneous facts, information or technology.
A heating system might be compared with a volcano, and from this new ideas may arise. A
direct analogy is a mechanism by which we try to make comparisons with analogous facts,
information or technology. In making use of this device we have to search our experiences and
knowledge to collect phenomena that seem to exhibit similar relationships to those in the
problem in hand. It is often fruitful to compare animate systems with inanimate systems, or
to make comparisons between biological, ecological and other natural science systems and
social systems.
Figure 10.2
Personal analogy – a glass of wine

SYNECTICS
198
Example
Decision making can be likened to ﬁnding one’s way across paths over a marsh. There are
many pitfalls and wrong turnings along the way. The various paths have different pay-offs,
so we need to estimate the value of the various pay-offs. Will they enable us to reach our
destination or objective?
The idea is to describe a clear, straightforward relationship between the problem and some
object, thing or idea with the expectation of being able to transfer insights back to the
problem in hand.
Figure 10.3
Direct analogy – paths across the marshes 
•
What are seemingly paths across the marshes often lead you the wrong way.
•
Unfamiliar and potentially hazardous options need careful prior analysis when making
decisions in order to ensure that good choices are made
Symbolic analogy
Symbolic analogy is the use of objective and personal images.
If the problem is to ﬁt ﬁfty people into a small conference room, it may be likened to
cramming sardines into a can or the London Underground.
Symbolic analogy involves making use of objective and personal images to describe a
problem (e.g. like an Indian rope trick, like a thief in the night, like a pirate).
Example
It may be difﬁcult to get hold of the boss because the boss is nearly always out of the ofﬁce.
Finding the boss may be likened to ﬁnding the elusive Scarlet Pimpernel. It might well be
Figure 10.4
Symbolic analogy– the Scarlet Pimpernel

that in trying to suggest ways of ﬁnding the elusive ﬂower (or ﬁctional character of Baroness
Orczy, who shares the same name) we may get some further insights into how to keep tabs
on the whereabouts of the boss.
•
Getting hold of the boss is like ﬁnding the Scarlet Pimpernel. ‘We seek her here, we seek
her there, we seek her everywhere!’
Fantasy analogy
This is based on Freud’s notion that creative thinking and wish fulﬁlment are strongly related.
It is usually prefaced by the words ‘How do we in our wildest fantasy. . .?’ For example, when
considering a problem dealing with managing difﬁcult staff at work we might pose the question:
How do we in our wildest fantasy (IOWF) manage difﬁcult staff without undue acrimony in the
workplace?
This may well take us into the realm of considering conﬂict-avoidance or conﬂict-molliﬁcation
management strategies.
Fantasy analogies take the most desirable solutions, which may be impossible to implement
but which may lead to some further practical ideas. This is similar to the intermediate impossible
technique advocated in lateral thinking.
SYNECTICS
199
Figure 10.5
Fantasy analogy – peace
•
How do we IOWF want to manage the ofﬁce?
• 
So that peace reigns all the time
•
Solution: adopt style of management based on conﬂict
CONDUCTING SYNECTICS SESSIONS
The management of synectics sessions is crucial to their success. If the session is not well
carried out, the psychological states that are required by users of the technique will not be
achieved.

Gordon laid down quite speciﬁc criteria for group membership and composition. He
suggested that group members should be frequent users of analogies and metaphors, have an
attitude of assistance, well coordinated bodily movements and the capacity to generalize.They
should possess personality traits such as emotional maturity,’constructive childishness’ and
‘risk taking’, and be non-status-orientated. They needed to show a commitment to the group
and its purpose and be 25 to 40 years of age. Gordon’s suggestion, however, should not be
seen as an absolute guideline, as far as age is concerned.
The group should not have too many experts. The problem owner will invariably be the
problem content expert. It is easier on the leader if all are of equal status. It is also useful to
have a couple of people who are good at coming up with wild ideas. These people may set the
cultural norm of the group, which otherwise might be unwilling to try wild ideas. It is also
advantageous to have some members who have been trained in the use of synectics.
The problem owner
He or she should be warned of what to expect, so that he or she is not alarmed when the
proceedings appear to be running off in a seemingly irrelevant direction. It is also useful for
the problem owner to understand the synectics process.
The group leader
The role is that of a process leader who guides only the problem solving process. The leader
should not get involved with the problem content in any way. Leaders should direct the
process, not contribute ideas, suggestions or possible solutions, let alone the best way of
resolving the problem. The group leader should determine the success of the process by
observing, and asking for, the client’s reactions to what is going on.
The synectics session leader needs to be seen as serving the needs of the group in order to
gain commitment, enthusiasm and the best ideas.The group leader is also responsible for
ensuring that the group members obey the rules; for encouraging speculation; for recording
all the ideas; for checking with the problem owner that the group is on the right track; and for
managing the time.
The group
Since the group may generate ideas faster than the leader can write them down on the ﬂip
charts, group members should be encouraged to jot ideas down on notepads until required.
Half-formed and wild ideas should be recorded, and group members should support each
other’s efforts by complimenting them where appropriate.
Process
The problem owner ﬁrst describes the problem. The next stage in the process is ‘goal
orientation’. Here one tries to view the problem situation in a variety of ways, so that one
looks for a solution in the most appropriate direction. ‘Goal wishing’ stresses that
SYNECTICS
200

speculation/wishing is permitted and desired. We are seeking different angles or restatements
of the problem. This is a time when the group members must not evaluate their own ideas.
Way-out ideas often trigger other ideas in group members. The problem owner should offer
directions as to which of the ideas appear to offer the best way forward and so direct the group
members. ‘How to’ or ‘I wish’ statements are quite useful. The latter encourage speculation,
while the former convey positive direction.
Selection
The problem owner needs a chance to reﬂect on the restatements made in order to select two
or three that best describe the problem situation. He or she should be warned against selecting
only those that appear obviously practical, and be advised to choose those that are intriguing,
novel and interesting. The problem owner is asked to say what led him or her to choose the
selected ‘springboards’.
If no speciﬁc action is indicated by a ‘springboard’, the next step is to generate ideas as to
how the circumstances it describes might be brought about – possibly by using an excursion.
Excursion
Various types of excursion are used in the synectics process. The choice of excursion depends
on the degree of novelty required in a solution, the element of risk the leader is prepared to
take and the type of material which is being worked on. Hicks (1991) distinguishes between
‘imaging or fantasy excursion’ and ‘example excursion’. The imaging excursion is possibly the
most unorthodox form of excursion and can be a potential disaster with a conservative-minded
group – although it often works dramatically well when it is least expected and produces the
most innovative ideas.
Fantasy excursion
For a fantasy or image excursion the group is asked to describe a mental picture/story inspired
by the last item in a word-association preliminary exercise, starting with a word taken from
the ‘springboard’. One person will lead off, and then every other person in the group has to
add to the story. They should be invited to jump in whenever they like and told that the more
colourful, outlandish, weird or exotic the story the better. It is usually better to keep the story
in the same location, if possible, as this makes for better imagery. Everyone should try to add
about a minute to the story, and then someone else takes over. The changeover may be left to
the discretion of the leader.
If the story tends to stagnate on some minute detail of one particular image, the leader can
ask someone to make something surprising happen. Conversely, if images are insufﬁciently
developed because storytellers move too quickly to other images, the leader can pin people to
one scenario by asking for more detail. People may be anxious about producing mental images
in public and about their ability to contribute to the story. It is, however, the violent changing
of direction and having to build another mental image after the destruction of the ﬁrst that
makes the story rich in speculation and evocative images.
SYNECTICS
201

SYNECTICS
202
Figure 10.6
The synectics process: fantasy excursion method
Turn promising
absurd insights
into practical
solution
Select
KEYWORD from
problem
statement
Start the problem
Generate several
restatements of
the problem
Go over story in
one’s mind and
think up absurd or
impractical
solutions to the
problem
Make up a
FANTASY
EXCURSION
WEIRD STORY
Take KEYWORD
on an excursion
ABSURD
SOLUTIONS

Absurd solutions
When every group member has had at least one chance to contribute to the story the leader
stops the imaging and asks the group to replay the story in their mind and try to think up some
really absurd or impractical solutions to the problem. The absurd solutions are written up on
the ﬂip chart.
Having moved so far from the problem with the fantasy excursion, it usually becomes
desirable to return to the real world and the problem in several stages, the ﬁrst of which is this
drawing up of absurd solutions. If a group member immediately comes up with a sensible and
novel solution, one should obviously not reject it.
The leader needs to check with the problem owner to see if any of the absurd solutions
intrigue, fascinate or appeal to them. There should be no problem with picking too practical
a solution as there should not be any. After the problem owner makes his selection the leader
asks the group to examine the chosen absurd solutions and to try to ﬁnd ways of changing them
into something more practical and closer to reality, while retaining as much of the original idea
as possible. It is better not to attempt to do this in one step but to spend some time modifying
them, because there is a tendency to lose the novel feature contained in the absurd solution
by jumping back to reality too quickly.
Example excursion (includes the use of analogies)
The example excursion is perhaps most commonly applied and easiest to interpret, though it is
thought to be less generally applicable. It is introduced in the same general way as the fantasy
excursion. When moving into the excursion we ask the group for examples of a keyword
chosen from the problem restatements in a different ‘world’. The choice of appropriate world
is a matter of past experience and knowledge of those that seem to have worked well in the
past. Almost any ‘world’ can be used – e.g. sport, fashion, warfare, nature, physics, astrophysics,
engineering, and so on. Examples, of course, are only one form of analogy, and one can also
ask for other forms of direct, personal, fantasy or symbolic analogy – see the examples of
synectics in action in the next section. One often combines examples with some other form
of analogy. All ideas are, of course, written up and eventually explored to see how they can
provide insights into the problem under consideration.
A typical session might involve:
1
State and restate the problem.
2
Choose a keyword.
3
Take the keyword on an excursion into a different world – e.g. nature – asking for
examples of the keyword in that world.
4
Ask what it feels like to be that example in the different world – personal analogy.
5
See if any of the material listed so far gives insights into the problem.
6
If required, continue with more excursions.
SYNECTICS
203

SYNECTICS
204
Figure 10.7
The synectics process: example excursion method
Turn promising
absurd insights
into practical
solution
Select
KEYWORD from
problem
statement
Start the problem
Generate several
restatements of
the problem
Use different
forms of
ANALOGY with
the KEYWORD to
obtain insights
which may be
translated back
to the original
problem
EXCURSION into
world of
NATURE, 
SCIENCE,
FAMILY,
WORK,
etc.
Take KEYWORD
on an excursion
ANALOGIES
PERSONAL
FANTASY
DIRECT
SYMBOLIC

SYNECTICS IN ACTION
Fantasy excursion
A ﬁrm was looking for capital to invest in some risky ventures.
Problem statement: how to ﬁnance risky ventures.
Word selected: ventures.
Word association preliminary: ventures, adventure, excitement, journey, aspiration, jungle,
desert, joy.
Weird story: ‘Joy sat entrenched in the bob-sleigh. The ice seemed to seep up through the
runners as it began to move. The speed gathered. The sun glinted on the mountains
overlooking the course. The ﬁrst corner came. All was safe. The angle steepened, and
the speed increased. Joy’s helmet touched the ice wall. A reverberation rang through her
ears. Everything went out of focus except the track. It was white, fast and steep. A big
corner. Almost turned over. The ﬁnish in sight. Would she stop? Yes. Hugs and kisses.
All over.’
Absurd solutions
1
Win the money on the races.
2
Give potential backers a ride on a bob-sleigh and charge them exorbitant fares for the
ride.
3
Put on very risky bob-sleigh tournaments and charge spectators for the privilege of
watching.
4
Produce all kinds of spectacular events that will have great entertainment value and will
attract sponsorship and TV rights.
Practical solution
Make the ventures look very attractive propositions, stressing that what appears to be a risky
venture will, in fact, be quite safe and have substantial pay-offs.
Example excursions
Two groups, on separate days, but under the direction of the same synectics leader, were
assigned the task of ﬁnding insights into the problem of how to reduce stress at work. The
following episodes occurred:
Group 1: Problem deﬁnition/redeﬁnition:
•
How to reduce stress at work
•
How to work in a positive way
•
How to improve morale and reduce absenteeism
•
How to improve relations between staff
•
The word reduce was chosen by the leader, and the group suggested the world of forestry
for an excursion.
SYNECTICS
205

The group was then asked to think of examples of using reduce in the world of forestry.
• putting ﬁres out
• cutting paths through the forest
• reducing tree disease
• deforestation
• cutting the undergrowth
• stop illegal hunting of animals in the forest
• removal of weeds
The leader then focused on animals being hunted in the forest and asked the group to imagine
what it would be like to be an animal being hunted in the forest:
• browned off
• thinks it is a game
• scared
• unfairness
• premature death
• pain, misery, suffering
• looking for relatives that have been 
• survival of the ﬁttest
killed
• revenge
• running all the time
• victimized
• feeling it never stops (relentless 
• trying to ﬁnd somewhere to hide
pursuit)
Group 2: Problem deﬁnition/redeﬁnition:
• How to reduce stress in the workplace
• How to work in a more peaceful company
• How to make work pleasurable
• How to reward good performance
The word pleasurable was taken, and the suggested excursion was the family. Examples of
pleasurable things in the context of the family generated by the group were:
• home cooking
• gatherings
• support
• family intimacy
• cosiness
• quarrelling
• birthdays
• storytelling at bedtime
• family outings
• sport (doing it together)
• holidays having meals together
The word gatherings was then chosen for a further excursion, and the group was asked to
give examples of the kind of emotions that might be encountered at a family gathering:
• happiness
• love
• sadness
• anger
• satisfaction
• togetherness
• pride
• belonging
• frustration
• boredom
• protection
• tension
Now you consider how the data might be used to give insights into the original problem.
SYNECTICS
206

SYNECTICS
207
Itemized response
We should not reject ideas that are not perfectly formed. Indeed, the suggestion is to work
on and develop the ideas into more practical solutions. Synectics has developed this simple
technique of itemised response, which allows a possible solution to be developed from any
idea, using gentle evaluation that encourages the ironing out of minor concerns rather than
dismissal of the idea. It starts from the assumption that all ideas have value; and thus, before
any ﬂaws or imperfections in the idea are pointed out, some of the good points (say 3–5) are
listed. This reinforces the value of the idea, and justiﬁes the additional time that will be spent
overcoming concerns about it.
The problem owner is asked to identify practical, helpful or attractive aspects of an idea,
giving reasons wherever possible. It may be helpful to let the group contribute to this also,
since they may see beneﬁts not immediately apparent to the problem owner. The leader asks
for the problem owner’s major concern with the idea, expressing this as a ‘How to/I wish’ in
order to give the group a direction for further development of the idea in order to overcome
this concern.The leader then gathers ideas from the group and writes them on the ﬂip charts
while asking the problem owner to paraphrase the suggestions to ensure understanding. If the
group comes up with a suggestion that only partially overcomes the concern, the IR process
is repeated with this latest suggestion. As the idea develops in this way it becomes more
difﬁcult to get three ‘new’ good points each time, but the time spent trying is usually
worthwhile.
PROBLEM: ‘HOW TO MAKE OUR ADVERTISING MORE
EFFECTIVE’
Restated as ‘How to give our advertising more punch’.
Keyword taken ‘punch’.
Ideas about ‘punch’ from the world of boxing: jab, hook, knock-out, body, head, ribs,
rabbit, clinch. . . .
What does it feel like to be a ‘knock-out’?
1 Signiﬁcant
4 Strong
2 Penetrating
5 Rampant
3 Finishing touch
6 Explosive
All of the above seem applicable to the advertising problem. For example, it suggests
content – the advertising must contain highly signiﬁcant messages and images that will
awaken interest in the target audience. Moreover, in the presence of all the ‘noise’
created by competitive advertising, the advertisement must be able to penetrate through
to the reader. There must be something very attention-getting about it. Perhaps it
should contain strong, rampant and explosive messages and images. The ﬁnishing
touches to the advertisement are also important – its timing, media slot, etc.

SYNECTICS
208
Having resolved the major concern, the group tackles other concerns the problem owner
may have with respect to the original idea, always taking them one at a time. The process
continues, gradually homing in on a possible solution, a course of action which the problem
owner can implement without further help from the group.The leader then writes up the
possible solution.
THE SYNECTIC TRIGGER MECHANISMS
•
Synectic trigger mechanisms catalyse new thoughts, ideas and inventions.
•
Synectic theory is based on disruptive thinking – similar to the po operation of
Edward de Bono.
THE SYNECTIC WAYS OF WORKING
•
Synectics is based on the fusion of opposites.
•
Synectics is based on analogical thinking.
•
Synectics is synergistic. Its action produces a result that is greater than the sum
of its parts.
QUESTIONS
1
A ﬁrm is having problems in recruiting new managers to join its ranks. Discuss how the
use of synectics might lead to ideas on how to get to grips with this problem.
2
What is synectics? Illustrate its application to a problem of your choice.
3
When might synectics be most appropriately used in creative problem solving?
4
Illustrate the different forms of analogy that might be used in a synectics session (i.e.
personal, direct, symbolic and fantasy analogy).
5
What is the purpose of an excursion? Suggest ‘excursions’ and an example of the following
italicised keywords, in the excursions in each of the cases below:
(a) How to ignite enthusiasm for a project.
(b) How to liquidate assets to solve a ﬁnancial problem.
(c) How to purify the air in departmental meetings.
6
Work through a synectics session to gain insights into each of the following problems:
(a) How to improve communications between management and workers.
(b) How to prevent industrial espionage.
(c) How to minimize the number of industrial accidents.
(d) How to do more management work with fewer resources.

CASES
Crossing the river
The bridge over the river is very busy at peak trafﬁc times in the morning for three hours and
similarly in the evenings. Long queues build up on either side from the dual carriageways. The
bridge was built in the 1950s and has only one lane in each direction. On either side of the
river there are also two roads that feed into the approach to the bridge in addition to dual
carriageways. The bridge is a steel arched truss bridge and the steel girders need to be painted
regularly and after sixty years’ use need regular maintenance and repairs as well. This means
that lane closures on the bridge are inevitable from time to time and even on occasion the
bridge is totally put out of action. The river runs east to west and there are no crossings of the
river to the west and the nearest one to the east is some ﬁfteen miles away. There are large
concentrations of industry on either side of the river and two towns face each other across the
narrows spanned by the bridge. The river is around 300 metres wide at this point.
There has been talk of replacing the bridge with another for years and recently central
government pledged support for such a project. In the current climate of austerity, however,
it seems unlikely that any movement on building a new bridge is likely in the foreseeable
future.
Question
Can you think of alternative ways of solving this problem?
Jo Soap
Helena is deputy head of department and is in charge of the ofﬁce when the boss is away. Her
usual duties involve preparing departmental budgets and reports for the company’s directors
and handling complaints and other difﬁcult problems both by letter and over the telephone.
She is tactful, efﬁcient and cooperative.
Jo Soap is in charge of the secretaries and manages a group of ﬁve female employees. She
has to ensure that clerical work is progressed when it is passed on by the department head,
Helena or any of the administrative assistants in the department. Unfortunately, Jo tends to
have an authoritarian attitude which is resented both by the women who work under her
direction and other people in the department. She has demonstrated her rigidity to Helena on
many occasions in the past, insinuating that Helena has not been reasonable in expecting work
to be done by a particular time because reasonable advanced notice has not been given. There
is little truth in these allegations, though on occasion expectations might have been regarded
as ambitious by some people.
A short while ago an ofﬁcial complaint was lodged with the head of department by the
secretaries about Jo Soap’s approach to managing their work. The women even cited Jo’s
inappropriate behaviour towards Helena as evidence to support their complaint. The head of
department had approached Helena concerning the matter, but the latter thought she was well
equipped to handle her personal difﬁculties herself – a response which seemed to please the
boss, who did not really want to get involved in hassles of this type.
SYNECTICS
209

In the last few weeks, Jo’s attitude towards Helena has become more hostile. Finally, just
before Easter, when the head of department was away for a few days, Jo told the secretaries
that they need not come in the two days before the start of the holidays. She also said that she
would not be in, either. This was something that had not been the custom and practice in the
past, and secretarial support was always available up until the start of the holiday period.
Helena did not know about the planned additional holidays until the day before the women
were about to take the time off. Furthermore, Jo had been taken ill and was not available for
consultation. The result was that there were pressing jobs that required doing and no one to
do them. However, following a persuasive talk with Helena, a couple of the women agreed
to make themselves available to cover any necessary work that was required to be done.
After the break, Jo complained bitterly to Helena about interfering in her work. She was
extremely rude to Helena, despite Helena’s explanation that at the time Jo had been ill and
she had therefore to intervene herself as there were urgent jobs to be done.
Helena recognizes that Jo is very efﬁcient in her job but is rightly concerned that matters
could get out of hand, and she dreads having to interact with Jo at all. Something will have to
be done about the problem, but she is unsure what action to take.
Question
How would you advise Helena? Use synectics to gain some insights into the problem.
Consultants who don’t like meetings
Creative Marketing Consultants offers a wide range of expert marketing consultancy 
services to its clients. The ﬁrm employs ten consultants and is based in the West End of 
London in exclusive ofﬁces not far from Hyde Park Corner. Unfortunately, although the team
the chief executive has got together are very good individual thinkers, they hate having to
attend internal meetings and prefer to work outside the ofﬁce with clients. Internal meetings
are poorly attended, and a variety of plausible excuses are usually offered for being absent.
The chief executive feels that in order to foster a creative spirit in the staff it is essential to
encourage an atmosphere in which people are free to come and go as they please and to have
as much ﬂexibility as possible in their working arrangements.
The chief executive called in a creativity consultant to help deal with the problem. A one-
day seminar was presented to the staff in which, ostensibly, a range of creative thinking and
problem-solving techniques were presented and discussed. In one of the afternoon sessions a
synectics session was held during which the problem of getting staff to attend meetings was
discussed. Six of the consultants attended the synectics session, which proceeded along the
following lines:
First the problem was stated: how to encourage staff to attend meetings.
The word meetings was selected as the keyword for an excursion, and the world in which
the word was taken on an excursion was the family.
Examples of meetings suggested included:
•
weddings
•
Christmas dinners
•
funerals
•
golden weddings
•
birthdays
•
christenings
•
parties
SYNECTICS
210

‘Weddings’ was selected for further exploration, and the group was asked to suggest what it
felt like to be a bride or bridegroom. Answers included:
•
late
•
happy
•
hassled
•
well organized
•
nervous
•
showered with confetti
•
anxious
•
watched
•
over-dressed
•
religious experience
•
putting on a show
•
expensive on someone’s pocket
The leader felt that the above ideas represented food for thought with respect to the original
problem that was posed, but that the line of reasoning was not as productive as he would like.
He decided, therefore, to select another word from the list of meetings for the family.
‘Funerals’ was taken, and the group was asked what it feels like to be at a funeral. Answers
included:
•
depressed
•
boxed in
•
intoxicated
•
missing a friend
The leader then selected the word ‘depressed’ and asked what it would take to make
someone who was depressed at a funeral not ‘depressed’. Answers included:
•
someone friendly to talk to
•
party atmosphere
•
free drinks
•
being a beneﬁciary under a will
•
entertainment
Question
Suggest how the session might have continued and concluded.
Busy lines
‘What are we going to do about these phone bills?’ Sam asked, exasperated by the rising costs.’
Not only are expenses from this source rising out of all proportion, but also it is becoming
increasingly difﬁcult to cope with the number of incoming calls because of the time customers
are spending on the phone to us.’
‘But is this the real problem?’ Sally asked. ‘Perhaps we ought to think more about it.’
The two of them decided that they ought ﬁrst to try to deﬁne the problem and then to try
to think up some ideas. This produced some interesting results. Redeﬁnitions such as:
‘How to ensure people have the right knowledge.’
‘How to reduce customer calls, or stop them altogether.’
However, when conventional brainstorming was used to try to dream up ideas to solve the
problem – both as given and as redeﬁned – no really good answers seemed to be forthcoming.
‘What we really need to do is try one of the more adventurous techniques, such as synectics,’
Sally suggested. Sam agreed, and the two of them decided to get together a team of people in
the ofﬁces to generate some ideas. ‘Which deﬁnition should we take?’ Sam asked. ‘How about:
“How to reduce customer calls, or stop them altogether”?’ Sally suggested. ‘OK,’ said Sam.’
Let’s take “reduce” or “reduction” as our keyword and take it for an excursion.’
SYNECTICS
211

Questions
1
How might the synectics session continue from the point arrived at in the case?
2
How else might it have developed if a different problem deﬁnition had been taken?
Illustrate your answer.
3
Compare the kind of solutions you obtain with the two approaches.
Finding a new advertising platform
There is so much clutter surrounding advertising. If you want to get your message across to
the target market, you would do better to stand on the roof-top of your ofﬁce in central
London and shout it out to all who pass by. Such is the frustration that many ﬁrms now feel
about advertising. People just ignore it, look the other way, switch it off (if it is on TV) or
hum songs in the car if it is on the radio, yet ﬁrms still spend millions of pounds, dollars, euros
and rupees to get messages about their products and services into the media.
Advertising, on the face of it, is wasteful, and arguably much of the money spent on it could
be put to better use. That, however, is a rather negative way of looking at matters. Advertising
messages have to be marketed in the same way that products and services are marketed.
Successful products have unique selling features, and this is exactly what advertising messages
should strive to have as well.
An advertising agency was keen to put the above ideas into practice and was working on a
particular campaign for a particular client. The agency decided to use synectics to come up
with some insightful ideas. The problem was stated as:
How can the product be advertised in a unique and different way?
The keyword chosen was the word unique, and an analogy was sought in the world of nature.
The group sought ﬁrst to think of things that were unique in the world of nature. Ideas
included:
•
patterns on butterﬂies
•
snowﬂakes
•
patterns on the bark of trees
•
rain streaming down the window pane
Using the idea of patterns on butterﬂies the group next sought to use a personal meta -
phor.They were asked what it would be like to be patterns on butterﬂies. The following ideas
were generated:
•
stationary
•
vivid
•
multicoloured
•
ﬂoating on air
•
bright and distinctive
Question
Illustrate how the session might continue and conclude.
SYNECTICS
212

Coping with stress
‘Every time I have to make a presentation I get stressed out,’ Joanna complained, shaking her
ringlets as if to signify that she was throwing off the effects of stress.’What shall I do?’
‘Well, let’s have a synectics session to see if that will produce any ideas,’ Jan smiled. Jan
always smiled. No problem was too difﬁcult for him to consider and solve.
‘How do we do that?’ Joanna asked.
‘Well, ﬁrst we have to state the problem and then take a word from the problem statement
on an excursion.’
‘The problem is me and stress,’ Joanna sighed.
‘What about “how to deal with stress when delivering presentations”?’
‘I think “how to stop feeling sick every time I am under pressure” is better.’
‘OK! Let’s take the word “pressure” on an excursion. Let’s go into the world of cooking.
Give me some examples of pressure in the world of cooking.’
‘Pressure cooker, getting meals ready for you, crushing garlic, grinding nuts or coffee,
making a purée, making bread, squeezing the icing on to a cake, rolling pastry, getting the
juice out of apples and oranges, mashing potatoes and parsnips. . . .’
‘Stop, stop. That’s great. Now we are getting somewhere. Just let me ﬁnish writing all this
down,’ Jan interrupted.
Question
Suggest how the session might continue. Try to gain some useful insights that might help
Joanna with her problem.
Fantasies about competition
‘Competition is the root of all evil,’ sighed Wendy.
‘Competition is good for business,’ John retorted. ‘That just shows how much you know
about business.’
‘Well, somehow we have just got to meet the new menace.’ Wendy smiled. ‘If we don’t,
then it will soon put us out of business.’
‘Exactly. So we are going to have to respond to their price-cutting strategy somehow,’ 
John said seriously.
‘Synectics, that is the answer,’ Wendy grinned. ‘Let’s have a synectics session. I suggest
that we get the team together and have a go at a fantasy excursion.’
‘Well, it might work,’ John said quietly. ‘I know, let’s take the word “competition”. . .’
‘And ﬁnd a word associated with it,’ Wendy interrupted.
‘Football, cricket, cup, cigarettes, lighter, fuel,’ Ben cried out, rising from obscurity in the
recesses of the open-plan ofﬁce.
‘Right,’ said John. ‘Let’s have a weird story about fuel.’
Question
Illustrate how the session might continue. See if you can ﬁnd any general strategies as a
result which might help counter the competition’s moves.
SYNECTICS
213

FURTHER READING
Brewbaker J. (2001) Metaphor making through synectics, Exercise Exchange, Spring, 46(2);
ProQuest Education Journals, 6, available at: http://teaching.fec.anu.edu.au/. . ./Synectics%20
and%20Metaphors.pdf (accessed 14 April 2013).
Couch, Richard (1993) Synectics and imagery: developing creative thinking through images. In Art,
Science & Visual Literacy: Selected Readings from the Annual Conference of the International
Visual Literacy Association (24th, Pittsburgh, PA. 30 September–4 October, 1992). (ERIC
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 363 330).
Faulkner, D. (2011) Angels, tooth fairies and ghosts: thinking creatively in an early years classroom.
In D. Faulkner and E. Coates, Exploring Children’s Creative Narratives, Abingdon: Routledge,
pp. 39–62.
Nolan, V. (2003) Whatever happened to synectics?, Creativity and Innovation Management, 12(1),
March 24–27.
SYNECTICS
214

215
INTRODUCTION
Achieving paradigm breakthroughs and being able to take advantage of them through success-
ful commercialization of the ideas and innovation they produce can lead to rich rewards for
those who bring them about. We introduce this chapter by looking at how a breakthrough
scientiﬁc idea was achieved many years ago – unfortunately without bringing great riches to
the person involved. This is followed by examining a number of techniques that have been
tried out in recent times to achieve breakthrough ideas. Visualization, Symbolic representation
and Rich pictures are all mechanisms that can support this kind of thinking. Two other
mechanisms are also discussed: Wishful thinking and Role playing. Finally, we point to the
beneﬁts that disruptive technologies can bring for those who discover and commercialize them.
Such break throughs reﬂect paradigm shifts or breakthroughs. The techniques can require a
degree of divergent thinking though experience and knowledge of the subject matter is vitally
important. As group creative problem-solving techniques, both of these qualities need to be
present. In addition, a suitable skilful facilitator is a decided asset.
WEIGHTS FOR THOUGHT
Before we move on to look at a number of techniques which are thought to aid the process of
breakthrough ideas, it is useful to consider the historical account of a breakthrough in thought
that occurred nearly a century and a half ago.
We have noted early on in the book how many of the well-known scientiﬁc ideas appear to
have been hit on in a way for which there does not seem to be any particular rationale – the
Benzene ring idea of Kekule is an example. Yet it may be hard not to believe that there was
some kind of systematic thinking and problem solving at work. We do, in fact, have an account
of how one important discovery was made. Mendeleev, like Kekule, was thought to have made
his discovery in a dream.
Kedrov (1966), however, was able to throw further light on the matter. He describes in
some detail Mendeleev’s formulation of the Periodic Table of the Elements. Mendeleev was
looking for a pattern that could be applied to all of the known elements at that time. His
starting point was the atomic weights of these elements but he found that this was not enough.
He then switched to comparing and contrasting groups of elements based on their atomic
Paradigm-breaking 
techniques
Chapter 11

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
216
properties and ordered each group according to their atomic weights. This reduced the space
of comparisons considerably and he noticed patterns starting to emerge.
Encouraged by this, he decided to use cards to represent elements ordered in a two-
dimensional matrix space, with one dimension representing the ordering of atomic weights
(horizontal rows) and the other general chemical properties of the elements (vertical columns).
Kedrov speculated that this analogy presented itself to Mendeleev because he was an 
avid player of the game of patience. Mendeleev laid out the cards containing the identities of
chemical elements in the same orthogonal manner as he might do with the playing cards – that
is, according to suit and value. This enabled Mendeleev to simplify his representation of 
the problem. Although there were still elements to be discovered, the new representation
made clearer the organizational principle of the table that the properties of elements stand in
periodic relationship to atomic weight.
Figure 11.1
Position of this chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
217
From this he noted among several other things that:
1
Chemically analogous elements have either similar atomic weights (Pt, Ir, Os), or weights
that increase by equal increments (K, Rb, Cs).
2
The elements distributed most widely in nature have small atomic weights.
3
One can predict the discovery of many new elements.
The Periodic Table has proved to be extremely useful in facilitating the further study of less
well-understood elements and discovery of the ones that were unknown at the time, based on
the underlying logic of the table.
Based on Mendeleev’s approach, we might conjecture that the creative process for gaining
paradigm shifts or breakthroughs exhibits certain patterns:
1
Discerning the essential and solvable issues in the problem space while ignoring ‘noise’
that could easily distract a less skilled person.
2
Attacking the manageable alternatives ﬁrst, setting aside the more challenging ones for
later.
Mendeleev’s command of knowledge in his ﬁeld was essential. Some of the breakthroughs that
materialized were due to the circumstances surrounding his search activity such as the game
of patience. The strategy of deriving general principles from speciﬁc relationships helped
combine the search in the domain of problem spaces with the search for solutions within a
given problem space.
Figure 11.2
Mendeleev’s table as published in 1869, with many gaps and uncertainties
H＝1
Li＝7
Be＝  9.4
B＝11
C＝12
N＝14
O＝16
F＝19
Na＝23
Mg＝24
A1＝27.4
Si＝28
P＝31
S＝32
Cl＝35.5
K＝39
Ca＝40
?＝45
?Er＝56
?Yt＝60
?In＝75.6
Ti＝50
V＝51
Cr＝52
Mn＝55
Fe＝56
Ni＝Co＝59
Cu＝63.4
Zn＝65.2
?＝68
?＝70
As＝75
Sc＝79.4
Br＝80
Rb＝85.4
Sr＝87.6
Ce＝92
La＝94
Di＝95
Th＝118?
Zr＝90
Nb＝94
Mo＝96
Rh＝104.4
Ru＝104.4
Pd＝106.6
Ag＝108
Cd＝112
Ur＝116
Sn＝118
Sb＝122
Te＝128?
J＝127
Cs＝133
Ba＝137
?＝180
Ta＝182
W＝186
Pt＝197.4
Ir＝198
Os＝199
Hg＝200
Au＝197?
Bi＝210?
Tl＝204
Pb＝207

In Mendeleev’s case, ground-breaking discovery required a shift in the problem space that
resulted from the discovery of a new principle (periodicity of elements), a new representation
(playing cards of the game of patience) or a new frame of reference (comparing the atomic
weights of the elements).
Put in simple terms, Mendeleev’s procedure was:
1
List attributes of the phenomenon of interest – the atomic weights of the elements.
2
Ask whether this shows any discernible patterns – if not, then there may be some other
attribute(s) that are important. In this case, it was the chemical properties of the elements.
Can the elements, in conjunction with the two identiﬁed attributes, be organized or
visualized within a frame of reference that facilitates patterns of relationships to be observed?
Possibly using an analogy? In this case, yes. Mendeleev used something with which he was
familiar – laying out cards as in a game of patience so that they formed a two-dimensional
matrix as shown in ﬁgure.
This simple procedure of identifying one or more sets of attributes relating to the problem
of interest and visualizing them or organizing them within a new or analogous frame of
reference led to the identiﬁcation of a solution to the problem in hand.
Let us now turn to some of the customary suggestions regarding techniques that can
stimulate paradigm creating or breaking.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
Paradigm-breaking techniques can help participants to develop fantasies that may help 
them to generate novel ideas. While the use of synectics was discussed in the last section, it is
possible that the ‘fantasy analogy’ mechanism employed in synectics could lead to paradigm
shifts.
Anyone who has regularly ﬁlled in crossword puzzles will know that it is easier to ﬁnd the
required words when some of the letters are already in place. When solving problems,
performance is often improved when one is given a clue than when no clue is given (Bowden,
1985). It is argued, too, that when clues take the form of pictorial representations they are
more likely to elicit associated information than if they had been presented as words (Berry 
et al., 1997). Indeed, research indicates that pictures permit more easy access to semantic
memory (Seifert, 1997). Perhaps, not surprisingly, some people maintain that pictures help
creative thinking. For instance, Do and Gross (1995) argue that a more direct visual, graphical
reminding scheme based on sketches can help designers recall interesting references from
various domains. Such observations promote the notion of using pictures as clues for solving
problems requiring insights (Schwert, 2007).
Next we shall consider some approaches that make use of these suggestions. First we look
at vision building and symbolic representation. Next we move on to look at the use of rich
pictures.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
218

Visualizing
It is well known that Albert Einstein had considerable powers of imagination and that he used
these skills to get to grips with problems in theoretical physics using mental images. Words or
language did not come into his process of thinking but only signs or blurred images capable of
being reproduced or combined. (Limont, n.d.) It was only after the combinations were
sufﬁciently developed and reproduced that he tried to put the thoughts into words (Shepard,
1978). For example, when coming up with the formula concerning the equivalence of mass
and energy, Einstein claims that this result was not achieved by means of verbal deduction
based on the formal mathematical apparatus but by means of intuition which involved visual
images (Shepard, 1978).
Several other scientists used visualization extensively in their research and discoveries.
Michael Faraday transformed visual images he conceived in the course of his research. His
representation of invisible lines of electromagnetic power as thin tubes in space twisting around
a magnetic and electric current is an example of this (Limont, n.d.). Another extensive user
of visualization was James Clerk Maxwell. In creating his theory of electromagnetic ﬁeld he
used a visualization version of Faraday’s lines as electrostatic tubes through which electric
current ﬂowed in the form of a liquid similar to water. From this he worked out a mechanical
model, taking into consideration magnetic attraction and electromagnetic induction. Finally,
he put everything in the form of an equation (Limont, n.d.). Examining the process adopted
by Maxwell we note three stages:
1
Visualize the concept as a physical entity – use a (visual) analogy if necessary.
2
Work out a mechanical model or just work out how the model actually works.
3
Formulate the observed process in terms that can be generalized by users in practice to
applications.
Visions play an important part in how we conduct our life. A vision is a wish of what we
want to happen. In some cultures it is believed that by making a wish that wish will come true,
and day-dreaming is an excellent form of visualizing.
Symbolic representation
One constructs a diagram or picture of a problem or situation with the use of symbols (Van
Gundy, [1981] 1988; Hicks, 1991). It may be useful to generate a set of symbols that can be
used on a regular basis by those involved in the creative problem-solving sessions. Users of this
method will then quickly learn the meaning of the symbols, be able to develop the list of easily
understood and recognized symbols, and quickly build up complex pictures of the problem
situation.
The steps are as follows:
1
Write down a statement of the problem.
2
Redeﬁne the problem or restate it in terms of the basic underlying principle which is
involved.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
219

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
220
3
Insert into the picture-carrying device – ﬂip chart, computer graphics program, etc. – an
abstract symbol that generally represents the underlying principle underpinning the
problem.
4
The symbol inserted at stage 3 represents the starting-point, and through free association
another symbol, prompted by the ﬁrst one, is inserted (or drawn).
5
A third symbol suggested by the ﬁrst or second symbol is inserted or drawn, and matters
proceed in this fashion using free association until several symbols have been used. Each
symbol is used as a stimulus, and any ideas suggested are recorded.
Figure 11.3
Symbolic representation
1. Write down
a statement
of the problem
2. Redefine the
problem or restate it
in terms of the
basic underlying
principle which is
involved
3. Insert into the
picture-carrying
device – flip chart,
computer graphics,
program, etc. –
an abstract symbol
that generally
represents the
underlying principle
underpinning the
problem
4. The symbol
inserted at stage 3
represents the
starting point and
through free
association
another symbol,
promoted by the
first one, is inserted
(or drawn)
5. A third symbol
suggested by the
first or second
symbol is inserted
or drawn, and
matters proceed in
this fashion using
free association until
several symbols
have been used.
Eachy symbol is
used as a stimulus,
and any ideas
suggested are
recorded
In the problem depicted in the symbols shown in Figure 11.4, the alarm bells are sounding
at the factory because there is a problem. The key seems to be to cut out as much of the
paperwork at the factory as possible so that people can get on with the job of things.
Rich pictures
This is an approach that can help participants look at problems from a totally different
perspective, and it can change the patterns of thinking within the group. Rich pictures can be
used as follows:

1
Develop a problem statement and write it on a ﬂip chart.
2
Ask each individual to draw two pictures. The pictures may be metaphors for the situation
– for example, vehicles or animals. The ﬁrst drawing should be a picture of how the
participant sees the present situation.
3
Ask each participant to describe the picture of the present. He or she should describe not
only the picture but also the properties of the objects drawn and why they were drawn
that way. Next, the individual should describe the picture of the future, again including
the properties and the relationships of the objects.
4
Ask the participants to generate new ideas based on the descriptions.
Rich pictures can be stored electronically in a database and either selected by people from
the database to represent their perceptions or combined into more complex pictures.
The technique enables a group to see what each member’s perception of the problem is and
what he or she would like in the future. Such a picture can very effectively show a vast amount
of information, such as patterns, relationships and properties, and it can easily be shared 
with the other group members; all can see the problem in its entirety in a single glance. The
following examples illustrate the use of rich pictures.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
221
Figure 11.4
Symbols can be used in pictures
alarm
celebrate
city
cut out
factory
hammer away
ignite
in writing
insight
key
research
records
problem
paperwork
money
safe bet
smooth matters
way over

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
222
Example
A medical practice wanted to improve the way in which appointments were arranged.
Telephone lines were jammed for up to two hours every morning with people wanting to
arrange appointments, and queues of callers making appointments in person took up a lot of
administrative time each day as well. A creative problem solving facilitator was employed to
help come up with ideas on how to alleviate the problem. She asked the GPs to draw a picture
of a city centre that depicted what they thought of the present situation within the GP
practice. The facilitator then asked them to draw a picture of a city centre illustrating what
they would see as the ideal practice. The ﬁrst pictures showed a city centre cluttered with
vehicles and pedestrians causing trafﬁc jams and angry and frustrated people. These pictures
represented a GP practice that lacked efﬁcient modern communication channels with its
patients. The pictures depicting the ideal situation, however, showed a city centre with
pedestrian zones and well-laid out broad roads and pavements, permitting rapid transit from
one area to the next, either on foot or by using modern trams. In addition, it had subways,
ﬂy-overs, an underground railway and even moving pavements in shopping malls and other
heavily used areas. It was well served with road signs pointing the way for pedestrians and
motorized travellers. The exercise took only a few minutes to complete and showed the GPs
what they thought of the communication systems of the practice and how they would like
them to change using modern technology. The drawings reﬂected the extent of the problem
to everybody present very quickly, and suggestions such as using state-of-the-art communi -
cation technology – such as appointments by email or SMS texting through an automated
intelligent Natural Language Processing interface – were put forward. In this way it was
anticipated that people who had access to the new technology would opt to use it, thereby
reducing congestion and allowing those who did not have such access to use the older
conventional methods with less hassle.
Figure 11.5
A problem in symbols
alarm
cut out
factory
problem
paperwork
key

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
223
Imagining
Highly creative people say that once they have an idea they attempt to make a clear and detailed
picture of the ﬁnal, implemented solution. Some songwriters, for example, create the album
cover in their mind before composing the ﬁrst song. Soccer players and skiers see themselves
creating new moves over and over in their minds. Painters visualize the ﬁnished canvas.
Whenever you have an idea, elaborate on it in your mind. Visualize it working in practice. 
Go through it over and over again.
Figure 11.6
The ringmaster
• Ringmaster in a circus trying to
get all and sundry to perform
• Flamboyant
• Has a whip
• Stereotyped ﬁgure
• Large teeth and big mouth
• Etc.
Figure 11.7
Different people have different perspectives
• Different people dealing with same
problem in different ways at
different levels
• Deskbound
• Men
• Levels of authority
• Sleeves down
• Away from problem

Ideas
•
Better communication among staff (big mouth and teeth)
•
Training (the whip)
•
Make it entertaining (circus idea)
•
Change of environment
•
Turn work into a circus
•
Laugh about things
•
See the funny side of everything
•
Need a clown
Wishful thinking
This technique requires one to visualize a perfect future. Its aim is to make it possible for users
of the technique to alter their perspectives on a problem and to establish goals for themselves
that should be achievable. Used as a group creative problem-solving tool in conjunction with
a facilitator the steps are as follows (Van Gundy, 1988):
Step 1
Group members jot down a brief statement of the problem.
Step 2
The facilitator then explains the technique with the aid of illustrative examples. It is
also stressed to group members that in the course of the ensuing exercise they should
always hold it in mind that anything is possible.
Step 3
This is then followed by individuals within the group discussing with one another what
the facilitator has told them so that they all have a deﬁnite idea of what they will have
to do during the exercise.
Step 4
Individuals then need to think up future orientated fantasy statements in the form of:
–
in the future, it would be nice if we did . . .
–
what really needs to happen is . . .
–
if I were making decisions I would do . . .
etc.
Step 5
Group members then consider all the fantasy statements that have been generated –
these can be listed on a ﬂip board or entered into a computer and projected on a
screen. They then have to try to develop ideas on how the thoughts expressed in the
statements could be achieved. These too are recorded in a likewise manner on the
ﬂip board or the computer.
Step 6
The more practical ideas are then linked back to the present problem situation. This
might involve asking themselves how it could be done, or what mechanisms might
facilitate doing it, or what might happen if it was actually done.
Step 7
Previous steps can be repeated after restating the problem.
The technique really requires both the facilitator and the group to have had some experience
of using creative problem-solving techniques since it is a difﬁcult one to use. Fantasies can be
difﬁcult to develop into practical solutions.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
224

PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
225
Example
Step 1
Problem: delay in processing accident claims in head ofﬁce of insurance company.
Step 4
In the future, it would be nice if we had more staff.
–
What really needs to happen is fewer accidents.
–
If I were making decisions I would settle all claims immediately.
Step 6
Settle all claims immediately.
–
How it could be done? Have the district ofﬁces settle all claims without referring
to head ofﬁce for claims of less than £2000.
–
What mechanisms might facilitate doing it? Training of district managers.
–
What might happen if it was actually done? A few mistakes might be made but
it would be a cost-effective approach.
Role playing
There are two approaches we will look at in this context, both of which require participants
to use their imagination and change what they have into what they want.
The ﬁrst involves imagining that you are another person who is involved in the problem 
or in its solution (Harris, 2002). If you are the person involved in causing the problem then
you will need to ask yourself why you act in such a way and what causes you to do so.
Subsequently, you will then need to think what it is that might improve your behaviour 
and in particular what personality quirks need attention. If you see yourself as the problem
solver, then you need to consider what expertise you have – what you do and what you know.
SKYPE
In the not too distant past, long-distance communication by voice was accomplished
with the aid of a telephone. Telephone companies worldwide made lots of money out
of it. Phone calls from Europe to distant countries were often charged in pounds per
minute and customers ran up large bills when they wanted to speak to their loved ones
in far corners of the globe.
Things changed dramatically when Skype arrived on the scene. Instead of using
telephone lines Skype has used Internet connections. This has reduced costs down to
next to nothing. Moreover, not only can one speak to one’s friends in this way, but one
can also see them and even converse with a small group of people.
Indeed, the visual impact can be very important because one is able to show objects
to one another in this way. A grandparent may have bought some clothes for a small
child and will now be able to see the child wearing those clothes without even being in
the same room.
Skype can offer many possible uses to business people. Can you make a list of these
things?

Armed with the know ledge and experience you have, you need to imagine how you put this
to good effect and solve the problem. In this case, you are making use of knowledge with which
you are familiar and transposing it on to the problem in hand.
The second approach involves a mental metamorphosis. Here you imagine you are the
subject of the problem itself – for example, an overcrowded motorway system. You would
need to list all the attributes of the situations – for example, the effects of grouping in slowing
down trafﬁc ﬂow, high frequency of accidents, expense and frustration caused to motorway
users, etc. Next, you would ask yourself what it would feel like to be all these things and what
action you would need to take in order to alleviate such inconveniences. This procedure is
very much akin to that we described in the case of personal analogies in Chapter 10 (Synectics).
Creative problem-solving tools such as those discussed above can lead to highly proﬁtable
innovations, particularly where this involves producing disruptive technologies.
DISRPUTIVE TECHNOLOGY
Christensen (1997) describes disruptive technologies and their consequences. Paradigm-
breaking ideas can produce disruptive technologies. Such technologies have an enormous
impact on the marketplace. They often change markets quite radically, wipe out the market
for existing technologies and create totally new markets that did not exist previously. They
create beneﬁts for some and incur costs for others. Disruptive technologies have to be created
by those who beneﬁt from them and anticipated by those who may suffer from their impact
when they are introduced.
Examples of disruptive technology (current and historical) include:
•
Digital cameras, which decimated the mass market for photographic ﬁlm, but at the same
time created markets for storage devices and photo printers.
•
Railways, which dramatically reduced the trafﬁc using other forms of transport such as
stage coaches and canals. At the same time it had many social beneﬁts (such as travel to
distant places in a short period of time) and economic beneﬁts (creating demand for
labour, fuel, steel and other materials they needed). They also encouraged the emergence
of new services such as trips to holiday destinations and the development of the hotel and
boarding-house industries.
•
Video recorders and televisions, which reduced cinema attendance. However, the ﬁlm
industry beneﬁted from new income streams.
It can be very difﬁcult to foresee the impact of a disruptive technology. Investors who do
successfully see the impact of a disruptive technology can make an extremely good return on
their investments. However, one does have to be aware of the possibility that in the case of
disruptive technologies they could have implications even for a country’s infrastructure. Brown
(2013) notes the impact of the growth in the market for electric cars in the UK could put a
strain on the capacity of the national grid.
Process innovation can also involve making use of a disruptive technology. This has been
forcefully felt in the case of the travel industry. Booking travel tickets online has had an
enormous impact on the industry. There has been a big movement towards customers booking
online, creating severe difﬁculties for high street providers of this service.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
226

QUESTIONS
1 Indicate how you would use vision building as a technique in solving different types of
business problems. Are there any limitations? Explain.
2 Suggest how vision building might be employed in helping to sort out the strategic mission
of an organization.
3 How might symbolic representation be used in a manufacturing company that wants to
improve its efﬁciency in distributing its products to wholesalers and other distributors in
the electrical white goods industry?
4 Rich pictures provide a method for gaining insights involving paradigm shifts. Draw up a
list of problems which you think it might be useful to examine using this method.
5 Describe a visioning session developing: a nightmare competitor!
(Who could become one, what could they do, what’s most horrifying about them, so what
is it that makes them better competitors . . .)
6 Identify those issues in an organization that people might not want to discuss. Explain why
this might be the case.
7 Have a list of possible major unexpected changes to an organization. They’re possible but
unlikely, for example:
–
Our stock triples over the next year (for a company expecting 4–5 per cent
growth).
–
We merge with Girl Scouts.
–
Google buys us even though we’re a men’s clothing store.
–
Everybody wants to come to work for us.
–
Our customers boycott us.
–
We can make a successful business selling to only ten customers.
Discuss how each of these could come about.
8 See if you can use the Mendeleev approach in getting ideas about problems of your own
choice.
9 How might paradigm-breaking techniques such as the ones indicated in this chapter have
helped bring about the paradigms shifts that are indicated? Looking ahead, can you think
of any possible areas where paradigm shifts might possibly occur? Could any of the
techniques be used to bring these paradigm shifts about? How?
10 Are disruptive technologies a good thing? Debate.
CASES
Airships
German and US stamps of the 1930s show various pictures of airships. They are even featured
tethered to the top of a New York skyscraper. Airships were able to cross the Atlantic from
Europe to America. Following disastrous accidents involving these craft and the development
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
227

of ﬁxed wing aircraft capable of transporting many passengers and goods, airships declined in
use and popularity after 1940.
The military use of airships has been spasmodic, but with the need for cost-effective
persistent intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, interest has persisted. Speed is not of
the essence and, indeed, an airship’s ability to hover and remain stationary is a great advantage.
Airships can also ﬂy at a high altitude and endure long missions. They are most useful in the
transport of heavy loads to harsh environments, like the Arctic territories.
Question
Many people might argue that while airships were a breakthrough innovation in their day,
they were rapidly displaced by a newer invention the aircraft. As a result, their full potential
was never fully realized. Today’s market seems rather limited. Use wishful thinking to try
to ﬁnd some really paradigm-breaking uses for airships of the future. Critically evaluate the
outcome of the exercise.
Problem solving with symbols
‘Everything is in a mess. Orders are not sent out on time. There are too many accounts
receivable overdue. We haven’t enough secretaries in the typing pool. There is grumbling in
the warehouse about overtime payments. Sales are declining and we have cashﬂow problems.
All this, and now we have a product liability case on our hands.’ The MD raised his hands in
exasperation at his regular meeting with the chairman and the other directors.
‘I heard Rumbles is entering the market with a new product. I bet it passed every standard
there is,’ the chairman sneered.
‘Well, I feel that my time has come to resign,’ the MD said solemnly. ‘We probably can
get out of this product liability mess by hiring a good lawyer, but I feel that I am not getting
all the backing I need from my colleagues on the board and in the middle management ranks
to enable me to keep the company on an even keel. It’s true Rumbles are going to get a leg
up with their new product. I can’t see any way in which this company can match it. I have
been saying for years that we need specialist marketers in the organization, as well as good
R&D people. We certainly can create opportunities for ourselves, but we cannot market
ourselves or our products and so exploit those opportunities to the full. Our distributors are
fed up with the poor level of service we offer them. They expect us to advertise and pull the
product through to their customers – but is that really our job? I’ve been grappling with this
problem for years, and still we haven’t got anywhere. Somewhere along the line there has been
a loss of rapport with the middlemen.’
‘I thought it was the MD’s job to market the product!’ the chairman exclaimed.
‘It is certainly not a job for any of us. We don’t have any sales experience.’
‘Marketing isn’t selling. How many times do I have to spell it out to you? We need
marketers not sales people. We are in an industry where the customer is king and we have to
serve the customers’ interests. This is precisely what we are not doing at the moment. The
R&D team think all they have to do is dream up some new ideas for improving products and
everything else will take care of itself. As long as you put a rein on the expenses we can incur
for stafﬁng I cannot obtain a good marketing team.’
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
228

‘You have a budget. You can spend the money how you like!’ the chairman retorted.
‘But I can’t,’ the MD replied. ‘Most of the budget is spent on ﬁreﬁghting the problems
created by the inadequacies of the previous budget. I am never in the position where I can
actually say, “Now I can plan”.’
‘Stuff and nonsense,’ growled the chairman. ‘You have always had a free rein.’
Question
Construct a rich picture to illustrate the problems, threats, opportunities, etc. that appear
to exist in the company at the time of the reported conversation.
A difﬁcult problem
The leader of the town council and its chief executive had to ﬁnd some kind of solution to the
problem. The town’s population was some 30,000 and the most recent unemployment ﬁgures
for the town showed that it now stood at just over 40 per cent. Never had either of them
witnessed such ﬁgures as this in the town’s history. The worst ﬁgures were those for young
people under 25 where it stood at 74 per cent.
In recent times shopkeepers had reported a considerable increase in the amount of shoplifting
while at the same time sales revenue had dropped by 25 per cent on the previous year at that
time. At least 20 per cent of the shops in the town centre were now vacant. In those that
remained there was talk of a recent daylight robbery that had taken place. Beggars were
appearing on the streets for the ﬁrst time and many people avoided the town centre altogether
after the ﬁrst signs of dusk appeared.
The chief executive and the leader of the council pondered on what they might do. While
the part of the population that appeared to be suffering most was largely concentrated in the
close vicinity of the town centre, there was a more afﬂuent community that lived along the
hillside outside the immediate vicinity of the town centre. Most of these people enjoyed good
incomes, athough the younger members of families living there were mostly without jobs, too.
Questions
Can you think of any ideas as to what might be done to alleviate the situation, bearing in
mind that no additional funding would be available from central government and community
tax rise in the forthcoming round would be limited to 1 per cent below the level of inﬂation.
The ﬂoating motorway
The M62 motorway connects Liverpool with Manchester before continuing on its route
eastwards over the moors to give access to Leeds, Bradford and eventually Hull. The stretch
of the motorway between Liverpool and Manchester that crosses Chat Moss literally ﬂoats 
on top of a bog. All year round a procession of cars, vans and lorries of all sizes pound 
along the carriageway of the three-lane motorway in both directions for much of the day and
night. The damage they cause is quite noticeable. The road surface develops bumps in it so
that drivers start to experience a sensation like that caused to boats cutting through waves 
on the high seas.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
229

Subsidence is a major problem on the road, and repairs are required from time to time as
and when the experience of driving along the road becomes more dangerous. No one as yet
appears to have come up with a lasting solution to this problem.
Question
Can you gain any insights into this problem?
When George Stephenson solved the problem of crossing Chat Moss with a ﬂoating railway
line he established an idea that well over a century later would be adopted by builders of
the M62 motorway.
FURTHER READING
Eppler, M. J. and Platts K. W. (2009) Visual strategizing: the systematic use of visualization in the
strategic-planning process, Long Range Planning, February, 42–74.
Gassmann, O. and Zeschky, M. (2008) Opening up the solution space: the role of analogical thinking
for breakthrough product innovation, Creativity and Innovation Management, 17(2): 97–106.
Schwert, P. M. (2007) Using sentence and picture clues to solve verbal insight problems‚ Creativity
Research Journal, 19(2/3): 293–306.
PARADIGM-BREAKING TECHNIQUES
230

231
In this chapter we will review some of the remaining techniques of creative problem solving
that can be used (the total number of techniques that could be addressed are well beyond 
the scope of this book to enumerate). The techniques we cover here are: Suggestion boxes,
exhibits and competitions; Clichés, proverbs and maxims; Storyboarding; Scenario writing;
Scenario day-dreaming; Bionics; Free Association; Two words; Story writing; Mind Map;
Fishbone Diagram; Lotus Blossom Technique; TRIZ; Vision Building. Many other techniques
are illustrated and discussed on various websites on the Internet and in other books written
for the popular press. Many of these techniques are straightforward and would ﬁt into
MacFadzean’s category of paradigm-preserving techniques. Some require more imaginative
thinking and could lead to paradigm stretching or even paradigm breaking.
SUGGESTION BOX, EXHIBITS AND COMPETITIONS
Suggestion-box systems are usually slow in generating ideas but give everyone in the organization
a chance to contribute. Employees provide suggestions either by using a special form or simply
by writing ideas on pieces of paper and putting them into the box. One disadvantage of the
method is that suggestion approval is subject to rather arbitrary decisions by managers who
may not understand anything about the problem the idea is supposed to deal with. The biggest
difﬁculty with suggestion boxes is not the concept, but how the concept is managed. The
power of a suggestion box is enhanced by a quick and objective response.
Suggestion exhibits comprise a process whereby people can bring their suggestions, ideas
and new inventions for all to see that the organization provides a display area and provides
time for this purpose. It is most suited to a manufacturing or technically orientated company,
but other kinds of business and organization might be able to use the system to advantage.
In the case of suggestion competitions, management asks departments or other organisational
subunits to make suggestions. Each unit reports the number of suggestions they make and posts
them each week or month on a wallchart in a public area. What is reported is the number of
ideas. Names are not used. Variations include rewarding the best idea each month or week,
or an award may be given to the group of people having 100 per cent participation.
Miscellaneous ideation 
techniques
Chapter 12

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
232
CLICHÉS, PROVERBS AND MAXIMS
1
Select a proverb or maxim that has no obvious associations with the problem.
2
Note any interpretations or implications that the chosen phrase may infer.
3
Use the interpretations and implications in 2 to stimulate ideas with respect to the problem.
Suppose the problem concerns getting employees to be more positive in their attitude to
adopting new working practices.
First proverb/maxim: If the shoe ﬁts, wear it.
Implications:
1
Try a shoe before you buy it.
2
You buy a new shoe when your old ones are no longer fashionable or are worn out.
3
Buy a shoe which is of quality regardless of its price or label.
4
If a shoe does not ﬁt, throw it away.
Interpretations:
1
Make sure people will respond to the company’s needs by testing their suitability ﬁrst.
2
Point out to people that they need to adapt to the changing needs of the times and that it
is in their own best interest to do so.
3
Make sure that people adopt the new practices and then be prepared to pay the price
whatever it costs to do so.
4
Sack people who are not cooperating and hire new personnel.
The key seems to be to recruit the people who ﬁnd new methods challenging and interesting.
Example
PROBLEM: how to familiarize the company’s staff with computers and make them more
productive. STIMULUS: when the cat’s away the mouse will play.
Interpretations:
•
Mice are afraid of the cat.
•
Why are the mice afraid of the cat?
•
The mice play often.
•
How far away does the cat go before the mice start to play?
•
The mice take advantage of the fact that the cat is away.
Implications for the problem:
•
Employees are afraid of computers.
•
How can we reduce fear in the employees?
•
When the boss is away the employees will play around and not try to familiarize
themselves with the computers.
•
Managers must encourage the employees to work with the computers.

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
233
Figure 12.1
Chapter overview
Miscellaneous
techniques
Vision
building
TRIZ
Lotus 
blossom
technique
Fishbone
diagram
Mind map
Story writing
Two words
Free
association
Bionics
Scenario
day
dreaming
Scenario
writing
Cliches,
proverbs,
maxims
Suggestion
boxes,
exhibits,
competitions
Figure 12.2
Clichés, proverbs and maxims
1. Select a proverb
or maxim that has
no obvious
associations with
the problem
2. Note any
interpretations or
implications that
the chosen phrase
may infer
3. Use the
interpretations and
implications in 2
to stimulate ideas
with respect to
the problem

Ideas:
Provide games etc. to enable the employees to play with their computers and gain familiarity
with them. This should dispel the fear.
Some degree of imagination and divergent thinking might enable the best to be got out of
this technique. It is unlikely to produce any paradigm breakthroughs but might produce some
paradigm stretching.
STORYBOARDING
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
234
Figure 12.3
Storyboarding
Storyboarding
2. Under the header
cards one puts
subheading cards
containing the ideas
that fall under each
header; they’re
the details/ideas
generated in the
creative thinking
session, ideas
that develop or
support the
headers
3. Consider all ideas
relevant, no matter
how impractical
they appear. Think
positively, hold all
criticism until later,
and hitch-hide on
others’ ideas
1. One starts with
a topic card, and
under the topic
card places header
cards containing
general points,
categories,
considerations etc.
that will come up
Walt Disney and his staff developed a storyboard system in 1928 to help with cartoon animation.
Disney wanted to achieve full animation, and for this he needed to produce an enormous
number of drawings. Managing the thousands of drawings and the progress of a project was
nearly impossible, so Disney had his artists pin up their drawings on the studio walls. This way,
progress could be checked, and scenes added and discarded with ease.
Storyboarding is like taking your thoughts along with the thoughts of others and spreading
them out on a wall as you work on a project or solve a problem. When you put ideas up on
storyboards, you begin to see interconnections, how one idea relates to another, and how all
the pieces come together. Once the ideas start ﬂowing people ‘hitch-hike’ on others’ ideas.
Software programs are now available such as Corkboard (Macintosh).
One starts with a topic card, and placed under the topic card are header cards containing
general points, categories, considerations, etc. that will come up. Under the header cards one

puts subheading cards containing the ideas that fall under each header; they are the details/ideas
generated in the creative thinking session, ideas that develop or support the headers.
Storyboarding works well in group sessions. There are four major types: planning, ideas,
communication, organization, and storyboards. During a storyboarding session, consider all
ideas relevant, no matter how impractical they appear. Think positively, hold all criticism 
until later, and hitch-hike on others’ ideas.
The method requires a degree of imagination and can produce paradigm stretching.
SCENARIO WRITING
This is a tool developed and used originally in long-term planning and technological forecasting.
It is a particularly useful method for speculating on the likelihood of new paradigm shifts.
Scenario writing is a method of looking ahead and forces an organization to be receptive to
the need for change and creative thinking. It is an experience that involves considering new
possibilities and opening up one’s mind to consider what might happen.
The method involves all members of a team of coworkers and requires a leader or facilitator
who introduces and coordinates sessions and who has the responsibility for producing a ﬁnal
report. Members of the team are referred to as scenario writers, and each member is usually
an expert in his or her own ﬁeld. One needs to make sure that there are experts in the group
whose expertise is relevant to the problem under study. At the start of the exercise the scenario
writers are briefed with the task of considering the developments in their area of expertise
over the next 5–10 years. When they have done this individually they are brought together
under the guidance of a leader to examine the situation collectively. Participants need to be
reminded that they should be tolerant of the views of others because a consensus of informed
opinion has to be reached.
The procedure adopted is as follows:
1
Brieﬁng. Here the scenario writers are requested to consider what developments will take
place in their area of specialization over the next 5–10 years. They are also asked to
provide supporting evidence for this and to assess the likely impact of these developments
on the organization.
2
Individual scenario writing. Scenario writers spend up to two weeks preparing their individual
scenarios independently.
3
Collective scenario writing. Here the scenario writers meet up to present their individual
papers and viewpoints and to reach a consensus viewpoint on possible developments. The
output of the meeting is usually the report.
Scenario writing can be extremely useful and productive where the situation under review is
a very complex one; it is, however, extremely time-consuming.
Although scenario writing is a formal procedure, it is still speculative in nature since it aims
to predict the future of an organization, thus aiding the strategic planning process. The exercise
can be conducted over a fairly lengthy time-period (say, two weeks), for its participants have
to prepare a written report explaining their view of the future. The participants will be experts
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
235

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
236
on the various functions of the organization. The beneﬁts of bringing together experts from
various functions enable an integrated vision of the future to be examined with documentary
evidence to support each argument. An awareness of the future environment (internal and
external) and the change which may take place in it will provoke more creative responses to
current situations.
SCENARIO DAY-DREAMING
Like scenario writing, this method also looks into the future and tries to assess the impact that
trend will have on the organization. It is, however, less formal in its approach, and it is not
the custom and practice to produce a report. It is usual for the entire process to take up only
a couple of days and is an ideal activity for an ‘away-day’ venue, provided there are at least
two away-days available.
Scenario day-dreamers are not expected to substantiate their contributions. The purpose is
to stimulate people’s imaginations to think in the broader context and to consider more
unusual ideas. A good group size is 8–10 people, but of course much depends on the size of
the organization and the complexity of its business.
Again, there is a leader or facilitator whose role it is to plan the sessions in detail, advise
on the selection of participants, brief the participants about the sessions, lead the sessions and
help summarize the conclusions which are reached. Minutes of the session also need to be taken
by someone. The procedure for the session is summarized below.
Figure 12.4
Scenario writing
Scenario writing
2. Individual scenario
writing – scenario
writers spend up to
two weeks preparing
their individual
scenarios
independently
3. Collective scenario
writing – have the
scenario writers
meet up to present
their individual papers
and viewpoints and
to reach a consensus
viewpoint on possible
developments. The
output of the
meeting is usually
the report
1. Briefing – scenario
writers requested to
consider what
developments will
take place in their
area of specialisation
over the next 5–10
years. They are also
asked to provide
supporting evidence
for this and to
assess the likely
impact of these
developments on
the organisation

Preparation
The nature of the proceedings is explained. The scenario day-dreaming session described:
1
The session has to be divided into a beginning, a middle and an end.
2
It is helpful to have a warm-up session prior to the main session.
3
The ﬁrst step is to identify the various factors that are likely to affect the future of the
organization. These factors usually reﬂect aspects of the environment such as economic
trends, cost of commodities, political and governmental policies, changes in demography,
technology, social structure, consumer requirements and competitive activity.
4
The main factors should be summarized on a ﬂip chart and possibly entered into a cross-
impact matrix to indicate their importance.
5
Those present are then split into groups, and each group is given several of the factors to
consider in depth and arrive at a future scenario for each of them. Group members should
have the expertise to be able to scenario day-dream effectively for the factors they have
been allocated. Roughly half an hour per scenario should be taken.
6
Groups should then reassemble to present their scenarios to one another. The entire group
should discuss each scenario in turn and reach a common consensus.
7
All the scenarios presented should be integrated into a single comprehensive vision of the
future.
8
Groups break into syndicates again and consider how the organization can respond to the
opportunities and threats that are presented. Brainstorming and the use of the TOWS
matrix (see Table 12.1) are useful tools to use at this point.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
237
Table 12.1 The TOWS matrix
Strengths
Weaknesses 
Opportunities
Maximize on strengths and
Maximize on opportunities,
opportunities
minimize on weaknesses
Threats
Maximize on strengths,
Minimize on weaknesses,
minimize on threats
minimize on threats
The TOWS matrix presents a mechanism for facilitating the linkages between company
strengths/weaknesses and threats/opportunities in the environment. It also provides a
framework for identifying and formulating strategies. Opportunities, threats, strengths and
weaknesses have to be identiﬁed and listed in the matrix. Next, various combinations of
opportunities and strengths, opportunities and weaknesses, threats and strengths, and weaknesses
and threats are examined in order to generate possible strategies. It should be observed that
in generating strategies one seeks to maximize on strengths and opportunities, and minimize
on weaknesses and threats. Brainstorming may be used effectively in helping to identify factors
and generate strategies.
The whole group reconvenes, and the leader should review the proceedings, summarizing
how the group sees matters and how the organization can try to meet future challenges.

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
238
SWOT ANALYSIS AND THE TOWS MATRIX
SWOT analysis is a technique speciﬁcally designed to help with the identiﬁcation of
suitable business strategies for an organization to follow. It involves specifying and
relating organizational strengths and weaknesses and environmental opportunities and
threats. In practice this is often an activity that is not carried out well. It is all too easy,
having identiﬁed all the important points, not to know what to do with the data
generated. Although intended as a mechanism to explain strategy rather than to
facilitate its generation, the TOWS matrix (Weihrich, 1982) presents a mechanism for
facilitating linkages and presents a framework for identifying and formulating strategies.
Implementing the TOWS matrix requires that the following steps are followed:
1
Pinpoint and assess the impact of environmental factors – economic, political,
demo graphic, products and technology, market and competition – on the
organization.
2
Make a prognosis about the future.
3
Undertake an assessment of ‘strengths and weaknesses’ in terms of management
and organization, operations, ﬁnance and marketing.
4
Develop strategy options.
Working systematically through this process enables internal and external factors to
be entered on a grid and different combinations to be studied. For example, the entry
to one cell of the grid could involve maximizing opportunities and maximizing strengths.
This would amount to putting together at least one strength and one opportunity to
produce a strategy that capitalizes upon this combination.
The Tows matrix
Product: plastic bags
Strengths
Weaknesses
1 Brand name
1 Exports
2 Distribution
2 Sales force
3 Low cost
Opportunities
1 Need for robust rubbish
Use existing distribution
Strengthen sales force
disposal bags
and brand name to
and export skills. Look
2 European markets
market scented bin
to European markets
3 Scented bin-liners
liners (S1,S2, 03)
(W1, W2, 03)
Threats
1 Substitute materials
Capitalize on brand
Develop capability
2 Imports
name, distribution
in substitute materials
and low costs to meet
particularly for products
competition from
that can be sold to export
imports (S1, S2, S3, T2)
markets (T1, W1)

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
239
Any kind of organizational unit can beneﬁt from this type of analysis as well as any
situation that involves strategic decision making. Originally, Weihrich (1982) illustrated
a conceptual application of the TOWS matrix to the strategic dilemma facing
Volkswagen in the USA during the 1970s. His account demonstrated how the TOWS
matrix could be used as a structuring device for analysing strategic problems. For the
writer, this raised the interesting question of whether the use of the TOWS matrix could
lead to the identiﬁcation of appropriate strategies for an organization. In pursuing this
question the writer has examined over ﬁfty cases in which the TOWS matrix has been
employed in commercial organizations. In all of these cases the users of the technique
have felt that the method has enabled them to gain a deeper insight into the process
of strategy formulation, has helped to structure their thinking and has often enabled
them to come up with good new strategic ideas.
Figure 12.5
Scenario day dreaming
1. Divide session
into a beginning,
a middle and
an end
2. It is helpful to
have a warm-up
session prior to
the main session
3. Identify the factors that are likely 
to affect the future of the organization: 
e.g. economic trends, cost of 
commodities, political and govern-
mental policies, changes in
demography, technology, etc.
4. Summarize the main factors on a flip
chart and enter into a cross-impact
matrix to indicate their importance
5. Split into groups, and
each group is given
several of the factors to
consider and arrive at a 
future scenario for each
factor
6. Groups reassemble
to present scenarios to
one another. The entire
group should discuss
each scenario in turn and 
reach a common 
consensus
7. All the scenarios
presented should be
integrated into a single
comprehensive vision of
the future
8. Groups break into
syndicate and consider
how the organization can 
respond to the opportu-
nities that are presented.
Brainstorming and the
use of the TOWS matrix
are useful tools
9. The whole group reconvenes, and 
the leader should review the proceed-
ings, summarizing how the group sees
matters and how the organization can
try to meet future challenges

BIONICS
This is a special application of analogies and involves looking for stimulation in similar objects,
products and processes. The search is usually restricted to examining biological and botanical
systems using the argument that nature provides clues with regard to how to solve problems
because it has itself solved many such problems.
Examples of where the method has resulted in useful applications include the Sidewinder
heat-seeking missile (based on the temperature-sensing organs of a rattlesnake) and Velcro
(based on the idea of burdock seeds which tend to cling to one’s clothes if blown into contact
with them – see pp. 48 and 167). The latter have minute hooks attached to them, and this is
why they tend to cling to clothes. Velcro uses this same principle and provides a very effective
fastening mechanism to supplement or even replace a zip or other fastener on clothing.
Nature, of course, does not always provide the right kind of guidance, so care has to be
exercised in using bionics. Many years were spent trying to mimic the wing-ﬂapping movements
of birds before ﬂight was eventually achieved using the principle of the ﬁxed wing. Any
technique featuring the use of analogies calls for some degree of imagination and is likely to
result in paradigm stretching at least.
FREE ASSOCIATION
Of all the idea-generating techniques this is one of the simplest. One idea is used to generate
another, which is then used to produce a third, and so on. There are two forms of free
association.
•
Unstructured free association
Here ideas are listed as they naturally occur and where one idea then leads to another. It
is very similar to classical brainstorming.
•
Structured free association
Here the procedure adopted attempts to increase the relevance of ideas to a problem. The
procedure adopted is as follows:
1
A symbol – word, number, object, condition – that is directly related to the
problem is drawn or otherwise recorded.
2
Whatever is suggested by the ﬁrst step, whether or not it seems relevant to the
problem, is recorded.
3
Step 2 is repeated until all possible associations have been listed.
4
Associations that seem most relevant to the problem are selected from the list.
5
The associations selected at stage 4 are used to develop and produce ideas that
appear capable of solving the problem. If the ﬁrst effort does not produce useful
insights, it is repeated using another symbol as the starting-point – i.e. one
recommences at stage 1.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
240

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
241
Example
A hotel wants to improve the facilities and services it offers to holidaying guests and is
looking for ideas. It uses structured free association in the following way to gain new insights.
1
Stimulus word: history
2–3 Thoughts recorded:
–
visits to local museums and art galleries
–
tours of local historical sites
–
ﬁlms and videos about local history
–
library of books and documents on history roundabout
–
antiques and collectors’ fairs
–
displays
Figure 12.6
Structured free association
3. Step 2 is
repeated until all
possible associations
have been listed
1. A symbol – word,
number, object,
condition – that is
directly related to
the problem is
drawn or otherwise
recorded
2. Whatever is
suggested by the
first step, whether
or not it seems
relevant to the
problem is
recorded
Structured free
association
4. Associations
that seem most
relevant to the
problem are
selected from
the list
5. Associations
selected at stage 4
are used to develop
and produce ideas
that appear capable
of solving the
problem. If the first
effort does not
produce useful
insights, it is
repeated. Another
symbol is used as
the starting-
point – i.e. one
recommences at
stage 1

4
Antiques/collectors’ fairs and displays
5
Hold weekly antique/collectors’ fairs for the beneﬁt of the paying guests and outsiders.
–
Also mount permanent displays of antique/collectors’ items that might be of interest
to visitors.
Free association can be used by anyone and can be used within existing paradigms. Like
other techniques highly imaginative thinkers may be able to use the method to stretch or even
break existing paradigms.
TWO WORDS
The two words technique employs forced relationships and related problem stimuli to generate
ideas. The stimuli are obtained by examining different combinations of alternative descriptions
of two keywords in the problem statement. The rationale behind this approach is that the
phrasing of the initial problem statement may be limited in terms of its ability to provoke
certain types of idea. By restating the problem using alternative meanings the technique will
provide new perspectives that will give rise to new ideas. As suggested by Olson (1980), this
involves the following steps:
1
Select two words (a verb and a noun) from the problem statement.
2
List alternative meanings for each of the keywords.
3
Select the ﬁrst word from the ﬁrst list and combine it with the ﬁrst word from the second
list.
4
Using this combination as a stimulus write down any ideas suggested.
5
Combine the ﬁrst word from the ﬁrst list with the second word from the second list and
record any ideas suggested by this combination.
6
Continue combining words in the above manner until all possible combinations have been
exhausted. Finally, different two-word combinations are examined for possible idea
stimulation.
Example
How to ensure a high level of customer service:
1 
ensure 
and 
service
2 
ensure
service
assure
aid
clinch
assistance
conﬁrm
help
guarantee
effort
guard
labour
protect
beneﬁt
safeguard
utility
secure
wear
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
242

3
assure
aid
assure
assistance
assure
help
etc.
4–6 –
assure assistance: 
assure customers that the ﬁrm is always available to help with
problems 
–
assure effort: 
inform customers that the utmost effort will always be expended
to ensure customer satisfaction, etc.
The major strength of the two-word technique is that it provides a variety of new problem
perspectives – any one of which might prompt a high-quality solution. It is also very easy to
use and takes up very little time.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
243
Figure 12.7
Two words
1. Select two
words (a verb
and a noun) from
the problem
statement
3. Select the first
word from the first
list and combine
it with the first word
from the second list
4. Using this
combination as a
stimulus, write
down any ideas
suggested
Two words
5. Combine the first
word from the first
list with the second
word from the
second list and
record any ideas
suggested by this
combination
2. List alternative
meanings for each
of the keywords
6. Continue
combining words in
the above manner
until all possible
combinations have
been exhaused
STORY WRITING
The technique, as the name suggests, involves writing a highly imaginative ﬁctional story of,
say, a few hundred words, and then relating it to the problem in hand. The story is then
examined closely, and major principles, themes, expressions, thoughts, objects, etc., are listed
separately. A long story can, of course, take considerable time to analyse for its relevance to
a problem. On the other hand, a very short story may not be rich enough in ideas to stimulate
thought with respect to the problem under consideration.

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
244
The routine may be carried out in various ways. One such approach is the round-robin story
and involves a group of people. Each member of the group contributes a line in the story-
writing process. An alternative might be for one person to write the story, with the remainder
of the group then working on its analysis and interpretation.
Example
PROBLEM
The ﬁrm in question produces alcoholic beverages and its position in the market has been
threatened by changes in consumer tastes and a change in the taxation system, both of which
have encouraged the entry of imported drinks. The ﬁrm produces traditional local drinks
which are similar to whisky and brandy. The problem is that the ﬁrm feels that it has lost its
competitive advantage and wants to regain its former position. It is not sure, however, what
strategy it would be best to adopt.
THE STORY
Shading his eyes with his right hand, the colonel surveyed the distant mountains. He
could just about pick out the unfamiliar narrow valleys seeming like tiny scars on the
distant landscape. He observed his demoralized troops going about their routine chores
drenched in sweat under the blistering sun. The town seemed quite close, glinting white
through the haze, and as he watched he perceived an enemy soldier waving a white ﬂag
drawing near. He was a messenger from the town’s mayor asking to meet the colonel
because, as he said, they were tired of the siege. Before nightfall the colonel met the
town’s mayor and all was settled. Later, the colonel slept soundly. The plan of the battle
lay on the table and by its side a bunch of ﬂowers. The colonel had put his gun point
next to the ﬂowers as a sign of peace. He felt good when he awoke.
Figure 12.8
Story writing
1. A fictional story
is developed.
The story should
be highly
imaginative
3. The data should
then be used
as a basis for
suggesting
problem solutions
Story writing
2. The story should
be examined
closely, and major
principles, actions,
characters, events,
themes, expressions,
objects, etc.
should be listed

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
245
A TALL STORY
‘If you are all sitting comfortably, I shall begin.’ Andrea drew her breath.
‘There was a gnome who lived not far from a railway bridge. The bridge
was a dark and damp place, and people said that a troll named Zeino lived
under the bridge. The gnome was a happy-go-lucky fellow and every day
he would go to market on the other side of the railway line. He would not
pass under the bridge, however, because he was afraid of the troll. People
said that the troll was a horrible creature who used to eat all his victims
alive and spit their bones at passing railway trains.
‘One sunny morning the gnome set off for the market. He took a road
through the woods, which led him to a level crossing over the railway. In
that way he avoided the need to pass under the bridge. As he walked along,
the gnome whistled a happy tune and thought about all the nice things he
would see at the market. Just as he was about to reach the end of the
clearing he heard the sound of running feet behind him. Turning round, he
saw the most beautiful young woman that can ever have lived. She had fair
hair and blue eyes and cried out to him to stop.
‘“I am a fairy princess,” she cried. “Please help me ﬁnd my way home
from this dark wood.”
‘The gnome stopped and said to the young woman: “Well, that is really
very easy. All you have to do is follow me, for I am going to the market.”
‘At that moment, Zeino the troll appeared from behind a tree. He bared
his teeth and chuckled: “Ah, ah! A gnome for dinner and a princess for
supper. What a lucky troll am I!”
‘But the fairy princess waved her wand, and behold it became a ﬁre-
breathing dragon. With one deep breath the dragon burned the troll to a
cinder, and the princess and the gnome lived happily ever after.’
This short story can help in gaining insights into a range of different
management problems. Storytelling, and relating the events in a story to
the problem in hand, is one of a number of different methods that allow us
to stimulate the imagination. In the above example we might ask ourselves
‘What is the troll in our problem?’, ‘Who is the gnome?’, ‘What is the
happy tune?’, ‘Who is the princess?’, ‘What is the ﬁre-breathing dragon?’
and ‘What is the magic wand?’ and so on!

SOME POINTS 
1
demoralized troops
2
unfamiliar narrow valleys
3
a message from the mayor
4
asking to meet
5
tired of the siege
6
bunch of ﬂowers at the gun point
7
plan of the battle
INTERPRETATIONS FOR IDEA GENERATION
1
demotivated sales force and other staff – need to ﬁnd some way of motivating them;
2
need to explore new segments of the market which have been neglected until now;
3
should look out for those competitors who are in the same boat and who have been in
the business for a long time;
4
need has arisen to make business alliance with competitors identiﬁed in 4, above;
5
ﬁnd an appropriate opportunity to move ahead in the market when others have started
to make mistakes;
6
long-term interests are the priority;
7
establish superiority in quality and special features of your products.
The ﬁrm eventually merged with a competitor which had good access to some of the market
segments. Together they worked in marketing new brands, making an issue of the quality of
the product and focusing on the purity of the water and special ingredients that were used to
give it its own special ﬂavour.
What other ideas might have come from the story?
MIND MAP
Mind maps can be drawn by hand, and this is the quickest way to perform the task. However,
there are advantages in using mind mapping software. Mind mapping is a graphical means of
taking or making notes. Graphical noting has been used since the dawn of humankind – early
cave paintings and Egyptian hieroglyphics being obvious examples. In more modern times,
process engineers and concept-orientated people have used ﬂow charts and process diagrams
to develop and explain their trains of thought and procedural ﬂow.
The structure of the mind map allows for making intuitive associations, and capturing them
within the ‘notes’ structure. Mind maps use a central image to connote the overall theme,
keywords, colours, codes and symbols. Buzan (1994), who synthesized graphic noting techniques
and evolved them into modern mind mapping, writes:
The Mind Map can be applied to every aspect of life where improved learning and clearer
thinking will enhance human performance. The Mind Map has four essential characteristics:
(a) The subject of attention is crystallized in a central image.
(b) The main themes of the subject radiate from the central image as branches.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
246

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
247
(c) Branches comprise a key image or keyword printed on an associated line. Topics of
lesser importance are also represented as branches attached to higher level branches.
(d) The branches form a connected nodal structure.
(Buzan, 1994: 59)
Gelb (1988) offers seven guidelines to effective mind mapping:
1
Start the map by drawing a picture of the topic in the centre of the paper.
2
Use keywords.
3
Connect the words with lines radiating out from the central image.
4
Print the keywords.
5
Print the keyword per line.
6
Use colours, pictures and codes for emphasis.
7
Free-associate, then organize.
To appreciate why the mind mapping process works as well as it does, one has to go back
to how the brain functions. The left side of the brain has been shown to process information
in a linear/sequential fashion, analysing the various parts that make up the whole. The right
side of the brain, on the other hand, processes concepts, patterns and relationships. The right
side synthesizes while the left side analyses.
Mind mapping uses both sides of the brain. It allows the mapper to build out ideas by
expanding the branches. Entering new ideas is as easy as adding another branch to either the
central theme or one of the other main branches. Information presented later in the discussion
or book can easily be related to a concept that was developed early in the programme by
extending the branch. Once completed, the mind map presents the concepts and relationships,
along with the keywords that will trigger memory.
One of the central concepts of mind mapping is the use of keywords. Keywords are the
seeds of intuitive association. They are easy to create, and much easier to remember and recall
than full sentences. The use of keywords also forces our creative brain to add the context (the
rest of the story) to the keyword – in its own words or pictures. The emphasis must be on
concepts and not on isolated facts. The use of keywords can help us to conceptualize. Keywords
tend to be strong nouns or verbs. They are words that evoke strong images that can trigger
our contextual recall.
Buzan (1991) writes:
Every word is ‘multi-ordinate’, which simply means that each word is like a little centre
on which there are many, many little hooks. Each hook can attach to other words to give
both words in the new pair slightly different meanings. For example the word ‘run’ can
be hooked quite differently in ‘run like hell’ and ‘her stocking has a run in it’.
Rustico (2007) notes that the solution to difﬁcult problems could require a variety of
different approaches, including some of the methods indicated in this book. He also illustrates
how mind mapping can greatly assist the implementation of these methods or techniques.
Below in Figure 12.9 we show how a mind map can be used combine check listing with
brainstorming to produce ideas/insights with respect to holidays.

Figure 12.9
Using mind maps to combine checklists with brainstorming
A holiday
Winter destinations in the summer
Summer destinations in the winter
Rearrange
Visiting gardening centres
Relaxing in the garden
Holidays at home
Reverse
Holiday destination programmes
Travel/exploration documentaries
Virtual holidays watching TV videos
Au pair work
Working in bars/clubs
Au pair work
Working in bars/clubs
Work experience in holidays destinations
Virtual reality holidays in theme parks
Substitute
Visiting auctions
Holidays to pursue hobbies
Visiting collectors’ fairs
Simulated fun parks
Holidays for adventure
Holidays for personal research
Adapt/modify
Family history
Holidays to play or watch sport
Real: safaris
Lunch time entertainment
Holidays alongside work
Evening out with the boys/girls
Explore own area of study/interest in the real world
Holidays and study
Visits to universities to see how students study
Local history
Museums
Rugby/football/cricket world cup
Tennis tournaments
Olympics
Long stay holidays for 3 to 6 months
Maximize/magnify
Experience living abroad
Study abroad
Travel the world on foot/by car/by bicycle
Stay in an expensive hotel
Visit an historic city
Stay in a castle/mansion
Short trip in a canal barge
Old fashioned coach trip to resort
Day trips
Day out in large city – shopping
Weekend breaks
Minimize/eliminate
Combine

Fishbone diagram
The ﬁshbone diagram was proposed by Professor Ishikawa of Tokyo University (Majaro, 1991).
The diagram depicts all possible causes contributing to a problem, or can be used as shown in
the illustration to depict all factors relating to a problem or concept. The shape of the diagram
resembles that of a ﬁshbone structure – hence its name.
To draw the diagram one ﬁrst places the problem under consideration (or the topic of
interest) at the ‘head’ end. All possible causes of the problem or principal features of the
concept are inserted at the end of the bones and at 45 degrees to the backbone. Further
breakdowns of the causes or features are listed on additional branches running off those already
inserted at 45 degrees to the backbone.
Having completed the diagram, the group uses it as a discussion vehicle, and it is customary
to consider the points that are raised in ascending order of complexity, starting with the
simplest relationships.
In the example diagram (Figure 12.10) we see that the concept under study is the design
for a new car. The diagram picks out the main features of the car and indicates the speciﬁcations
for each feature. Of course, in practice such a diagram would be much larger and contain many
more features and their corresponding speciﬁcations.
The ﬁshbone diagram encourages one to look at every aspect of a problem or a topic of
interest and to highlight the various relationships along with the relative importance of its
various parts. It also helps to establish a logical sequence for handling various parts of a problem
in a systematic way and enables one to visualise the parts within the whole.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
249
Figure 12.10
Fishbone diagram
New car
specification
FISHBONE DIAGRAM
Seats
4
Engine
1000cc
Shape
Coupé
Wheels
Alloy
Extras
Sunroof
Doors
3
Power
Diesel
Body
Fibreglass

MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
250
Lotus blossom technique
This method starts with a central theme or problem and works outward, using ever-widening
circles or ‘petals’ (shown as stars in Figure 12.11). Central themes lead to ideas that themselves
become central themes, and so on. The unfolding themes trigger new ideas and new themes.
1
Copy the diagram shown in Figure 12.11.
2
Write your central theme or problem in the diagram’s centre.
3
Think of related ideas or applications and write them in the surrounding stars. For instance,
one company’s central theme was ‘establishing a creative climate’. They surrounded this
statement in the central box with: ‘offer idea contests’, ‘create a stimulating environment’,
‘have creative-thinking meetings’, ‘generate ways to “get out of the mould”,’ ‘create a
positive attitude’, ‘establish a creative-idea committee’, ‘make work fun’, and ‘expand
the meaning of work’.
4
Use the ideas written in each of the eight surrounding stars as the central themes for
another eight ideas. (New layer of stars not shown in Figure 12.11)
Figure 12.11
The lotus blossom method
Core
problem
or idea
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA
IDEA

5
Try to think of eight new ideas involving the new central theme, and write them in the
stars surrounding it. Use the idea stimulators to help you generate ideas. Fill out as many
stars as you can.
6
Continue the process until you’ve completed as much of the diagram as you can.
7
Evaluate the ideas.
TRIZ
TRIZ is a series of creativity triggers that assist one to see problems from different angles, hone
in on the real underlying problem and come up with possible solutions. TRIZ has 40 Inventive
Principles that provide innovators with a means of breaking out of current paradigms into new
ones.
Set in a business context, the principles exhibit a number of similarities and differences
relative to their use in technical problem solving applications. To use these 40 Inventive
Principles, one has to formulate the problem using the same methods used for TRIZ for
technical problems.
It will be particularly helpful to formulate the ideal ﬁnal result and the reasons that the ideal
cannot be achieved. This will usually lead to contradictions. For example, in a decision-making
situation, the ideal ﬁnal result is ‘everyone is always satisﬁed with the decision’. The analysis
might follow this path:
•
‘Satisfaction of everyone is not always possible’.
•
‘Why not?’
•
‘Because there are too many interests to consider’.
This analysis reveals a potential problem and a pathway to solution:
•
Everyone may be satisﬁed provided that their interests can be taken into account.
•
Next, one uses the 40 principles to look for a solution to the problem.
Below we consider examples of the use of seven of the principles (or constituent elements)
in connection with approaching the above problem.
Principle 1: Segmentation
Divide an object into independent parts.
Identify various ways of satisfying different groups of individuals.
Principle 2: Taking out
Separate an interfering part or property from an object, or single out the only necessary part (or property)
of an object.
Identify and highlight key compromise or satisfaction issues.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
251

Principle 3: Local quality
Make each part of an object fulﬁl a different and useful function.
Show how what the organization wants to do is congruent with the individual wants of all or
most interested parties.
Principle 4: Asymmetry
Change the shape of an object from symmetrical to asymmetrical.
Alter the proposed action so that it seems to beneﬁt most or all interested parties.
Principle 5: Merging
Bring closer together (or merge) identical or similar objects, assemble identical or similar parts to perform
parallel operations.
Stress the overlap of the wants and needs that one seeks to serve and reconcile.
Principle 6: Universality
Make an object or structure perform multiple functions; eliminate the need for other parts.
Show or argue that by taking a single course of action one can eliminate the need for other
costly undertakings.
Principle 7: ‘Nested Doll’
Make one part pass through a cavity in the other.
Show how satisfying the needs of one or more groups helps to satisfy unsatisﬁed needs of other
groups.
VISION BUILDING
Vision building has become an effective means for individuals and organizations to set and
achieve goals. The vision is believed to reinforce and reorientate efforts to create and achieve
organizational goals (Parker, 1990; Saxberg, 1993). Forsth and Nordvik (1995) describe a
method for building visions in organizations. An important aspect of this method is that
communication is achieved through visual pictures. They suggest that one needs to build up a
‘picture language’ comprising not fewer than 50 and not more than 200 pictures. The pictures
should evoke pleasant feelings rather than unpleasant ones. Roughly 25 per cent of the pictures
used in a session should relate directly to the kind of vision being built. Examples include
people working or playing together, or animals/ﬂowers (these symbolize the organization).
Another 25 per cent might represent emotional states that are relevant to the vision – pictures
symbolizing happiness, stability, change, etc. Yet another 25 per cent of the pictures should
be highly stimulating – pictures using strange colours, unusual forms or even amusing pictures.
The ﬁnal quarter should comprise a mixed bag of pictures of all kinds. Photographs and artwork
may be used.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
252

In essence, a group of individuals from an organization are invited to browse the pictures
and see if they can relate the symbolism of whichever pictures take their fancy to their own
organization. Through subsequent group discussion in which they share their own experiences
of the pictures, they are able to create a group vision for the company.
QUESTIONS
1
Imagine you have the task of managing the production of one of Gilbert and Sullivan’s
operettas. Use the technique of storyboarding to record your ideas on planning, organizing
and communicating your ideas on the production to all parties who will be associated with
the project (i.e. participants, sponsors and potential audiences).
2
Evaluate the usefulness of bionics as a means of generating insights. Provide some
illustrations of how it might be applied on different kinds of problem.
3
What is free association? Illustrate how it might be used in helping to come up with solving
water-shortage problems during the summer or dry season.
4
Construct a ﬁshbone diagram to sketch out the relevant factors impinging on a problem
of your choice.
5
Show how you would apply the technique of clichés, proverbs and maxims in coming up
with insights concerning the following problems:
(a) How to improve efﬁciency in the warehouse.
(b) How to reduce lost time through accidents in the ofﬁce.
(c) How to make the most of the time available in meetings.
(d) How to reduce the impact of organizational politics on decision making.
(e) How to avoid making major errors when setting down policy.
6
When might an organization use scenario writing? What are its major limitations?
7
Evaluate the usefulness of the kind of things that is suggested by TRIZ as a creative
problem solving technique for business management.
CASES
Universal creativity
It is 3575 and the Androids have taken over control of all commercial enterprise on the earth
and in most parts of the universe which has been explored to date by mankind and other
intelligent life-forms. Androids run all the businesses and all intelligent life-forms enjoy an
existence of enforced idleness and pleasure. Disease has become a thing of the past and most
earthling beings now live to at least 110 years of age. Moreover, poverty as it was known in
the nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries on earth has disappeared. Afﬂuence
abounds everywhere and all human beings have a standard of living at least equivalent to the
very richest people in the twenty-ﬁrst century on earth.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
253

The Androids are looking for ways to provide new entertainment for human beings and
other intelligent forms on distant galaxies. Time travel is now possible, though it has only been
experienced by relatively few intelligent beings who live on the planet A6183 in Galaxy 918.
In addition, instant means of transportation over distances of thousands of light years has been
made possible during the last decade as a result of new technologies.
Question
Can you think of any ideas that might be helpful for the Androids in their search for new
ways to entertain intelligent life-forms throughout the galaxies?
Hillchurch Council
Hillchurch Council is faced with the problem of how to cope with on-street parking problems
and trafﬁc congestion in the town centre. Originally, a bypass was approved for the town, but
successive national governments have repeatedly delayed giving their support for the scheme,
and at present the prospect of a bypass seems to have receded altogether.
Recent improvements to the town centre have included the opening of a large superstore
and the development of a high-class shopping precinct. In addition, a new college of further
education has opened up to serve the local community. All of these factors have led to an
increased demand for parking space, and this has only been achieved at the expense of on-street
parking in neighbourhoods surrounding the town centre. Not only has this led to an increase
in complaints from residents, but it has also substantially increased the risk of accidents on the
roads and increased congestion in the town. Indeed, many of the streets that originally were
available for parking have now had to be painted with double yellow lines to prevent parking
and hence reduce the risk of serious accidents. There are no plans to build new car parks and
there is no new space available for the building of car parks. At present there is one car park
which can accommodate 50 vehicles and two which can accommodate 100 vehicles each. None
of these sites is suitable for development as a multistorey car park.
On market days (two days a week) and Saturdays the situation in the town is chaotic.
Moreover, the situation is made much worse in the summer when travellers to a nearby seaside
resort come through the town in their thousands. Hillchurch is a veritable bottleneck straddling
main north–south and east–west routes. Furthermore, only one major road runs north to south
through the town and only one runs east to west.
The town’s sole trafﬁc warden is hard pressed to keep up with the numerous complaints
that are made daily but, despite requests made for additional wardens, the council feels that
providing more wardens will do little to alleviate the dreadful problems that exist. The leader
of the council feels that this is a problem that requires some creative insights and has approached
a ﬁrm of management consultants to help with the problem. The consultants have indicated
that they feel their expert on lateral thinking may be able to help with this particular problem
and have assigned the task accordingly.
Question
Use story telling in order to get some insights in to the problem.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
254

The conference
John is organizing a creativity and innovation conference to be held in Brussels. It is very
important that he records all the things that he has to do, but, inevitably, when he draws up
lists of things to do he leaves important things out. He is expecting over 500 delegates to the
conference, which he plans to hold at one of the city-centre hotels. In addition to the actual
conference itself there is the matter of guest speakers to sort out, plus their transport from
different parts of the world – not to mention their accommodation. Many of the guest speakers
require special equipment, such as large-screen TVs, video-player, computer and projection
panel, as well as the basic things like ﬂip charts, markers, overhead projector, etc. Then there
are the meals, the paperwork, the bound copies of the proceedings and, of course, the helpers
who are going to make the conference run smoothly.
John does not know where to start, but someone has told him that mind maps can be very
useful in such an instance.
Question
Produce a mind map of the kind you think would be helpful to John in this instance.
What to do with all the glass
After 20 years working with his business partner setting up a highly lucrative hi-tech business
John is now free to do anything he pleases. The pair sold the business to a larger company for
£10 million. John has moved house from the city into the country. He has acquired a smart
house with 4 acres of arable land. In addition there are stables, a two-storey outbuilding that
is suitable for ofﬁces and some 40,000 square feet of greenhousing. At 50 years of age John
still has the urge to get involved in setting up a business. However, he is somewhat at a loss
to know what to do with the various assets he has recently acquired.
Question
Can you come up with any ideas?
FURTHER READING
Jamali, K. and Hashm, S. M. (2010) Managing projects through the theory of inventive problem
solving (TRIZ), International Research Journal of Finance and Economics, 44.
Rustico, E. (2007) Mindmapping applied to problem solving, Turku University Computer Science
CONNET: Communication Networks and Human Technology, 15 February.
MISCELLANEOUS IDEATION TECHNIQUES
255

256
Rating and evaluating ideas
A publisher is reviewing the recurrent problem of how to market books. Two thoughts
have been put forward. On the one hand, more effort could be put into employing
additional sales representatives to call on universities and colleges or, on the other hand,
efforts could be directed towards developing and marketing a website. There are various
ways in which such ideas could be evaluated. We could try to evaluate the likely ﬁnancial
effectiveness of the two approaches in terms of generating extra revenue and choose the
option or possible combination of the two options that will produce the highest expected
ﬁnancial pay-off. However, relying on such an approach alone may be unsatisfactory
because of the uncertainty surrounding the ﬁnancial costs and beneﬁts associated with
the two options or their various combinations. An alternative might be to consider non-
ﬁnancial criteria in addition to ﬁnancial criteria. For example, we could determine a
set of non-ﬁnancial criteria and evaluate each idea against the criteria on a scale of,
say, 1–10 (10 being ‘good’ and 1 being ‘poor’). Such criteria might reﬂect such factors
as how good the option is at increasing such things as awareness, interest, knowledge,
etc., of the publisher’s products and services. Of course, as with all rating scales,
complications then arise as to how one weights the different criteria since some may be
considered to be more important than others.
Rating scales and ﬁnancial costs and beneﬁt analyses are not the only ways of
evaluating options. A more qualitative offering to the problem is also possible. This is
provided by reverse brainstorming. Here we would list the options available and
brainstorm the difﬁculties that might be associated with implementing each one of the
options available. Then we would look at problems identiﬁed and try to come up with
possible solutions to these problems. In this way we would be able to identify the
practicability of implementing each option in addition to the ﬁnancial costs and beneﬁts
that have been estimated to be associated with that option.
How does one decide that one idea is better than another? What criteria does one
use to make such evaluations? How does one equate one thing with another? These are
some of the key issues to consider. For example, two projects offer different ﬁnancial
beneﬁts, so should one consider the one with the better ﬁnancial prospect? What about
risk? What about non-ﬁnancial beneﬁts? How does one measure many of these things?
Are some of the criteria more critical to the success of the project than others? All these
kinds of things have to be taken into account when evaluating projects or ideas.
Evaluation
Chapter 13

INTRODUCTION
Having covered the methods of ideation in the previous chapters we now move on to looking
at decision making – deciding whether or not it is worthwhile taking any ideas that have been
generated any further. Methods of evaluation range from simple checklists to complex weighted
scoring systems. First, however, we look at sorting methods before turning to look at evalua -
tion methods. Many of the ideation methods we have examined in the previous chapters
produce a large quantity of ideas. Before we can evaluate these ideas we need to sort them
into categories or themes. This facilitates the process of making comparisons and evaluations.
Finally, we give some thought to exercising choice. We look at a number of methods:
advantage–disadvantage tables, Plus and Minus Interesting (PMI), Castle technique, Sticking
dots, Creative evaluation, Weighting systems, reverse brainstorming, ﬁnancial evaluation,
mathematical evaluations, Pay-off tables and Decision trees. We also look at Naturalistic
decision making and Strategic framing. While decision making is important in this context we
EVALUATION
257
Figure 13.1
Position of the chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

still have to consider the question of how decisions are implemented, which is the topic of the
last chapter.
SORTING
An individual was asked to brainstorm ideas for the use of aluminium foil. These were ﬁrst
written down on a sheet of paper. Ideas were then examined for those that looked interesting
(highlighting), and the remainder were discarded. The remaining ideas were then grouped
according to different hotspots or themes. An idea could be appended to more than one hotspot
or theme (indicated by the entries in brackets).
1
Cooking
1.1
covering roast chicken
1.2
wrapping baked potato
1.3
covering food for storage
1.4
milk-bottle tops
1.5
wrapping food for storage w/o fridge
1.6
keeping food warm
1.7
lining a grill pan
1.8
wrapping sandwiches to keep fresh
1.9
lining cake storage tins
1.10 (cooking food on campﬁre)
1.11 reﬂecting heat source
1.12 keep food cold
2
Fun
2.1
baby’s rattle
2.2
screw up to make ball
2.3
making a cat’s toy
2.4
stepping stones
2.5
ﬂapping ﬁsh game
2.6
(water in Brownie pool)
2.7
(making children’s jewellery)
3
Practical
3.1
making a cup
3.3
smooth to make a mirror the CPS process
3.4
lining wall behind radiator
3.5
glue/paint dish
3.6
temporary curtains
3.7
(wrapping buttonhole stem)
3.8
(cutting strip to make bookmark)
3.9
(make milk-bottle tops)
4
Camping/out of doors
4.1
reﬂecting sunlight for SOS
4.2
lining under sleeping-bag
EVALUATION
258

EVALUATION
259
4.3
wrapping food on campﬁre
4.4
keeping matches dry
4.5
(keep food warm)
5
Decorative
5.1
wrapping buttonhole stem
5.2
Christmas decorations
5.3
use in collage
5.4
water in Brownie pool
5.5
making children’s jewellery
5.6
cutting strip to make bookmark
5.7
gift-wrap 25th-anniversary presents
5.8
(smooth to make mirror)
Figure 13.2
Overview of the process of sorting and evaluation
Where appropriate use 
mathematical/financial
evaluation
Use qualitative analysis
to select the final ideas
for implementation
Sort ideas under the
headings of themes 
or groupings
Use reverse
brainstorming
Use hits and hotspots as a 
method of identifying themes
and groupings
Use relatively simple evaluation
methods such as: 
Advantages/
disadvantages
Plus/Minus/
Interesting
Castle technique
Sticking dots
Creative evaluation
Force-field analysis
Weighting systems 
or a more sophisticated
evaluation system such as the
Analytic hierarchy process
Eliminate generally
unnattractive groupings
 or themes from further
consideration

EVALUATION
260
To help group the ideas, ﬁve columns were drawn up on a piece of paper and each column
was headed with the title of the theme. Ideas were then listed as appropriate under each column
heading, thus:
Cooking
Fun
Practical
Camping/ 
Decorative
out of doors
ideas
ideas
ideas
ideas
ideas
The next stage involved evaluating the hotspots or themes before analysing retained ideas (one
or other of the methods described below can be used to evaluate themes or hotspots). Interesting
hotspots are retained so that the ideas within the hotspots can be individually evaluated.
Figure 13.3
Sorting
4. List ideas under
columns designated
for each theme or
hotspot on a sheet
of paper
3. Group remaining
ideas according to
hotspots or
themes
5. Evaluate hotspots
or themes before
analysing retained
ideas
Sorting
1. Record ideas
in writing
2. Examine ideas
for those that look
interesting (highlight)
Discard the
remainder
EVALUATION METHODS
The following methods may be used to evaluate all the ideas that have been generated along a
particular theme or grouping, or to evaluate/eliminate particular themes or groupings.
Adavantage–disadvantage tables
Perhaps the simplest method of evaluating ideas makes use of tables that permit the comparison
of the advantages and disadvantages of various ideas. For example, suppose there are two ideas
about how we should reorganize the ofﬁce – method A and method B. First we list the criteria
against which we want to compare and evaluate the ideas. The same criteria are used for both
of the options, and space is left to indicate whether the idea was rated as having predominantly
advantages or disadvantages when considered against those criteria.
The technique is useful as a rough evaluation tool, and in the example in Table 13.1 it will
be noted that method B seems to have the better rating. However, except for possible use as
a preliminary screening device, this approach has too many limitations. Its main weakness is,
of course, that it assumes that all the criteria carry equal weight and that it is the overall score
that is important (it overlooks the fact that some of the criteria may be critical – i.e. they must
be satisﬁed).
More elaborate screening methods have been suggested by Hamilton (1974). The methods
involve ‘culling’ ideas that fail to satisfy key criteria, and rating and scoring ideas against
desirable criteria.

Figure 13.4
Mind map of ideas on the uses of aluminium foil
Decorative
Practical
Fun
Camping out of doors
wrapping buttonhole stem
Christmas decorations
use in collage
water in Brownie pool
making children’s jewellery
cutting strip to make bookmark
giftwrap 25th-anniversary present
(smooth to make mirror)
reflecting sunlight for SOS
lining under sleeping-bag
wrapping food on campfire
keeping matches dry
(keep food warm)
baby’s rattle
screw up to make ball
make cat’s toy
stepping stones
flapping fish game
Cooking
covering food for storage
wrapping baked potatoes
covering roast chicken
milk-bottle tops
wrapping food for storage w/o fridge
keeping food warm
lining a grill pan
wrapping sandwiches to keep fresh
lining cake storage tins
(cooking food on campfire)
reflecting heat source
keep food cold
(water in Brownie pool)
(making children’s jewellery)
making a plate
making a cup
smooth to make a mirror
lining wall behind radiator
glue/paint dish
temporary curtains
(wrapping buttonhole stem)
(cutting strip to make bookmark)
(make mil-bottle tops)
Ideas for
aluminium foil

PMI: Plus/Minus/Interesting
PMI stands for ‘Plus/Minus/Interesting’. It is a development (by Edward de Bono) of the ‘pros
and cons’ technique used for centuries.
One simply draws up a table headed ‘Plus’, ‘Minus’ and ‘Interesting’. In the column
underneath the ‘Plus’ heading one writes down all the positive points of taking the action.
Underneath the ‘Minus’ heading one writes down all the negative effects. In the ‘Interesting’
column one writes down the extended implications of taking the action, whether positive or
negative.
Scoring the PMI table
One may be able to make an evaluation just from looking at the table. Alternatively, each of
the points written down can be considered and assigned a positive or negative score. The scores
assigned can be entirely subjective. Once done, the score is added up. A strongly positive score
is a favourable evaluation while a strongly negative score suggests the idea is a poor one.
Example
Should I move from my house to a ﬂat (see Table 13.2)?
EVALUATION
262
Table 13.1 An advantage–disadvantage table
Options
Method A
Method B
Criteria
Advantage
Disadvantage
Advantage
Disadvantage
Efﬁciency
x
x
Cost
x
x
Employee
satisfaction
x
x
Score
2
1
3
0
Table 13.2 Plus, Minus, Interesting
Plus
Minus
Interesting
More luxurious
(+5)
More expensive
(–6)
Easier to get to work?
(+1)
Close to city centre
(+5)
Less space
(–7)
Meet more people?
(+1)
More noise
(–4)
Easier to get to places?
(+1)
No garden terrace
(–5)
Totals
10
–22
3
Overall total = –9: I’m happier living where I am!

Castle technique
The Castle technique is useful for evaluating a large number of ideas and is made up of four
steps:
1
A time-limit for the exercise should be set – say, one hour.
2
Three criteria are used to evaluate each idea: acceptability (the extent to which it leads to
a satisfactory solution), practicality (the extent to which it satisﬁes ﬁnancial and time
constraints) and originality (the extent to which it makes a signiﬁcant improvement on the
status quo).
3
Each participant in the evaluation exercise has the same number of votes as there are ideas.
Participants are instructed to vote for each idea with either a ‘yes’ or a ‘no’ vote. One
vote per idea per individual is allowed.
4
The two ideas that receive the highest number of positive votes (number of ‘yes’ votes
minus number of ‘no’ votes) are then combined into one idea.
EVALUATION
263
Figure 13.5
Castle technique
1. A time-limit
for the exercise
should be set –
say, 1 hour
2. Three criteria
are used:
acceptability,
practicality and
originality
3. Each
participant has
the same number
of votes as
there are ideas.
Participants vote
for each idea with
either a ‘yes’ or
a ‘no’ vote. One
vote per idea
per individual
is allowed
4. The two ideas
which receive the
highest number of
positive votes
(number of ‘yes’
votes – number
of ‘no’ votes)
are then
combined
into one idea
Castle technique
Sticking dots
This is a useful method for a small group of individuals to employ when trying to make an
evaluation (see Geschka, 1979). Each group member has a ﬁxed number of votes (usually these
are physically represented in the form of self-adhesive coloured dots). Group members can
then vote in any way they wish. The procedure is as follows:
1
Each member of the group has a card on which there are adhesive dots of a colour unique
to that person. The number of dots corresponds to 10 per cent of the total number of
ideas being considered.
2
Ideas are listed on cards or ﬂip charts and pinned to a wallboard.

EVALUATION
264
3
Ideas are evaluated by group members sticking dots next to the ideas they prefer. Dots
can be allocated in any manner. An individual can place all his or her allocated dots against
one idea if he or she so desires.
4
The ideas receiving the largest number of votes are selected for further analysis or
implementation.
Note: If the number of ideas is less than 10, then the method of calculating the total number
of dots available to a person needs to be modiﬁed. One suggestion is to divide the total by a
suitable number which is less than the total number of ideas. Then add 1 to ensure that
Figure 13.6
Sticking dots method
1. Each member
of the group has
a card on which
there are
adhesive dots of
a colour which
are unique to
that person. The
number of dots
corresponds to
10 per cent of
the total number
of ideas being
considered
2. Ideas are
listed on cards
of flip charts and
pinned to a
wallboard
3. Ideas are
evaluated by
group members
sticking dots next
to the ideas that
they prefer. Dots
can be allocated
in any manner.
An individual
can allocate all
his or her
allocated dots
against one idea
if he or she
so desires
4. The ideas
receiving the
largest number
of votes are
selected for
further analysis
or implementation
Sticking dots
Figure 13.7
Example of using sticking dots
IDEA
three-act play
musical
musical concert
variety show
What type of show should the theatre offer next?
The sticking dots indicate a preference for a musical

everyone has at least 1 vote – for example, if the total number of ideas is 5, then divide by 3,
giving 1.6 votes and add an additional 1, giving 2.6 votes. Rounding this number up would 3
votes per person.
Creative evaluation
This also is a method which is useful for dealing with a large number of ideas. It attempts to
present ideas in a format that will reduce the amount of time required for evaluation. All ideas
are evaluated in terms of time and ﬁnancial requirements (Moore, 1962). The procedure is as
follows:
1
List the ideas.
2
Categorize the ideas into simple, hard and difﬁcult. Note that simple ideas are those that
can be put into action with a minimum of expenditure of time and money. Hard ideas
require more expenditure, while difﬁcult ideas require the most expenditure.
Like the advantages–disadvantages method, this approach is most suitable for a cursory
examination of a large number of ideas.
Force-ﬁeld analysis
This is a method used to get a whole view of all the forces for or against a plan so that a decision
can be made which takes into account all interests. In effect, this is a specialized method of
weighing pros and cons. Where a plan has been decided on, force-ﬁeld analysis allows you to
look at all the forces for or against the plan. It helps you to plan or reduce the impact of the
opposing forces, and strengthen and reinforce the supporting forces. To carry out a force-ﬁeld
analysis, take the following steps:
•
List all forces for change in one column, and all forces against change in another column.
•
Assign a score to each force, from 1 (weak) to 5 (strong).
•
Draw a diagram showing the forces for and against, and the size of the forces (see Figure
13.8).
Once you have carried out an analysis, you can decide on the viability of the project. Where
you have decided to carry out a project, it can help you to analyse how you can push through
a project that may be in difﬁculty. Here you have two choices:
•
Reduce the strength of the forces opposing a project.
•
Increase the forces pushing a project.
Often the most elegant solution is the ﬁrst: just trying to force change through may cause its
own problems (e.g. staff can be annoyed into active opposition to a plan instead of merely not
welcoming it).
EVALUATION
265

If you were faced with the task of pushing through the project in the example above, the
analysis might suggest a number of points:
•
By looking for a strategic alliance, loss of management control could be reduced (reduce
loss of management control by 2).
•
Coping with uncertainty is necessary for business survival (new force in favour, +2).
•
More work will mean a more productive workforce (new force, +1).
•
More sales will increase morale of sales force (new force, +1).
•
More proﬁt will increase satisfaction of shareholders (new force, +1).
These changes swing the balance from 9:9 (neither for nor against the plan) to 14:7 (in favour
of the plan).
Force-ﬁeld analysis is an effective method of getting a picture of all the forces for and against
a plan. It helps you to weigh the importance of these factors and to assess whether a plan is
worth pursuing. Where you have decided to proceed with a plan, carrying out a force-ﬁeld
analysis helps you identify changes that might be made to improve the plan.
Weighting systems
The ﬁrst step is to generate evaluative criteria. Next, one assigns different weighting for each
criterion, reﬂecting its importance with respect to the problem under consideration. Next,
each idea is rated on the degree to which it satisﬁes each criterion. The lower the number, the
less the criterion is satisﬁed. Finally, one multiplies the criteria-importance rating one has
assigned to obtain the rated score. Weighted scores are then summed to obtain an overall
weighted score for each idea or theme. An example of a weighted decision matrix is shown in
Table 13.3, in which case weights and scores are out of a maximum of 5, where 5 is considered
very important or high-scoring and 1 is relatively unimportant or low-scoring.
EVALUATION
266
Figure 13.8
Force-ﬁeld analysis
A FIRM WHICH IS GOING FOR GROWTH
FORCES FOR
MORE SALES
MORE PROFIT
MORE WORK
FOR EMPLOYEES
+9
+3
+3
+3
FORCES AGAINST
LOSS OF CONTROL BY
EXISTING MANAGEMENT
UNCERTAINTY
–9
–5
–4

Generally, ideas with the highest overall scores are considered the best. However, one must
take account of the fact that there may be some critical criteria that have to be satisﬁed, and
even if an idea has the best score of those available it may still not be considered adoptable
simply because it has failed to satisfy the requirements of particular criteria. In addition, one
might specify that an idea must obtain a certain overall score before it can be considered
adoptable. If the best idea available does not satisfy this criteria, it may not be adopted.
THE PROCESS OF CHOOSING
As can be seen from the foregoing, when exercising choice it is usual to have a set of alternatives
and a set of evaluation criteria. Evaluating a list of alternatives involves measuring, trading off
or scoring them in terms of the speciﬁed criteria and determining the relative importance of
the criteria. This may involve several complexities:
•
multiple criteria and multiple alternatives;
•
a large number of criteria and sub-criteria;
•
criteria which are not all equally important to the decision maker;
•
some criteria may be qualitative while other criteria are quantitative.
Some of the typical suggestions for analysing such data involve:
•
discussing the pros and cons of each alternative;
•
analysing the costs and beneﬁts, or weaknesses and strengths, of each alternative;
•
ensuring the effective utilization of ﬁnancial and other quantitative information in evaluating
alternatives;
•
sifting back through evidence provided in situation analysis to help reach a conclusion;
•
assessing whether a chosen alternative solves a problem without creating new problems;
•
justifying why an alternative has been selected and outlining why others may have been
rejected.
EVALUATION
267
Table 13.3 Weighted decision matrix
Criteria
Criteria
Idea 1
Idea 2
importance
Score
Subtotal
Score
Subtotal
1 a
5
2
10
3
15
2 b
5
1
5
2
10
3 c
4
2
8
3
12
4 d
4
3
12
5
20
5 e
3
3
9
5
15
Totals
44
72

EVALUATION
268
The general approach to adopt at the choice phase is as follows:
1
Use quantitative analysis on objective data:
(a) acquire data on the anticipated outcomes of each alternative with respect to each
criterion;
(b) perform descriptive or experimental research to measure each alternative’s perform -
ance on the criteria;
(c) consider whether quantitative tools such as simulationand optimization methods
might be usefully applied; conduct a sensitivity analysis with the quantitative data.
2
Use qualitative analysis with subjective criteria:
(a) conduct a pro/con analysis;
(b) make use of expert judgement in dealing with the evaluation of alternatives with
respect to the qualitative criteria.
3
Merge quantitative and qualitative analysis.
4
Perform a synthesis of the data generated to rank alternatives.
5
Conduct a sensitivity analysis to show how sensitive the ﬁnal priorities for decision
alternatives are to possible changes in scores assigned to alternatives and weights assigned
to decision criteria.
6
Check analytical results against intuition. If they agree, you can be more assured that the
decision is a good one. If they do not agree, ﬁnd out why this is the case. Check, in
particular, to ascertain that all relevant factors have been included in the decision analysis
and that they have appropriate scores or weights.
The merging and evaluating of quantitative and qualitative data presents considerable choices.
Moreover, synthesis and sensitivity analysis of such data presents a daunting task for all but
relatively simple decisions. One sophisticated tool that can be used to get to grips with this
process is the analytic hierarchy process (Saaty, 1980).
The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) enables the decision makers to set priorities and make
choices on the basis of their objectives and knowledge and experience in a way that is consistent
with their intuitive thought process. It has substantial theoretical and empirical support,
overcomes problems associated with pro/con analysis, and the weights and scores technique
by using a hierarchical structure of the decision problem, pair-wise relative comparison of the
elements in the hierarchy and a series of redundant judgements. The approach reduces error
and encourages consistency in judgements. The use of redundancy allows accurate priorities
to be derived from qualitative judgements, even though the wording may not be very precise.
This means that words can be used to compare qualitative factors and derive ratio scale
priorities that can be combined with quantitative factors.
Expert Choice helps a decision maker examine and resolve problems involving multiple
evaluation criteria. The software uses the AHP methodology to model a decision problem and
evaluate the relative desirability of alternatives.

QUALITATIVE EVALUATION: REVERSE BRAINSTORMING
The technique was developed at the Hotpoint company (Whiting, 1958) as a group method
for discussing all possible weaknesses of an idea, or what might go wrong with an idea when
it is implemented. It is almost identical to classical brainstorming except that criticisms rather
than ideas are generated.
Imagine the problem being how to counteract declining sales and that the following 
potential ideas for solutions were generated by classical brainstorming or some other ideation
method:
•
new advertising strategy
•
change or improve packaging
•
offer discounts
•
ﬁnd new markets
•
door-to-door sales
The ﬁrst step in reverse brainstorming is to suggest criticisms for the ﬁrst of these ideas – new
advertising strategy. Criticisms developed might be:
•
too expensive
•
unable to target the speciﬁc areas required
EVALUATION
269
Figure 13.9
The choice process
1. Use
quantitative
analysis
objective data
3. Merge
quantitative and
qualitative
analysis
4. Perform a
synthesis of the
data generated to
rank alternatives
5. Conduct a
sensitivity analysis
to show how
sensitive the final
priorities for
decision alternatives
are to possible
changes in scores
assigned to
alternatives and
weights assigned to
decision criteria
6. Check analytical
results against
intuition. Check, in
particular, to
ascertain that all
relevant factors
have been included
in the decision
analysis and that
they have
appropriate
weights/scores
Choice phase
2. Use qualitative
analysis with
subjective criteria

EVALUATION
270
After exhausting criticisms for the ﬁrst idea, the group begins criticizing the second idea,
and the process continues until all the ideas have been criticized.
Using classical brainstorming the group then re-examines the ideas to generate possible
solutions for each weakness that has been identiﬁed. For example, in the case of the second
idea, ‘offer discounts’, the criticisms might be that people might perceive the quality of the
product not to be good as a result of offering discounts. In the case of ‘door-to-door sales’, it
might be the fact that unacceptable training and added costs will be incurred because of the
need to employ more sales staff. Other criticisms will no doubt be found for the other ideas.
As far as solutions to these criticisms are concerned, it may not be felt that there are any in,
say, the case of a ‘new advertising strategy’; however, in the case of ‘door-to-door sales’ it
may be felt possible to employ part-time workers in order to lower the cost.
The idea that possesses the lowest number of weaknesses, and that will be most likely to
solve the problem, is usually selected for implementation. Of course, one does also have to
bear in mind the comparative seriousness of any unresolved criticisms.
Example
PROBLEM
Getting people to have a positive attitude towards adopting new ways of working.
Figure 13.10
Reverse brainstorming
2. Objective/
problem with list
of ideas generated
are displayed
5. The idea
possessing the
fewest unanswered
criticisms, and that
is most likely to
solve the problem,
is selected
1. People who
generated ideas
evaluate them
3. All ideas are
criticised in turn and
criticisms noted
4. Solutions sought
for the various
criticisms made
Reverse
brainstorming

IDEAS
1
Rewards associated with adopting new methods.
2
Firing those who do not cooperate and hiring new staff.
3
Training people and giving them the right kind of skills to do the new tasks.
CRITICISMS:
1
(a) May be too costly.
(b) May not believe they will receive rewards, or seen as further manipulation by
management.
2
(a) Will cause even more hostility and resentment.
(b) Difﬁcult to identify best method of recruitment – may still hire inappropriate people.
(c) Effort and time need to be spent on recruitment and interviews.
3
(a) Training requires additional time and cost.
(b) Not possible to provide training for every situation.
SOLUTIONS TO WEAKNESSES:
1
(a) Link the new methods with productivity increases.
(b) Provide written agreements to show commitment.
2
(a) No solution.
(b) Agree that all new appointees be on probation for a ﬁxed period.
(c) Hire recruitment consultants.
3
(a) Provide training on the job.
(b) As (a), plus make sure ﬁrst line managers can provide proper guidance and support
to workers.
Although both ideas 1 and 3 seem to have resolved all the difﬁculties associated with them,
3 might well be the preferable alternative. This is because the problem at the core of the
matter lies in a decrease in productivity which is incurred as each new method is adopted.
FINANCIAL EVALUATION
Projects may be cash generators (i.e. new products or services) or cash savers (e.g. new
procedures aimed at reducing costs). Essentially, the way in which these projects may be
evaluated in ﬁnancial terms is similar. Money received today is worth more than the same
amount of money we receive in the future. This principle reﬂects the fact that any money can
be invested and earn interest for the period it is invested, so it must be more valuable than the
same amount received at a later date. The discounted cash ﬂow principle takes into account
this principle.
There are several ways of using the discounted cash ﬂow concept to evaluate capital
expenditures. The most popular of these appears to be the net present value of an investment.
Savings year by year are compared with the outﬂow of cash required by the investment. The
expected savings received each year are discounted by selected interest rates. The outﬂow of
EVALUATION
271

cash is also discounted by the same interest rate. If the present value of the savings exceeds the
present value of the outlays after discounting at a common interest rate, then the project will
deemed ﬁt for the purpose for which it was intended.
Example
A hospital is seeking to make savings of overall 10 per cent on all its administrative functions.
One idea is to replace one of its manned reception points with an automated system. The cost
of installing the system initially is £50,000 and each subsequent year it will be necessary to
incur £5,000 maintaining the new system. Currently, the receptionist costs the hospital
£20,000 a year. It is expected that further revisions will be made at the end of ﬁve years so
the hospital wants to know whether the savings will meet the criteria set within the ﬁve-year
period. Using the above example again and using a discount factor of 10 per cent as the
minimum acceptable discount factor produces the following results.
EVALUATION
272
Table 13.4 Example DCF calculation
Year
Discount 
Investment
Savings
Cash ﬂow
Present 
factor
(£000)
(£000)
value
(10%)
£
0
1
–50
–50
–50,000
1
0.909
–5
20
15
13,635
2
0.756
–5
20
15
11,340
3
0.631
–5
20
15
9,465
4
0.526
–5
20
15
7,890
5
0.438
–5
20
15
6,570
Total net 
present value = –1,100
Using the net present value approach shows that the projects just failed to exceed the 10
per cent minimum rate of return set down by the organization. However, assuming that some
projects will exceed the 10 per cent criterion, it is possible that the organization may be happy
to include this project in the portfolio of savings strategies that it adopts.
The actual yield of the project can be determined experimentally with the aid of a spread -
sheet by increasing the discount rate until the total net present value of the project equates to
zero.
MATHEMATICAL EVALUATION
Mathematics can be used effectively to aid/evaluate possible solutions. In essence one is
interested in assessing the potential pay-off of problem solutions. One way to achieve this is
to consider the probabilities of certain pay-offs in the light of previous experience. Of course,
this method can only be used where there is enough experience to calculate the odds with
some degree of accuracy; and, of course, probabilities of this kind are of no use in a case where
it has never been necessary to consider a similar instance before.

PAY-OFF TABLES
Alternative solutions to a problem can be laid out in a pay-off table (Table 13.5). Three
probabilities are shown with respect to both costs and beneﬁts associated with the ideas (.25,
.50 and .25). Thus, for option A, for example, it is estimated that there is a 25 per cent chance
the costs will be £2,500, a 50 per cent chance it will be £3,000 and a further 25 per cent
chance that it will be £4,000. Beneﬁts are calculated in a similar way.
Using the expected pay-off concept we can see that option A appears to have the best
expected pay-off.
EVALUATION
273
Table 13.5 Example of pay-off table
Cost 
Expected 
Beneﬁt 
Expected Expected
(£)
cost
(£)
beneﬁt 
pay-off 
(£) 
(£) 
(£)
(EC)
(EB)
(EB–EC)
Probability
.25
.50
.25
.25
.50
.25
Option A
2,500
3,000
4,000
3,125
5,200
6,000
7,600
6,200
3,075
Option B
1,500
2,000
3,000
2,125
3,600
4,800
5,600
4,700
2,575
Option C
2,000
2,500
3,000
2,500
4,200
5,700
6,000
5,400
2,900
DECISION TREES
While pay-off tables are adequate for most purposes, decision trees enable one to see what
effect a decision made at a particular moment will have on the options to be faced in the future.
For example, suppose that a ﬁrm is operating at full capacity and demand for its products is
rising. A 20 per cent rise in demand is expected, and this can be met by adopting one of two
new methods of working (A and B). The net cash ﬂow in the case of a 20 per cent rise in
demand will be $460,000 if new method A is used, or $440,000 if the extra production is
obtained by method B. However, there is a body of opinion in the ﬁrm that sales will not rise
and that they will actually decline by 5 per cent, even though the rise is more likely. There is
general agreement that there is a 60 per cent probability of a rise in sales of 20 per cent and a
40 per cent probability of a 5 per cent drop in sales.
If there were a 5 per cent sales drop, the cash ﬂow would be $340,000 if the company were
to use method A and $380,000 if it were to opt for method B. The alternatives are presented
in the decision tree (Figure 13.10).
In order to take account of the probabilities, one has to make the following calculations:
Method A: $460,000 0.6 + $340,000 0.4 = $412,000
Method B: 
$440,000 0.6 + $380,000 0.4 = $416,000
Method B seems preferable. However, one does have to take account of future years’ sales;
and, assuming predictions can be made for a further couple of years, this would introduce

EVALUATION
274
another two decision points and extend the branches of the decision tree. Care, however, has
to be exercised in terms of extending a decision tree into the future as uncertainty increases
the further ahead one looks.
EXERCISING CHOICE
Naturalistic decision making
Classical decision making (CDM) has its place in how we look at and evaluate options, and
reﬂects two basic assumptions about decision evaluation. The ﬁrst of these prescribes optimal
choice from a ﬁxed set of known options. As a result of this, prescribed choice models deﬁne
optimality and explicit rules determine choice (Beach and Lipshitz, 1995; Orasanu and Connolly,
1995). The second of the assumptions describes the choices of an ideal hypothetical decision
maker. As a challenge to these assumptions there is research that suggests that CDM is not an
appropriate paradigm as far as ‘real-world’ decision making is concerned (Beach and Lipshitz,
1995; Klein, 1989, 1993, 1997). The research argues that situations within a CDM framework
comprise simplistic, highly structured choice tasks that are in possession of complete information
and that these have little relevance to ‘real-world”‘ choices (Duggan and Harris, 2001).
Moreover, it is argued that in practice decision makers have insufﬁcient time and resources
during CDM operations to make truly rational choices.
Naturalistic Decision Making (NDM) is an alternative approach to the CDM approach.
NDM theory evolved because of the deﬁciencies of CDM. In advocating NDM (Pruitt et al.,
1997) there is an attempt to more accurately describe the process involved in ‘real world’.
The archetypal NDM reﬂects choices or decisions entrenched in larger dynamic tasks made by
Figure 13.11
Decision tree
Decision point
Present time
sales rise (0.6)
$412,000
method A
$416,000
method B
sales drop (0.4)
sales drop (0.4)
sales rise (0.6)
$460,000
$340,000
$380,000
Future time
$440,000

experienced decision makers. It acknowledges that decision making in the laboratory and in
real life are not directly comparable (Beach and Lipshitz, 1995; Orasanu and Connolly, 1995).
Klein (1989, 1993, 1997) acknowledges how experience informs decision making through the
processes, of situation assessment, recognition and mental simulation in the Recognition Primed
Decision Model. Indeed, It has been suggested that NDM can be thought of as ‘the study of how
people use their experience to make decisions in ﬁeld settings’ (Zsambok and Klein, 1997).
A primary difference between NDM and CDM is that people tend to ﬁnd a solution that’s
‘good enough’ (satisﬁcing rather than optimal). The chosen option will cannot be guaranteed
to be the ‘best possible’ out of all the options, but will be good enough as a solution. A
naturalistic approach to decision making and choice does not demand the exhaustive,
simultaneous evaluation of multiple options as required by the CDM paradigm.
Strategic framing
Organizations are guided by strategic visions and planning processes. When they decide to
innovate, they create strategic innovation frames to guide the innovation process. A primary
obstacle is how to state innovation challenges and link together objectives so they will produce
strategic results.
Many innovation initiatives may fail because all of the secondary objectives were not detailed
and linked together appropriately. An organisation may simultaneously be concerned about
maintaining its image, improving cash-ﬂow, maintaining highly motivated managers, and,
keeping good relations with other staff and trade unions. These may all be corporate objectives
and the overarching task is how to linked them all together in the best manner. Complex,
interrelated decisions such as these are associated with objectives that are nested within
hierarchies of other, related objectives and multiple goals typically must be achieved to
accomplish one primary goal (Richards, 1986).
The problem is to identify which objective or goal should be accomplished ﬁrst to achieve
the primary objective. It is also important to identify how the different objectives might be
interdependent – i.e. linked in ways so that achieving one will help achieve another.
Visual diagrams of strategic goals and objectives can be represented in cognitive maps. For
a comprehensive review of strategy, Van Gundy (2007) shows how the use of such diagrams
and maps can help unravel the complexities of multiple goals and objectives when evaluating
ideas. Here we will discuss a simpliﬁed illustration of the concepts involved. Let us assume
that the four objectives that the organization is trying to satisﬁce are:
•
maintaining its image
•
improving cash-ﬂow
•
maintaining highly motivated managers
•
keeping good relations with other staff and trade unions
If we arrange the objectives in the form of a hierarchical cognitive map (Figure 13.12), we will
see that improving the cash ﬂow is seen as the prime objective but that maintaining the
organizational image is a contributing factor to this. Any idea that does not satisﬁce in terms
of enabling maintenance of the organizational image may not contribute to improving the cash
EVALUATION
275

EVALUATION
276
ﬂow. We say ‘may not’ rather than ‘will not’ because we cannot be absolutely certain of this.
It could be that the ﬁrm can improve cash ﬂow in the short term by issuing a notice of intention
to customers that it will take legal redress where bills are not settled within forty days. This
may be seen as the mark of an efﬁcient company with whom it should continue to deal by some
customers but may be viewed as overly threatening by others. The net effect may be productive
in the short term but may be less effective or even have a negative effect in the long run. In
addition to customer attitudes towards the organization, maintaining the organizational image
is seen to be affected by motivation levels of managers and staff, too, so any idea should be
seen to satisﬁce in this respect as well. A more elaborate cognitive map might take each of the
boxes in the diagram and produce cognitive maps relating to each one. Ideas might then also
be screened or evaluated against each of these to assess whether they are likely to satisﬁce on
critical criteria.
QUESTIONS
1 Describe two different techniques that can be used to assist in the evaluation of ideas.
2 ‘Ideation techniques only generate insights into a problem and not solutions to a problem.’
To what extent would you agree or disagree with this statement? How does this inﬂuence
how we might set about the process of evaluating the output of an ideation process?
Figure 13.12
Cognitive mapping of the hierarchy of objectives and goals
Undertake steps to
develop a positive
attitude among
customers towards
the organization
and its products/
services
Keep good relations
with other staff and
Trade Union
Maintain
organizational image
Improve cash
flow
Maintain highly
motivated managers

3 A manager has a number of proposals for improving communications in the ofﬁce. How
might he or she set about evaluating the different proposals?
4 When might one use reverse brainstorming? Describe the process.
5 What are the advantages of using reverse brainstorming compared with other methods of
evaluation? What are its limitations? Illustrate its application to a situation of your own
choice.
6 What is the purpose of reverse brainstorming? Illustrate its use through an example of
your own choice.
7 A canning company is considering vertical integration as a means of obviating supply- and
distribution-chain problems that have become apparent in the past few months. Discuss
how force-ﬁeld analysis might be used to good effect in helping to analyse such a situation.
8 A company is considering three alternative ways of improving productivity. The expected
costs, expected pay-offs and associated probabilities of events occurring are shown below.
Using expected pay-off tables calculate the value of the best option.
Option 1:
expected costs
£450,000, probability
.35
ditto
£290,000, probability
.25
ditto
£300,000, probability
.40
expected beneﬁts
£750,000, probability
.40
ditto
£490,000, probability
.35
ditto
–£200,000, probability
.25
Option 2:
expected costs
£440,000, probability
.30
ditto
£250,000, probability
.45
ditto
£380,000, probability
.25
expected beneﬁts
£650,000, probability
.35
ditto
£390,000, probability
.25
ditto
£200,000, probability
.40
Option 3:
expected costs
£430,000, probability
.15
ditto
£390,000, probability
.55
ditto
£320,000, probability
.30
expected beneﬁts
£850,000, probability
.35
ditto
£190,000, probability
.35
ditto
–£250,000, probability
.30
9 Given the following information, construct a decision tree and assess the best course of
action.
A ﬁrm is operating at full capacity and demand for its products is falling. A further
decline is expected, and this can be met by adopting one of two new methods of
working (A and B). The net cash ﬂow in the case of a decline in demand will be
£150,000 if new method A is used or £140,000 if new method B is adopted. However,
there is a body of opinion in the ﬁrm that sales will not fall and that they will actually
rise, even though the fall is more likely. There is general agreement that there is a 
EVALUATION
277

55 per cent probability of a fall in sales and a 45 per cent probability of a rise in sales.
If sales rise, new method A would yield a net cash ﬂow of £148,000 and new method
B £142,000.
10 How might naturalistic decision making play a role in choosing which ideas or insights are
worthy of further development?
11 Organizations have multiple objectives and goals. Discuss how cognitive mapping might
assist in evaluating new ideas or insights into a problem of your own choice.
CASES
Leaking yoghurt cartons
JOHN:
15 per cent of yoghurt cartons in the supermarkets are leaking.
BILL:
Perhaps stronger cartons are required.
JOHN:
But that could increase the price of the yoghurts and make them too expensive.
SALLY: Perhaps it may be possible to obtain cheaper material with which to have the cartons
made up?
LEN:
I’ve heard there is a cheap source of cartons in Poland.
SALLY: Could be import and supply problems there.
JOHN:
What about lower-grade materials for the cartons?
LEN:
They leak now – surely that would simply weaken the cartons and make them more
likely to leak!
SALLY: But it might be possible to redesign the cartons using the new materials so that they
are actually stronger.
JOHN:
It is possible, but we would need to have that explored in some depth and get expert
advice.
BILL:
What about new materials?
SALLY: Perhaps we could ask the help of professional carton designers or some other experts?
JOHN:
Maybe.
BILL:
Could be that we should be looking at when the damage occurs.
SALLY: I gather it is mainly during transportation.
JOHN:
Perhaps those handling the goods should receive some additional training.
SALLY: Or better handling equipment at each end. It may be the handling equipment that is
unsatisfactory.
LEN:
I gather no use is made of fork-lift trucks at all.
BILL:
Yes, but not all supermarkets have that sort of equipment.
SALLY: Perhaps we should have some sort of publicity campaign to make everyone concerned
with the handling of the product aware of the potential problems of rough handling?
LEN:
Punishments and rewards for careless and careful handling?
JOHN:
Does it really matter to the customer if some of the cartons leak?
SALLY: Too many health hazards and scares associated with food products. We cannot afford
risking adverse press!
EVALUATION
278

JOHN:
I’m not sure. Shouldn’t we perhaps investigate it?
LEN:
This transportation idea – maybe it’s because of the distance the yoghurts have to
travel before they reach the supermarket shelves. Perhaps if we could ﬁnd some way
of shortening the distance to be travelled.
SALLY: Maybe we could deliver the yoghurt in bulk and pack it on the premises of the
supermarket?
BILL:
Would the sales volume warrant it? Could we do that and maintain our
proﬁtability?
SALLY: We could use supermarket staff and pay the supermarkets.
JOHN:
I don’t know. It seems that it might be too expensive to do that.
SALLY: We could supply in bulk to the large supermarket’s group central distribution and
warehousing points and have it packed there.
BILL:
It could still get damaged in transport.
LEN: 
Perhaps we could supply the yoghurts in bottles?
JOHN:
There would be breakages and leakages, too.
LEN:
But perhaps nothing like as much.
BILL:
What about bulk delivery – either to individual supermarkets or to central distribution
points, coupled with an emphasis on private brands?
JOHN:
Yes, I suppose we could explore that possibility.
Question
Assume that the above has been generated by on-line discussions between a team of people
wanting to ﬁnd a solution to the identiﬁed problem of leaking yoghurt containers. Use
highlighting and reverse brainstorming to evaluate the ideas. Add ideas and criticisms of
your own to facilitate the analysis and insights into the problem that can be generated.
The Go-Ahead garage
The proprietor of the Go-Ahead garage is looking for ways of improving its image with its
customers, and through word-of-mouth communication is hoping to persuade more car owners
to make use of its services. A brainstorming session came up with the following ideas:
1 Get rid of all excess grease and dirt on all cars serviced or repaired.
2 Ensure prices charged are very much in line with those of competitors.
3 Double-check all repairs involving tightening of screws.
4 Inform the customer of the exact nature of all guarantees regarding repairs.
5 Always consult customer before carrying out any repairs.
6 Make sure that the estimate corresponds well with the actual price charged.
7 Ensure cars are always ready for collection by a speciﬁed time arranged with the customer
in advance.
8 Make sure that the mechanics are neat and tidy before they talk to customers.
9 Have a comfortable reception area for customers.
10 Ensure that staff understand the importance of being courteous to customers.
11 Provide a while-you-wait service for small jobs.
EVALUATION
279

12 Offer do-it-yourself facilities.
13 Provide free advice regarding repairs or problems reported by customers.
14 Provide written estimates for all jobs.
15 Offer a 24-hour service.
16 Offer a free car-loan service while undertaking repairs or service.
17 Better petrol pump dispensers which do not damage car paintwork around the ﬁller oriﬁce
or allow petrol to drip on to the bodywork.
18 Readily visible price list for standard servicing charges in the reception area.
19 Provide details of mechanics’ experience and qualiﬁcations in a ‘hall of fame’ board in the
reception area – and make sure that it is up to date.
20 Have an experienced member of staff inspect all repair jobs prior to vehicle release to
customers and make sure that customers know who the inspector is.
21 Attract well-qualiﬁed staff.
22 Make sure all equipment and tools are regularly inspected and replaced at regular 
intervals.
23 Get AA and RAC approval.
24 Ensure adequate stocks are kept of common parts to avoid delays and reduce costs which
are normally passed on to the customer.
25 Ensure the service management personnel who interact with the staff are well trained in
customer interaction.
26 Better advertising.
27 Lower prices for regular customers.
28 More detailed reports for the customer of work carried out on the car.
EVALUATION
280
Table 13.6 Customer satisfaction rating of the garage
Satisfaction with:
Importance
Garage rating
(mean value)
(mean value)
Reliability of repairs
10.0
7.3
Prices for repairs
6.5
6.5
Prices for service
5.3
7.2
Guarantees
7.5
5.5
Time taken for repairs
6.2
4.6
Time taken for service
5.4
3.9
Appearance of staff
3.2
6.5
Availability of spares
4.1
2.6
Help given to DIY
3.0
2.2
Helpfulness of staff
6.5
4.1
Opening hours
8.0
7.5
Forecourt petrol facilities
5.5
6.0
Staff expertise
9.0
4.2
Staff courteousness
7.1
3.5
Realism of estimates
8.0
3.1

Recently the garage had commissioned a market research survey to ascertain customer
satisfaction with its services. The information shown in Table 13.6 had been ascertained using
a ten-point scale:
Question
How would you suggest the garage sets about evaluating its ideas? Can you improve on the
ideas suggested, evaluate all the ideas and make some positive recommendations?
Customer loyalty campaign
A petrol station is looking for ways of attracting customers and has come up with the notion
of a customer loyalty scheme where free gifts are given to customers after they have collected
a given number of tokens. Ideas suggested for free gifts include:
sweets
jigsaw puzzles 
hammers
chewing gum
packs of playing cards 
letter openers
adhesive tape
calculators 
dusters
glue
silver pendants 
potato peelers
model kits
music tapes 
manicure sets
car shampoo
music CDs 
aftershave lotion
maps
torches 
hand-held TVs
key rings
writing pads 
pocket radios
sachets of tea
sandwich boxes 
cheap cameras
sachets of coffee
spanners 
cheap quartz watches
Questions
1
Add to and expand the list of possibilities.
2
Use evaluation highlighting to sort ideas and gain more insights.
3
Use reverse brainstorming to pick out the best ideas.
4
How many tokens should be collected to redeem each of the items you ﬁnally suggest
should be included in the loyalty scheme?
Hierarchy of objectives
SAM:
We have to decide which of these ideas for magazine ads is most likely to produce
the effect we want.
BILL:
Yeah, yeah.
SAM:
We have to get people to notice the ad that’s the key point.
BILL:
Yeah, yeah.
SAM:
But to get them to notice it then there has to be something special about the ad.
BILL:
Guess so.
SAM:
So what makes an ad special, eh?
BILL:
Attractive people?
EVALUATION
281

SAM:
Well, partly. But there has to be something else.
BILL:
Customer beneﬁts of the product?
SAM:
Tangible cues?
BILL:
Bright colours, perhaps, make it stand out in a crowd.
SAM:
Get people to read the ad?
BILL:
Yeah . . . but do we want lots of words in the ad or just a few and rely on the image
to get people’s interest?
SAM:
A picture tells a thousand words!
BILL:
Get people to construct their own narratives . . . their own story about what is going
on in the ad.
SAM:
Complex isn’t it? Depends on how our viewers are likely to react to the ads. Some
may prefer one type while another may hate that type.
BILL:
OK, so what should we do?
Question
Suggest how Sam and Bill might set about tackling this problem. Is there a case for
cognitive/strategic mapping here? Explain.
London Furniture Company
The ﬁrm is a furniture company situated in an area of London where the majority of the
population is made up of adults aged between 21 and 40. The company manufactures and
markets furniture to the local population. Some years ago the ﬁrm designed a new type of
furniture that proved very successful, but recently its sales have taken an unprecedented
tumble.
The initial statement of the problem now is:
•
The ﬁrm wants to increase its furniture sales volume and is looking for ways of doing this.
Using the boundary examination technique the ﬁrm restructures the problem perception as
follows:
•
The ﬁrm highlights the words ‘furniture’ and ‘looking’. In the case of the furniture it is
felt that there are hidden assumptions about shape, size and style. In the case of the word
‘looking’ it is felt that a more proactive stance is in order and that one needs to create
ways rather than just look for them.
This leads to a new problem redeﬁnition:
•
How can the ﬁrm improve the style of the furniture in order to stimulate people to 
buy it?
The next step is to generate some insights or possible solutions to the problem. The Gordon–
Little variation of brainstorming is chosen for this purpose. In this case only the leader of the
EVALUATION
282

creativity session knows the real problem and introduces the problem to the group in the ﬁrst
place in abstract form. The problem is gradually introduced through a number of stages of
revelation – moving from the abstract to the concrete and original problem. In the ﬁnal stage
the group re-examines all previously generated ideas and tries to turn them into tangible ideas
relating to the original problem.
The following episodes ensue:
1
Think of ways to improve something:
make it larger
make it smaller
polish it
change its shape
add more features
make it interchangeable
use new technology
2
Think of ways to improve something in order to stimulate people:
put wheels on it
make it easy to pick up
make it lighter in weight
make it curvy
add some sugar
add some colours
attach a winning lottery ticket to it
use new material
give it a face lift
3
Original problem: How can the ﬁrm improve the style of the furniture in order to stimulate
people to buy it?:
make it of stainless steel (from ‘polish it’)
use computers to design it (from ‘use new technology’)
design a chair which can also be used as a small table (from ‘make it interchangeable’)
paint it with an unusual type of varnish (from ‘add some colours’)
create a table lamp from wire (from ‘use new materials’)
While the ﬁrm feels it has generated some useful insights it decides that it would use the
morphological analysis approach as well to see if this will produce further new ideas 
(Table 13.7).
EVALUATION
283
Table 13.7 Morphological analysis matrix
Shapes
Kinds
Material
Function
Style
Oval
Chairs
Wood
Sleeping
Period
Square
Beds
Metal
Eating
Deco
Round
Tables
Plastic
Resting
Modern
Rectangle
Desks
Stone
Sitting
Italian
Pentagon
Clocks
Glass
Reading
Western
Hexagon
Stools
Leather
Thinking
Campaign
Cylinder
TVs
Foam
Entertaining
Regency

EVALUATION
284
Table 13.8 Evaluating the ideas
Simple
Hard
Difﬁcult
–
Paint it with an unusual 
–
Oval metal regency 
–
Use computers to design 
type of varnish
kitchen table
furniture
–
Design a chair that can 
–
Modern plastic chair with 
–
Hexagonal stone TV 
be used as a small table 
storage space
cabinet
as well
–
Create a table lamp out 
–
Circular glass TV with 
of wire
screen along edges
–
Make it of stainless steel
This leads to further possible practical solutions:
•
Design furniture out of cheap material (wire, glass, etc.).
•
Design strange shapes and styles (hexagonal, triangular, etc.).
•
Invest in computer technology
Question
Has the ﬁrm enough information to make a decision? If so, what should it do? If not, then
why not?
FURTHER READING
Blair, C. S. and Mumford, M. D. (2007) Errors in idea evaluation: preference for the unoriginal?
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 41: 197–222.
Faure, C. (2004) Beyond brainstorming: effects of different group procedures on selection of ideas
and satisfaction with the process, The Journal of Creative Behavior: 38, 13–34.
The next step combined two or more sub-elements of the matrix to ﬁnd useful ideas. The
following are suggested:
•
A circular, glass television with four screens capable of revolving for entertainment.
•
A modern-style plastic chair with storage space under the scat and behind the back.
•
A hexagonal stone TV cabinet.
•
An oval metal imitation regency style kitchen table.
The next stage involves evaluating the ideas in terms of their time and money requirements.
Ideas were categorized into three groups: simple, hard and difﬁcult. Simple ideas are those that
can be put into action with the minimum of expenditure of both time and money. Hard ideas
require more expenditure of time and money, while difﬁcult ideas require substantial
expenditure of time and money. Using this method ideas are classiﬁed as shown in Table 13.8.

Grohman, M., Wodniecka, Z. and Klusak, M. (2006) Divergent thinking and evaluation skills: do
they always go together?, The Journal of Creative Behavior, 40: 125–145.
Licuanan, B. F., Dailey, L. R. and Mumford, M. D. (2007) Idea evaluation: error in evaluating
highly original ideas, The Journal of Creative Behavior, 41(1): 1–27, March.
Puccio, G. J. and Cabra, J. F. (2012) Idea generation and idea evaluation: cognitive skills 
and deliberate practices. In M. D. Mumford (ed.), Handbook of Organizational Creativity. 
San Diego, CA: Elsevier, pp. 189–215.
Licuanan, B. F., Dailey, L. R. and Dr Michael D. Mumford, (2007) Idea evaluation: error in
evaluating highly original ideas, The Journal of Creative Behavior, 41(1): 1–27, March.
Puccio, G. J. and Cabra, J. F. (2012) Idea generation and idea evaluation: cognitive skills 
and deliberate practices. In M. D. Mumford (ed.), Handbook of organizational Creativity, 
San Diego, CA: Elsevier, pp. 189–215.
EVALUATION
285

286
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we examine some of the problems of implementing ideas. First we consider the
various sources of resistance to change. Next we look at the role of communication in
overcoming resistance to change. This is followed by an examination of how ideas might be
Introducing a new product
Getting a new product exactly right to meet the expectations of the market is fraught
with difﬁculties. Early in 2001, the luxury-car manufacturer Jaguar (latter-day Ford
in disguise) launched the X-type sports saloon, nicknamed ‘Baby Jag’, with lower prices
than previous models, in an attempt to attract a younger, female audience. The company
was banking on the arrival of the new X-type to send global sales past the 100,000
barrier. In the early 1990s it sold just 20,000 a year. While independent market
analysts predicted that the Jaguar X-type would be a success, they thought that it would
not displace the current market leaders in this sector of the car market. It was felt that
sales would be held back by Jaguar’s failure to foresee Europe’s preference for diesel
power (given the high cost of fuel in many European markets). The X-type was
introduced with just two petrol engines – 2.5 and 3.0 litre V6s. Somewhat belatedly,
in mid-2003 a 2-litre diesel X-type was introduced to the market.
The implementation of any new idea in the commercial world, whether it is a new
product or a new administrative process, may be likened to the situation facing Ford
when it launched the ‘Baby Jag’. Time, money and effort are put into getting a new
project off the ground, and it has to be marketed to those who the project will most
affect – whether they are customers, employees or stakeholders of some other kind.
Getting people committed to a new venture must take account of their willingness and
ability to participate in getting such ventures off the ground. The marketing of new
ideas has to be undertaken in a systematic manner and attention paid to detail in the
implementation of such ideas. In this chapter we shall review the factors that have to
be taken into account in such circumstances and offer suggestions as to how this might
be best achieved.
Implementing ideas
Chapter 14

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
287
put into action. Lastly we look at how we might foster a climate for change in an organization.
The successful introduction of new ideas helps maintain an effective organization and sustain
a competitive advantage in the marketplace. New ideas are not accepted automatically; they
are often resisted. Knowing what resistance there will be is the ﬁrst step in introducing change.
Getting people to accept the need for new ideas through good communication is a key element
in the process of effecting change. Various communication models are considered, along with
identifying within an organization spheres of inﬂuence needed to implement ideas and change.
The chapter considers how various computer application packages such as COPE/Decision
Explorer, PERT and computer simulation can help the implementation and acceptance of new
ideas. Contingency plans are necessary when implementing ideas. One needs to anticipate the
problems that will arise and the objections that will be raised. The importance of ‘potential
problem analysis’ as a technique that can be used to good effect in this latter context is
considered in the chapter.
Figure 14.1
Position of the chapter within the CPS process
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
288
IDEAS ARE NOT READILY IMPLEMENTED
THE PROBLEMS OF INTRODUCING NEW IDEAS
In The Prince, Machiavelli wrote: ‘there is nothing more difﬁcult to take in hand, more
powerless to conduct or more uncertain in its success than to take the lead in the
introduction of a new order of things because the innovators have for enemies all those
who would have done well under the old conditions and lukewarm defenders in those
who may do well’ (Ch. 5).
Figure 14.2
Overview of acceptance ﬁnding
Identify main sources
of resistance to
change people
and ideas
Monitor the post-
implementation
phase closely
for problems
Explain the costs
of not accepting
change 
Use CHIPS
analysis
Show them
the benefits
Get their
ATTENTION
INTEREST
DESIRE
ACTION
Use techniques
such as PERT
and SIMULATION
to show benefits
and costs and
illustrate their
involvement
Use potential
problem analysis
to cater for
contingencies in
implementing
change
Persuade people
that it is in their
best interest to
accept change

Getting new ideas off the ground can meet considerable opposition, and it is important to
recognize this before embarking on introducing change into an organization. Some insights into
the reasons for this can be obtained by looking back, even before the time of Machiavelli.
We may wonder why the ancient Greeks, who produced so many great philosophers, artists
and writers, did so little in the sphere of applied science. The reasons were both sociological
and psychological. It was generally accepted in those times that the normal condition of a large
part of mankind was that they must toil for the few. A shortage of labour or energy was never
a problem. When a job had to be done the slaves had to do it, and they were whipped until it
was done (Larsen, 1961).
It is easy to imagine that throughout history the ideas of original inventors were sufﬁcient
to start off some new development. However, it is obvious on deeper reﬂection that the
inventions themselves, as well as those who produced them, would be bound to fail if there
was no need, demand or social basis for the ideas. As a consequence it is not surprising that
many so-called inventions have been produced several times until eventually the time for their
introduction has been appropriate. At the same time, developments in people’s ways of life,
new social orders inﬂuencing production and demand, have stimulated inventors to work along
certain lines. It may not therefore have been pure chance that the railway and steam engine
reached maturity at about the same time, and that they were brought together for the ﬁrst time
in England, the country, at the time, where social and economic developments were more
rapid than anywhere else in the world. ‘The locomotive is not the invention of one man,’ said
Robert Stephenson, ‘but of a nation of mechanical engineers’ (Larsen, 1961: 125).
SOURCES OF RESISTANCE TO CHANGE
There are many sources of resistance to change. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant is that many
people are afraid of new ideas. They may feel threatened by new ideas and fear that they will
not be able to cope with a change in working patterns that is demanded of them or that they
will not understand how to use a new technology. Even today there are many older people
who are afraid of the desktop computer. Another point is that people may have a vested interest
in not accepting change. Why change when you are doing very nicely with things as they are?
Resistance to change has many sources (see, for example, Lawrence and Greiner, 1970).
Fear of the unknown, lack of information, threats to status, fear of failure and lack of perceived
beneﬁts are examples of such sources. However, one of the most important sources is that
people resist being treated as pawns in an organizational reshufﬂe. People like to feel that they
are in control of what is happening to them, and the more that change is imposed from outside
by others the more they will see it as something to feel threatened about and the more they
will resist it. People resort to using their last remaining powerbase: their will to cooperate.
People like to feel that they are in control of what is happening to them, and the more that
change is imposed from outside by others the more they will see it as something to feel
threatened about and the more they will resist it.
Human and technological factors produce implementation blocks. While some of the blocks
are intentional and are designed as checks to ensure that an organization always functions
smoothly, other blocks are unintentional and may arise from how the organisation has developed
historically – organizations tend to stagnate as they age. A third type of block may arise from
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
289

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
290
an outside source – a change in market demand, for example, can act as a barrier to idea
implementation.
Blocks to implementing ideas and change reﬂect such things as a lack of adequate resources
to implement ideas, a lack of commitment and motivation in those required to implement
ideas, resistance to change, procedural obstacles, perceived risk associated with implementing
ideas, political undercurrents, lack of cooperation in the organization, and so on. The important
thing is to uncover what resistance is likely to arise and what the reasons for the resistance are
likely to be. With this information one can look for ways of implementing ideas so that the
resistance encountered can be reduced.
ROLE OF COMMUNICATION IN OVERCOMING RESISTANCE 
TO CHANGE
The key to effecting change is to involve people in the process early, to consult them and to
get them to take ownership for themselves of the new ideas that are to be introduced (see, for
example, Coch and French, 1948). To sustain a programme of change it is essential to
understand the culture of the organization in which new ideas are to be introduced. New 
ideas that run counter to the traditional values of an organization are the ones that are most
difﬁcult to introduce. Organizational culture is the pattern of shared values and norms that
distinguishes it from all others (Higgins, 1994; Kotter, 1997). Before one thinks about
implementing change one needs to create a readiness for change within an organization. One
needs to think of the organization as an internal market for change initiatives where ideas have
to be marketed. This means that opinions and attitudes have to be assessed and potential
sources of resistance identiﬁed. Commitment to change can be instigated by helping people to
develop a shared diagnosis of what is wrong in an organization and what can and must be
improved (see Kotter, 1997).
Communication is the spearhead of ensuring that successful change can take place (see, for
example, Higgins, 1994). It helps to overcome ambiguity and uncertainty, and provides
information and power to those who are the subject of change. It enables them to have control
over their destiny, to understand why change is necessary, and provides the suppressant to
fear. Through open communication channels, people can express their doubts about the
effectiveness of proposed changes and can understand the necessity for new ideas. Relying on
an attempt to implement ideas only from the top is likely to meet with difﬁculties. Grass-roots
change is the only way to ensure that process becomes ﬁrmly embedded. It is natural for people
to resist change, and by anticipating, identifying and welcoming resistance we convert resistance
into a perceived need for change.
‘Innovation – any new idea – by deﬁnition will not be accepted at ﬁrst. It takes repeated
attempts, endless demonstrations, monotonous rehearsals before innovation can be
accepted and internalized by an organization. This requires courageous patience.’
(Warren Bennis). Available at: www.leadershipnow.com/creativityquotes.html (accessed:
28 March 2013).

PUTTING IDEAS INTO PRACTICE
There are a variety of tools and techniques that can be used to good advantage in helping to
introduce new ideas in a systematic and planned way into an organization. ‘Consensus mapping’,
recommended by Hart et al. (1985), is one such tool. It helps those involved in the process of
implementation to visualize, analyse and organize ideas that are sequence dependent. In
applying the technique, a graphic map is produced that portrays implementation steps and ideas
in relationship to one another and shows how they are related to one another. COPE or The
Decision Explorer is a computer package that can be used to achieve a similar goal (see pp. 287
and 294). PERT networks and research-planning diagrams may also be used to good effect in
facilitating the implementation of new ideas. Similarly, computer simulation methods can
provide a basis for showing the impact new ideas will have on people and processes as well as
on costs and efﬁciency. Another useful method, put forward by Kepner and Tregoe (1976),
is ‘potential problem analysis’. This method places an emphasis on a systematic approach to
anticipating problems that are likely to stand in the way of the successful implementation of a
project, changes or ideas. Some of these methods are discussed in this chapter.
Besides the use of tools to systematize the introduction of new ideas, there is also the task
of persuading people who are going to make use of those ideas that are worth using. Ideas may
have to be sold to people who can authorize their implementation. This may make it easier to
arouse subsequent motivation to implement ideas among those who have to do the job and
make the chance of a successful implementation more likely. Putting ideas into practice usually
requires:
1
an ability to get people to accept ideas;
2
an ability to cope with difﬁcult obstacles;
3
an ability to plan and manage time in an effective manner;
4
an ability to create the enthusiasm and motivation to follow through ideas.
Persuading people to view new ideas in a favourable light when they are not readily disposed
to do so essentially involves inﬂuencing and changing attitudes. To do this it is ﬁrst necessary
to convince people that they need to be dissatisﬁed with the status quo. It is important to note
that people may not readily recognize that they are dissatisﬁed with the current situation. One
cannot assume that people will readily accept that a problem exists, even when it is blatantly
obvious to an outsider. It may be necessary to:
1
Create an awareness of problems that exist and make people recognize that there is a need
for change and a need to adopt the idea that is being put forward.
2
Point out to people the potential hazards and pitfalls of not accepting the need for change.
3
Stress the beneﬁts of change to the individuals involved since they will only be motivated
to accept and to adopt new ideas when they perceive and acknowledge that it is in their
own best interest to do so.
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
291

Spheres of inﬂuence
We have to recognize that people are part of a group in the organization. Getting people to
change means getting the group to change and involves understanding the nature of group
dynamics. Identifying opinion leaders, action initiators, people with status and inﬂuence in the
group, and those most affected in carrying out the changes required is therefore very important.
It is also important to have the backing of someone who has the authority and the resources
to enable an idea to get off the ground. Knowing how to communicate with the target audiences
is therefore an important skill when trying to implement new ideas and effect change.
Communication models
Communication theories offer several different descriptive models of the process by which it
is thought that people adopt ideas as a result of receiving information about them. The models
can also be used prescriptively as aids to producing communications that are intended to bring
about action. One of the earliest models used was the AIDA model (origin uncertain). The
model comprised four stages:
•
attracting ATTENTION
•
maintaining INTEREST
•
arousing DESIRE
•
getting ACTION
The early 1960s saw considerable interest in advertising models. Lavidge and Steiner (1961)
developed the ‘hierarchy of effects’ model. This model was directly related to understanding
how marketing communications worked. The model implied a six-stage process where the
customer moves through stages from awareness to purchase:
AWARENESS → KNOWLEDGE →LIKING →PREFERENCE →
CONVICTION  →PURCHASE
Different persuasive activities were considered ﬁtting to move customers through the various
stages. To develop AWARENESS teaser campaigns, sky writing, jingles, slogans and classiﬁed
advertisements are considered suitable. In order to convey KNOWLEDGE, announcements
and descriptive copy were recommended. Image advertising and status or glamour appeals are
envisaged to be ways of producing a LIKING, while competitive advertisements and
argumentative copy are more relevant to generating a PREFERENCE. Finally, price appeals
and testimonials may produce CONVICTION, while deals, last-chance offers and point-of-
purchase retail-store advertisements are seen as ways of encouraging actual PURCHASE.
Contemporary with Lavidge and Steiner, Colley (1961) produced a model called DAGMAR,
which stands for deﬁning advertising goals, measuring advertising results. It was argued that a
communication must carry a prospect through four levels of understanding:
AWARENESS →COMPREHENSION →CONVICTION →ACTION
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
292

Shortly after, Rogers (1962) suggested the ‘Innovation Adoption’ model. In this case the
theory was not directed speciﬁcally at the relationship between marketing communications and
sales but rather at the adoption of a new idea. Several stages were suggested in the model:
AWARENESS →INTEREST →EVALUATION →TRIAL →ADOPTION
All of these models seem to ﬁt in well with the more general communications model of:
EXPOSURE →RECEPTION →COGNITIVE RESPONSE →ATTITUDE 
→INTENTION →BEHAVIOUR
The point about all the above models is that attitude change and subsequent action are seen as
a gradual step-by-step process. The models will be appropriate for different circumstances
depending on exactly what is required concerning the idea that is being implemented. Moreover,
different ways of communicating, and even different communication media, may be more
appropriate for moving people from one stage to the next.
Effective communications need to appeal to the needs and wants of the recipients. They
should give the recipient a motive or incentive to act. They also need to generate involvement
with the message on the part of the recipient by asking questions that leave the message
incomplete. In addition, they should also explain exactly what course of action it is expected
the recipient will follow.
Getting people to consider adopting an idea or changing behaviour can be achieved through
appealing to their cognitive processes (see Burnett, 1993). One needs to arouse desire, indicate
a need, or offer a logical reason why they should cooperate. In so doing the message becomes
implanted in the recipient’s memory and can be triggered by future needs, motives and
associations. However, one does have to remember that the rational approach may not be so
effective for some recipients or in situations where there is likely to be less involvement in the
action required. In these cases emotional appeals may be used. The appeal, theme, idea or
unique selling proposition is what the communicator has to get over to the target audience to
produce the desired response. Beneﬁt, identiﬁcation, motivation are all concepts that can be
built into the message. Messages can be built around rational, emotional or moral appeals,
themes, ideas or unique selling propositions. Economy, value and performance are used in
messages with a rational content. Emotional appeals make use of both positive and negative
aspects. On the negative side, this involves fear, guilt and shame (Janis and Feshback, 1953),
while on the positive side it comprises humour (Beggs, 1989), love, pride and joy. Too much
fear in a message may cause the audience to reject it. The use of humour may generate ‘noise’
and interfere with the message. Moral appeals address to people’s sense of what is right and just.
REDUCING RESISTANCE TO CHANGE
Getting people to change their attitudes is fundamental to reducing resistance to new ideas.
While creating dissatisfaction with the status quo is one method of effecting attitude change
and getting ideas implemented, there are other ways of achieving the same objective. A good
way to counter resistance to change is to pre-empt the possibility of it occurring. As mentioned
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
293

above, getting people involved in the idea-development process in the ﬁrst place anticipates
resistance to change. Resistance is reduced because people feel that they have had the opportunity
to participate and express their view.
In the same way that attitude change is seen as a gradual process, the implementation
process should follow a similar pattern. New ideas that involve substantial change need to be
implemented gradually, smoothly and systematically. Resistance to change can be softened by
making the changes tentative rather than deﬁnite or permanent. It is a good strategy to get
people to try out ideas initially for a short period. In addition people should be encouraged to
say whether they think an idea is working. If a new idea fails, it does not cause its originator
as much loss of face under such circumstances.
Encouraging people to recognize that change is a normal facet of life is important. If they
come to accept this viewpoint, they will not see change as being out of the ordinary when it
is applied to them. It can help them to become less emotionally attached to the status quo.
In introducing a new idea one has to be reasonably sure that it is worthwhile. There is a
cost associated with change, for it causes disruption to those who are concerned. However,
provided that the required change is accompanied by demonstrable beneﬁts that more than
offset the costs of disruption, the new idea is more likely to meet with little resistance. In
addition, it will pave the way for the introduction of future new ideas in that it is more likely
to be seen as being in the interests of the organization.
Cognitive mapping devices
Cognitive mapping is a modelling technique that portrays ideas, beliefs, values and attitudes
and their relationship to one another in a manner that facilitates examination and analysis. Such
data are collected through focus-group interviews or in-depth personal interviews. Cognitive
mapping is a practical development of the implications of Personal Construct Theory, which
in turn purports to reﬂect how people construe their world (Kelly, 1955). A cognitive map is
a network of ideas and is illustrated as nodes linked by arrows, representing goals and actions.
SODA (Strategic Option Development Analysis) is such a methodology and uses a computer
model called COPE (now known as The Decision Explorer) to help in the analysis. A facilitator
interviews individuals involved with a problem and draws up their cognitive maps of the factors
relating to and inﬂuencing the situation subsumed in the problem. A single person might
suggest tens of factors relating to a particular problem. The facilitator constructs a COPE model
to reﬂect a person’s view. The group as a whole can express thousands of views, and COPE is
designed to accumulate and compress this diversity of ideas.
COPE has been deployed to help identify resistance in implementing ideas (see Bessant and
Buckingham, 1989). By showing groups their own and others’ perspectives on an issue it is
often possible to ease problems encountered in implementation.
COPE is primarily designed to produce such cognitive maps, and recent versions facilitate
this through a graphic user interface. Since it also has the facility to trace paths throughout the
very complex network structures that can be constructed, it can also help to establish cause–
effect relationships and hence build causal models. Simpler devices such as mind maps and
research-planning diagrams can also be used to good effect. While they lack the sophistication
of such programs as The Decision Explorer (COPE), they do enable one to record graphically the
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
294

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
295
Action required to help ensure that implementation stands the best
chance of success
•
Make it a stimulating experience for those involved or affected by the changes
involved.
•
Publicize the changes involved and try to ensure encouraging media coverage at all
times.
•
Ensure the objectives of the change are congruent with the organization’s aims and
objectives
•
Find a reliable task-oriented project manager to ensure that the programme of
change is properly implemented in the planned manner and according to the planned
schedule.
•
Identify all relevant stakeholders inﬂuenced by the planned changes and ensure they
are kept informed or otherwise involved throughout the change progamme.
•
Pay attention to ensuring effective communication with all programme participants.
•
Ensure senior or top management backs the planned changes involved and will
support action taken to implement all the changes.
•
Ensure that the purpose and projected outcomes of the changes are clearly stated
and understood by all concerned.
•
Build in mechanisms and develop an organizational climate where it will be possible
to the tolerate mistakes being made by people during the implementation of the
changes.
•
Create a small implementation team who hold the decision-making power.
•
Consider the broader strategic issues and the implication of the changes for these
when considering the changes that will be required.
•
Identify a person or persons who feel ownership of the planned programme of
changes.
•
Persist in the face of resistance and show determination but take cognizance of all
objections and ensure that these are given serious consideration.
•
Document the planned changes and the progress made in the process of implantation.
•
Produce adequate control and contingency measures and mechanisms.
•
Put in place support governance structures and ensure that agreements are recorded
and veriﬁed.
•
Obtain regular feedback from all engaged in or who have an interest in the changes
as they are planned and made.
•
Demonstrate early ongoing success.
•
Ensure that the implementation is put into operation speedily to avoid losing focus
and momentum.
•
Pay attention to and learn from errors as they occur and act on the information
obtained immediately.
•
Study what other innovators have encountered when designing and implementing
changes.
•
Make sure all necessary resources are available at the right time and in the right
place.

relationship between events and people’s attitudes as they impinge on the implementation of
new ideas. Such tools facilitate consensus mapping, and their visual impact can be helpful when
trying to get the cooperation of those who are needed to ensure the success of a project.
PERT
Planning, scheduling and control in the introduction of new ideas and the implementation of
organizational changes can be greatly enhanced with the aid of PERT (project evaluation and
review technique). The tool helps to monitor and organize resources to enable a project to be
completed on time and within budget limits. It is customary to model projects and planning
activities as networks to capture the nature of the interrelationships and sequencing of their
various component parts.
PERT/CPM is basically a three-part technique:
1
Planning. This incorporates an in-depth analysis of the project or planning task and
construction of the network to describe it.
2
Scheduling. This involves the analysis of the project or exercise to determine completion
time, critical activities, and start and ﬁnish times for each activity.
3
Controlling. This includes using the network and schedule to keep track of progress and to
make any revisions necessary to keep the project on schedule and within budget.
Seeing a whole project in perspective helps those involved to understand what is happening or
about to happen and can help to dispel people’s uncertainties. PERT provides a framework and
timescale within which new ideas are to be implemented.
PERT/CPM is a sophisticated tool for use in planning but a more simple but useful approach
is to use a Gannt chart. In the example shown in Figure 14.3, a ﬁrm is implanting changes to
its organizational procedures. The Gannt chart shown outlines the timescale for undertaking
various activities.
Computer simulation
Computer simulation models enable one to study how a system reacts to conditions that are
not readily or safely put into practice in a real situation. With the aid of a computer simulation
model the user can study how the behaviour of an entire system can be altered by changing
individual parts of the system. A computer simulation model is usually deﬁned in mathematical
terms within a computer program. The functional relationships among elements within a
system are represented by mathematical equations, and when the program is executed the
mathematical dynamics become analogous to the dynamics of the real system.
Computer simulation brings life to planned changes and helps people to appreciate what
will be the result of making such changes. The dynamic and visual nature of this way of showing
the effect of change actually can help people to visualize for themselves the effect of accepting
new ideas and change.
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
296

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
297
Figure 14.3
Gannt chart detailing project timescales
Initial
discussions
with staff
Preliminary
review of
discussions
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Develop
implementation
strategy
Collect
relevant data
from office staff
Collect relevant
data from
production staff
Finalize
implementation
plan
Undertake
office
reorganization
Draw up final
agreement
regarding
details
Undertake
production
shop
reorganization
Establish best
way forward
Meet with key
staff
Test feasibility
of plan
Monitor effect
of changes
Jun
Consult with
office staff re
changes
Consult with
production staff
re changes
Report on
changes to top
management
Continue
monitoring of
changes made
Adjust changes
made

Potential problem analysis
Kepner and Tregoe (1976) developed potential problem analysis (PPA) to alleviate the risk of
new problems occurring during the implementation of new ideas and processes. Eight steps
were involved in PPA:
1
Determine exactly what should take place if the task is to be done successfully.
2
Employ reverse brainstorming to identify everything that can go wrong during implementation.
3
Detail highlighted problems.
4
Assess and evaluate the impact of each identiﬁed potential problem on the implementation
of the whole project.
5
Look for causes of the identiﬁed new problems.
6
Assess the probability of occurrence of each one of the potential problems.
7
Determine ways of minimizing the effect of the potential problems.
8
Develop contingency plans for the most serious potential problems.
PPA provides a systematic framework to help implementers of ideas avoid the occurrence of
the events of Murphy’s Law (Bloch, 1990). Murphy’s Law states that if anything can go wrong
it will. PPA also helps to get to grips with many of the possible corollaries to Murphy’s Law.
For example:
1
Nothing is as easy as it looks.
2
Everything takes longer than you think.
3
If there is a possibility of several things going wrong, the one that will cause the most
damage will be the one to go wrong.
4
Left to themselves, things tend to go from bad to worse.
5
Whenever you set out to do something, something else must be done ﬁrst.
6
Every solution breeds new problems.
Post-implementation
One has to make sure that what has been implemented actually works for more than just a
couple of days and does not fall down because of something that has not been foreseen. That
is not to say there will not be complaints about what has been implemented. It is quite likely
that the change agents or idea implementers will be inundated with messages, both from people
who supported the new idea and from people who opposed it, saying that things do not seem
to be working properly.
Feedback messages about new ideas that have been implemented may take the form of:
(a) Grousing. This usually does not require action and simply reﬂects people’s resistance to
change. People may complain because they are required to do things in a different way.
(b) Errors of detail. Aspects of detail may have been overlooked. When the detail is not critical
it is usually possible to remedy the situation fairly easily. Elements that are critical to the
functioning of the whole, however, are more problematic and may require thorough
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
298

IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
299
analysis and reﬂection. In some cases they may even temporarily hold up matters until
they can be resolved.
(c) Apparently major errors. These can be either real or supposed. In the latter case it is simply
a matter of reassuring all concerned that it is only supposition. Where the problem is real,
then the implementation of the whole project may be at risk.
Ideas and changes must be workable and reliable. Thinking through and testing out ideas before
they are ﬁnally implemented is highlighted as a critical stage of the process.
CLIMATE FOR CHANGE
Any organization wanting to become more creative needs to be aware of the necessary
conditions for creativity to thrive. Majaro (1992) suggested three prerequisites. These are:
1
The right climate.
2
An effective system of communicating ideas.
3
Procedures for managing innovation.
MANAGING CHANGE SUCCESSFULLY
To get change in an organization introduced successfully it is suggested that one
should:
•
React quickly to change. You need to think in a creative and innovative way.
•
Accept that dealing with a continually changing situation is a normal part of your
job. Don’t bury your head in the sand when new or different problems arrive.
•
Maintain a well-informed knowledge of developments in your industry or profession.
•
Monitor the environment for signals, trends and developments in the attitudes and
behaviour of competitors, customers and the market.
•
Stimulate a positive attitude to change by regularly discussing new ideas and issues
with colleagues.
•
Encourage your staff to raise issues affecting their work.
•
Discuss future plans and issues with your staff both individually and as a group,
on a regular basis.
•
Communicate internal changes to your staff unless there is good reason not to do
so in the short term.
•
Be experimental and ﬂexible in your approach to people’s ideas.
•
Try out new techniques and ideas whenever appropriate.
•
Mobilize staff quickly and boldly, but in a coordinated fashion.
•
Create a working atmosphere in which ideas and issues do not fall between
bureaucratic cracks.

A ﬁrm in which the climate is either hostile or indifferent to ideas is unlikely to be creative.
But what is the right climate? First, the organization must be prepared to ﬁnance creative ideas.
It is also very important that top management should encourage creativity at all times. Negativity
has to be avoided at all costs. If those at the top do not take creativity seriously, they send out
messages to others in the organization who will also tend to accept the same perspective. In
an organization without good communications good ideas can be lost simply because people
do not know who to inform about their ideas.
Old behaviour and attitudes are often deeply imbedded in the (comfortable) relationships
that have been built up over the years. Any signiﬁcant change generally suggests an upset or
reshufﬂing of these relationships, and a change of one’s position relative to others in the
workplace. It appears that new thinking and new behaviour patterns are most readily and ﬁrmly
established when they are conditions of regular membership in a new group, for group members
exercise the most powerful tool for shaping behaviour.
QUESTIONS
1
A ﬁrm is trying to get its employees to participate in a new job-enlargement scheme.
Indicate the difﬁculties that might be encountered when trying to implement such a
scheme. Outline the mechanisms that can be used to help deal effectively with such
problems.
2
An organization is experiencing problems in implementing a new computer-based
information system in its ﬁnance department. Illustrate how a cognitive mapping device
might be used to help gain insights into this problem.
3
Discuss the problems encountered in implementing ideas and indicate the various ploys
that can be used to help get around these problems.
4
Machiavelli wrote: ‘there is nothing more difﬁcult to take in hand, more powerless to
conduct or more uncertain in its success than to take the lead in the introduction of a new
order of things because the innovators have for enemies all those who would have done
well under the old conditions and lukewarm defenders in those who may do well’ (The
Prince, Ch. 5). Discuss the implications of Machiavelli’s thinking for the implementation
of ideas. What steps can be taken to try to circumvent some of the difﬁculties that might
arise in the way that Machiavelli suggested?
5
A ﬁrm is trying to get its employees to change their operating procedures to improve
efﬁciency in the workplace. What kind of difﬁculties might be encountered when trying
to implement such a scheme? Indicate what you would do in order to deal effectively with
such difﬁculties.
6
Getting good ideas adopted by management can often pose problems. Indicate the nature
of the problems and outline the mechanisms that can be applied to overcome the difﬁculties
presented by the problems.
7
A ﬁrm is trying to get its employees to join a new pay scheme. Indicate the difﬁculties
that might be encountered when trying to implement such a scheme. Outline the
mechanisms that can be used to help deal effectively with such problems.
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
300

CASES
The Northern Bank
The CEO of the Northern Bank is concerned about the ability of the bank to give the type and
quality of services that its customers require. He feels that the branch managers and their staff
are coming under too much pressure to enable them to do their jobs properly. The branches
have to be involved in all aspects of banking and operate at the sharp end of the business. Many
of the jobs and operations that are performed at branch level are becoming increasingly
expensive to operate, difﬁcult to perform and need to be looked at in detail. The processing
of routine activity takes up a good deal of the work and costs, and less than 30 per cent of time
and money is put into improving customer relations and the marketing of services. Moreover,
the nature of the marketing task has become increasingly complex. Not only does the
organization have to market itself to its customers, but also the management of the organization
has to engage in extensive internal marketing to gain the commitment and cooperation of staff
in providing the kind of customer service the bank thinks desirable. Moreover, the CEO feels
that the requirements of personal customers are now too wide and too costly to be fully met
by every branch.
In essence, the CEO believes that the bank must be able to deliver to its customers the kinds
of services and products that they want if it is to stay in business and return satisfactory proﬁts.
Furthermore, he does not believe that the onus of this task should be the sole responsibility of
the senior management or the bank’s marketing staff. Achieving the required proﬁle demands
the support of the whole of the bank’s staff.
Questions
1
How would you deﬁne the problem in this case?
2
What ideas can you think of that may lead to a solution to the problem?
3
Evaluate the ideas that you develop.
4
What problems would you expect to encounter in implementing these ideas? How would
you try to overcome these problems?
Re-siting the sorting ofﬁce
Green Star Parcels operates a parcels delivery service from its base in West Bromwich. Opened
in 1993, during the ﬁrst three years of operation the ﬁrm grew rapidly from employing ten
people on sorting to over ﬁfty by late 1996. During the ﬁrst three years of operation labour
relations were good, but during the past three years they have somewhat soured owing to a
number of wildcat strikes, mainly on issues regarding pay and conditions of work. 95 per cent
of those engaged in sorting are members of a trade union.
The company operates a three-shift seven-days-a-week operation and guarantees next-day
delivery on 90 per cent of its business. Because of the wildcat strikes, however, its delivery
reputation has recently become somewhat tarnished.
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
301

Late in 1998, largely because of the continuing troubles (but not actually giving this as the
reason for change), the company decided to re-site its operations at three new depots in the
West Midlands and close the existing one. The new depots were close enough to where
existing workers lived to enable most of them to retain their jobs and be employed at one or
other of the depots. The company felt that it could take on additional workers since the actual
demand for its services was far outstripping its capacity, despite the recent adverse publicity
it had been receiving. It felt that by splitting up the workforce those with a tendency to create
trouble would be fewer in number on any one of the sites.
Question
Draw up a plan of action to implement this project. What do you consider to be the most
important aspects that management should bear in mind?
Outsourcing services
The city council has decided to outsource its ofﬁce cleaning services in an attempt to save costs
and reduce council tax bills. Private contractors have put forward a scheme whereby cost
savings of around 20 per cent can be achieved and at the same time guaranteeing employment
for 90 per cent of the current stafﬁng levels. The director of the city council and her colleagues
are keen to push ahead with the project as part of a general programme of cost reduction within
council expenditure. A survey conducted by the management of current staff concerns over
the subject of outsourcing indicated that staff had many concerns over job security and pay and
conditions resulting from any changes that might take place.
Question
How would you advise management to set about implementing the proposed changes?
Further reading
Klein, K. J. and Knight, A. P. (2005) Innovation implementation: overcoming the challenge, Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 14: 243–246.
Vandenbosch, B. and Saatcioglu, A. (2006) How managers generate ideas and why it matters,
Journal of Business Strategy, 27(6): 11–17.
IMPLEMENTING IDEAS
302

303
Computer-assisted creative
problem solving
Chapter 15
INTRODUCTION
In general, so far, computers have not been speciﬁcally harnessed to produce creative ideas
and insights for managers by themselves. Rather it has been through the interaction of people
and computers that ideas have been produced. There is now a range of computer software
which can be used to assist creative problem solving. This stretches from purpose-built software
to more general-purpose software which can be used to stimulate creative thinking. In addition,
some software is useful for the individual working alone while other software is of beneﬁt to
groups of individuals working on a problem or project together. The amount of software
available has expanded considerably over the past few years with recent development of
applications that will run on hand-held and mini computers ﬁtted with touch screens –
commonly referred to as ‘apps’. In the future we may expect to see a greater emphasis on
programs that facilitate visualization in one way or another. Developments on the Internet have
also led to the setting of social network sites and these to have facilitated the ideation process.
Indeed, the very existence of information on Internet sites can act as a spur to ideation.
Photographs and videos can act as a spur to ideation and, with the aid of computers, their use
can be made in creative problem-solving sessions.
COMPUTER PROGRAMS
‘I think it’s fair to say that personal computers have become the most empowering tool
we’ve ever created. They’re tools of communication, they’re tools of creativity and they
can be shaped by their user.’ (Bill Gates). Available at: www.brainyquote.com/
quotes/quotes/b/billgates173261.html (accessed 28 March 2013).
HISTORY OF DEVELOPMENT
Simon (1985) discussed a computer program called BACON, which he had developed with
co-workers. He argued that if a computer program was able to make discoveries which, if
made by a human, could be considered creative, then the processes it used should provide
useful information about the creative process. The BACON program received raw observational

COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
304
or experimental data and produced, when successful, scientiﬁc laws. Simon wanted to show
that scientiﬁc discovery is an understandable phenomenon that can be explained in terms of all
the same kinds of basic information-processing mechanisms that account for other forms of
human problem solving and thinking. Simon’s efforts were directed at getting a computer to
undertake creative problem solving by itself.
Computer-aided creative thinking and problem-solving mechanisms began to appear in the
late 1970s, reﬂecting some of the ideas of Rogers (1954), Maslow (1954) and Kelly (1955).
Rogers and Maslow had argued that self-discovery might lead to creative insights, while Kelly
had suggested that the loosening of constructs produced the same results.
Rokeach (1979) put together a computer program that enabled individuals to examine their
own value systems and clarify their knowledge. Planet (designed by Shaw, 1982) was a later
program that helped the user to uncover the themes and variations with respect to their
Figure 15.1
The stages in CPS covered by this chapter
Objective finding
Fact finding
Problem finding
Idea finding
Solution finding
Acceptance finding

problems. A central component of this latter program was the Repertory Grid discussed by
Kelly, and it is this which helped comprehension of the classiﬁcations people construct around
their experiences and, if required, to reconstruct views on a problem. COPE (now the Decision
Explorer) was devised by Colin Eden (Eden et al., 1983) and was designed to help map the
relationship between ideas connecting interrelated sets of problems. It also facilitates cause-
and-effect analysis.
A growth in interest in the development of computer programs to aid creative thinking
problem solving took place in the 1980s. Brainstorm was typical of a number of programs
designed to help people be more systematic in their thinking. Essentially, it was an idea
processor working rather like a word processor and a database combined. It permitted the user
to type in ideas, or the outline of a plan or schedule, as they came to mind. Subsequently, it
allowed the user to reorganize ideas or points entered under any number of headings or
subheadings so that the structure of a document, and the user’s thoughts, too, could be
meaningfully organized.
While the above programs assisted in making the users more aware of their own thought
processes, none facilitated the restructuring of the user’s thinking in order to provide a basis
for creative thought. The fact that people understand their thought processes and can organize
them in a systematic way is not always a sufﬁcient condition to encourage the generation of
creative insights. Kelly (1955) had argued that it was ﬁrst necessary to go through the process
of destructuring existing thought patterns before one could hope to gain any insights into a
problem.
Some of the programs developed in the 1980s attempted to introduce mechanisms that
would help people to destructure and restructure their thinking. Brainstormer, for example,
was such a program and, using the morphological approach, divided a problem along major
dimensions or themes. It presented a structured approach to creative problem solving and
facilitated three-dimensional morphological analysis. Creators of computer-assisted creative
problem-solving aids adopted different approaches. One such approach was reﬂected in the
Idea Generator. The program encouraged the user to employ a fairly wide range of analogical
reasoning methods. Methods included asking the user to relate similar situations to the problem,
thinking up metaphors for the situation, and developing other perspectives. The program also
included sections that helped people focus on goals and on the reverse of goals. In addition
there was a section that helped the user to evaluate ideas.
Several of these early programs attempted to take people through a number of stages of the
creative problem-solving process (e.g. Idea Generator), while others made speciﬁc use of 
the computer’s ability to randomize events or help in recording and restructuring ideas. 
Some of the programs facilitated more than one of these features. In very recent times the
advent of tablet computers and growth of interest in writing apps for these machines has led
to cheap programs becoming available that will perform a number of the techniques covered
in this book.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
305

COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
306
STRUCTURED APPROACH TO CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING 
IN COMPUTER PROGRAMS
To be of assistance, the computer-assisted techniques should have the following features:
1
Facilitate movement through any or all of the stages of creative problem solving (i.e.
problem deﬁnition, idea generation, idea evaluation, etc.).
2
Provide mechanisms that stimulate thought.
3
Provide a structuring framework within which to deﬁne problems, generate or evaluate
ideas.
4
Facilitate or improve the use of conventional creative problem solving aids.
TYPES OF COMPUTER-ASSISTED STIMULI
Purpose-built creative solving programs are not the only way of stimulating creative thinking
with the aid of a computer. There are other ways in which computers can assist in this process.
The various ways of classifying computer-assisted creativity stimuli are summarized in 
Figure 15.2.
Let us look at some of the recent trends that have taken place.
Figure 15.2
An overview of the ways in which computers can help in the creative thinking process
Computer-
assisted
creative
problem
solving
Stand
alone
programs
Apps for
mini and
hand held
computers
and
mobile
phones
Digital
photographs
Professional
networks
Internet
Social
networks
Simulation
programs
Electronic
mail
Conventional
packages
Visual
Metaphors
Spreadsheets
Twitter
Facebook
Databases
Web-sites

Recent trends in stand-alone programs
Computers have evolved over time into machines that differ radically from one generation to
the next. The current trend in machines is towards portability and ultra-compact machines
with touch-screen keyboards and voice control. At the same time the computer industry has
been quite effective in being able to keep the price of its software comparatively low.
There are software titles that will be very useful to people keen on using some of the
standard techniques described in the book. Storyboarding as described in the earlier part of
this chapter is one such technique for which there is software available. There is also software
that, while designed for writing stories per se, also helps with the use of the Storywriting
techniques (also described earlier in the chapter). Essentially, such software helps to get stories
started and provides plots, endings and even characters. There are also visual stimuli programs
involving dice with images on each one of the six sides of the dice. One rolls the dice and
arranges the images shown into a sequence around which one can create a story.
There are also electronic sticky notes and boards, and similar programs which are useful
substitutes for ﬂip charts and can be used with most of the group of creative problem techniques
that need such a facility to record and display ideas.
There are also programs that imitate the creative problem-solving tools speciﬁcally. In one
application the ideas behind TRIZ are expounded.
These represent just some of the current offerings. The rate of development of all this kind
of software is far too proliﬁc for this book to provide a realistic overview. Moreover, applications
appear on the Internet and then disappear or are replaced by something else. Rather than listing
speciﬁc programs here, readers are urged by me to look for themselves on the ‘app’ pages for
different machines.
The Internet as a medium for ideation
Worldwide communications, including the Internet, are good ways to bring people together
for sharing ideas. Internet access offers facilities for bringing people together in a virtual
meeting room and aid the generation of ideas and discussion. Meeting-room technology
transforms the way people meet, improving the performance of people and the organization.
It can be used for brainstorming, problem solving, team building, strategic planning and
interactive learning.
Electronic brainstorming is argued to be a better technique than verbal brainstorming or
nominal groups (Dennis and Valacich, 1994). The technique permits one to take advantage of
working by oneself, thereby reducing the risk of blocking, but at the same time has the
advantage of beneﬁting from inputs of the other group members. It is also maintained that 
the novelty of technology appears to make up for the cognitive inertia that characterizes
information overload in the productivity of groups.
Facebook and Twitter
The growth of Internet social network groups such as Facebook and Twitter has led to a new
way of creating and sharing ideas. One can work with a circle of friends or associates based
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
307

anywhere on earth where one can get Internet access. Formal idea generating with other
members of the group or simply exchanging views or advice can lead to insights into problems
in hand. In 2011 there were over ﬁfty million such groups on Facebook. People are using
groups to communicate with many of the important communities in their lives, such as their
families, best friends and team-mates (Lynde, 2011).
Twitter offers not only the opportunity for interactions with one’s group of friends or
associates, it also enables one to pick up ideas from various corporate organizations and media
creators such as The Guardian and The Economist. Regular tweaks of interface can be followed.
Potentially, Twitter is a useful tool to make use of when it comes to getting and sharing ideas.
Just by reading tweets of others one can set off creative lines of thought. Marketers are
interested in getting ideas about trends and topics of interest that they can use to their advantage
in promoting their goods and services. Social networks such as Twitter, Facebook and the
professional network LinkedIn are excellent sources from which this kind of information can
be gleaned simply by reading and taking in comments and material which is placed on these
websites.
However, it is by being proactive oneself that one can get speciﬁc ideas about a subject of
interest. In this instance it is not sufﬁcient just to put out a question on Twitter. One should
put it to a speciﬁc group of people or use popular hash tags to increase the question’s exposure.
This means that it is important to have built up a well-deﬁned set of people with whom one
interacts on a fairly regular basis on Twitter. Another useful approach is to look for tweets
that include a keyword/topic of interest along with a question mark (i.e. creativity?). This can
make it possible to get a sense of how other people may be interested in the topic. One can
try to start tweeting with them about common interests (Brown, 2011).
Crowdsourcing
Howe (2006) describes a web-based business model that solicits the creative insights into
problems offered by a distributed network of individuals on the Internet. It does this by openly
inviting suggestions. He sees it as outsourcing a task usually carried out by employees of a
company to an unknown substantial network of people. Usually, a ﬁrm posts a problem online
to which a large number of individuals offer solutions. The suggestion which is judged most
useful is rewarded and the company makes use of the idea. (See also Chapter 5 regarding the
Innocentive website.)
Facebook, too, is seen by some businesses as a medium to use for crowdsourcing. For
example, a brewery worked with a social media enthusiast to create a Facebook crowdsourcing
campaign. The campaign asked for opinions on what a good beer should taste like. By voting
on ingredients like yeast, hops, malt and colour, the respondents essentially helped create a
new recipe for the brewery (The Blog, 2013).
Blogs and everyday activities
Creativity has started penetrating into everyday activities due to the vast growth of the Internet.
Let’s take an example of a person cooking a recipe and posting it on their blog. Thousands of
other users looking for a similar recipe come across it and attempt new variations with the
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
308

COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
309
same recipe and post this recipe on the same blog. This in turn stimulates other people and
this cycle goes on in an inﬁnite loop. The same thing happens in every ﬁeld and topic in our
everyday life. Thus the Internet and computers have made our lives more creative.
CONVENTIONAL SOFTWARE
Outliners, visual outliner, questioning programs and idea processors
Modern word-processing packages usually have an outliner mode built in. They are designed
to help structure one’s thoughts when preparing reports, articles or other literary works.
Brainstorm was a forerunner of such features, the main idea of which is that one types ideas
or thoughts into sections of an electronic page. One can then easily rearrange the sections in
whatever order one chooses. It is also possible to collapse the sections to show just the ﬁrst
line. This provides a quick overview of what has been typed in. Rearranging sections with just
the ﬁrst line showing facilitates the construction of a logically ordered document.
There are a number of more expensive commercial programs with sophisticated interfaces
which are helpful in terms of helping one to generate insights. These include:
Visual outliners
Several programs attempt to automate the process of drawing graphical outlines, mind maps
and concept maps. These programs are useful for presentations and publication. There have
been a number of good mind mapping programs produced commercially. Good examples are
Inspiration, The Brain and Concept Draw.
Questioning programs
Several programs take input from the user and then present sets of questions, keywords, or
exercises to provoke new ideas. IdeaFisher and ThoughtPath (formerly MindLink), for example,
both make use of this approach.
Idea processors
There are many different idea processors. Two examples are: the Axon Idea Processor offers
a visual workbench with a range of tools to record, process and manipulate ideas. The Idea
Generator Plus boosts creative thinking and planning skills by dividing the problem solving
process into three logical parts: deﬁning the problem, generating ideas and evaluating ideas.
Visual aids
Strategizing involves problem solving and creative thinking. Eppler et al. (2006) discuss and
illustrate the beneﬁts that methods that employ graphic representations of strategic content
offer for the entire process of strategizing. Among the beneﬁts they note are that it improves
problem solving (Vessey, 1991) and inspires creativity and imagination (Buzan, 2003; Morgan,
1986). Visualization facilitates inference processes (Larkin and Simon 1987) and facilitates the
decision-making process (Foil and Huff, 1992).

Eppler et al. (2006) also propose a framework for visualization in the strategy process and
provide examples of typical visual formats that may be used within this framework. For
example, one of the elements within the framework involves elaborating on information,
discovering new patterns, building a common understanding and developing options. In this
connection they note that decision trees, concept maps, mind maps and inﬂuence diagrams
among other aids are useful.
For example, concept maps comprise linked node labelled with descriptive text (Figure 15.3).
The text should contain a word or short phrase representing the concept and similarly labelled
links between the concepts. Concept maps facilitate visualizing the connections between ideas
and arranging them in a logical structure.
The diagram below (Figure 15.4) models ‘cause and effect with multiple inputs and outputs’
– an ‘inﬂuence model’ noted above. This is a more elaborate and sophisticated approach than
the Fishbone diagram we noted in Chapter 12. Like the ﬁshbone diagram, it encourages one
to look at every aspect of a problem or a topic of interest and to highlight the various
relationships. It also helps to establish a logical sequence for handling various parts of a problem
in a systematic way. It also enables one to visualize the parts within the whole. However, in
this case it recognizes the complex nature of problems and that there may be multiple causes
and effects produced. It helps one to identify and trace these multiple causes and effects.
This is a very simple map of only twenty items and it is possible to build up models with
hundreds of items. The Decision Explorer program, for instance, has routines in it that enable
one to trace cause-and-effect chains in the model. In this simple model we can visually trace
various chains – e.g.:
11 New supplier > 12 Higher quality components > 13 Higher quality products
And 6 Training > 7 Improved skills > 13 Higher quality products
And 6 Recruitment > 6 Improved skills > 13 Higher quality products
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
310
Figure 15.3
Concept map
Sources of
information
Working papers
Specify
Journals
Other reports
Senior management
Sets
Ascertain
Confidentiality
restrictions
People to talk with
Identify
Write a report
Check
Select
Topic to include
Identify
Co-writers
Make
Collaborative
agreements
Inform

The Decision Explorer program can rapidly ﬁnd all chains of causes that lead to one effect in
very complex models and also taking any starting point in the map, examine all the chains of
effects it helps to produce. For example, in the latter instance, we can see from visual inspection
that:
15 Lower prices > 14 Increased sales > 17 Increased proﬁts
and 15 Lower prices > 20 Satisﬁed customers > 19 Increased corporate responsibility
Visual analogy
The Internet has many image ﬁles that can be easily accessed with a search engine such as
Google. These can be used as stimuli for use in the Vision Building technique described in
chapter 12. One can also use one’s own photographs to stimulate creative thinking in a number
of different ways. One possible way is as follows:
One can keep a stock of unusual photographs on a computer. The photographs can be of
real events (such as the one used here in the example illustration, Exhibit 15.1). Alternatively,
given modern technological help that can be provided by photograph manipulating 
programs they can be ‘manufactured’ to give special effects. Such photographs can be used as
visual stimuli in the use of visual analogies to get insight into problems. The ﬁrst step is to
select a suitable photograph as an analogy for the problem. Next one needs to create a suit-
able problem deﬁnition which could also be an analogy for a possible problem associated with
the picture.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
311
Figure 15.4
Multiple cause-and-effect map
11 New supplier
12 Higher quality
components
15 Lower Prices
8 Better pay
18 Cost cutting
9 Improved prospects
2 More efficient
production
1 New production
equipment
5 Recruitment
6 Training
16 Main competitor
exits
7 Improved skills
13 Higher quality
products
14 Increased sales
17 Increased profits
19 Increased
corporate
responsibility
4 Satisfies other
stakeholders
3 Environmental
friendly
20 Satisfied
customers
10 Employee
satisfaction

COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
312
An illustration of the use of the photograph shown in Exhibit 15.1 might be as follows:
•
Problem given: how to get something to work in an inaccessible place.
•
Analogy problem: how to set up and light a ﬁre on top of a very large boulder.
Assuming that one is working with a group of people, one might then have the group
members generate suggestions for a solution to the analogy problem. These might be suggestions
such as:
1
Ensure whoever has to climb the boulder is ﬁt and able to do so, and has the necessary
climbing aids available.
2
Have the person ascending the boulder take up a cord attached to a rope which can be
subsequently pulled to the top of the boulder.
3
Make best use of the handholds and footholds cut into the boulder to assist with the climb
and the task in hand.
4
Get a long ladder to lean up against the boulder to make it easier to climb to the top.
5
Use a helicopter to drop a person and all the equipment needed on top of the boulder.
6
Light a ﬁre on the ground instead.
From each one of these suggestions the group may then be able to reach possible solutions
to the problem given as follows:
Exhibit 15.1
Visual analogy (photograph by the author)

1
Ensure that the person who has to service the equipment has the necessary skills to
perform the task without danger to herself or himself.
2
Look at the existing facilities that are available and consider the various ways in which they
might be used to solve the problem.
3
Ensure that at installation there are mechanisms and servicing aids that facilitate access to
the problem object.
4
Use a tool or resource that can be extended in terms of its reach to help solve the 
problem.
5
Use a mechanical device to help solve the problem.
6
Do not install the problem object in an inaccessible place in the ﬁrst instance.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
313
Exhibit 15.2
Collage of seven photographs (photograph by author and altered with computer
software)

COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
314
Visual images that one can take with one’s own camera can readily be manipulated with
readily available software to present distorted, exaggerated or unusual images. Exhibit 15.2
shows a collage of seven such photographs which have been altered with readily computer
software. They present a possible alternative to standard photographs that are used in
visualization or other creative problem-solving sessions requiring visual inputs.
Examples
Take one of the photographs (Exhibit 15.3). Suppose the problem is how to shorten the time
that we spend on administration. We might take the word ‘shorten’ as the keyword and ask
people to look at the picture and see where ‘shorten’ might be something that appears relevant.
We might start by asking people to list the characteristics of what seems to be featured or
suggested in the picture according to how they perceive it that relate to the opposite of our key
word. This might elicit such comments as ‘high arches, high clouds, high foliage’.
We might then ask in turn ‘how might one lower the arches, lower the clouds, lower the
foliage?’. This could lead to ideas such as ‘dismantle the structure piece by piece and rebuild,
get closer to the clouds in an aircraft or balloon so they are closer to you, cut back the foliage
regularly so it does not grow so high’.
These suggestions might then be related back to the original problem:
look in detail at our administrative work and see how we might construct it so that it
can be lowered;
employ an electronic, mechanical or similar means of dealing with the administration so
that the process can be shortened.
Or take another of the photographs (Exhibit 15.4) with the same problem:
In this case we might simply ask people what they see happening in the picture and to
express it in as few words as possible. This might lead to such thoughts as: ‘shadows, strange
ﬁgures, ﬂitting about, weird place’.
Exhibit 15.3
The viaduct

We might then ask people to take some of these thoughts and combine them into something
more meaningful. This might lead to: ‘weird shadow-like ﬁgures ﬂitting about in a strange
place’.
We might then ask how we could make the picture appear how we might actually see it
in real life. This might produce suggestions such as ‘put colour into, turn the shadows into
people or things they actually represent, straighten the appearance of the buildings and
features of them, don’t distort things so much’.
We might then ask people to relate these thoughts back to the original problem. This might
produce suggestions such as ‘plan to do the administrative work at time when you might get
some enjoyment from doing it, identify what aspects of the work seem burdensome and look
at them closely to see if they can really be done in some other way, don’t let the administrative
work seem more than it really is’. In other words, question your own perceptions of the
problem.
There are many ways in which one might use photographs as visual stimuli and create different
techniques of your own.
Videos
Personal computer software now enables people to create video material. The material can be
recorded with the aid of digital cameras or even with the aid of the built-in camera that is
available on computers themselves. The software facilitates cutting up videos into sections and
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
315
Exhibit 15.4
Trafalgar Square

rearranging or piecing the sections together in different ways. One can also add in sections of
other videos and still photographs as well. The resulting new videos that one makes may be
used to create different stories or effects. Indeed, one can even just simply put together a
selection of still photographs accompanied by a verbal commentary and/or music to represent
a story.
These kinds of visual presentations can build a dynamic element into visual stimulation when
it comes to stimulating creative thinking. Used in conjunction with a technique such as Story
Writing, described in Chapter 12, it may be a fruitful way for a group to gain insight into a
problem on which they are working.
One can also just take short videos of particular events and use these as a stimulus for
thought in the same way as one might use still photographs. A video featuring a bird searching
for food on the ground, cats watching birds, different types of machine in operation, a farm
worker ploughing a ﬁeld, an aeroplane coming into land, birds landing on ice, or literally any
kind of event may prove a fruitful source of an idea or insight. Such videos only need to be of
short duration.
YouTube on the Internet, of course, is a vast resource of video material and one can search
it to ﬁnd information that might be used as a stimulus for thought. Rights of ownership of the
material on YouTube, of course, restrict downloading of the material.
Spreadsheets
Spreadsheets facilitate creative problem solving. Simple or complex mathematical models can
be constructed with the aid of a spreadsheet and subjected to sensitivity analysis. This is both
a powerful and a simple way of encouraging creative thinking. It encourages people to try out
ideas in a risk-free environment and provides a ready-made tool for doing so. Jackson (1985)
provided an ample illustration of the use of spreadsheets for this purpose. Here illustrations
cover many aspects of business including database management; statistical analysis; survey data;
analysis of relationships; sales forecasting; ﬁnancial planning; cost estimation; budgeting;
decision modelling; sensitivity analysis; and simulation. An example of a sensitivity analysis of
the net savings to be derived from implementing a project is shown in Table 15.1. Three
scenarios are assumed, showing the added costs of the new method as 75 per cent, 70 per cent
and 65 per cent of the savings effected on the old method. A projection for four years is shown.
Spreadsheets are also extremely useful in facilitating the other quantitative evaluation of
ideas that we covered in Chapter 13. In particular, they are useful in connection with using
those that involve mathematical evaluations, such as pay-off tables and decision trees. They can
also be used effectively when making evaluations using weighting systems.
Simulation packages
Simulation can be of enormous beneﬁt to an organization. Years ago programs ran on main-
frame computers and were used by large corporations to assist in the solution of complex
problems. For instance, the Exxon Corporation developed a model of gasoline supply at a
reﬁnery that was used to control the inventories of several blends of gasoline and maximize
storage-tank utilization. Savings resulting from not building an additional storage tank amounted
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
316

to $1.4 million (Golovin, 1979). In another instance a corporate simulation model was
developed for Canterbury Timber Products Ltd to improve planning for domestic and export
operations. The resultant ability to explore more alternatives with the model resulted in
savings in direct and opportunity costs of at least $10,000 per annum (de Kluyver and McNally,
1980).
Today there are simulation programs that can be used by anyone who has the time to spend
learning how to use them. They can be found by searching online and are relatively cheap to
acquire. Simulation packages can be used to enable complex processes in organizations to be
modelled. Based upon sampling real data, simulations of activities can be carried out on a
microcomputer. It might be difﬁcult, expensive or even dangerous to experiment in the real
world with such activities, but on the computer these problems are removed. As in the case
of the spreadsheet, people are encouraged to try out their ideas in a risk-free environment.
Simulations are extremely useful for developing different scenarios and can be used in
conjunction with the techniques discussed in Chapter 12 relating to scenario building. They
are sometimes referred to as ‘best-practice’ simulations and can be used for various purposes
associated with envisaging what things will be like given different estimations of future
happenings which will inﬂuence outcomes. One can enter numerical values for different
parameters and see what effect this will have on outcomes.
The dynamic nature of simulations is one of its most powerful features.
An example of a useful business simulation tool is Vensim. Vensim provides industrial
strength simulation software for improving the performance of real systems. There are
conﬁgurations of the software available for everyone from students to professionals. There are
also associated model libraries and tutorials to support learning how to make use of the
software. The simulation software adopts the System Dynamics approach which resulted from
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
317
Table 15.1 Scenario analysis (£)
Scenario 1
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Total
Savings on old method
75,000
100,000
125,000
200,000
500,000
Added cost of new 
75%
56,250
75,000
93,750
150,000
375,000
method
Net savings
18,750
25,000
31,250
50,000
125,000
Scenario 2
year 1
year 2
year 3
year 4
Total
Savings on old method
75,000
100,000
125,000
200,000
500,000
Added cost of new 
70%
52,500
70,000
87,500
140,000
350,000
method
Net savings
22,500
30,000
37,500
60,000
150,000
Scenario 3
year 1
year 2
year 3
year 4
Total
Savings on old method
75,000
100,000
125,000
200,000
500,000
Added cost of new 
65%
48,750
65,000
81,250
130,000
325,000
method
Net savings
26,250
35,000
43,750
70,000
175,000

the pioneering efforts of Jay W. Forrester to apply the engineering principles of feedback and
control to social systems (Forrester, 1961). A good illustration of the use of Vensim can be
found in Shahgholian and Hajihosseini (2009).
Databases
A ﬁrm’s internal records can be scanned to help solve customers’ problems. In addition,
external databases can be searched for information which has an inﬂuence on pending
organizational decisions. Essentially, databases are storage facilities for data, information and,
most importantly, for knowledge. Existing information in computerized databases can be
examined, reassessed and made use of so that it becomes new explicit knowledge. Such knowledge
can then be put to good use in solving new problems that may arise. For example, many large
companies examine point-of-sales data to discover not only what does and does not sell, but
also to ﬁnd new ways to expand their sales. The data held reﬂects the type of outlets where
the sales have been made and proﬁles of the customers using those stores. This enables the ﬁrm
to identify characteristics of the shoppers at different stores and what they actually buy.
Changes in patterns can readily be recognized and adjustments then made to marketing tactics
to enable suitable merchandise to be supplied and apt sales promotions to promote future sales.
Perhaps even more sophisticated is the use of databases for turning explicit knowledge into
tacit knowledge. The latter reﬂects experience that has been gained by individuals and which
would be beneﬁcial to the organization if it could be shared and accessed by all members of
the organization. For example, customer complaints could be entered into a database and other
members interacting with customers could then use the knowledge it creates to experience
for themselves the kinds of things about which complaints have been raised. The search facility
on a database can readily list material on the insertion of a keyword.
Electronic mail systems
The use of an electronic mail system for creative problem solving purposes illustrates how a
general-purpose computer installation can aid the creative thinking process. It facilitates the
informal exchange of ideas but in addition to this when used in conjunction with a database
can become a very powerful tool. Emails containing useful tacit information can quickly be
inserted into a database and become explicit knowledge that may be of future use to others in the
organization.
Business simulators
Business games were designed as aids to management development and training. They provide
a vehicle by which principle and practice can be learned and experienced. Yet the business
game also contains something that is vitally important in management but which is seldom
found in practice: it allows individuals to take risks and make mistakes; to play out hunches
and follow up wild ideas. By their very nature, business games encourage creative thinking and
ideas by helping people to overcome some of the well-known barriers to creativity such as the
pressure to conform and the fear of looking foolish.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
318

Business simulators offer the opportunity for individuals to test ideas and take risks. They
can be made to provide positive feedback when satisfactory decisions or suggestions are made
by the user or when creative and sensible suggestions are made. Conversely, negative reinforcers
can be employed when rash or uncreative actions or suggestions are made.
Computer-assisted creative problem solving is not eccentric. It has been around now for
the best part of twenty years. As one the early developers of the area, I have a keen interest.
The chapter suggests some useful packages.
QUESTIONS
1
What do you consider to be the essentials of a creative problem-solving program? Do you
think it should provide a structured approach to the whole CPS process or should it just
concentrate on one aspect of it?
2
Design a creative problem-solving program which you think could help people to deal
with different kinds of open-ended problem.
3
How do you visualize computer-assisted creative problem solving developing in the future?
4
Do you think crowdsourcing is a good idea? Why or why not?
Suggest how you might use Facebook and Twitter to get insights you may want into a
pressing problem.
5
If you have access to a touch-screen phone, hand-held tablet machine or a tablet computer,
have look to see how many different apps or programs there are on it that facilitate
ideation. Indicate what these are and critically evaluate their usefulness.
CASES
A complaints system
A large city council has recently decided that it wants to add a website section to its main
website to deal with complaints lodged by users of its services and members of the public.
Such a system it believes would serve two purposes:
1
It would enable it to deal with the speciﬁc complaints raised.
2
It would provide a knowledge base for getting to know how to improve services to best
ﬁt with user needs and wants.
It believes that many people have access to computers and mobile phones and that they might
prefer to leave messages on the council’s website rather than phone in or visit a ‘One Stop
Shop’ to speak in person about their concerns.
The council has appointed a consultant to produce a prototype design for such a system and
is now awaiting further details. Imagine you are the consultant.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
319

Question
Draw up a document outlining the design for the system that you think the city council might
need bearing in mind the speciﬁc requirements.
Getting into computer apps
Jane is a keen programmer and is interested in making extra money from writing apps for
touch-screen hand-held machines and mobile phones. She is also interested in creative problem
solving and feels she knows enough about the subject to enable her to produce the kind of
software that people might be interested to buy. She decides to ﬁnd more about this possibility
and asks her friend John what he thinks about the idea. John suggests she should scan the app
software for machines like the iPad, iPhone and iPod to get some idea of what people have
been producing already. ‘That way,’ he says,’you will get some idea of what is on offer, what
people think about the apps and what price they sell for.’
Question
What do you think Jane found out when she did what John suggested?
The socialite
Ever since she was a small girl Emily was always talked about as being a bit of a ‘socialite’. She
had lots of friends in the primary school and even more at the secondary school. She joined
Facebook and received over 2,000 emails in the ﬁrst six months of joining.
Emily is now 18 and has just started studying for a degree in Business Studies at a university
more than a hundred miles away from home. She is keen to do well on her degree course and
at the same time she wants to get the maximum beneﬁts from all the social activities that are
associated with being at a large campus university. She has accommodation on campus but is
not allowed to have a car on campus during her ﬁrst year at university. She does, however,
have both an iPad and an iPhone which enable her to keep in touch with people.
Question
Students face all kinds of ill-structured problems when they leave home and go to university,
and it can be quite difﬁcult for them during their ﬁrst-year studies. Given Emily’s personality
and resources, how would you advise her to make use of (or not make use of) the resources
she does have available?
FURTHER READING
Ayuso, S., Rodríguez, M. A. and Ricart, J. E. (2006) Using stakeholder dialogue as a source for
new ideas: a dynamic capability underlying sustainable innovation, Corporate Governance,
6(4): 475–490.
Eppler, M. J. and Burkhard, R. A.(2007) Visual representations in knowledge management:
framework and cases, Journal of Knowledge Management, 11(4): 112–122.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
320

Goldenberg, S. (2011) BP’s oil spill crowdsourcing exercise: ‘a lot of effort for little result’.
Available at: www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/jul/12/bp-deepwater-horizon-oil-spill-
crowdsourcing (accessed 12 July 2011).
Sawhney, M., Verona, G. and Prandelli, E. (2005) Collaborating to create: the Internet as a
platform for customer engagement in product innovation, Journal of Interactive Marketing,
19(4): 4–17.
Thagard, P. (2013) Creative combination of representations: scientiﬁc discovery and technological
invention. Available at: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/Articles/Thagard.2011.creative-combination.
ﬁnal%20copy.pdf (accessed 24 April 2013).
Thagard, P. (forthcoming) Creative combination of representations: scientiﬁc discovery and
technological invention. In R. Proctor and E. J. Capaldi (eds), Psychology of Science, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROBLEM SOLVING
321

322
GREAT NORTHERN BUS COMPANY
The Great Northern Bus Company is based in Newcastle upon Tyne and runs regular services
to other parts of the UK. The company deﬁnes its competitors as all carriers of passengers to
all parts of the United Kingdom. The company is forward looking and recently appointed you
as a consultant to advise on how it might get to grips with the current problems it faces. These
are summarized by the marketing director as follows:
Recently we have experienced a drop in sales and loss of market share in our long distance
business and we need to ﬁnd ways to improve our position. We desperately need some
good ideas and a speciﬁc plan of action to help us get to grips with this problem. Can you
advise, or better still see, what solutions to our problem you can come up with?
You, of course, want to help and decide that the best way is to make use of the creative
problem-solving process in which you are an expert. As a ﬁrst step you decide to gather a small
group of personnel with interest and expertise in the subject together to start the process
rolling.
You start with objective ﬁnding and ask the group to defer judgement and list some major
concerns in the company. The following list is generated:
1 Recruitment of more qualiﬁed personnel.
2 Improved customer service among long distance passengers.
3 Increasing market share.
4 Better prediction of customer responses to marketing.
5 Developing a marketing slogan.
6 Improving manager–subordinate relations.
7 Reducing promotional costs.
8 Improving target market identiﬁcation.
9 Determining customer preferences.
10 Improving focus group procedures.
Case example of the creative
problem-solving process
Appendix 1

Next you identify ‘hits’. This is a subjective process and varies from company to company 
and from person to person. In this case suppose the company identiﬁes items 1, 2, 4 and 9.
Items 2, 4 and 9 clearly represent hotspots concerning customers. If the group members agree,
they might identify an objective involving customers.
To identify this area, they apply the criteria of ownership, priority and critical nature. They
decide they have ownership over all the hits, since customers are a prime marketing
responsibility. Of the hits, they decide that item 2 (improving customer service among long-
distance passengers) has higher priority than the other hits, since it is more likely to affect
ﬁnancial proﬁt. (Remember, this was the concern of the marketing director.) It is also critical
because an improvement in the ﬁnancial position is critical and there is a deﬁnite need to
increase market share. Improved customer service may result in more customers (or repeat
business) and therefore more proﬁt.
After reviewing the hits and applying the criteria, they decide on the problem statement:
‘IWWM improve customer service for the long distance passengers?’ They are now ready to
move on to the next stage – fact ﬁnding.
FACT FINDING
The purpose of this stage is to generate relevant data to improve understanding of the problem.
This in turn allows you to consider different problem perspectives. To search for data
systematically the group uses the 5 W’s method. They generate a list of Who? What? Where?
When? and Why? questions and answer them as follows:
Who are the potential customers?
•
The long distance travellers
•
People on business
•
People on vacation/holiday
•
People combining business and pleasure
•
Frequent travellers
•
People visiting families
•
Males and females
•
Young and old people
•
Rich and poor people
•
People travelling with other bus companies
Who provides customer service?
•
Couriers
•
Ticket counter personnel
•
Catering personnel
•
Drivers
•
Maintenance staff
•
Travel agents
CASE EXAMPLE
323

What is customer service?
•
Learning customer preferences
•
Attending to customer needs
•
Solving customer problems
•
Anticipating problems before they occur
•
Interacting with customers with a positive attitude
Where is customer service most evident?
•
During journeys
•
When delays occur
•
At ticketing counters
•
When any other problem affects customers
•
During peak travel periods
When do most people notice customer service?
•
When they are ignored
•
When someone goes out of his or her way to help
•
When they receive prompt attention
•
When an employee overlooks a minor policy to help someone in trouble
Why is good customer service important?
•
It helps to attract new customers
•
It helps to retain old customers
•
Sustained proﬁts depend on it
•
It helps the company project a positive image
•
It creates satisﬁed customers who are more likely to travel with us again
The group members then converge and identify hits among the fact-ﬁnding data. To do this
they underline the most important responses to the questions and list the results. For example:
•
The long distance traveller
•
People travelling with other bus companies
•
Couriers
•
Drivers
•
Ticket counter personnel
•
Learning customer preferences
•
Anticipating problems before they occur
•
During journeys
•
When delays occur
•
When someone goes out of his or her way to help
APPENDIX 1
324

•
When they receive prompt attention
•
It helps attract new customers
•
It helps retain old customers
•
It produces satisﬁed customers
•
It helps the company project a positive image
Next the group examines the hits to see if might group some together as hotspots. The group
members develop the following list:
Employees
•
Couriers
•
Ticket counter personnel
•
When someone goes out of his or her way to help
Customers
•
The travelling public
•
People travelling with other bus companies
•
Learning customer preferences
•
It helps to attract new customers
•
It helps retain old customers
•
It produces satisﬁed customers
Travel related data
•
During journeys
•
When delays occur
PROBLEM FINDING
The group now is ready to enter the problem-ﬁnding stage to consider a variety of problem
perspectives. Restating the problem might unlock a new viewpoint that could lead to many
creative solutions. To create these viewpoints, the group examines the fact-ﬁnding hotspots
and uses the hotspots to generate possible problem redeﬁnitions. The group members generate
the following list of problems.
In which we may
1
encourage employees to go out of their way to help customers?
2
attract passengers who regularly travel with other bus companies?
3
attract new customers?
4
increase long-distance traveller customer satisfaction?
5
reduce the number of departure delays?
CASE EXAMPLE
325

Next they converge and identify hits using the criteria of ownership, likelihood of stimulating
many ideas, and freedom from criteria. After analysing all the statements, they select prob -
lems 1, 3 and 4. Of these they decide that problem 4 is most likely to resolve their objective
of improving the company’s ﬁnancial position. The primary reason for this choice is one of
ownership. Their marketing data suggests that the long- distance market is the most unstable
because no bus company has established itself in a dominant market position, as is the case with
short-distance travel. Thus, they may be able to capture a larger market share and improve
their ﬁnancial position.
IDEA FINDING
The group is now ready to begin idea ﬁnding using the problem ‘IWWM increase long distance
traveller satisfaction?’ The members start with a purge to list more conventional ideas:
•
install more comfortable seats
•
offer good entertainment
•
provide more leg-room
•
train personnel to be more courteous
•
lower ticket prices
Next they select a formal idea generation technique such as the two words method to
implement the approach. To implement this approach, they follow these steps:
1
List alternative word meanings for two keywords in the problem statement.
2
Examine combinations of two words, one word from each list.
3
Use combinations to suggest ideas.
For instance, they might focus on the words increase and satisfaction and set up the technique
as follows:
Increase
Satisfaction
Improve
Pleasure
Enlarge
Ease
Enhance
Enjoyment
Renew
Peace of mind
Upgrade
Contentment
Different combinations of these words suggest such ideas as:
Gourmet food (upgrade–pleasure)
Seconds on food and drink (renew–satisfaction)
Free travel insurance (upgrade–peace of mind)
Better seats (enhance–enjoyment)
Shortening ticket-buying queues (improve–ease)
APPENDIX 1
326

After generating these and other ideas, the group might try another technique such as
brainwriting. Brainwriting is a brainstorming variation in which a group generates ideas silently
and in writing. The steps for this method are:
1
Each group member is given a stack of index cards.
2
Each member writes down one idea per card and passes it to the person on the right.
3
The person receiving a card examines the idea on it for possible stimulation of a new idea.
4
Members write down (on another card) any new ideas suggested and pass the card to the
person on the right.
5
After about ten minutes of this activity, the idea cards are collected and evaluated.
Some possible ideas from this technique are:
•
Video-cassette players built into seat backs.
•
Free snacks.
•
On-board business card rafﬂes.
In this example, the group has generated a total of twenty ideas for improving passenger
satisfaction. Group members now need to converge, identify any hotspots and select idea-
ﬁnding hits. For hotspots, they identify:
•
Travel comfort (e.g. more comfortable seats, more leg-room).
•
Food enhancements (e.g. gourmet food, free snacks).
To select hits from among these hotspots, they decide upon three criteria: cost, ease of
implementation and likelihood of increasing passenger satisfaction. After examining all the
ideas and applying the criteria, they reduce the list of twenty ideas to two:
1
More comfortable seats.
2
Video-cassettes built into seat backs.
The group is now ready to move to the next CPS stage and select a ﬁnal problem solution.
SOLUTION FINDING
Solution ﬁnding contains two sets of divergent activities. First, the group generates evaluative
criteria:
1
Cost.
2
Time to implement.
3
Degree to which current equipment will require modiﬁcation.
4
Effect on routine travel operations.
5
Acceptance by bus crew.
6
Passenger long-term interest level.
7
Ability to interest a broad cross-section of passengers.
CASE EXAMPLE
327

The second divergent solution-ﬁnding activity is to improve the ideas from idea ﬁnding. In
this case the group members decide that the ideas don’t need improvement and move on to
convergent solution ﬁnding.
Of the seven criteria they generated, the group members decide to delete criteria 2 and 5.
They then construct a weighted decision matrix (Table A1.1). This allows different weighting
for each criterion; thus, cost may be seen as more important than acceptance of an idea by a
bus crew.
APPENDIX 1
328
Table A1.1 Weighted decision matrix
Criteria
Criteria 
More comfortable seats
VCRs in seat backs
importance
Idea score
Subtotal
Idea score
Subtotal
1 Low cost
5
2
10
3
15
2 Equipment 
5
1
5
2
10
modiﬁcation
3 Routine travel 
4
2
8
3
12
operations
4 Passenger interest 
4
3
12
5
20
level
5 Interest to cross 
3
3
9
5
15
section
Totals
44
72
The group rates each criterion on importance, using a ﬁve-point scale (1 = not very important;
5 = very important). Next, each solution is rated on the degree to which it satisﬁes each
criterion. The lower the number, the less the criterion is satisﬁed. For instance, more
comfortable seats were rated a 2 on the criterion of low cost. This means the group believes
they will be relatively expensive. (Cost is always a confusing item since low cost will receive
a high rating.) Finally, they multiply the criterion ratings by the ratings for each solution (‘idea
score’) and sum the products (subtotal). For instance, they multiplied the criteria importance
rating of 5 for low cost by the rating of 2 for more comfortable seats and recorded a response
of 10 as the subtotal. Then they summed the products in each column. As shown below, they
rated VCRs the higher of the two options. In this case, however, the group decides to select
VCRs.
ACCEPTANCE FINDING
It is not enough to select the best solution. Steps must also be taken to ensure the solution can
be implemented successfully. This requires consideration of implementation obstacles and
ways to overcome them.
A systematic way to ensure effective implementation is to conduct a potential problem
analysis (PPA). Although different versions exist, the PPA used here was developed originally
by Kepner and Tregoe (1976) and later modiﬁed by Van Gundy ([1981] 1988). The steps for
conducting a PPA are as follows:

1
Generate a list of potential problems that might hinder solution implementation.
2
Select the most important problems and list the possible causes of each.
3
Rate the probability of occurrence of each (1 = not very probable; 5 = very probable)
and the seriousness of each (1 = not very serious; 5 = very serious).
4
Multiply each probability rating (P) times each seriousness rating (S) to obtain a PS score.
5
Generate preventive actions for each problem cause.
6
Rate the residual probability (RP) that each problem cause still will occur after a preventive
action has been taken.
7
Multiply the PS score by the RP score.
8
Develop contingency (back-up) plans for causes with the highest PS  RP scores.
An example of a PPA using the VCR is shown in Table A1.2. There are two problems with
three causes each. The group estimates that all the preventive actions will reduce the probability
of occurrence of each cause. For instance, equipment failure owing to lack of maintenance is
reduced from a probability value of 3 to a 1 after the preventive action of checking the VCRs
after every trip. Group members then multiply the PS ratings by the RP ratings to determine
which causes should have back-up or contingency plans. In this case, the most important area
seems to be equipment failure owing to misuse. If built-in ‘help’ functions do not prevent
misuse, they suggest a computer diagnostic program that automatically signals potential misuse.
If the group wanted, it could also have developed contingency plans for the other, more highly
rated causes.
The last acceptance-ﬁnding activity involves developing an action plan to guide solution
implementation. A useful way to structure this plan is to use the ﬁve Ws questions of Who?
What? Where? When? and Why? For instance, they might ask such questions as:
•
Who will be responsible for implementation?
•
What will they implement?
CASE EXAMPLE
329
Table A1.2 Example of a potential problem analysis (PPA)
Potential problem/
P
S
Preventive actions
PS
RP
PS × RP Contingency 
causes
plan
1 Equipment failure
(a) Heavy use
4
5
Use industrial equipment
20
2
40
(b) Misuse
5
5
Built in help
25
2
50
Computer 
diagnosis
(c) Lack of 
3
5
Check after every journey 10
1
10
maintenance
2 Passengers do not know how to use 
equipment
(a) Unfamiliarity
2
3
Instructional video/ﬁlm
6
1
6
(b) Poor instructions 5
3
Write own instructions
15
1
15
(c) Not user friendly 5
4
Test with passenger 
20
2
40
sample

•
Where will they need to go to implement it?
•
When should it be implemented?
The Why? question can be used by asking ‘Why?’ of all the other questions – that is, asking
why a particular person (or persons) should be responsible for an implementation activity
(Who?); why a particular thing should be implemented (What?); why it should be implemented
in a particular location (Where?); and why one time rather than another would be better to
implement it (When?). This stage ends with a sequential listing of speciﬁc action plan steps.
For instance, the group might want to survey customers, then contact VCR manufacturers and
take bids, consult with engineers on installation problems, rewrite instructions if necessary,
and so forth.
After implementation, the only remaining CPS activity is to follow up the effectiveness of
the solution. In this instance, the group would want to know if it has solved the original
problem of increasing passenger satisfaction. If so, the next task would be to relate improved
satisfaction with increased revenues from ticket sales.
APPENDIX 1
330

331
CHAPTER 1
Doppler system
In the Doppler system of aircraft navigation two beams of radio waves are aimed at the ground
from transmitters under the fuselage, the forward beam striking the ground slightly ahead of
the aircraft and the back beam slightly astern; both alternate twice each second from port to
starboard. The forward beam signals reﬂected back to the aircraft are increased in frequency
in proportion to its speed over the ground, the back beam signals decrease. The difference in
frequency is measured automatically to give the navigator an accurate indication of the speed
of the aircraft and of the drift angle so that the course can be corrected accordingly. This is
turn has led to the development of automatic ﬂying and landing devices. The ﬁrst pilotless
aircraft successfully completed an Atlantic crossing as long ago as 1947.
Tank refurbishers
Instead of cutting off both ends of a tank only one end needs to be removed. Cleaning and
painting can be performed adequately in this way. It also saves the cost of rewelding both ends
of the tank.
Keeping prices competitive
Organizations can often disguise price rises, permanent or temporary, by making it appear that
no price rise is in fact occurring. This can be achieved in any one of the following ways:
1 The discount structure can be altered so that the total proﬁt to the company is increased
but the list price to customers remains the same.
2 The minimum order size is increased so that small orders are eliminated and overall costs
thereby reduced.
3 Delivery and special services are charged for.
4 Invoices are raised for repairs on purchased equipment.
5 Charge for engineering, installation and supervision.
6 Customers are made to pay for overtime required to get out rush orders.
Notes on problems
Appendix 2

7 Interest is collected on overdue accounts.
8 Lower margin models in the product line are eliminated and more proﬁtable ones sold in
their place.
9 Escalator clauses are built into bids for contracts.
10 The physical characteristics of the product are changed – e.g., it is made smaller.
Price and innovation
Unless Sally feels conﬁdent that her ﬁrm can take on the role of market leader, it would
probably be better to hold prices steady – but there may be more creative solutions!
CHAPTER 2
Perceptual block
There are, in fact, 18 occurrences, but most people do not get it right ﬁrst time despite having
at least two chances to read through and count the occurrence of the letter.
Why are 2013 coins worth more than 2007 coins?
Because there are more of them – 12 more to be precise.
The clock problem solved
Hint: normal sum of clock numbers 1–12 = 78 not divisible into whole numbers when divided
by 4. Need to artiﬁcially ﬁnd an extra 2. The answer usually involves reversal of the IX (or IV
if this is used instead of IIII).
CHAPTER 3
Chessboard problem
The mutilated chessboard problem was a tiling puzzle proposed by philosopher Max Black in
his book Critical Thinking (1946). He asked whether it was possible on a standard 8 × 8
chessboard to remover two diagonally opposite corners, leaving 62 squares and to place 31
dominoes of size 2 × 1 so as to cover all of the remaining.
The answer to this puzzle is no. Placing a domino on the chessboard will always cover one
white square and one black square. As a result, dominoes will cover equal numbers squares of
each colour. Removing the two white squares will not leave an equal number of black and
white squares. Thus, it will not be possible to cover all the squares.
The same proof shows that whenever any two white squares are removed from the chessboard
it will not be possible to cover all the remaining squares.
APPENDIX 2
332

See the following:
Gamow, G. and Stern, M. (1958) Puzzle-Math, New York: Viking Press.
‘Gomory’s Theorem’ from the Wolfram Demonstrations Project, available at: http://
demonstrations.wolfram.com/GomorysTheorem/; contributed by: Jay Warendorff
(accessed 17 April 2013).
CHAPTER 4
Problem solving and decision making in a crisis
The central problem is that if the dam breaks down, the people in Oldenborough will be
ﬂooded.
Many problems and decisions must be made to address this problem. Some of the key
problems and decisions are:
•
Should residents in the city be evacuated?
•
Are there some parts of the city where it will not be necessary to evacuate people?
•
If the decision is to evacuate is taken, when should the evacuation take place?
•
Who will notify the citizens of the evacuation, and how will this be accomplished?
•
What will be required in the way of additional resources will to accomplish the evacuation
and provide any shelter required?
•
What is the most effective way to keep the dam from collapsing, and what resources will
be needed to accomplish that?
•
What action should be taken if the dam starts to collapse and water ﬂoods through?
•
How might early decisions affect later decisions?
CHAPTER 6
Seven letters problem
SUPERMARKET
Parcel delivery problem
Reducing the number of sorters, introducing a clear system of coding to identify relevant
delivery vans, and training sorters on how to implement such a system.
CHAPTER 8
Reducing wear and tear
In order to reduce the amount of resurfacing work on motorways the white lines should be
repositioned every few years. Resurfacing costs, it was estimated, could be reduced substantially
as a result since repair work would need to be done at considerably longer intervals.
NOTES ON PROBLEMS
333

CHAPTER 9
Points about ‘Challenging assumptions: what can we take for
granted?’
Total expense would go up after outsourcing components because ﬁxed costs had not been
reduced, but one still had to pay suppliers for components. The assumptions must also include
either that the ﬁxed cost can be reduced (e.g. plant, machinery, etc. sold off, etc.) or that ﬁxed
costs are relatively small in relationship to the savings that can be achieved by outsourcing.
Outsourcing only some of the components means that the remaining components still produced
by the company must now shoulder an increased overhead of ﬁxed costs, thereby making the
possibility of outsourcing these components a more attractive proposition.
Over-utilization of assets, such as assembly plant, leads to the creation of extra inventory
and not extra sales. Inventory absorbs overheads and is shown as an asset in the balance sheet
and can therefore give a misleading picture of the company’s ﬁnancial position.
The CEO resigned because he must have known the true state the company was in.
Subsequently, many thousands of workers were laid off and the company nearly went out of
business. The build-up of inventory, given a signiﬁcant increase in demand for the ﬁrm’s
products, might have resulted in a favourable situation for the company as its inventory would
have transformed into sales and generated cash ﬂow and proﬁt. Any other scenario was a recipe
for disaster.
ANSWERS TO IN-TEXT PUZZLES
Puzzle 9.1. answer:
Grand-mother + her 3 daughters + their 3 daughters(1 + 3 + 9 = 13).
Inventive clerk case in Chapter 9
What he did was draw the data on calibrated 100 gram paper and then cut out the graph and
weighed it.
APPENDIX 2
334

335
Abra, J. (1994) Collaboration in creative work: an initiative for investigation, Creativity Research
Journal, 8: 205–218.
Ackoff, R. L. and Vegara, E. (1988) Creativity in problem solving and planning. In R. L. Kuhn (ed.),
Handbook for Creative and Innovative Managers, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Adair, J. (1999) Decision Making and Problem Solving, London: CIPD Management Shapers.
Adams, J. L. (1974) Conceptual Blockbusting, New York: W. H. Freeman.
Akin, O. (2001) Variants in design cognition. In C. Eastman, M. McCraken and W. Newstetter (eds)
Knowing and Learning to Design: Cognition in Design Education, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Press, pp. 105–125.
Amabile, T. M. (1983) The Social Psychology of Creativity, New York: Springer.
Amabile, T. M. (1996) Creativity in Context, Boulder, CO: Westview.
Amabile, T. M. (1997) Motivating creativity in organizations: on doing what you love and loving
what you do, California Management Review, 40: 39–58.
Amabile, T. M. and Gryskiewicz, N. D. (1989) The creative environment scales: work environment
inventory, Creativity Research Journal, 2: 231–253.
Amabile, T. M., Shatzel, E. A., Moneta, G. B. and Kramer, S. J. (2004) Leader behaviors and the
work environment for creativity: perceived leader support, Leadership Quarterly, 15: 5–33.
Amabile, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J. and Herron, M. (1996) Assessing the work
environment for creativity, Academy of Management Journal, 39: 5.
Anderson, N., De Dreu, C. K. and Nijstad, B. A. (2004) The routinization of innovation research: 
a constructively critical review of the state-of-the-science, Journal of Organizational Behavior,
25: 147–173.
Argyle, M. (2001) The Psychology of Happiness, Routledge: New York.
Arnold, J. E. (1962) Education for innovation. In S. J. Parnes and H. F. Harding (eds), 
A Sourcebook for Creative Thinking, New York: Scribner.
Atkins, C. R., Dykes, P., Hagerty, J. and Hoye, J. (2002) How customer performance partnerships
can sharpen your competitive edge, The Journal for Quality and Participation, 25(3): 22.
Avan, J. (1997) Aha! 10 Ways to Free Your Creative Spirit and Find Your Great Ideas, London:
Random House.
Banks, B. and Winston, B. E. (2008) The importance of creativity and innovation in organizations,
weLEAD Online Magazine, available at: www.leadingtoday.org/Onmag/2008%20Archives/
November%2008/bb-november08.pdf (accessed 11 April 2013).
References

Barron, F. (1988) Putting creativity to work. In R. J. Sternberg (ed.), The Nature of Creativity,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Batey, M. (2012) The measurement of creativity: from deﬁnitional consensus to the introduction of
a new heuristic framework, Creativity Research Journal, 24(1): 55–65.
Beach, L. R. and Lipshitz, R. (1995) Why classical decision theory is an inappropriate standard for
evaluating and aiding most human decision-making. In G. A. Klein, J. Orasanu, R. Calderwood
and C. E. Zsambok (eds), Decision Making in Action: Models and Methods. New York: Ablex.
Beggs, W. B. (1989) Humour in advertising‚ Link, November/December, 2: 15.
Bennis, W. and Nanus, B. (1985) Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge, New York: Harper
& Row.
Berry, D. C., Banbury, S. and Henry, L. (1997) Transfer across form and modality in implicit and
explicit memory, The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50: 1–24.
Bessant, J. and Buckingham, J. (1989) Organizational learning for effective implementation of
computer-aided production management, Creativity and Innovation Year-book, 2, Manchester:
Manchester Business School.
Bessant, J., Caffyn, S. and Gallagher, M. (2001) An evolutionary model of continuous improvement
behaviour, Technovation 21: 67–77.
Birch, P. and Clegg, B. (1995) Business Creativity: A Guide for Managers, London: Kogan Page.
Blake, R. and Mouton, J. (1964) The Managerial Grid, Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing.
Blanchette, I. and Dunbar, K. (2000) How analogies are generated: the roles of structural and
superﬁcial similarity, Memory & Cognition, 28(1): 108–124.
Blevins, J. P. and Blevins, J. (2009) Introduction. In J. P. Blevins and J. Blevins (eds), Analogy in
Grammar: Form and Acquisition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bloch, A. (1990) Murphy’s Law Complete, London: Mandarin.
The Blog (2013) 3 examples of brands using Facebook to crowd source ideas, available at: http://
napkinlabs.com/3-examples-of-brands-using-facebook-to-crowdsource-ideas (accessed 1 April
2013).
Boden, M. (1990) The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, London: Abacus.
Boucher, L. and Dienes, Z. (2003) Two ways of learning associations, Cognitive Science, 27: 807–
842.
Bowden, E. M. (1985) Accessing relevant information during problem solving: time constraints 
on search in the problem space, Memory & Cognition, 13: 280–286.
Bransford, J. D. and Stein, B. S. (1993) The Ideal Problem Solver (2nd edition), New York: 
W. H. Freeman.
Briggs, K. and Myers, I. (1976) The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Brooks, J. D. (n.d.) Review of Operational Mechanisms for Innovative Management Course,
Pittsburgh, PA: Industrial Studies Program, US Steel Corporation.
Brown, M. (2011) Brain zooming, 7 ideas for using Twitter to be more creative, 23 June, available
at: http://brainzooming.com/7-ways-twitter-boosts-creative-ideas-beats-creative-blocks/8132/
(accessed 14 January 2013).
Brown, R. (2013) As demand for electric vehicles increases in the UK, the government needs to take
action on our ageing infrastructure, Verdict, 9 April, available at: www.verdictretail.com/if-
we-all-buy-electric-cars-then-the-lights-may-go-out/ (accessed 11 April 2013).
REFERENCES
336

Bryson, J. M., Ackermann, F., Eden, C. and Finn, C. B. (2004), Visible Thinking, Chichester: 
Wiley.
Bujake, J. E. (1969) Programmed innovation in new product development‚ Research Management,
12: 279–287.
Bullinger, H. J., Auernhammer, K. and Gomeringer, A. (2004) Managing innovation networks 
in the knowledge-driven economy, International Journal of Production Research, 42:
3337–3344.
Burnett, J. (1993) Promotion Management, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin, Ch. 7.
Buzan, T. (1991) Use Both Sides of Your Brain, New York: Dutton (Penguin Books).
Buzan, T. (1994) The Mind Map Book, New York: Dutton (Penguin Books).
Buzan, T. (2003) The Mind Map Book: Radiant Thinking, BBC Active.
Byman, J. (1999) Andrew Grove and the Intel Corporation, Greensboro, NC: Morgan Reynolds.
Byrne, C. L., Mumford, M. D., Barrett, J. D. and Vessey, W. B. (2009) Examining the leaders of
creative efforts: what do they do, and what do they think about?, Creativity and Innovation
Management, 18(4).
Cafolla, L. (2007) Championing change from the bottom up, China Staff, 13(7): 2.
Cardinal, L. B. and Hatﬁeld, D. E. (2000) Internal knowledge generation: the research laboratory
and innovative productivity in the pharmaceutical industry, Journal of Engineering Technology
Management, 17: 247–271.
Carr, A. (2010) The most important leadership quality for CEOs? Creativity, Fast Company, 
18 May. Available at: www.fastcompany.com/1648943/most-important-leadership-quality-
ceos-creativity (accessed 11 April 2013).
Carson, J. and Rickards, T. (1979) Industrial New Product Development, Farnborough: Gower.
Castells, M. (2000) The Rise of the Network Society. The Information Age: Economy, Society and
Culture, Vol. 1 (2nd edn), Cambridge, MA: Oxford.
Clegg, B. and Birch, P. (2002) Crash Course in Creativity, London: Kogan Page.
Coch, L. and French, J. R. P. (1948) Overcoming resistance to change‚ Human Relations, 
pp. 512–532.
Christensen, C. M. (1997) The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms
to Fail, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Christensen, C. M., Cook, S. and Hall, T. (2005) Marketing malpractice, Harvard Business Review,
83(12): 74–83.
Colley, R. H. (1961) Deﬁning Advertising Goals for Measuring Advertising Effectiveness, New York:
Association for National Advertising.
Couger, J. D. (1995) Creative Problem Solving and Opportunity Finding (Decision Making and
Operations Management), London: Thomson Learning.
Coyle, R. G. and McGlone, G. R. (1995) Projection scenarios for south-east Asia and the southwest
Paciﬁc, Futures, 27(1): 65–79.
Coyle, R. G. and Yong, Y. C. (1996) A scenario projection for the South China Sea, Futures 28(3):
269–283.
Coyle, R. G., Crawshay, R. and Sutton, L. (1994) Futures assessments by ﬁeld anomaly relaxation,
Futures, 26(1): 25–43.
Cropley, A. J. (1997) Fostering creativity in the classroom. In M. A. Runco (ed.), The Creativity
Research Handbook, Vol. 1. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, pp. 83–114.
REFERENCES
337

Cropley, A. J. and Urban, K. K. (2000) Programs and strategies for nurturing creativity. In K. A.
Heller, F. J. Monks, R. J. Sternberg and R. F. Subotnik (eds) International Handbook of
Research and Development of Giftedness and Talent, Oxford: Pergamon.
Cyert, R. N. and March, J. G. (1963) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Dacey, J. S. (1989) Fundamentals of Creative Thinking, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Dahl, D. W. and Moreau, P. (2002) The inﬂuence and value of analogical thinking during new
product ideation, Journal of Marketing Research, 34 (1): 47–60.
Damanpour, F. (1996) Organizational complexity and innovation: developing and testing multiple
contingency models, Management Science, 42: 693–722.
Daugherty, J. and Mentzer, N. (2008) Analogical reasoning in the engineering design process and
technology education applications, Journal of Technology Education, 19(2), Spring, 7–21.
Davidson, J. E. (1995) The suddenness of insight. In R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson (eds), The
Nature of Insight, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 125–156.
Davidson, J. E. (2003) Insights about insightful problem solving. In J. E. Davidson and R. J.
Sternberg (eds), The Psychology of Problem Solving, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
de Bono, E. ([1970] 1971) Lateral Thinking for Management, New York: McGraw-Hill (republished
in Pelican).
de Bono, E. (1985) Six Thinking Hats, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
de Bono, E. (2006) Creativity and management: a business not using creativity is under-using its
assets, Thinking Managers, available at: www.thinkingmanagers.com/management/creativity-
management.php (accessed 9 April 2013).
de Bono, E. (2008) Creativity Workout: 62 Exercises to Unlock Your Most Creative Ideas, Berkeley,
CA: Ulysses Press.
de Brabandere, L. (2005) The Forgotten Half of Change: Achieiving Greater Creativity through
Changes in Perception, Chicago, IL: Dearborn.
DeGraff, J. and Lawrence, K. A. (2002) Creativity at Work, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
de Kluyver, C. A. and McNally, G. M. (1980) Corporate planning using simulation‚ Interface, June:
1–8.
Dennis, A. R. and Valacich, J. S. (1994) Group, sub-group, and nominal group idea generation: new
rules for a new media?‚ Journal of Management, 4: 723–736.
Dingli, S. (2009) Thinking outside the box: Edward de Bono’s lateral thinking. In Tudor Rickards,
Mark A. Runco and Susan Moger (eds), The Routledge Companion to Creativity, Abingdon,
Oxon: Routledge, pp. 338–350.
Do, E. Y. and Gross, M. D. (1995) Drawing, Analogies: Finding Visual References by Sketching,
Proceedings of Association of Computer Aided Design in Architecture (ACADIA), Seattle, WA,
pp. 35–52.
Dombrovski, T. W. (2000) Creative Problem Solving: The Door to Individual Success and Change,
Lincoln, NE: iUniverse.
Duggan, S. J. and Harris, D. (2001) Modelling naturalistic decision making using an artiﬁcial neural
network: pilot’s responses to a disruptive passenger incident, Human Factors and Aerospace
Safety, 1(2): 145–166.
Duncker, K. (1945) On problem solving (trans. L. S. Lees), Psychological Monographs, 58(5)
(whole no. 270).
REFERENCES
338

Dyson R. G., Bryant J., Morecroft, J. and O‚ Brien F. (2007) The strategy development process. In
F. O’Brien and R. G. Dyson (eds), Supporting Strategy: Frameworks, Methods and Models,
West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons.
Eden, C., Jones, S. and Sims, D. (1983) Messing About in Problems, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Edwards, B. (1999) The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain, London: HarperCollins.
Ekvall, G. (1988) Change centred leaders: empirical evidence of a third dimension of leadership,
Creativity and Innovation Year-book, 1: 36–46.
Eppler, M.J., Platts, K. and Kazancioglu, E. (2006) Visual Strategizing: The Systematic Use of
Visualization in the Strategy Process, Universita della Svizzera italiana, Faculty of
Communication Sciences, Institute for Corporate Communication, Paper #7/2006, December,
available at: doc.rero.ch/record/6186/ﬁles/wpca0607.pdf (accessed 18 April 2013).
Estes, W. K. (1991) Cognitive architectures from the standpoint of an experimental psychologist,
Annual Review of Psychology, 42(1): 28.
Estes, Z. and Ward, J. B. (2002) The emergence of novel attributes in concept modiﬁcation,
Creativity Research Journal, 14: 149–156.
European Business Forum (2002) Does strategy really matter anymore? EBF, 8 (Winter 2001/2002).
Article provided by the European Business Forum (EBF): available at: www.mce.be/news/
articles/a67.htm (accessed 2 February 2002).
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B. and Smith, S. M. (1992) Creative Cognition: Theory, Research and
Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fisher, C. and Amabile, T. (2008) Creativity, improvisation and organisations. In T. Rickards, 
M. A. Runco and S. Moger (eds), The Routledge Companion to Creativity, Abingdon, Oxford:
Taylor & Francis.
Foil, C. M. and Huff, A. S. (1992) Maps for managers: Where are we? Where do we go from here?,
Journal of Management Studies, 29(3): 267–285.
Forgas, J. P. (2000) Feeling and Thinking: The Role of Affect in Social Cognition. Paris: Cambridge
University Press.
Forrester, J. (1961) Industrial Dynamics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forsth, L. and Nordvik, B. (1995) Building a vision‚ a practical guide‚ Creativity and Innovation
Management, 4(4): 251–257.
Gasper, K. (2004) Permission to seek freely? The effect of happy and sad moods on generating old
and new ideas, Creativity Research Journal, 16: 215–229.
Gelb, M. (1988) Present Yourself!, Torrance, CA: Jalmar Press.
Gentner, D. and Colhoun, J. (2010) Analogical processes in human thinking and learning. In 
B. Glatzeder, V. Goel and A. von Müller (eds), On Thinking, Vol. 2: Towards a Theory of
Thinking. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 35–48 (‘in print’ version PDF printed 20 November
2008, available at http://groups.psych.northwestern.edu/gentner/papers/Gentner-Calhoun_in_
press.pdf (accessed 22 April 2013).
Geschka, H. (1979) Methods and Organization of Idea Generation‚ Paper presented at the Creativity
Development Week II, Center for Creative Leadership, Greensboro, NC, September.
Geschka, H. and Reibnitz, U. V. (1983) Vademecum der Ideenﬁndung: Eine Anleitung zum Arbeiten
mit Me. Frankfurt am Main: Battelle-Institut.
Geschka, H., Schaude, G. R. and Schlicksupp, H. (1973) Modern techniques for solving problems‚
Chemical Engineering, August: 91–97.
REFERENCES
339

Gilliam, T. K. (1993) Managing the power of creativity‚ Bank Marketing, 25(12): 14‚ 19.
Gogatz, A. and Mondejar, R. (2005) Business Creativity: Breaking the Invisible Barriers, Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Golovin, L. (1979) Product blending: a simulation case study in double time‚ Interfaces, 9(5).
Gordon, W. J. (1961) Synectics, New York: Harper & Row.
Gordon, W. J. (1969) Synectics: The Development of Creative Capacity, New York: Harper & 
Row.
Greve, A. (2008) Social networks and creativity: combining expertise in complex innovations. In
Rickards, T., Runco, M. A. and Moger, S. (eds), The Routledge Companion to Creativity,
Abingdon, Oxford: Taylor & Francis.
Grossman, S. R. (1984) Releasing problem solving energies, Training and Development Journal, 38:
94–98.
Gruszka, A. and Necka, E. (2002) Priming and acceptance of close and remote associations by
creative and less creative people, Creativity Research Journal, 14: 174‚ 192.
Guilford, J. P. (1967) The Nature of Human Intelligence, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Guilford, J. P. (1975) Creativity: a quarter century of progress. In I. A. Taylor and J. W. Getzels
(eds), Perspectives in Creativity, Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Haefele, J. W. (1962) Creativity and Innovation, New York: Reinhold.
Halpern, D. (1989) Thought and Knowledge: An Introduction to Critical Thinking, Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hamilton, H. R. (1974) Screening business development opportunities‚ Business Horizons, August:
13–34.
Hammond, K. J. (1990) Case-based planning: a framework for planning from experience, Cognitive
Science, 14: 385–443.
Hargadon, A. (2002) Brokering knowledge: linking learning and innovation, Research in Organ -
izational Behaviour, 24: 41–85.
Hargadon, A. (2003) How breakthroughs happen: the surprising truth about how companies innovate,
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Harris, R. A. (2002) Creative Problem Solving: A Step by Step Approach, Los Angeles, CA: Pyrczak
Publishing.
Hart, S., Borush, M., Enk, G. and Hornick, W. (1985) Managing complexity through consensus
mapping: technology for the managing of group decisions‚ Academy of Management Review,
10(3): 587‚ 600.
Harvard Business School Essentials (2003) Managing Creativity and Innovation, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Harvey, Jerry B. (1996) The Abilene Paradox and Other Meditations on Management, San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Harris, R. (2002) Virtual salt, 5 January, available at: www.virtualsalt.com/crebook4.htm (accessed
29 March 2013).
Hayes, J. (2002) The Theory and Practice of Change Management, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hayes, J. R. (1989) The Complete Problem Solver (2nd edn), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Henle, M. (1962) The birth and death of ideas. In H. E. Gruber, G. Terrell and M. Wertheimer
(eds), Contemporary Approaches to Creative Thinking, a symposium at the University of
Colorado.
REFERENCES
340

Hennessey, B. A. (2003) The social psychology of creativity, Scandinavian Journal of Educational
Psychology, 47: 253–271.
Hennessey, B. A. and Amabile, T. M. (1988) The conditions of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (ed.),
The Nature of Creativity, New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 11–38.
Henry, J. (1991) The Creative Manager, London: Sage.
Henry, J. (2002) Creativity and Perception in Management, London: Sage.
Henry, J. (2006) Creative Management and Development, London: Sage.
Herrmann, N. (1990) The Creative Brain, Lake Lure, NC: Brain Books.
Hershey, D. A., Walsh, D. A., Read, S. J. and Chulef, A. S. (1990) The effects of expertise on
ﬁnancial problem solving: evidence for goal directed problem solving scripts, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 46: 77‚ 101.
Hicks, M. J. (1991) Problem Solving in Business and Management, London: Chapman & Hall.
Hicks, M. J. (2004) Problem Solving and Decision Making (2nd edn), London: Thomson.
Higgins, J. M. (1994) The Management Challenge (2nd edn), New York: Macmillan.
Higgins, J. M. (2005) (revised edn) 101 Creative Problem-Solving Techniques, Winter Park, FL:
New Management Publishing.
Howell, J. M. and Boies, K. (2004) Champions of technological innovation: the inﬂuence of contextual
knowledge, role orientation, idea generation, and idea promotion on champion emergence,
Leadership Quarterly, 15: 130–149.
Holyoak, K. J. and Thagard, P. (1995) Mental leaps: Analogy. In E. Schmidt Verlag, Creative
Thought, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R. and Melz, E. R. (1994) Component processes in analogical transfer:
mapping, pattern completion and adaptation. In K. J. and J. A. Barnden (eds) Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory, Vol. 2: Analogical connections, Norwood, NJ:
Ablex, pp. 113–180.
Houtz, J., Tetenbaum, T. and Phillips, R. H. (1981) Affective correlates in the problem solving
process, Journal of Psychology, 109: 262–269.
Houtz, J., LeBlanc, E. and Butera, T. (1994) Personality type, creativity, and classroom teaching
style, Journal of Classroom Interaction, 29: 19–24.
Houtz, J., Selby, E., Esquivel, G. E., Okoye, R. A., Peters, K. and Trefﬁnger, D. J. (2003) Creativity
style and personality type, Creativity Research Journal, 15: 321–330.
Howe, J. (2006) The rise of crowdsourcing, Wired, 14(6), June, available at: www.wired.com/
wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html (accessed 26 March 2013).
Humphrey, G. (1948) Directed Thinking, New York: Dodd Mead.
Hunter, S. T., Bedell-Avers, K. E., Hunsicker, C. M. and Mumford, M. D. (2008) Applying multiple
knowledge structures in creative thought: effects on idea generation and problem-solving‚
Creativity Research Journal, 20(2): 137–154.
Isaksen, S. G., Dorval, K. B. and Trefﬁnger, D. J. (1994) Creative Approaches to Problem Solving,
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
Isenberg, D. J. (1984) Field Research on Managerial Thinking: Seven Findings, Seven Puzzles‚
Working Paper 9, Division of Research, Harvard Business School, August.
Jackson, M. (1985) Creative Modelling with Lotus 1–2-3, Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Jacob, N. (1998) Creativity in Organizations, New Delhi: Wheeler Publishing.
Janis, I. (1982) Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decision. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifﬂin.
REFERENCES
341

Janis, I. L. and Feshback, S. (1953) Effects of fear arousing communications‚ Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 48(1): 78–92.
Jensen, J. V. (1978) A heuristic for the evaluation of the nature and extent of a problem‚ Journal
of Creative Behavior, 12: 268–280.
Jones, L. J. (1987) The Development and Testing of a Psychological Instrument to Measure Barriers
to Effective Problem Solving‚ unpublished MB.Sc. dissertation, Manchester Business School.
Kahnemann, D. (2012) Thinking Fast and Slow, London: Penguin.
Kanter, R. M. (1983) The Change Masters: Corporate Entrepreneurs at Work, London: International
Thomson Business Press.
Kao, J. (1996) Jamming: The Art and Discipline of Business Creativity, London: HarperCollins.
Kaufmann, G. and Vosburg, S. K. (1997) Paradoxical‚ mood effects on creative problem solving,
Cognition and Emotion, 11: 151–170.
Kedrov, B. M. (1966) On the question of the psychology of scientiﬁc creativity, Soviet Psychology
5(2): 16–37.
Kelley, T. (2001) The Art of Innovation, London: Proﬁle Books.
Kelly, G. A. (1955) The Psychology of Personal Constructs, New York: Norton.
Kepner, C. H. and Tregoe, B. B. (1976) The Rational Manager, Princeton, NJ: Kepner-Tregoe.
Kirton, M. (1976) Adaptors and innovators: a description and measure, Journal of Applied
Psychology, 61(5): 622–629.
Klein, G. A. (1989) Recognition-primed decisions. In W. B. Rouse (ed.), Advances in Man-Machine
System Research. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Klein, G. A. (1993) A recognition-primed decision (RPD) model of rapid decision making. In 
G. Klein, J. Orasanu, R. Calderwood and C. E. Zsambok (eds), Decision Making in Action:
Models and Methods. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Klein, G. A. (1995) A recognition-primed decision (RPD) model of rapid decision making. In 
G. Klein, J. Orasanu, R. Calderwood and C. E. Zsambok (eds), Decision Making in Action:
Models and Methods. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Klein, G. A. (1997) The current status of the naturalistic decision-making framework. In R. Flin, 
E. Salas, M. Strub and L. Martin (eds), Decision Making Under Stress: Emerging Themes and
Applications. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Koberg, D. and Bagnall J. (2002) (4th edn) The Universal Traveller: A Soft Systems Guide to
Creativity, Problem Solving and the Process of Reaching Goals. Menlo Park, CA: Crisp.
Koestler, A. (1964) The Act of Creation, London: Hutchinson.
Kolb, D. A. (1976) The Learning Style Inventory: Technical Manual, Boston, MA: McBer.
Kolb, D. A. (1981) Learning styles and disciplinary differences. In A. W. Chickering (ed.), The
Modern American College. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kolodner, J. L. (1997) Educational implications of analogy: a view from case-based reasoning,
American Psychologist, 52: 57–66.
Kotter, J. (1997) Rethinking leadership. In R. Gibson (ed.), Rethinking the Future, London: Nicholas
Brealey.
Kroeger, O. and Thueson, J. (1988) Type Talk, New York: Dell.
Kuhn, Thomas, S. (1970) (2nd edn, enlarged) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions), Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Langer, S. K. (1942) Philosophy in a New Key, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
REFERENCES
342

Large, M. (1992) Eco-mapping: how to avoid boiled frogs‚ Management Education and Development,
23(4): 317–325.
Larkin, J. H. and Simon, H. A. (1987) Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words.
In J. Glasgow, H. Narayahan and B. Chandrasekaram (eds) (1995), Diagrammatic Reasoning:
Cognitive and Computational Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Reprinted from
Cognitive Science, 11: 65–100.
Larsen, E. (1961) A History of Invention, London: Phoenix House.
Larsen, E. (1962) Freedom and its obstacles in Ancient Greece, Classical Philology, LVII, October,
234.
Lavidge, R. J. and Steiner, G. A. (1961) A model for predictive measurements of advertising
effectiveness‚ Journal of Marketing, October: 58–62.
Lawrence, G. (1982) People Types and Tiger Stripes: A Practical Guide to Learning Styles
(2nd edn), Gainesville, FL: Centre for Applications of Psychological Type.
Lawrence, P. R. and Greiner, L. R. (1970) How to deal with resistance to change. In G. W. Dalton,
P. R. Lawrence and L. R. Greiner (eds), Organizational Change and Development, Homewood,
IL: Irwin.
Le Boeuf, M. (1994) Creative Thinking, London: Piatkus.
LeBoutillier, N. and Marks, D. F. (2003) Mental imagery and creativity: a meta-analytic review
study, British Journal of Psychology, 94: 29–45.
Lehere, J. (2012) Imagine How Creativity Works, Edinburgh: Canongate Books.
Leonard, D. and Swap, W. (1999) When Sparks Fly: Igniting Creativity, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Leong, P. (2001) I Can Cre8!, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Leybourne, S. and Sadler-Smith, E. (2006) The role of intuition and improvisation in project
management, International Journal of Project Management, 24(6): 483–492.
Limont W. (n.d.) Imagination in science and science education, available at: www.chaperone.
sote.hu/limont.htm (accessed 29 March 2013).
Locke, J. ([1690] 1964) An essay concerning human understanding‚ in J. V. Canﬁeld and F. H.
Donnell (eds) Readings in the Theory of Knowledge, New York: Appleton Century-Crofts.
Lubart, T. I. (1994) Creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (ed.) Thinking and Problem Solving, San Diego,
CA: Academic, pp. 290–332.
Luchins, A. A. (1942) Mechanisation problem solving: the effect of Einstellung‚ Psychological
Monographs, 54.
Lynde, E. (2011) Sharing with small groups, 25 April, available at: http://blog.facebook.com/
blog.php?post_start=10 (accessed 1 April 2013).
McClelland, J. L. (1981) Retrieving General and Speciﬁc Information from Stored Knowledge 
of Speciﬁcs‚ proceedings of the Third Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 
pp. 170–172.
McClelland, J. L. and Rumelhart, D. E. (1986) A distributed model of human learning and memory.
In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland and the PDP Research Group (eds), Parallel Distributed
Processing, Volume 2: Psychological and Biological Models, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
McCoy, C. (2002) Why Didn’t I Think of That?, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
REFERENCES
343

McFadzean, E. S. (1998a) Enhancing creative thinking within organisations‚ Management Decision,
36(5): 309–315.
McFadzean, E. S. (1998b) The creativity continuum: towards a classiﬁcation of creative problem
solving techniques, Creativity and Innovation Management, 7(3): 131–139.
McFadzean, E. S. (1998c) The Creativity Tool Box: A Practical Guide for Facilitating Creative
Problem Solving Sessions, Milton Keynes: TeamTalk Consulting.
McFadzean, E. S., Somersall, L. and Coker, A. (1998d) Creative problem solving using unrelated
stimuli, Journal of General Management, 24(2): 36–50.
McFadzean, E. S., Somersall, L. and Coker, A. (1999) A framework for facilitating group processes‚
Strategic Change, 8(7): 421–431.
Machiavelli, N. (1993) Concerning the way to govern cities or principalities which lived under their
own laws before they were annexed‚ The Prince (in translation), Ware, Herts: Wordsworth
Reference.
Majaro, S. (1991) The Creative Marketeer, London: Butterworth Heinemann.
Majaro, S. (1992) Managing Ideas for Proﬁt, Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
Mangieri, J. N. and Block, C. C. (2004) Power Thinking, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
March, J. G. (1988) Decisions and Organisations, Oxford: Blackwell.
Martin, A., McCauley, C., Wilburn, P., Calarco, A. and Ernst, C. (2005) The Changing Nature of
Leadership, a CCL Research Report, Brussels, Belgium: The Center for Creative Leadership.
Maslow, A. H. (1954) Motivation and Personality, New York: Harper & Row.
Mathisen, G. E. and Einarsen, S. (2004) A review of instruments assessing creative and innovative
environments within organizations, Creativity Research Journal, 16: 119–140.
Mayer, R. E. (1995) The search for insight: grappling with gestalt psychology’s unanswered questions.
In R. J. Sternberg and J. E. Davidson (eds), The Nature of Insight, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, pp. 3–32.
Meisinger, S. (2007) Creativity and innovation: key drivers for success, HR Magazine: on human
resource management, 52(5): 10.
Mendeleev, D. (1869) On the relationship of the properties of the elements to their atomic weights,
Zhurnal Russkoe Fiziko-Khimicheskoe Obshchestvo, 1: 60–77; abstracted in Zeitschrift für
Chemie, 12: 405–406.
Michalko, M. (1998) Cracking Creativity: The Secrets of Creative Genius, Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed
Press.
Minsky, M. (1974) A Framework for Representing Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: MIT Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Memo No. 306.
Mintzberg, H. (1976) Planning on the left side and managing on the right, Harvard Business Review,
July‚ August.
Mintzberg, H. (1987) Five p’s for strategy‚ California Management Review, 30: 11–24.
Mintzberg H., Alstrand B. and Lampel J. (1998) Strategy Safari‚ New York: Free Press.
Moon, Y. (2005) Break free from the product life cycle, Harvard Business Review, 83(5): 86–94.
Moore, L. B. (1962) Creative action‚ the evaluation, development, and use of ideas. In S. J. Parnes
and H. F. Harding (eds), A Sourcebook for Creative Thinking, New York: Scribner.
Moorman, C. and Miner, A. S. (1998) The convergence of planning and execution: improvisation
in new product development, Journal of Marketing, 62(3): 1–20.
Morecroft J. D. (1992) Strategy support models‚ Strategic Management Journal, 5(3): 215–229.
Morgan, G. (1986) Images of Organizations, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
REFERENCES
344

Morgan, G. (1989) Riding the Waves of Change: Developing Managerial Competencies for a
Turbulent World, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Moss S. A. (2002) The impact of environmental clues in problem solving and incubation: the
moderating effect of ability‚ Creativity Research Journal, 14(2): 207–211.
Mukerjea, D. (1997a) Braindancing, Singapore: Oxford University Press.
Mukerjea, D. (1997b) Brainﬁnity, Singapore: Oxford University Press.
Mukerjea, D. (1997c) Surﬁng the Intellect, Singapore: The Brainware Press.
Mumford, M. D. (2003) Taking stock in taking stock, Creativity Research Journal, 15: 147–151.
Myers, D. G. (2002) The Pursuit of Happiness: Discovering the Pathway to Fulﬁllment, Well-being,
and Enduring Personal Joy, New York: HarperCollins.
Myers, I. and Myers, P. (1980) Gifts Differing, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Myers, I. and McCaulley, M. (1985) Manual: A Guide to the Development and Use of the Myers-
Briggs Type Indicator, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Nelson, R. and Winter, S. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Nemkova E., Souchon A. L. and Hughes, P. (2012) Export decision-making orientation: an
exploratory study, International Marketing Review 29(4): 349–337.
Newell, A. and Simon, H. A. (1972) Human Problem Solving, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C. and Simon, H. A. (1962) The processes of creative thinking. In H. E. Gruber,
Terrell, G. and Wertheimer, M. (eds), Contemporary Approaches to Creative Thinking, New
York: Atherton Press.
Nolan, V. (2003) Whatever happened to synectics?, Creativity and Innovation Management, 12(1):
24–27.
O’Dell, D. (2000) Creative Problem Solving, Cirencester: Management Books.
Oech, R. von (1990) A Whack on the Side of the Head, London: Thorsons.
Oldman, G. R. and Cummings, A. (1996) Employee creativity: personal and contextual factors at
work‚ Academy of Management Journal, 39 (June).
Olson, R. W. (1980) The Art of Creative Thinking, New York: Barnes & Noble.
Orasanu, J. and Connolly, T. (1995) The reinvention of decision-making. In G. A. Klein, J. Orasanu,
R. Calderwood and C. E. Zsambok (eds), Decision Making in Action: Models and Methods,
New York: Ablex.
Osborn, A. (1957) Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures of Creative Thinking, New York:
Scribner.
Palus, C. J. and Horth, D. M. (2002) The Leader’s Edge: Six Creative Competencies for 
Navigating Complex Challenges, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass and The Center for Creative
Leadership.
Parker, M. (1990) Creating Shared Vision, Dialog International.
Parkhurst, H. B. (1999) Confusion, lack of consensus, and the deﬁnition of creativity as a construct,
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 33: 1–21.
Parnes, S. J. (1963) The deferment of judgement principle: a clariﬁcation of the literature‚
Psychological Reports, 12: 521–522.
Parnes, S. J. (1981) The Magic of Your Mind, Buffalo, NY: The Creative Education Foundation/
Bearly.
REFERENCES
345

Parnes, S. J. (1992) Source Book for Creative Problem Solving, Buffalo, NY: Creative Foundation
Press.
Parnes, S. J., Noller, R. and Biondi, A. (1977) Guide to Creative Action, New York: Scribner.
Poincaré, J. H. (1952) Science and Methods (trans. F. Maitland), New York: Dover Publications.
Polya, G. (1957) How to Solve It, Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor.
Popova, M. (2012) John Cleese on the 5 factors to make your life more creative, available at: www.
brainpickings.org/index.php/2012/04/12/john-cleese-on-creativity-1991 (accessed 14 April
2013).
Porter, M. and Ketels, C. H. M. (2003) UK Competitiveness: Moving to the Next Stage, Department
of Trade and Industry Economics, Paper 3, May, London: DTI and ESRC.
Pounds, W. F. (1969) The process of problem ﬁnding‚ Industrial Management Review (Fall), 1–19.
Prather, C. W. and Gundry, L. (1996) Blueprints for Innovation, New York: American Management
Association.
Prince, G. (1970) The Practice of Creativity: A Manual for Dynamic Group Problem Solving, 
New York: Collier Books.
Pruitt J. S., Cannon-Bowers, J. A. and Salas, E. (1997) In search of naturalistic decisions. In 
R. Flin, E. Salas, M. Strub and L. Martin (eds), Decision Making Under Stress: Emerging
Themes and Applications, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.
Pryce, V. (2005) Creativity, Design and Business Performance, DTI Economics, Paper No. 15,
November, p. iv. London: DTI.
Quillian, M. R. (1968) Semantic memory. In Minsky, M. (ed.), Semantic Information Processing,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Randall, T., Terwiesch, C. and Ulrich, K. T. (2005) Principles for user design of customised products,
California Management Review, 47(4): 68–85.
Rhodes, M. (1961) An analysis of creativity, Phi Delta Kappan: 305–310.
Rhyne, R. (1981) Whole-pattern futures projection, using ﬁeld anomaly relaxation, Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 19: 331–360.
Rhyne, R. (1995a) Field anomaly relaxation: the arts of usage, Futures 27(6): 657–674.
Rhyne, R. (1995b) Evaluating Alternative Indonesian Sea-Sovereignty Systems: An Exercise in Soft
Technology Transfer, Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences.
Rich, J. D. and Weisberg, R. W. (2004) Creating all in the family: a case study in creative thinking,
Creativity Research Journal, 16: 247–259.
Richards, M. D. (1986) Setting Strategic Goals and Objectives, 2nd edn, St. Paul, MN: West.
Ritchey, T. (1991) Analysis and synthesis: on scientiﬁc method based on a study by Bernhard
Riemann, Systems Research, 8(4): 21–41 (available for download as reprint at: www.swemorph.
com/downloads.html).
Ritchey, T. (1997) Scenario Development and Risk Management Using Morphological Field Analysis,
Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Information Systems, Vol. 3, Cork: Cork
Publishing Company, pp. 1053–1059.
Ritchey, T. (1998) Fritz Zwicky, Morphologie and Policy Analysis‚ presented at the 16th Euro
Conference on Operational Analysis, Brussels.
Ritchey, T. (2002) Modeling Complex Socio-Technical Systems using Morphological Analysis,
adapted from an address to the Swedish Parliamentary IT Commission, Stockholm, December
(available for download at: www.swemorph.com/downloads.html).
REFERENCES
346

Ritchey, T. (2003a) Nuclear Facilities and Sabotage: Using Morphological Analysis as a Scenario
and Strategy Development Laboratory, adapted from a study for the Swedish Nuclear Power
Inspectorate and presented to the 44th Annual Meeting of the Institute of Nuclear Materials
Management, Phoenix, Arizona, July (available for download at: www.swemorph.com/
downloads.html).
Ritchey, T. (2003b) MA/Casper‚ Advanced Computer Support for Morphological Analysis (available
for download at: www.swemorph.com/macasper.html).
Ritchey, T. (2004) Strategic Decision Support using Computerised Morphological Analysis, pre -
sented at the 9th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium,
Copenhagen, September 2004 (available for download at: www.swemorph.com/downloads.html).
Ritchey, T. (2005a) Wicked Problems: Structuring Social Messes with Morphological Analysis,
adapted from a lecture given at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, 2004 (available
for download at: www.swemorph.com/downloads.html).
Ritchey, T. (2005b) Futures Studies using Morphological Analysis, adapted from an article for the
UN University Millennium Project: Futures Research Methodology Series (available for
download at: www.swemorph.com/downloads.html).
Ritchey, T. (2006a) Problem structuring using computer-aided morphological analysis, Journal of
the Operational Research Society. Special issue on Problem Structuring Methods, 57: 792–
801 (available for download in PDF for JORS subscribers at: www.palgravejournals.com/
jors/journal/v57/n7/abs/2602177a.html).
Ritchey, T. (2006b) Modeling Multi-Hazard Disaster Reduction Strategies with Computer-Aided
Morphological Analysis. Reprint from the Proceedings of the 3rd International ISCRAM
Conference, Newark, NJ, May.
Richey, T. (2009) General Morphological Analysis: A General Method for Non-quantiﬁed Modelling,
adapted from the paper Fritz Zwicky, Morphologie and Policy Analysis, presented at the 16th
EURO Conference on Operational Analysis, Brussels, 1998 (available for downloaded at:
www.swemorph.com).
Rickards, T. (1985) Stimulating Innovation: A Systems Approach, London: Frances Pinter.
Rickards, T. (1988) Creativity and innovation: a transatlantic perspective, Creativity and Innovation
Year-book, Manchester: Manchester Business School.
Rickards, T. (1990) Creativity and Problem Solving at Work, Farnborough: Gower.
Rickards, T. (1999) Creativity and the Management of Change, Oxford: Blackwell.
Rickards, T., Chen, M. and Moger, S. (2001) Development of a self-report instrument for exploring
team factor, leadership and performance relationships, British Journal of Management, 12:
243–251.
Rogers, B. (1993) Giving creativity a shot in the arm‚ Involvement and Participation, Summer: 
6–10.
Rogers, B. (1996) Creating Product Strategies, London: International Thompson.
Rogers, C. (1954) Towards a theory of creativity, A Review of General Semantics, 11: 249–260;
reprinted in P. E. Vernon (ed.) (1995) Creativity, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Rogers, E. (1962) Diffusion of Innovations, New York: Free Press.
Rokeach, M. (1979) Understanding Human Values: Individual and Societal, New York: Free Press.
Ross, E. (2006) A Model of Inventive Ideation, Victor E. Ross Institute for Technological Innovation,
Faculty of EBIT, University of Pretoria, Hatﬁeld 0002, South Africa.
REFERENCES
347

Rumelhart, D. E. and Norman, D. A. (1983) Representation in Memory, CHIP Technical Report
No. 116, San Diego, CA: Center for Human Information Processing, University of California.
Rundh, B. (2007) International marketing behaviour amongst exporting ﬁrms, European Journal of
Marketing, 4(1/2): 181–198.
Russ, S. W. (1999) Affect, Creative Experiences and Psychological Adjustment, Ann Arbor, MI:
Bruner Mazel.
Rustico, E. (2007) Mindmapping Applied to Problem Solving, Turku University Computer Science
CONNET: Communication Networks and Human Technology, 15 February.
Saaty, T. L. (1980) The Analytic Hierarchy Process, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sakamoto, Y. and Love, B. C. (2004) Schematic inﬂuences on category learning and recognition
memory, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 133: 534–553.
Saxberg, B. O. (1993) Vision management: translating strategy into action‚ Personnel Psychology,
46(1): 180–183.
Schank, R. and Abelson, R. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Enquiry Into
Human Knowledge Structure, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schein, E. (1984) Coming to a new awareness of organisational culture, Sloan Management Review,
Winter, 3–16.
Schwarz, N. (2000) Emotion, cognition and decision making, Cognition and Emotion, 14: 433–440.
Schwert, P. M. (2007) Using sentence and picture clues to solve verbal insight problems, Creativity
Research Journal, 19(2/3): 293–306.
Scott, S. G. and Bruce, R. A. (1994) Determinants of innovative behavior: a path model of individual
innovation in the workplace, Academy of Management Journal, 37(5): 80‚ 607.
Scott, G. M., Lonergan, D. C. and Mumford, M. D. (2005) Contractual combination: alternative
knowledge structures, alternative heuristics, Creativity Research Journal, 17: 21–36.
Segal, E. (2004) Incubation in insight problem solving incubation‚ Creativity Research Journal,
16(1): 141–148.
Seifert, L. (1997) Activating representations in permanent memory: different beneﬁts for 
pictures and words, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
23: 1106–1121.
Shapiro, P. J., Weisberg, R. W. and Alloy, L. B. (2000) Creativity and Bipolarity: Affective Patterns
Predict Trait Creativity, Paper presented at the Convention of the American Psychological
Society, Miami, June.
Shahgholian, K. and Hajihosseini, H. (2009) A Dynamic Model of Air Pollution, Health, and
Population Growth Using System Dynamics: A Study on Tehran–Iran (With Computer
Simulation by the Software Vensim), World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology,
available at: http://connection.ebscohost.com/c/articles/52895625/dynamic-model-air-pollution-
health-population-growth-using-system-dynamics-study-tehran-iran-computer-simulation-by-
software-vensim (accessed 14 April 2013).
Shaw, M. L. (1982) PLANET: some experience in creating an integrated system for repertory grid
applications on a microcomputer‚ International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 17: 
345–360.
Shepard, R. N. (1978) Externalization of mental images and the act of creation. In B. S. Randhava,
W. E. Coffman (eds), Visual Learning, Thinking and Communication, New York: Academic
Press, pp. 133–191.
REFERENCES
348

Silber, L. and Silber, L. T. (1998), Time Management for the Creative Person, New York: Three
Rivers Press.
Simon, H. (1957) Administrative Behavior, New York: Macmillan.
Simon, H. (1982) Models of Bounded Rationality, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, H. (1996) Bounded rationality. In J. Eatwell, M. Milgate and P. Newman (eds), The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, London: Macmillan.
Simon, H. A. (1969) The Science of the Artiﬁcial, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, H. A. (1985) What we know about the creative process. In R. L. Kuhn (ed.), Frontiers in
Creative and Innovative Management, New York: Ballinger.
Smart, J. K. (2003) Real Problem Solving, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall/Pearson.
Smith, C. and Munn, G. (2000) How to maintain a competitive edge, PPI, 42(12): 19.
Spalazzi, L. (2001) A survey on case-based planning, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 16: 3–36.
Stein, M. (1974) Stimulating Creativity, New York: Academic Press.
Sternberg, R. (1999) (ed.) Handbook of Creativity, Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. and Lubart, T. I. (1991) An investment theory of creativity and its development,
Human Development, 34(1): 1–31.
Sternberg, R. J. and Lubart, T. I. (1995) Defying the Crowd, New York: Free Press.
Talley J. L. (2013) Problem solving process: context of problem solving, available at: www.
problemsolving2.com/process/theprocess.htm (accessed 26 March 2013).
Tan, K. and Platts, K. (2003) Linking objects to action plans: a decision support approach based
on the connectance concept, Decision Sciences, 34(3): 569–593.
Tauber, E. M. (1972) HIT: heuristic ideation technique‚ a systematic procedure for new product
search‚ Journal of Marketing, 36: 58–61.
Tellis, G. J., Prabhu, J. C. and Chandy, R. K. (2009) Radical innovation across nations: the
preeminence of corporate culture, Journal of Marketing, 73(1): 3–23.
Terninko, J., Zusman, A. and Zlotin, B. (1998) Systematic Innovation: An Introduction to TRIZ,
Boca Raton, FL: St Lucie Press.
Thompson, J. D. (1967) Organizations in Action, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Torrance, E. P. (1965) Rewarding Creative Behavior: Experiments in Classroom Creativity,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Treacy, M. (2004) Innovation as a last resort, Harvard Business Review, 82(7/8): 29–30.
Trefﬁnger, D. J. (2000) Practice Problems for Creative Problem Solving, Waco, TX: Prufrock
Press.
Trefﬁnger, D. J., Isaksen, S. G. and Dorval, K. B. (2000) Introduction to Creative Problem Solving,
Waco, TX: Prufrock Press.
Trefﬁnger, D., Isaksen, S. G., Stead-dorval, B. (2006) (4th edn) Creative Problem-Solving: 
An Introduction, Waco, TX: Prufrock Press.
Tsai, Y. and Beverton, S. (2007) Top-down management: an effective tool in higher education? 
The International Journal of Educational Management, 21(1): 6.
Ury, W. (2004) Getting Past No, London: Random House.
Van Gundy, A. B. ([1981] 1988) Techniques of Structured Problem Solving, New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Van Gundy, A. B. (1987) Organizational creativity and innovation. In S. G. Isaksen (ed.), Frontiers
of Creative Research: Beyond the Basics, Buffalo, NY: Bearly.
REFERENCES
349

Van Gundy, A. B. (1993) Techniques of Structured Problem Solving, New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Van Gundy, A. B. (2005) 101 Activities for Teaching Creativity and Problem Solving, San Francisco,
CA: Wiley.
Vendelo, M. T. (2009) Improvisation and learning in organizations: an opportunity for future
empirical research, Management Learning, 40(4): 449–456.
Vessey, I. (1991) Cognitive ﬁt: a theory-based analysis of the graphs versus tables literature,
Decision Sciences, 22: 219–241.
Violino, B. (2006) Top-down innovation, Wall Street and Technology, 43.
Vise, D. A. (2005) The Google Story, New York: Random House.
Wakin, E. (1985) Creative Thinking‚ presentation at the 31st Annual Creative Problem Solving
Institute, Buffalo, NY, June.
Wallas, G. (1926) The Art of Thought, London: Jonathan Cape.
Ward, T. B., Patterson, M. J. and Sifonis, C. M. (2004) The role of speciﬁcity and abstraction in
creative idea generation, Creativity Research Journal, 16: 1–9.
Weihrich, H. (1982) The TOWS matrix: a tool for situational analysis‚ Long Range Planning, 15(2):
54–66.
Weinman, C. (1991) It’s not art but marketing research can be creative, Marketing News, 25(8)
(15 April): 9–24.
Weisberg, R. W. (1986) Creativity, Genius and Other Myths, New York: W. H. Freeman.
Weisberg, R. W. (1999) Creativity and knowledge: a challenge to theories. In R. J. Sternberg (ed.),
Handbook of Creativity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 226–250.
Weizenbaum, J. (1984) Computer Power and Human Reason, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Wertheimer, M. ([1945] 1959), Productive Thinking, New York: Harper & Row.
Wertheimer, M. (1962) Contemporary Approaches to Creative Thinking, a symposium at the
University of Colorado.
West, M. A. (2002) Sparkling fountains or stagnant ponds: an integrative model of creativity and
innovation implementation in work groups, Applied Psychology: An International Review, 51:
355–387.
Whiting, C. S. (1958) Creative Thinking, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Wilson, P. (1997) Simplex creative problem solving, Creativity and Innovation Management, 6(3)
(September): 160–166.
Young, L. W. (1989) Decision Support and Idea Processing Systems, Dubuque, IA: W. C. Brown.
Zsambok, C. E. and Klein, G. (1997) Naturalistic Decision-Making, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Zwicky, F. (1948) Discovery, Invention, Research through the Morphological Approach, New York:
Macmillan.
REFERENCES
350

Computer software programs
Axon Idea Processor, Axon Research, http://web.singnet.com.sg/~axon2000/
The Brain, The Brain Technologies, www.thebrain.com
ConceptDraw, ConceptDraw, www.conceptdraw.com/
Decision Explorer, Banxia Software, www.banxia.com
IdeaFisher/Thoughtpath, thoughtofﬁceTM, www.thoughtrod.com/idea-software/ideaﬁsher-upgrades/
Idea Generator Plus, William Steinberg Consultants, http://s101827553.oneandoneshop.com/shop
data/product_detail/IDEAGEN/index.html
Inspiration, Inspiration Software, www.inspiration.com
REFERENCES
351

Abelson, R. 4
Adams, J. L. 23
Akin, O. 58
Amabile, T. 4, 40, 41, 74
Arnold, J. E. 23
Atkins, C. R. 8
Batey, M. 4
Beach, L. R. 274, 275
Beggs, W. B. 293
Bennis, W. 290
Berry, D. C. 92, 218
Bessant, J. 31
Beverton, S. 29
Black, M. 332
Blanchette, I. 56
Blevins, J. 55
Blevins, J. P. 55
Bloch, A. 298
Boucher, L. 58
Bowden, E. M. 218
Bransford, J. D. 66, 67
Brown, M. 308
Brown, R. 226
Buzan, T. 246–247, 309
Byrne, C. L. 71
Carson, J. 135
Castells, M. 76
Christensen, C. M. 4, 226
Cleese, J. 5, 27
Colley, R. H. 292
Connolly, T. 274, 275
Cropley, A. J. 44
Cummings, A. 7
Cyert, R. N. 4
Dacey, J. S. 45
Dahl, D. W. 56
Daugherty, J. 55
Davidson, J. E. 69
de Bono, E. 16, 111, 167, 168, 178, 187,
262
de Kluyver, C. A. 317
Dennis, A. R. 307
Dienes, Z. 58
Do, E. Y. 92, 218
Duggan, S. J. 274
Dunbar, K. 56
Duncker, K. 22, 62
Dyson, R. G. 11
Eden, C. 305
Eppler, M. J. 309, 310
Estes, W. K. 58
Feshback, S. 293
Finke, R. A. 69
Fisher, C. 74
Foil, C. M. 309
Forrester, J. W. 318
Forsth, L. 252
Gasper, K. 23
Gates, B. 303
Gelb, M. 247
Gentner, D. 55
Geschka, H. 69, 113
Gilliam, T. K. 4
Golovin, L. 317
Gordon, W. J. 118, 156–157, 195, 199, 200
Greve, A. 76
Grossman, S. R. 174
352
Author index

Gross, M. D. 92, 218
Grove, A. 60
Guilford, J. P. 45
Hajihosseini, H. 318
Hamilton, H. R. 260
Hammond, K. J. 58
Hargadon, A. 57, 69
Harris, D. 274
Harris, R. A. 225
Hart, S. 291, 294
Harvey, J. B. 77
Henle, M. 45, 46
Henry, J. 47–49
Herrmann, N. 42
Hershy, D. A. 58
Hicks, M. J. 158, 201, 219
Higgins, J. M. 290
Holyoak, K. J. 57
Horth, D. M. 13–14
Houtz, J. 88
Howe, J. 308
Huff, A. C. 309
Hunter, S. T. 58
Isaken, S. G. 77
Isenberg, D. J. 39
Jackson, M. 316
Janis, I. 91
Janis, I. L. 293
Jensen, J. V. 102
Jobs, S. 87
Jones, J. H. 8
Jones, L. J. 23, 24
Kanter, R. M. 74
Kedrov, B. M. 215, 216
Kelly, G. A. 3, 171, 294, 304, 305
Kepner, C. H. 291, 298, 328
Ketels, C. H. M. 9
Kirton, M. 87
Klein, G. 274, 275
Koestler, A. 4, 15, 49
Kolb, D. A. 89
Kotter, J. 290
Kuhn, T. 14
Langer, S. K. 47
Large, M. 11
Larkin, J. H. 309
Larsen, E. 289
Lavidge, R. J, 292
LeBoutillier, N. 92
Lehrer, J. 90
Leybourne, S. 74
Limont, W. 219
Lipshitz, R. 274, 275
Locke, J. 4
Lubart, T. I. 39–40
Luchins, A. A. 22
Lynde, E. 308
Machiavelli, N. 286, 300
Majaro, S. 7, 247, 299
March, J. G. 8, 15, 22
Marks, D. F. 92
Martin, A. 13
Maslow, A. H. 3, 304
Mayer, R. E. 69
McClelland, J. L. 50
McFadzean, E. S. 91
McNally, G. M. 317
Meisinger, S. 8
Mendeleev, D. 215–216, 217, 218
Mentzner, N. 55
Minsky, M. 70
Mintzberg, H. 11, 39
Moon, Y. 5
Moorecroft, J. D. 11
Moore, L. B. 265
Moreau, P. 56
Morgan, G. 21, 309
Moss, S. A. 44
Mumford, M. D. 4
Nemkova, E. 74
Newell, A. 3, 69, 70
Nolan, V. 194
Nordvik, B. 252
Oldman, G. R. 7
Olson, R. W. 242
Orasanu, J. 274, 275
Osborn, A. 85, 86, 149, 152
Palus, C. H. 13–14
Parker, M. 252
Parkhurst, H. B. 4
Parnes, S. J. 71, 101, 114, 149
Platts, K. 11
Polya, G. 62
AUTHOR INDEX
353

Popova, M. 27
Porter, M. 9
Pounds, W. F. 99
Prince, G. 195
Pruitt, J. S. 274
Pryce, V. 4
Quillian, M. R. 50
Randall, T. 5
Reibnitz, U. 69
Richards, M. D. 275
Rickards, T. 3, 29, 31, 105, 106, 135, 158
Ritchey, T. 131
Rogers, B. 8, 171, 304
Rogers, C. 3
Rokeach, M. 304
Ross, E. 91
Rumelhart, D. E. 50
Rundh, B. 11
Rustico, E. 247
Saaty, T. L. 268
Sadler-Smith, E. 74
Saxberg, B. O. 252
Schank, R. 52
Schein, E. 31
Schwert, P. M. 92, 218
Segal, E. 44
Seifert, L. 218
Shahgholian, K. 318
Shaw, M. L. 304–305
Shepard, R. N. 219
Simon, H. A. 69, 70, 114, 303–304, 309
Stein, B. S. 66, 67
Stein, M. 3
Steiner, G. A. 292
Sternberg, R. J. 39–40, 41
Talley, J. L. 77
Tan, K. 11
Tauber, E. M. 138
Tellis, G. J. 11, 74
Terninko, J. 69
Thagard, P. 57
Thompson, J. D. 11
Torrance, E.P. 3
Treacy, M. 4, 5
Tregoe, B. B. 291, 298, 328
Tsai, Y. 29
Valacich, J. S. 307
Van Gundy, A. B. 8, 61, 219, 224, 275,
328–329
Vendelo, M. T. 74
Vessey, I. 309
Vise, D. A. 5
Von Oech, R. 187
Wakin, E. 139
Wallas, G. 43–44, 47, 62, 183
Weinman, C. 4
Weisberg, R. W. 44, 45, 76
Weizenbaum, J. J. 22
Wells, H. G. 173
Wertheimer, M. 3, 46, 47, 66
Whiting, C. S. 269
Zsambok, C. E. 275
Zwicky, F. 131
AUTHOR INDEX
354

Abiline Paradox 77
absurd solutions 203
acceptance ﬁnding 71–74, 288; case example
328, 329, 330 see also ideas,
implementation of
accident theory 47–48
acquisitions, sorting out (case) 162–163
advantage–disadvantage tables 260, 262
advertising platform, ﬁnding a new (case) 212
AIDA 292
Air Canada 12
aircraft pollution 1
airlines 12–13
airport development (case) 122–123
airships (case) 227–228
alternatives see evaluation
alternatives: lateral thinking 168, 174, 176, 177
analogical reasoning 55–59
analogy 185, 186, 187, 196, 197–199
analytical techniques 114–115, 116–118
analytic hierarchy process (AHP) 268
anchoring (heuristics) 65
Arthur D. Little 156, 195
associational knowledge 58
association theory 49
assumptions 172, 173–174, 175; challenging
(problem) 175, 334
attribute listings 128–129, 130–131
availability (heuristics) 65
avoidance devices 174
awareness: lateral thinking 170, 171,
172–173
back-stabbing, thoughts on (case) 165
BACON 303–304
bionics 240
blocks to creativity 24; being ready for change
21; cases 32–36; creative organizations
30–31; diagnosing 25–27; how techniques
help 27, 28, 29; individuals’ 23, 24–25;
mind-set 21, 22–23; organizational 29–30;
questions 31–32
blogs 308–309
Blog, The 308
boundaries 173
boundary examination 111, 112
brainlining 159, 160–161
brain, the: as an information processor 41–42;
whole brain/four-quadrant model 42, 43, 44
Brainstorm (program) 305
Brainstormer (program) 305
brainstorming 85, 148, 149, 150–166;
brainlining 159, 160–161; brainwriting
159; cases 161–165; classical 149–150,
151, 152; electronic 307; Gordon-Little
156, 157; methods 151; problems with
158; process 152, 153, 154–156; questions
161; reverse 269, 270, 271; round-robin
156; stop-and-go 156; trigger method 157;
wildest-idea variant 156
brainwriting 159
bridging divisions 177
British Airways 12–13
business books (case) 189–190
business, creativity in 6–9
business simulators 318–319
busy lines (case) 211–212
candidates for interview (case) 190
Canterbury Timber Products Ltd 317
car parking problem 97
case-based knowledge 58
355
Subject index
Page numbers in italic refer to ﬁgures/tables.

case example: Great Northern Bus Company
322–327, 328–329, 330
cases: blocks to creativity 32–36;
brainstorming 161–165; computer-assisted
problem solving 319–320; creativity 16–19,
59–60; evaluation 278–284; ideation 94–
95, 253–255; implementing ideas 301–
302; lateral thinking 189–192;
morphological analysis 144–147; objective
ﬁnding 119–123; paradigm breaking 227–
230; problem solving and improvisation
78–80; synectics 209–213
cash problems (case) 191
Castle technique 263
catalogue selling (case) 121–122
cause-and-effect diagrams 117, 118
cause-and-effect map, multiple 311
challenging assumptions problem 175, 334
change 8, 9, 299–300
checklists 125–126, 128
chessboard problem 44, 332–333
choice, exercising 274–275, 276
choice process, the 269
church affairs (case) 145
classical decision making (CDM) 274–275
clichés, proverbs and maxims 232, 233, 234
clock, broken (problem) 28, 29, 332
cognitive maps 275, 276
cognitive theory 49–50, 51, 52
coins problem 28, 332
communication models 292–293
communication, role of 290
competition, fantasies about (case) 213
competitions: ideation techniques 231
complaints system (case) 319–320
component detailing 139, 140
compositional and improvisational creativity
74–76
computer apps 320
computer-assisted problem solving 303–321;
cases 319–320; computer-assisted stimuli
306, 307–309; conventional software 309,
310–315, 316, 317, 318–319; history of
development 303, 304, 305; questions 319;
structured approach 306
computer-assisted stimuli 306, 307–309
computer simulation 296
Computers Incorporated (case) 163–164
concept challenging 177
concept changing 177
concept map 310
conference, the (case) 255
‘consensus mapping’ 291
consultants and meetings (case) 210–211
convergent and divergent thinking 45
Coolers (case) 163
COPE (The Decision Explorer) 294, 296, 305
council’s difﬁcult problem (case) 229
CPS process 98
creative evaluation 265
creative organizations 30–31
creative people 85–86
Creative Problem Solving Method (CPSM) 45
creative problem-solving process: case example
322–328, 329, 330; nine stages approach
73–74; six stages of 71–72 see also
computer-assisted problem solving; theories
of creativity
creative process 69–74; Cropley’s stages model
44; Wallas’s model 43–44
creative qualities 85–87
creative research 6
creative skills 86–87
creative thinking 3–4, 39, 45, 46, 47
creativity 1–19; blocks to see blocks to
creativity; in business 6–9; cases 16–19;
cognitive theory of 49–50, 51, 52;
deﬁnitions of 3–4; invention and 4–6; in
management 9–11; origin of 47–49;
paradigm shift 14, 15; questions 15–16
creativity theories 37, 38, 39–60; analogical
reasoning 55–59; brain process 41–42, 43,
44, 50; cases 59–60; cognitive theory 49–
50, 51, 52; conditions of creative thinking
45, 46, 47; convergent and divergent
thinking 45; creative thinking 39; the index
metaphor 52, 53, 54; investment theory
39–41; origins of creativity 47–49;
problem solving mechanisms 54; questions
59
crisis, problem solving in a 75, 333
Cropley’s stages model 44
cross-fertilization 183
crossing the river (case) 209
crowdsourcing 308
customer loyalty campaign (case) 281
DAGMAR 292
databases 318
da Vinci, L. 56, 84
Decision Analyser (program) 310, 311
Decision Explorer, The (COPE) 294, 296, 305
SUBJECT INDEX
356

decision trees 273, 274
decomposable matrices 114–115, 116–117
delivery company problem 104, 333
Delta Engineering (case) 145
demand, keeping up with (case) 119–120
deputy, the problem (case) 34
detached devotion 47
digital camera 5
dimensional analysis 102–103, 104–106
direct analogy 197, 198
discontinuity principle 187
discoveries 48
disruptive technology 226
distortion and exaggeration 182
dominant idea 171–172
Doppler effect 7, 331
Edison, T. 15, 84
Einstein, Albert 46, 59, 71, 84, 219
electronic mail systems 318
Elgin 26
entry point, change of 176
environment 40
environmental analysis 99
evaluation 256, 257, 258–285; cases 278–
284; decision trees 273, 274; exercising
choice 274–275, 276; ﬁnancial 271, 272;
mathematical 272; methods 260, 262–264,
265, 266–267; pay-off tables 273; process
of choosing 267–268, 269; qualitative 269,
270, 271; questions 276–278; sorting 258,
259–260, 261
example excursion 203, 204, 205–207
excursions 201–207
exhibits: ideation techniques 231
exposure 182
Exxon Corporation 316, 317
Facebook 307–308
fact ﬁnding 71–74, 98, 110; case example
101, 102, 323–326
fantasies about competition (case) 213
fantasy excursion 201, 202, 205
Faraday, M. 219
female preferences (case) 192
ﬁnancial evaluation 271, 272
ﬂat panels (case) 146–147
ﬂoating motorway 229–230
forced analogy 185, 186, 187
force-ﬁeld analysis 265, 266
force-ﬁtting triggers 135, 136–137
Ford 20
Ford, Henry 20
fractionation 177
free association 240, 241, 242
Freud, S. 199
Game Enough (case) 16–17
Gannt chart 296, 297
gene research 6
glasshouses (case) 255
Go-Ahead garage (case) 279, 280, 281
goal orientation 109, 110–111
goals, deﬁning 67–68
Gordon-Little variation 156, 157
Grace theory 47
Great Northern Bus Company: case example
323–327, 328, 329, 330
groups, problems in 90–91
groupthink 91
heuristic ideation technique 138, 139
‘heuristics’ 62, 63, 64
‘hierarchy of effects’ 292
hierarchy of objectives (case) 281–282
Hillchurch Council (case) 254
‘how to’ approach 152–153
idea ﬁnding 71–74, 326–327 see also
brainstorming; lateral thinking; paradigm
breaking; synectics
Idea Generator 305, 309
IDEAL 67–68
idea processors 309
ideas, implementation of 286, 287, 288–302;
cases 301–302; climate for change 299–
300; problems with 288, 289; putting into
practice 291–293; questions 300; reducing
resistance 293–296, 297, 298–299; role of
communication 290; sources of resistance
289–290
ideas, rating and evaluating 131
ideas wanted (case) 79–80
ideas: where did they get them from? (case)
59–60
ideation 39, 82–96; cases 94–95; conclusion
92–93; learning style 89; mood and
emotions 89–90; personality 87–88;
problems in groups 90–91; qualities of a
creative person 85–87; questions 93;
thinking style 87; what helps people get
ideas 82, 83, 84–85
SUBJECT INDEX
357

ideation techniques 85, 91–92, 231–255, 233;
bionics 240; cases 253–255; clichés,
proverbs and maxims 232, 233, 234;
competitions 231; exhibits 231; free
association 240, 241, 242; mind map
246–247, 248–250, 251; questions 253;
scenario day-dreaming 236, 237, 238, 239;
scenario writing 235, 236; storyboarding
234, 235; story writing 243, 244, 245–246;
suggestion box 231; TRIZ 252–253; two
words 242, 243; vision building 251–252
imagining 223, 224
immersion 46
improvisation see problem solving and
improvisation
improvisational creativity 74
index metaphor 52, 53, 54
Innocentive (website) 90, 308
innovation 4–6
‘Innovation Adoption’ 293
innovative ﬁrm, an (case) 95
intellectual skills 39–40
intermediate impossible 180, 181, 182
Internet, The, and ideation 307–309
invention, creativity and 4–6
inventive clerk (case) 191, 334
investment theory 39–41
Ishikawa, K. 249
itemized response 207–208
Jaguar X-type 286
J. C. losing money (case) 32–33
Jo Soap (case) 209–210
Kay’s café (case) 145–146
Kekule, A. 59, 215
keyword omission 177
knowledge 40
laddering 108, 109
Laennec, R. T. H. 59, 182
lateral thinking 167–192; alternatives 174,
176, 177; analogy 185, 186, 187;
assumptions 173–174; awareness 168, 170,
171, 172–173; cases 189–192;
discontinuity principle 187; metaphorical
thinking 184–185; overview 168, 169,
170; provocative methods 178, 179–180,
181, 182–184; questions 188–189; six
thinking hats 187–188; and vertical
thinking 170
Learning Style Inventory 89
London Furniture Company (case) 282, 283–284
looking back and learning 68–69
management, creativity in 9–11
managing change 299
Marshall, C. 12
mathematical evaluation 272
Maxwell, J. C. 219
meetings, underproductive 148
memory 50, 51, 52
memory organization packets (MOPS) 52,
53–54
‘mental knowledge book’ 52, 53, 54
metaphorical thinking 184–185
mind map 246–247, 248–250, 251
mind-set 21–23
models, problem solving 63, 64, 65–66
mood and emotions 89–90
morphological analysis (MA) 124, 125,
126–147; attribute listings 128–129,
130–131; cases 144–147; checklists
125–126, 128; component detailing 139,
140; force-ﬁtting triggers 135, 136–137;
heuristic ideation technique 138, 139;
morphological analysis 131, 132–135;
questions 143–144; sequence-attribute
modiﬁcation matrix 141, 142, 143; 
which techniques to use 127
Morse, S. 84
motivation 40
multiple cause-and-effect map 311
Murphy’s Law 298
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) 87–88
naturalistic decision making (NDM) 274–275
New Shoe Company (case) 33–34
nine dots problem 180, 181
nine stages creative problem solving 73–74
non-smooth four-dimensional spaces, 
inﬁnity of 6
Northern Bank (case) 301
objective ﬁnding 71–74, 97–98, 99–100, 101,
110; case-example 322–323
ofﬁce juniors, inefﬁcient (case) 162
ofﬁce, the (case) 80
oil crisis revisited (case) 18–19
Olden Valley dam problem 75, 333
Olympus 124
only one, the (case) 35–36
SUBJECT INDEX
358

organizations: blocks to creativity 29–30
outcomes, anticipating 68
outliners 309
outsourcing services (case) 302
paradigm breaking 215–230; cases 
227–230; disruptive technology 226;
questions 227; techniques 218–219,
220–223, 224–226; weights for 
thought 215, 216–217, 218
paradigm-breaking techniques 92
paradigm-preserving techniques 91
paradigm shift 14, 15
paradigm shift (case) 17–18
paradigm-stretching techniques 91–92
paranoia produces progress (case) 60
parcel-delivery problem 104
pay-off tables 273
perceptual blocks 24, 25, 332
Periodic Table 215–218
personal analogy 196, 197
personal computers 303
personality theory 40, 49
personality types 87–88
PERT (project evaluation and review
technique) 288, 291, 296, 297
phone bills (case) 211–212
photographs (visual analogy) 312–315
Picasso 32
pink skirts (case) 78
Planet (program) 304–305
Plus/Minus/Interesting (PMI) 262
po 183, 184, 187
polarizing tendencies 172
positioning a product 130
post-implementation 298–299
potential problem analysis (PPA) 288, 
291, 297, 298, 328, 329
price and innovation (case) 17, 332
prices, keeping competitive (case) 17,
331–332
Prince, The (Machiavelli) 288, 300
problem ﬁnding/deﬁnition 71–74, 97–98, 
110; analytical techniques 114–115,
116–118; boundary examination 111, 
112; case example 325–326; cases
119–123; cause-and-effect diagrams 117,
118; decomposable matrices 114–115,
116–117; dimensional analysis 102–103,
104–106; fact ﬁnding and problem
deﬁnition 101, 102; goal orientation 109,
110–111; laddering 108, 109; objective
ﬁnding 99–100, 101; progressive
abstractions 113; questions 119;
redeﬁnition approaches 106, 107–108; 
the why method 114 see also
brainstorming; lateral thinking; 
synectics
problem-ﬁnding process 105
problems, notes on 331–334
problem solving and improvisation 61, 62,
63–81; cases 78–80; compositional and
improvisational creativity 74–76; and
creative process 69–74; identifying 67;
limitations of formal approaches 76–77;
models 63; process of 66–69; questions 
78; types of 63–65
problem-solving mechanisms 54
problem solving with symbols (case) 
228–229
problem switching 183, 184
process innovation 4
product innovation 4, 5
production problems (case) 122
productive thinking 83
progressive abstractions 113
provocative methods: lateral thinking 178,
179–180, 181, 182–184
P’s, four, of creativity 30–31
pyjama company example 110
qualitative evaluation 269, 270, 271
quality from work, more (case) 164–165
quarks 6
questions: blocks to creativity 31–32;
brainstorming 161; computer-assisted
problem solving 319; creativity 15–16, 
59; evaluation 276–278; ideation 93, 
253; implementing ideas 300; lateral
thinking 188–189; morphological analysis
143–144; objective ﬁnding 119; paradigm
breaking 227; problem solving and
improvisation 78; synectics 208
Quillian Pens (case) 121
quota of alternatives 176
random stimulus 178–180
receptivity 45, 46
redeﬁning the problem 110–111
redeﬁnition approaches 106, 107–109,
110–111, 112–114
reducing wear and tear (case) 122
SUBJECT INDEX
359

relative assumptions puzzle 171, 334
representativeness (heuristics) 64
reproductive thinking 83, 84
resistance: reducing 293–296, 297, 
298–299; sources of 289–290
reversals 182, 183
reverse brainstorming 269, 270, 271
rich pictures 220, 221, 222
Rogers, B. 158, 185
Rogers, C. 304
Rogers, E. 293
role playing 225–226
Rose (case) 190–191
rotation of attention 176
round-robin: brainstorming 156
scenario analysis 317
scenario day-dreaming 236, 237, 238, 239
scenario writing 235, 236
schemas 51, 52, 53, 56
schematic knowledge 57
scripts 52, 53
seeing questions 47
self-conﬁdence block 25, 27
self-image blocks 24
semantic network 51
sequence-attribute modiﬁcation matrix 141,
142, 143
seven letter problem 106, 333
spheres of inﬂuence 292
simulation packages 316, 317–318
six honest serving men 101–102
six stages of creative problem solving 71–72
six thinking hats 187–188
Skype 225
SMS texting (case) 147
socialite, the (case) 320
software 309, 310–315, 316, 317, 
318–319
solution ﬁnding 71–74; case example 
327, 328 see also evaluation
sorting: evaluation 258, 259–260
sorting ofﬁce (case) 301–302
Sperry, R. 42
spreadsheets 316, 317
Stephenson, Robert 289
sticking dots 263, 264, 265
stop-and-go: brainstorming 156
storyboarding 234, 235, 307
story writing 243, 244, 245–246, 307
strategic blocks 23–24, 25–27
strategic framing 275, 276
strategies, exploring possible 68
strategizing 309
stress, coping with (case) 213
suggestion box 231
symbolic analogy 198, 199
superconductors 6
super-liners (case) 144–145
SWOT analysis 100, 238
symbolic representation 219, 220, 221
synectics 193, 194, 195–196, 197–199; in
action 205–208; cases 209–213;
conducting sessions 199–201, 202, 203,
204; questions 208
System Dynamics 317–318
Tank Refurbishers (problem) 8, 331
techniques: ideation 85; overcoming blocks 27,
28, 29; paradigm breaking 218–219,
220–223, 224–226
television 37
tethering factors 172
theories of creativity see creativity theories
thinking hats 187–188
thinking styles 40, 87
think-tank, the (case) 94
TOWS matrix 237, 238–239
toy manufacturing example 101
trigger method 157
TRIZ 252–253
tunnel vision (case) 34–35
Twitter 307–308
two words: ideation techniques 242, 243
universal creativity (case) 253–254
utilization of errors 47
value blocks 24, 25
Velcro 48, 240
Vensim (program) 317–318
vertical thinking 170
videos 315–316
vision building 252–253
visual aids 309, 310–311
visual analogy 311, 312–315
visualization 309–310
visualizing 219
visual outliner 309
watch industry 26
wear and tear, reducing (case) 161, 333
SUBJECT INDEX
360

weighted decision matrix 328
weighting systems 266, 267
Whole Brain Model (Herrmann) 42, 43
why method: objective ﬁnding 114
wildest-idea variant 156
wishful thinking 224–225
yoghurt cartons, leaking (case) 278–279
SUBJECT INDEX
361

This page intentionally left blank

Taylor & Francis
eBooks
FOR
LIBRARIES
Over 23,000 eBook titles in the Humanities,
Social Sciences, STM and Law from some of the
world's leading imprints.
Choose from a range of subject packages or create your own!
.. Free MARC records
... COUNTER-compliant usage statistics
.... Flexible purchase and pricing options
.... Off-site, anytime access via Athens or referring URL
.... Print or copy pages or chapters
lit- Full content search
... Bookmark, highlight and annotate text
.... Access to thousands of pages of quality research
at the click of a button
For more information, pricing enquiries or to order
a free trial, contact your local online sales team.
UK and Rest of World: online.sales@tandLco.uk
US, Canada and latin America:
e-reference@taylorandfrancis.com
www.ebooksubscriptions.com
Taylor & Francis
eBooks
F O R  
L I B R A R I E S
Over 23,000 eBook titles in the Humanities, 
Social Sciences, STM and Law from some of the 
world's leading imprints.
Choose from a range of subject packages or create your own!
ORDEf yOUK 
30 D a v
? yOlJR
0 Da y
t io n a l
° n a l
Da y  i
■ 
t
^STlTt
k Tr/a l i
wSTIT I
^ U E R  y, 
R £ E  3 0  [
ST/TUT/c
To D
Free M ARC records 
COUNTER-com pliant usage statistics 
Flexible purchase and pricing options
Benefits 
for vour
user
Off-site, anytime access via Athens or referring URL 
Print or copy pages or chapters
Full content search
Bookmark, highlight and annotate text
Access to thousands of pages of quality research 
at the click of a button
For more information, pricing enquiries or to order 
a free trial, contact your local online sales team.
UK and Rest of World: online.salesC^tandf.co.uk
US, Canada and Latin America: 
e-reference@taylorandfrancis.com
www.ebooksubscriptions.com
I Taylor & Francis
Taylor &. Frands Group
ALPSP Award for 
BESTc&OOK 
PUBLISHER 
2009 Finalist
P Award i 
EST cEWX 
PUBLISH 
309 Final
forOK
HR
.list
A flexible and dynam ic resource tor teaching, learning and research.
user
Benefits 
Benefits 

