
What People Are Saying about
Valerie Geller’s Creating Powerful Radio
“If you want to understand what makes radio work, read this, then read it again.”
—  Jon Faine, Air Personality
ABC Radio 774, Melbourne, Australia
“It should be a textbook.”
—  Chris Berry, General Manager
WMAL, Washington, DC
“If you want to achieve compelling radio and increase audiences, read 
this book immediately! LBC 97.3 in London has experienced massive 
growth using its methods.”
—  Scott Solder, Programme Controller
LBC Radio, London
“Making it in broadcasting takes more than just luck. Think of Creating 
Powerful Radio as your ‘Road Guide’ to success in radio.”
—  Andy Vierra, Program Director
KNUU, Las Vegas
“This book will help your show get better.”
—  Al Rantel, Talk Show Host
KABC, Los Angeles
“Wonderful.”
—  Paul Fisher, Vice President
Rogers Radio
Vancouver, BC, Canada
“Valerie Geller’s ﬁ rst book was a triumph. It has proved to be an excellent
primer for my staff. Valerie is an inspiration. If you can’t get her for your 
station, buy this book.”
—  John Ryan, Managing Director
BBC Radio Manchester, Manchester, UK
“Creating Powerful Radio is a ﬁ ne guide for people inside the radio biz and 
an explanation of that biz to people outside, including the people who 
would like to get in. It’s the kind of book where the reader thinks, ‘Oh 
that’s why they do that.’”
—  David Hinkley
New York Daily News
“Creating Powerful Radio might eventually make an executive’s job at a 
satellite formatted afﬁ liate much tougher.”
—  Professor Peter Hunn
Communications Studies Department
State University of New York, Oswego

“It’s great. Read it!”
—  Kim Komando, 
Syndicated Air Personality
“I recommend it to everyone and I use it in my classes. I love this book.”
—  Jo Maeder (The Rock ‘N Roll Madame)
Air Personality and Instructor
New York University
“Packed with insights, well written, and fun to read. It’s obvious why so 
many radio people consider this book ‘a must’!”
—  John Sawatsky, Professor of Journalism
Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
“Brilliant.”
—  Phil Taylor
BBC, Scotland
“Creating Powerful Radio contains valuable tips and information for 
presenters, managers, and programmers.”
—  Julia Sullivan
Music & Media
“Useful and practical.”
—  Jan Ørskov, Journalist
Danmarks Radio, Denmark
“It’s my bible!”
—  Åsa Paborn, Program Director
SBS Radio, Stockholm, Sweden
“We gave copies to the entire staff.”
—  Viktor Worms, Antenne Bayern
Munich, Germany
“Anyone even considering a career in radio should read this!”
—  Adele Scheele, Ph.D, Career Strategist
Author of Skills for Success

Creating Powerful Radio
Getting, Keeping & Growing Audiences
News, Talk, Information & Personality
Broadcast, HD, Satellite & Internet
VALERIE GELLER
Edited by Turi Ryder
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier

Senior Acquisitions Editor:  Angelina Ward
Assistant Editor:  Doug Shults
Publishing Services Manager:  George Morrison
Project Manager:  Marilyn E. Rash
Marketing Manager:  Christine Degon
Cover Design:  Alisa Andreola
Production Services:  Graphic World Inc.
Printing and binding:  Sheridan Books
Cover printer:  Phoenix Color Corp.
Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK
Copyright © 2007, Valerie Geller.  Published by Elsevier Inc.  All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the 
prior written permission of the publisher. 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights Department 
in Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333, E-mail: permissions@elsevier.
com.  You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.
com), by selecting “Support & Contact”  then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining 
Permissions.”
Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, Elsevier prints its books on 
acid-free paper whenever possible.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Application submitted.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 13:  978-0-240-51928-9
ISBN 10:  0-240-51928-0
For information on all Focal Press publications, 
visit our website at www.books.elsevier.com
07  08  09  10  11 5  4  3  2  1
Printed in the United States of America

For Lyla and Fred

Other Books by Valerie Geller
Creating Powerful Radio: A Communicator’s Handbook 
for News, Talk, Information & Personality
The Powerful Radio Workbook: The Prep, Performance &
Post Production Planning

C o n t e n t s
vii
 
Permissions 
ix
 
Foreword 
xi
 
Acknowledgments 
xiii
 
Introduction 
xv
 1 Creating Powerful Radio 
  1
 2 Finding and Developing Talent 
  7
 3 Generators and Reactors 
 25
 4 Performance and Formatics 
 29
 5 Morning Shows 
 45
 6 From Rock to Talk 
 55
 7 Talk Shows 
 71
 8 Integrating News and Talk 
 79
 9 Interviews 
 87
10 Show Prep 
 95
11 Producers 
113
12 Call Screening 
123
13 High-Ego Talent 
133

 
14 News 
137
15 Trafﬁ c and Weather Together 
153
16 Newswriting 
159
17 News Anchoring 
169
18 Multi-version News 
177
19 Integrating Radio and TV News  
191
20 Public Service Announcements 
197
21 Avoiding Burnout 
201
22 Airchecking 
209
23 Promotion 
245
24 Sales and Commercials 
275
25 LifeStage Demographics 
299
26 Research 
311
27 Final Notes  
321
 
Resources 
323
 
Index 
327
viii         Contents

P e r m i s s i o n s
Grateful acknowledgment is given to the following people and organizations 
for permission to reprint previously published materials.
Bonus Books: Excerpts from Writing Broadcast News. © Copyright 1987 by 
Mervin Block. Reprinted with permission of Bonus Books.
Leo Cullum cartoon: “That’s not my political opinion. That’s just stuff I hear 
on the radio.” © The New Yorker Collection, 2003. Leo Cullum from cartoon-
bank.com. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
Leo Cullum cartoon: “It’s always ‘Get me a Godzilla type,’ never, ‘Get me 
Godzilla!’ ” © The New Yorker Collection, 2004. Leo Cullum from cartoon-
bank.com. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
Leo Cullum cartoon: “That’s not what you told my screener you wanted to talk 
about.” © The New Yorker Collection, 2001. Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.
com. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
Leo Cullum cartoon: “It’s come to my attention that you have a life outside the 
ofﬁ ce.” © Copyright 1992. Reprinted with permission of Leo Cullum, Sandhill 
Arts.
Leo Cullum cartoon: “They say the early forties is the new late thirties.” © The 
New Yorker Collection, 2005. Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.com. All rights 
reserved. Reprinted with permission.
Pantheon Press: Excerpt from Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing 
and Life. © Copyright 1994 by Anne Lamott. Reprinted with permission of 
Pantheon Books.
Perseus Press: Excerpt from On Listening. © Copyright 1976 by Carl 
A. Faber, Ph.D. Reprinted with permission of Carl A. Faber.
The Radio Store: Excerpts from Write Good Copy Fast: The Broadcast 
Professional’s Guide to Writing Effective Copy for Direct Advertisers. © 
Copyright 2003 by Maureen Bulley.
ix

 The Radio Store: Excerpts from “The Certiﬁ ed Radio Copywriter Course.” © 
Copyright 1999 by Maureen Bulley.
The Radio Store: Excerpts from “Radio Power Tools,” “The Copy Navigator,” 
and “Creative Advice” by Maureen Bulley. © Copyright, The Radio Store, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Reprinted with permission of Maureen Bulley.
Turtle Bay Books, A Division of Random House: Excerpt from Talk, NPR’s 
Susan Stamberg Considers All Things. © Copyright 1993 by Susan Stamberg. 
Reprinted with permission of Turtle Bay Books.
x         Permissions

F o r e w o r d
Opinions regarding the future prospects of broadcast radio have been, to 
say the least, mixed, if not disconcerting, in recent years. Traditional radio’s 
popularity and audience shares have taken a hit as the result of the rollout 
of satellite and Web radio, and the most signiﬁ cant impact on the fortunes 
of the eldest electronic mass medium has come from music downloading. 
Young people have been abandoning music radio in droves in favor of their 
MP3 and iPod players. These recently evolved audio services have taken 
considerable luster away from over-the-air radio, and station consolidation 
has added to its listening audience’s disenchantment as well.
Critics claim media conglomeration has bred more sameness on the 
radio dial and has fostered an intensiﬁ cation of commercial clutter. Many 
of these same detractors point to the decline in localism in favor of voice 
tracking and music playlists originating from faraway studios as yet another 
reason for terrestrial radio’s mounting woes.
However, to paraphrase Samuel Langhorne Clemens, stories in the 
press about radio’s so-called death have been greatly exaggerated. The 
“talking box,” as radio legend Fred Allen once called it, still claims more 
listeners in an average week than all of the new audio technologies com-
bined, and then some; but this does not mean that broadcast radio can rest 
on its fading laurels. The contrary is true. It is an undeniable fact that the 
medium’s audience numbers are eroding, and if it treads water (as many 
contend it has been doing for a long time), it will lose its dominance and 
end up as just another store in the burgeoning audio mall. Indeed, radio 
is not dead, nor is it moribund, but it is in need of some major ﬁ rst aid by 
talented professionals who have a genuine passion and appreciation for the 
medium and the expertise to restore its ﬂ agging health.
Enter Valerie Geller. Never has the medium needed someone with her 
vision and knowledge more. For years she has been reinvigorating stations 
around the globe by focusing on the development of on-air talent—radio’s 
eternal mainstay—as well as by providing dynamic workshops on creativity 
in programming, news, promotion, and sales, among a host of other areas. In 
xi

 nearly every instance, her extraordinary consultancy has resulted in vastly 
improved ratings. Valerie knows radio and knows how to help it realize its 
fullest potential, and that is what the medium needs to do in an audio mar-
ketplace that is more competitive than ever. The challenges confronting 
broadcast radio are greater than at any time in its one hundred year history, 
which is saying a lot, because the medium is no stranger to challenges.
In this new and vastly enhanced edition of Creating Powerful Radio, 
the reader will ﬁ nd a comprehensive and incisive schematic for achieving 
success in every aspect of station operations. Valerie Geller provides pro-
fessionals and students alike with an invaluable resource at a time when 
radio is about to transition to digital. A new age of broadcast radio is upon 
us—one that will require great communicators, programmers, and manag-
ers more than ever. Toward that end, this book constitutes a precious tool.
— Michael C. Keith
xii         Foreword

A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
It is impossible to thank all the people whose friendship, insight, and talent 
have helped nurture, develop, and inspire this work. I am deeply grateful to 
those who have generously shared their ideas, wisdom, and experiences.
There are no words to thank my editor and friend, Turi Ryder, without 
whom this book would not exist.
Special thanks to Doug Harris and Maureen Bulley, both of whom cre-
ated extensive sections for this book in their areas of expertise.
Many thanks also to contributors Lee Harris, Sean Ross, Mike 
Sugerman, Jim Chenevey, Warren Levinson, Michael Haas, Dave Ross, 
Sharon Katchen, Phil Hendrie, Mervin Block, Scott Shannon, John 
Catchings, Lynn Jimenez Catchings, Denise Jimenez Adams, Christine 
Lavin, Howard Price, Bob Christopher, Sheri Inglis-Schmickl, Jerry Bell, 
Dan Vallie, Bernard Gershon, Mackie Morris, Jaye Albright, Tom Zarecki, 
Guy Zapoleon, Randy Lane, Denise McIntee, Alan Eisenson, Lorna 
Ozmon, Deborah Potter, Tommy Kramer, June Barnes, Kelli Grisez, Ed 
Walsh, Michael Hedges, Susanne Whatley, Scott Borden, Andy Beaubien, 
Jeremy Millar, Mike Siegel, Mark Howell, Dave Sholin, David Baronfeld, 
Ross Brittain, Matt Siegel, Caroline Feraday, Sam Litzinger, Pam Lontos, 
Matt Hudson, Steve Apel, Pat McCrummen, and Robert Unmacht.
And personal thanks to Melissa McConnell Wilson, J. Ruth Gendler, Anne 
Chaabane, Dr. Linwood Hagin, Dr. Adele Scheele, Kate McCallum, Elizabeth 
L. Dribben, Laurel Ornitz, Carol Archer, Jeff Neuman, Don Barrett, Marie 
Sandgren, Marian O’Brien, Gillien Goll, Christine Henrich, Rhonda Funes, 
Ron and Alice Lando, Bonnie Aylesworth, Wendy McLeod, Scott Adams, 
Colman Adams, Simon Adams, Nic and Becky Gaunt, Dr. Evian Gordon, and 
Doug Kaplan.
Finally, a sincere thank you to all my client stations and to the talented 
broadcasters, around the world, who have taken these ideas to heart, have 
believed in this material, have risked much, and have succeeded by using 
the methods in Creating Powerful Radio, currently and in years past.
xiii

 
This page intentionally left blank

I n t r o d u c t i o n
“Art happens—no hovel is safe from it, no prince may depend 
upon it, the vastest intelligence cannot bring it about.”
— James McNeill Whistler
One of the curses of radio is that it seems so easy. Everyone can talk, so 
everyone thinks that they are experts at radio and that just about anyone 
can do it. And the great on-air personalities always make their shows look 
effortless. But creating powerful radio that will get, keep, and grow audi-
ences is very hard work. It takes craft, skill, desire, and training. If you have 
the desire and the talent for this work, this book will teach you methods 
that will help you succeed.
It has been well over a decade since the ﬁ rst edition of Creating 
Powerful Radio was published. At the time, I had no idea that it would ﬁ nd 
its way around the world. It was mostly intended for my clients as a sort 
of “written summary” of ideas we’d worked with to get stations and air 
personalities up to the next level. I wanted to leave them with something 
tangible and permanent that would last after a Creating Powerful Radio 
Workshop was over—something to avoid that “back-to-normal slump” that 
hits a few weeks after the consultant leaves. But Creating Powerful Radio 
has become so much more than that. It has served as a calling card in 27 
countries at more than 500 stations, all of which have increased listenership 
by learning and working with the book’s methods. It has helped thousands 
of broadcasters and students in dozens of countries with techniques to get, 
keep, and grow audiences.
The Creating Powerful Radio techniques work in every language and 
every country because they are based on the common denominator of 
human connection and communication. The three basic Creating Powerful 
Radio principles are: Tell the truth. Make it matter. Never be boring. The 
way you create powerful radio is a highly personal effort. Your show is 
unique. No one can tell you how to do it. You have to ﬁ nd your own way. 
xv

 
Wherever you are in your broadcast career, this book can help you. It 
is intended for people at every level of broadcasting whose jobs are to face 
the blank page and create compelling programming using their personali-
ties, listening skills, and powers of observation and communication.
The nature of radio is to capture and chronicle. Much of its power 
comes from its immediacy. Powerful radio holds up a mirror and reﬂ ects 
life as it is at the moment. Broadcasting stays interesting because, just as in 
life, it is in a state of constant change.
Since the ﬁ rst edition of Creating Powerful Radio was published, satel-
lite delivery and digital technologies have emerged that let us work cleaner, 
faster, and better. The Internet also plays a bigger role in broadcasting. But 
no matter the delivery system, there will always need to be a story, and a 
storyteller who makes it matter.
If you have a copy of the ﬁ rst edition, you will ﬁ nd that this is a com-
pletely updated and revised book, with several new chapters based on what 
I’ve learned from working with the Creating Powerful Radio techniques 
over the years. I’ve also asked some people whose work I respect to 
contribute to this edition of Creating Powerful Radio.
You’ll ﬁ nd much more on talent development and airchecking and see 
expanded sections on creating powerful news, show prep, producers,  on-
air performing, selling, and effective promoting and marketing. You’ll also 
learn more about your audience, how they react to and take in information 
in new chapters on Research and LifeStage Demographics.
A colleague of mine, David G. Hall, once paid me a very high compli-
ment when he said: “This is the book I wish someone had given me when 
I ﬁ rst got into radio.” So, here it is in writing. Do your best. Make it count. 
Learn the techniques. Don’t waste a moment of it.
If you would like further information about Geller Media International or 
the Creating Powerful Radio Workshops, contact:
 Geller Media International
 Phone: 212-580-3385
 Email: vgeller@aol.com
 www.gellermedia.com
xvi         Introduction

A b o u t  t h e  A u t h o r
Internationally acclaimed broadcast consultant VALERIE GELLER 
works with top stations and broadcast groups throughout the United States 
and around the world, coaching individual talent, programmers, and 
managers and conducting Creating Powerful Radio™ Workshops.
A radio veteran with more than 30 years of experience, Geller pro-
grammed WABC in New York, has served on the Associated Press board 
of directors, and has held various management, news, and on-air positions 
at several major market U.S. stations.
In addition to her work in the United States, Geller’s international cli-
ent roster of more than 500 stations in 27 different countries includes the 
BBC in England, ABC in Australia, and radio and TV stations throughout 
Europe, Canada, Mexico, South America, Singapore, and Africa.
Geller has been a keynote presenter and workshop leader at numerous 
national and international broadcast gatherings and at various American 
State broadcast associations. She regularly guest lectures at the Graduate 
School of Journalism of both New York University and Columbia University 
in New York City.
Geller’s Powerful Radio Workbook: The Prep, Performance & Post 
Production Planning has been used to teach the Powerful Radio techniques 
to broadcasters in 60 countries around the world. Her ﬁ rst book, Creating 
Powerful Radio: A Communicator’s Handbook: News, Talk, Information, 
Personality, is regarded as a “bible” for radio professionals everywhere.
Visit her on the Internet at www.gellermedia.com

1
Creating Powerful Radio
“The experimental test of whether this art is great or good, 
or minor or abysmal is the effect it has on your own sense 
of the world and of yourself. Great art changes you.”
— Art historian Sister Wendy Beckett
“Art is accusation, expression, passion.”
— Gunter Grass
Sitting on a shelf or in a car dashboard, it’s merely a box full of wires and 
silicon chips. It may or may not look handsome, the outward appearance 
gives little indication of the magic contained within. The radio is clearly 
one of the most ingenious devices ever created, yet to understand its power 
fully, it may help to view radio with primitive eyes.
You may have heard the story of natives in Papua, New Guinea, who, 
upon seeing and hearing their ﬁ rst radio, demanded to see the little man 
inside. A magic man, obviously, to ﬁ t inside so small a box. In the Pidgin 
of Papua, radio is in fact known as “Bokis, he cry,” or “the box that cries.” 
Primitive, perhaps, but accurate in a philosophical sense.
The radio is a magical extension of the human spirit. It can “cry out” 
and make a listener feel, laugh, and think. Powerful radio rings true and 
evokes a reaction. It also makes the listener want to keep listening in the 
hope that this will happen again.
C H A P T E R  1

2         Valerie Geller
Radio is very, very personal. People no longer sit around in groups lis-
tening to it. Today, much listening is done alone, almost in secret, through 
headphones, computers, or in the steel-and-glass-enclosed privacy of a car.
One by one, the listeners are hunting for that connection, that powerful 
magic which is often missing from radio today. Watching an average lis-
tener punch through the buttons on the car radio is proof of that. One sta-
tion after another is rejected. Many of these stations are simply unknown 
to the listener. In the United States, often the entire AM band is unknown 
to the listener. Once that magic contact is made, listeners won’t go unless 
given a reason to leave. Your job as a radio professional is to entice the lis-
tener through the radio door, and then keep him or her coming back. This 
calls for powerful radio.
What is powerful radio? “I always know it when I hear it” is the answer 
most programmers give when asked to deﬁ ne it. But when asked to break 
down the speciﬁ c elements, they often cannot express it in words.
In working with stations around the world, I’ve noticed that certain 
common threads run through each great radio moment, whether on satel-
lite, HD, online, or on terrestrial radio. First, the audience must care about 
what is said. It must matter to them. It must touch their lives. The content 
or topic must reach them in a real and true way. And the topic can never be 
boring, or the audience will tune out.
Before anything goes on air, ask yourself:
■ Is it relevant?
■ Does it matter?
■ Do you care?
■ Do your listeners care?
While it may be the music or the news that ﬁ rst touches a listener, 
I believe the richest source of powerful radio comes from the personalities 
of the performers.
The key to personality radio is, logically, having a personality. This 
means having a rich, full life and drawing on all of your experiences. How 
you relate to life is how your audience will relate to you. The best broad-
casters are great observers of life. They ﬁ lter what they see going on around 

them through their unique creative process, and send it back out to the 
world. They talk about what they see, notice, think, and feel. They share 
their real selves. They mention what irritates them, what excites them, what 
saddens them. They react honestly to the news, current events, and the 
music they play.  They are good storytellers.
If an air personality is doing the job right, audience members will feel 
that they are being addressed individually. The words “Hello, everybody” 
or “Good morning, St. Louis” will likely not be heard. The listener should 
feel that the person behind the microphone is like a friend. The air person-
ality won’t seem like a star but more like someone they would know in real 
life—a person with daily struggles, life experiences, and problems. Humor 
helps. You don’t have to be a funny person to recognize a funny moment. 
This is a key element in creating powerful radio.
The points in the list on the following page are a basic recipe for Creating 
Powerful Radio. You will read more about each of them in the rest of this 
book.
Every element of Creating Powerful Radio relates back to these 
ideas. You can apply them to all facets of on-air work, including music 
 presentation, talk shows, news, commercials, public service announcements, 
promotions, and more.
Let It Grow
Even the most powerful radio programming will take time to build an audience. 
Growing tomatoes takes a certain amount of time. So does building a news-
talk radio station. Music stations tend to grow a little faster. Obviously standing 
over the tomatoes yelling “hurry up” is futile. Though it may seem ridiculous, it’s 
amazing how many people expect that approach to be effective with creative 
talent and sales. Managers and owners hate to hear this, but in my experience, 
with few exceptions, it takes about three years to build a talk station.
The “overnight success” of Los Angeles Talk Station KFI is a good 
example: In 1988 every single bus board in trafﬁ c-infested Southern 
California was plastered with KFI ads. You could hear the station playing 
everywhere. People were talking about then-newcomer Rush Limbaugh. 
The Los Angeles Times printed six huge cover stories in its entertainment 
Creating Powerful Radio         3

4         Valerie Geller
Valerie Geller’s Guidelines 
for Creating Powerful Radio
■  Speak in terms your listener can “picture.” Use details. Describe 
the little things so your audience can “see” what you are talking 
about.
■  Always start your show with something very interesting. This ought 
to be obvious but often isn’t.
■  Tell the truth. Listeners can tell when you don’t.
■  Never be boring. If you are bored, your audience will be too.
■   If something big or important is happening today, go with it. It 
may be a pain to change your program or reschedule a guest, but 
it's worth the trouble.
■  Listen to your station, even when you are not on.
■  Make your program matter. Use your own life as a show resource. 
Always answer: “Why is this on air? Why should someone listen 
to this?”
■  Bury the dead. If a topic is overdone, drop it.
■  If you are live on-air, anything goes! But anything pre-recorded 
should be perfect.
■  It is okay to brag about your stuff—if it’s good. Promote it.
■   Brag about other people’s stuff. If another host on your station had 
a “magic moment,” talk about that too.
■  If you don’t know something, it’s okay to say so. Actually, audi-
ences love it when they sense that you are like them.
■  Do smooth and interesting segue-ways and transitions to other 
hosts and shows. Support them sincerely.
■  Be who you are on the radio.
■  Risk. Try things. Dare to be great!

Creating Powerful Radio         5
section about the various KFI hosts. Still the numbers hardly budged. 
Former owner Cox Broadcasting persevered. The company had spent 
money on programming, talent, promotion, and an award-winning news 
department, so they hung on without making major changes. Three years, 
or about a thousand days after it signed on, KFI became an “overnight 
success.” Years later it remains one of the most listened to news-talk 
stations in the USA.
Give It Time
It is appalling to observe various local stations and networks hire and ﬁ re 
an on-air personality in haste if the show is not a “two-book wonder.” One 
of the problems with our industry is a lack of commitment to talent on the 
part of management.
Brain researcher Dr. Evian Gordon writes, “It takes a thousand times 
of doing a repeated behavior to rewire the human brain to change a habit,” 
including changing the listener’s habits. Building an audience for both tal-
ent and a format is a process. It is tempting to pull the plug if results are not 
immediate, but a little patience and consistency can go a long way toward 
success.
The original Star Trek TV series was canceled after just three seasons, 
because it had “failed.” It took reruns for the audience to discover the star-
ship Enterprise and get hooked on the show. Star Trek in television spin-off 
shows, movies, and books has been breaking records for decades.
American comedy star Jerry Seinfeld exhibits a framed memo from 
NBC-TV declaring that the initial research on his then new situation com-
edy showed a weak response, a poor supporting cast, and that most viewers 
who had seen the test pilot would not want to watch it again. The network 
ordered only four episodes. But somebody had faith in the series, and it 
paid off with years of success for the network. Broadcasting is ﬁ lled with 
stories like these.
If you can create quality programming, and consistently stick with a 
host, program, or format over the time it takes to ﬁ nd its audience, you will 
likely have your own success story.

This page intentionally left blank

Creating Powerful Radio 
Finding and Developing Talent
“Sometimes when you are leading [an expedition] you have 
to say whatever you can to keep people on your side. It 
doesn’t matter if people believe what you say or not. They 
need to see you believe it. That’s what leadership is about.”
— Philip Kerr (on leadership and mountain climbing)
Where Do We Find Tomorrow’s Talent?
In her novel Star Country, Jill Robinson suggests that “star potential,” or 
raw talent, is easy to spot: “Long before the fame hits, the star’s the differ-
ent one. The leader—or the weird one. The motor’s there. You want to feed 
off it; use its heat.”
The stars of broadcasting share certain traits. Genuine talent are true 
individuals, gifted storytellers, and good listeners, as well as articulate com-
municators. They have original thought, intelligence, and passion. These 
people have a spark of life and a sense of humor. They get a kick out of 
things. They burn with curiosity. Some have a formal academic education; 
all have a lot of life experience. These are people who naturally connect 
with others—individuals with ideas and things to say. They tend to be a little 
ahead of popular trends. They have a strong need to be seen and heard.
C H A P T E R  2
7

8         Valerie Geller
Developing talent, product, and content requires another element: faith. 
There must be someone on staff—a manager, producer, or programmer—who 
has the ability to ﬁ nd the right people and bring them into the fold. The 
ability to recognize talent is a talent in itself.
General managers and program directors would love to have a crystal 
ball they could consult to ﬁ nd out which personalities will work and which 
will ﬂ op. But there’s just no way to do it with a new person the public has 
not experienced.
Take a chance. Give a talented prospect a shot on the air. Make it a 
weekend or ﬁ ll-in slot. See how he or she sounds and trust your instincts. 
Don’t pull the plug too soon. If you believe in a talent, hold on, even if not 
everyone in the building shares your belief.
A tip that can save you two ways: Never judge the talent on just one show. 
A talented host should be versatile and able to switch from light to heavy top-
ics. I once heard a guy do a pretty decent show on the right way to hang the 
toilet paper. The next day he was interviewing the Secretary of State. It’s just as 
important to know that the quality is consistent even if the topics vary wildly.
Finding Talent
Station managers constantly complain that fresh, up-and-coming talent is 
hard to ﬁ nd. Where are the syndication superstars of the future? Because 
talent is born, not created, how do we spot it? Then how do we develop and 
keep talent once we have them?
Despite the spectacular growth of syndicated and satellite radio, only 
a handful of people have developed at the network level. Most  successful 
national talent started on a much smaller scale, with daily or weekend shows 
in small to medium markets. When network talk or music shows are given to 
individuals who don’t have much training or talent, they  usually have some 
degree of fame, particularly in politics or acting. A lot of programmers get 
seduced by using a “big name” to draw an audience. Usually, this doesn’t 
work out. Most successful hosts are people with strong  backgrounds in radio. 
They’ve worked hard to learn their craft and often make the job look easier 
than it is. That illusion of ease is one of the reasons many managers think 
they can put any famous person on the air and have him succeed.
As more and more stations turn to syndicated programming, there is 
concern that the smaller-market, “farm team” method of growing  tomorrow’s 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         9
talent is disappearing. Using a syndicated show may be cheaper in the short 
run, but developing your own talent can pay off down the line in ratings, 
revenue, and goodwill.
Programming executive Denise McIntee has years of experience  ﬁ nding 
and developing new radio talent. She advises: 
Be on the lookout for colorful characters in your everyday life. Ask friends, 
business  associates, relatives, and neighbors. Often, they can tell you about 
an obscure cable-TV host on at 4:30 in the morning who was totally enter-
taining, or a local stand-up comic who had the patrons in stitches. Teenagers 
are a valuable resource as well. They hear about the latest trends or hottest 
acts about a year ahead of everybody else.
Radio stations are loaded with born entertainers, and not just the peo-
ple on the air.
Look closely for the [off-air] employees who are surrounded by staff 
when they walk in the ofﬁ ce. These are the people everyone looks to for 
entertainment. Their electricity may translate onto the airwaves.
Sadly, most programmers will not give an audition to anyone with-
out an established track record or who has not honed his or her craft in 
a smaller market. These programmers lack conﬁ dence in their ability to 
discover a “diamond-in-the-rough. ”
Sometimes looking at the people working or just “hanging around” 
your radio station can bring big beneﬁ ts. I have found and developed radio 
personalities who literally landed on my doorstep. At WABC/New York, we 
did a huge, nationwide talent search, looking for somebody fun, interesting, 
topical, and loaded with personality. I listened to hundreds of tapes from all 
over the country and auditioned several people. None of them proved right 
for the speciﬁ c proﬁ le of the station we were building. 
When our afternoon call screener/board operator expressed interest in 
hosting a show, no one took him seriously. Then we talked to him. He had 
studied acting at Yale and had a real feel for radio and a wonderful ability 
to do impressions. He could sing and write parody songs, was original and 
creative, and was up on current events. He was also funny. His idol was the 
afternoon host, for whom he was running the board. We tried him out. He 
was hilarious. The show was a success.
Syndicated host Lionel was a lawyer who called talk shows. He was so 
talented, verbal, and funny that the PD of a Florida station gave him a shot 
on the air. He wound up drawing such huge audiences that he was offered 
a job in New York.

10         Valerie Geller
Another example is TV and radio personality Danny Bonaduce, a for-
mer child actor from the popular 1970s TV show The Partridge Family. 
Chicago air personality Jonathon Brandmeier had a regular “Where Are 
They Now?” feature on his show. Brandmeier located Danny Partridge, 
alias Danny Bonaduce, in Danny’s own words, “broke and starving” as a 
maitre d’ at an L.A. restaurant. Brandmeier thought Bonaduce such an 
engaging personality that he helped him land a radio shift. Watch for talent 
wherever it presents itself.
Real-life characters are another way to jazz up your show. Include 
interesting folks from your community in your on-air cast. Many of the 
big morning show hosts in America have made “stars” out of peculiar 
people they encountered in real life. Brandmeier got enormous mileage 
out of “Piranha Man,” a Pakistani immigrant who operated a donut shop. 
“Piranha Man,” with his thick accent and his foreign ways, was endlessly 
amusing, but he also helped to familiarize other Chicagoans with a rather 
misunderstood ethnic group. “Piranha Man” eventually had his own theme 
song and even came out with his own line of cologne.
One BBC station in England has used a New York City taxi driver, “The 
Gabby Cabby,” to keep listeners up to date on what’s going on in America. 
His reports deal with pop culture, weird people, and odd  occurrences. How 
did the station ﬁ nd this guy? He’s the cab driver who happened to pick up 
a visiting British program director.
Another station uses a former ﬂ ight attendant as their regular con-
sumer/travel expert. Twice each week, she gives her humorous inside tips 
on the travel industry, and like the cabby, she’s developed into a genu-
ine station personality. “Rita from the Beauty Parlor” is another “found” 
 personality. She’s funny and spirited. Rita reviews movies, gossips, and 
gives advice about love and relationships, all based on what she’s learned 
while doing women’s hair.
Don’t exclude people who might be considered mentally ill. As it’s known 
in politically correct circles, their “alternative reality” can offer a refreshing 
change from the everyday reality the rest of us have to deal with. If a listener 
insists that he is Napoleon, and seems sincere, give him a chance.
You can ﬁ nd unique characters everywhere. The only requirements 
are that they have lots of personality, are fun, and are good talkers. I’ve 
found talent in all kinds of unlikely places. I’ve worked with bartenders, 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         11
teachers, musicians, writers, scientists, lawyers, doctors, university profes-
sors, pet groomers, athletes, pro-team coaches, priests and ministers, cops 
and housewives, all of whom had personality and original things to say. 
Even those who did not work out were worth a try. The moral is: Always 
be on the lookout for talent everywhere, from the experts who make guest 
appearances on your station to the life of the next party you attend.
What to Look for in a Talent
So how do you get on the talent development track while continuing to 
provide a decent level of programming today? There is no easy answer. 
Asking experts in the ﬁ eld for help and advice is one way. Many PDs use 
the weekend, ﬁ ll-in, or late-night shifts to ﬁ nd and develop people. Another 
tactic is to steal promising talent from the competition. Don’t worry if your 
prospective host isn’t perfect. Allow faults to show. That’s what makes 
 people interesting. Author Anne Lamott could easily be writing about air 
personalities as she describes the traits of narrators in her book Bird by 
Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life:
A person’s faults are what make him or her likable. I like [for narrators] 
to be like the people I would choose for friends, which is to say they have 
a lot of the same ﬂ aws as I do. Preoccupation with self is good. As is a ten-
dency toward procrastination, self-delusion, darkness, jealousy, grovelling, 
greediness, addictiveness. They shouldn’t be too perfect. Perfect means 
shallow and unreal and fatally uninteresting. I like for them to have a nice 
sick sense of humour and to be concerned with important things … politics 
and psychological and spiritual matters.
Look for people who are unique, bright, and articulate. Find good listen-
ers, with strong personalities and opinions and a variety of interests about 
which they are passionate. Most have a sense of joy and humor and are 
big readers. Often they are rebels. They should be fascinating. Sometimes 
they are angry. These are the “odd ducks.” They can talk to anyone about 
anything. Most of all, great personalities possess a quality that is at once 
indeﬁ nable and compelling. Some call this quality the “X-Factor.” Can you 
remember the last time you stood shivering in your towel in the morning, 
but couldn’t turn on your shower because you had to hear what was 
coming next on your radio? Find people who can make you do that.

12         Valerie Geller
Humor has a place on your station. You might be surprised to ﬁ nd that 
humor has a place on every radio station. You do not have to hire funny 
people, just people who have a sense of humor. It is important that your 
staff and your station have an appreciation for the odd, the strange, or the 
quirkier aspects of life. Moments of levity can be found in topical stories, 
news, or issues. Even the most serious news programs save a “kicker” or 
feature for the end of the newscast.
Hire storytellers. See if you can ﬁ nd someone who can tell a story 
three times, three different ways. Because many broadcasters work with 
subject matter that may not change very much over the course of days, 
weeks, or even months, they must be able to vary their storytelling. This 
keeps it interesting to an audience familiar with the material. It is as 
if you told your spouse a story. That night you have dinner guests and 
you tell the story again. The following day, you retell it to a friend over 
the phone. Your spouse has now heard the story three separate times. 
However, if you managed to vary your anecdote with different details or 
a new approach, it was not boring. If you have people on the air who can 
do this, you have the makings of a great radio station.
Finally, hire smart people. And when you ﬁ nd youself looking for 
work, try to ﬁ nd the smartest people you can and work for them. If you are 
just learning broadcast management or any other aspect of the broadcast 
 business, apprentice yourself as you would in any other ﬁ eld, from  medicine 
to plumbing. Learn from the best—it will set a standard for you.
Right Casting
It is important when you have assembled a stable of on-air talent to make 
sure that each one is positioned to achieve maximum success. In my work, 
I call this “right casting.” Understanding right casting is vital. If you were a 
movie director, you would not cast Arnold Schwarzenegger in the part of 
an old, bald, chemistry professor. He could play the part, but he is better 
playing his “strengths.”
Once you’ve decided that someone has what it takes to be on your 
station, you still have some assessing ahead. I have found that talent tends 
to fall into one of two categories; you can read about them in Chapter 3, 
“Generators and Reactors.”
Knowing the type of performer you have lets you guide toward his or 
her maximum performance. The programmer or manager is then able to 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         13
design a powerful radio program by building a show around the strengths 
of the personality instead of trying to do it the other way around by  stufﬁ ng 
your performer into a role that does not ﬁ t. Broadcasters also need to know 
what roles they play best when they are looking for work. As a manager, 
the ﬁ rst and maybe best thing you can do to help talent do their jobs well is 
to make sure they are correctly cast and given the tools they need to work 
effectively.
Managing Off-Air Staff
Most people get angry at anything they perceive as unfair. Radio is deﬁ -
nitely a business in which, as George Orwell writes in Animal Farm, 
“some animals are more equal than others.” A lot of radio performers are, 
at least on a local level, “stars.” They get treated differently, with a lot of 
extra  privileges. They are stars because of their talent, and talent is not 
 distributed fairly.
It takes many people working behind the scenes to support a star. 
Some people would be better off going for an on-air position in a small 
market rather than working in an off-air capacity in a large one, because 
their need to be the star is huge. Others are far happier remaining out of 
the limelight.
Lots of people are drawn to this business and take supporting jobs until 
they can be on the air, but until that happens, they need to be at peace with 
the job they are doing. A producer, glaring across the booth and  thinking, 
“I know I could do this show so much better” is not likely to be helping 
your program.
Management can compensate for some of the attention that gets directed 
to the star, but is really owed to the supporting cast, by  acknowledging the 
cast members directly. Still, if you have a chorus line that is miserable not 
being in the main spotlight, they will be angry and dissatisﬁ ed and will do 
your station very little good.
There is nothing wrong with ambition, but the people you hire must 
have the talent and desire to do the job they are currently doing. When 
they have mastered that position and are eager to move up, managers owe 
it to them to look at whether or not they would now be well cast in another 
job. If such a position is not immediately available, give them the option, 
even the assistance, to move to another situation where they would be 
 better able to fulﬁ ll their goals.

14         Valerie Geller
Radio is a highly demanding business. Often the hours are long and 
the pay is low. It would be nice if one could staff a station entirely with 
workaholics, heirs to large fortunes, or those who never need to go home. 
Many jobs in broadcasting really do require huge amounts of time and 
 commitment. If you enjoy your job, but it never seems to be over, you might 
ﬁ nd that other stations set up their staffs differently, hire more  people, and 
pay them better. It may not be the type of work you are doing that is  causing 
you difﬁ culty, but rather where you are doing it. In other words, you could 
be correctly cast doing the same job somewhere else.
Right Person, Wrong Show
Sometimes a talent has what it takes to succeed but has been put into a 
situation that is holding him or her back. Perhaps it’s the venue that’s to 
blame. Not everyone is right for every job. The talent may be GREAT, but 
the setting or the city or the station is wrong.
One example is funnyman Jay Thomas, a talented DJ and actor who 
never achieved substantial ratings in New York. But when he moved to Los 
Angeles, he became a top music radio personality.
The ﬁ rst incarnation of the David Letterman Show was actually in 
the middle of the day. It didn’t work very well, but the folks at NBC felt 
they had something and the show metamorphosed into the hit Late Night 
with David Letterman show. Less resolute managers might have thrown 
Letterman on the heap of former TV talk hosts. Believe in talent and take 
the risk.
Part of the right casting is learning the abilities of each performer. Do 
not expect a serious interviewer or journalist to go on the air in morning 
drive and be a comedian. That is not the nature of the individual’s  talent. 
Right casting is also about risk. Allow talent to fully realize their roles 
even if, occasionally, they go to the extreme. Do not be upset if your funny, 
 childlike jokesters make the occasional inappropriate remark. They are 
exploring the limits of the roles in which you have cast them.
Right Casting and the Passion Quotient
You and your staff should be listening to the station on your own time 
because you like to and because you are proud of it. Many managers who 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         15
have moved up through the ranks of sales sometimes do not  understand 
that although all on-air talent enjoy earning a good salary, their sole 
 motivation is not always strictly a ﬁ nancial reward. On-air personalities 
are strongly motivated by the chance to do creative work and perform for 
an audience. So when you are thinking about whether you or your staff are 
rightly cast at your stations and jobs, look for passion about the station, its 
place in the community, and the audience it serves. A talent who does not 
like, respect, or value the listeners is not likely interested in working hard 
to get more of them.
Though most people have to work to earn a living, many  broadcasters, 
if offered their same career track again today, say they would pursue it, 
even knowing in advance about the hardships and obstacles ahead. In 
fact, if asked how their jobs could be improved, other than with additional 
ﬁ nancial rewards, most on-air talent I’ve met list ways their show could be 
improved and the station could be promoted.
Meet with your staff. Ask each: “If I could offer you something to make 
your job easier, what would it be?” Those with a passion for their work 
often come up with ways they could do the job more efﬁ ciently, or better 
serve the listeners. They may surprise you. The following is from a news 
director’s actual wish list: “Poor newsroom lighting and a dearth of natural 
light are creating lethargy. Proposed Solution: Reworking the lighting and 
hanging some drapes could improve the work environment and pay off in 
a more energized staff.”
Notice this news director’s commitment to the quality of product 
and the well-being of her staff. She is successful in part because she feels 
strongly about doing a good job with the tools she is given—just the sort of 
person who is right for her job.
By the way, it is possible to kill an employee’s enthusiasm by  consistently 
saying “no” to small but practical solutions to real station problems. 
Wherever possible, say “yes” and build passion for the station and your 
product.
Find out why each member of your staff wanted the job he or she now 
has. The answers may prove enlightening. While some may have thought 
broadcasting would be an easy paycheck, others fought hard for a chance 
to be part of the station or on the air.
A lot of prestige and power comes with our titles. It sounds good to be 
able to say, “I am a journalist” or “I run a radio station.” The actual work is 
another matter. Did you become a program director because you thought 

16         Valerie Geller
that was the next job to take after hosting your own radio show and now 
ﬁ nd that you miss being on the air every day? You may have lost some of 
your passion for this work, due to wrong casting.
If you became a manager because you were offered a promotion and 
now ﬁ nd yourself in sales meetings when you would much rather be work-
ing with talent and marketing, your station is losing the beneﬁ t of a great 
PD who cared about the creative side of the organization.
Even if you have the most successful morning show in town on your 
station, if a DJ is burned out, or exhausted from getting up at 3:00 a.m., the 
numbers will soon reﬂ ect that. Keep checking in with your staff to make 
sure they are still happy. Just because all was well three months ago doesn’t 
mean that everything is ﬁ ne today, especially if there have been changes. 
For example, a member of a team show may have gotten a lot of inspiration 
from his or her co-host but may not enjoy working with the new partner.
There are a lot of reasons people choose a broadcast career. Perhaps in 
the beginning a DJ liked appealing to the opposite sex, seeing the country, 
and the music he played. But today, that same man is married, owns a house, 
and cannot bear listening to the music on his playlist. Clearly, as people grow 
and change, the challenge for a manager is to make sure they are cast in a role 
that is suitable for who they are today. That Top 40 DJ might be better cast 
playing hits on an Oldies station or Gold Format, or hosting a talk show.
Consolidation of broadcasting properties has made it easier to hang on 
to good people. Frequently, it’s just a matter of moving someone to the sister 
station in the studio across the hall to rekindle their passion for the work.
Someone who likes to write comedy and create clever parody songs 
may end up producing commercials for mattress stores. The payoff for 
this person could have been when clients and sales people request his or 
her spots because they work so well. If that is the case, as a manager, you 
should also make sure that you are spotlighting your staff’s achievements 
by submitting work for awards and industry commendations. But if that 
same production director envisioned being part of a morning team and is 
utterly miserable putting his or her creativity to use in a more anonymous 
and isolated setting, all the awards in the world can’t substitute.
It is possible that a few modiﬁ cations would make somebody’s job 
right again. This may be as simple as hiring an assistant for a production 
director who feels overwhelmed or ﬁ nding the right co-host for an unin-
spired morning host. Maybe a change of daypart would enable a presenter 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         17
to relax and rejuvenate with a favorite hobby in off-hours, bringing new life 
to his or her show.
One newsman I know takes several weeks off, with the blessing of the 
radio station management, during hunting season. When he returns, his 
work always improves. Another example: An album rock music host who 
was also a serious mountain biker was allowed to change shifts in order to 
have more daytime hours to pursue his passion. He enjoyed the change so 
much that he went on to organize station cycling promotions, which have 
beneﬁ ted the station and several charities.
It is also possible that someone is incorrectly cast not because he or she 
cannot do a job, but because he or she does not wish to do it. If you notice 
an employee speaking longingly of a position you never thought he or she 
would want, ask the employee why it appeals.
At stations around the world, and at the “Creating Powerful Radio” 
seminars, people ask how they can tell whether they are rightly cast. The 
shortest answer is: That which comes easily to you is probably what you do 
best. How much of that do you get to do? Do you have many perfect days 
at work? What is a perfect day at work for you? Is there an opportunity to 
do more of what appeals to you in your present position?
As a manager, you would do well to learn these things about your staff: 
What comes easily to them? When do you notice them having the most fun 
at work? Where do they struggle? These are areas that each host, manager, 
and programmer should look at from time to time.
Right Casting for Everybody
Just as many ﬁ ne actors also produce and direct their own award-winning 
ﬁ lms, you can have natural ability in many areas. So the question becomes 
what do you like to do best? How do you determine which job at a radio 
station is right for you? How do you ﬁ nd which shoe “ﬁ ts your foot”?
How do you know if you are rightly cast in your current role at a station?
■ If you look at the clock all day long and ﬁ nd the minutes inching 
by, perhaps you are not rightly cast. If you are a manager, ask: Do 
you like to manage others? Do you get as much satisfaction from 
someone else’s good work as you do from your own?

18         Valerie Geller
■ If you are on air or producing but you ﬁ nd that directing and devel-
oping others is fun, perhaps moving from on air to management 
may be the right casting for you. There are no rules. Though you can 
be successful either as a performer or manager or both, it’s often 
easier if you focus on and develop one area.
How do you know you are on the right track?
I cannot say this often enough: The skills that come easily to you are prob-
ably your strengths. But there is also a danger. Just as an opera fan who 
sings in the shower and joins the community choir may not have been 
blessed with a beautiful voice or perfect pitch, it is a sad but true fact 
that some gifted broadcasters waste years of their lives trying to make 
themselves something they are not. Sometimes the thing you love to do, 
or admire most in others, is not where your actual strength lies.
In her book The Vein of Gold, Julia Cameron explores this journey of 
discovering what you do best. Cameron quotes director Martin Ritt: 
All actors have a certain territory, a certain range, they were born to play, 
that is their “vein of gold.” If you cast an actor within that vein, he or she 
will always give you a brilliant performance. Of course you can always 
cast an actor outside his vein of gold. If you do, the actor can use craft and 
technique to give you a very ﬁ ne, a very credible performance, but never 
a performance as brilliant as when he or she is working in his or her vein 
of gold.
Here are some questions for broadcasters to consider, to help you 
decide if you are rightly cast in your current job.
Talent
When it comes to your show, are you more comfortable playing it safe 
than taking chances on the air? Do you worry about looking foolish?
Superstar performers take a few chances. If they spent a lot of time being 
anxious about their images, they would miss opportunities to be great. It 
takes bravery to risk looking silly in front of an audience, but your listeners 
appreciate courage even if you fail. If the thought of looking undigniﬁ ed 
petriﬁ es you, perhaps you should try something safer.

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         19
Talent and Managers
When there is a mistake on the air, is it always someone else’s fault? 
Who is to blame for sloppy on-air presentation?
Successful talent take a lot of responsibility for their shows. If some-
thing goes wrong on the air, they do not throw up their hands, blame the 
equipment or the producer, and give up for the rest of the hour. They 
dump the boring guest, look up an expert’s phone number, or carry the 
microphone down to the street. In short, they have courage to do what-
ever it takes to achieve a quality air product.
If the station has no budget for newspaper and magazine  advertising, 
successful talent buy their own. If the station cannot afford a piece of 
 equipment, motivated employees go out and ﬁ nd a sponsor who is will-
ing to provide the product on trade. An executive producer I know once 
organized a collection among the staff to buy a much-needed piece of 
 recording equipment. A manager went to the pharmacy and bought med-
icine for an ailing newscaster. A program director once told me, “I’d get 
down on my knees and shine (the host’s) shoes if that would help him do 
a better show.”
In a well-cast broadcasting scenario, if something goes wrong, each 
 person involved, from the program director to the call screener, comes up 
with an idea of how he or she could help make it better the next time. If 
you are not willing to take responsibility for your product, ask yourself why 
you are doing this job.
How afraid are you of getting ﬁ red? Does that motivate you?
Everyone has a boss. If you live in fear to the extent that you are not willing 
to risk management’s displeasure, you may be miscast. It is important that 
you feel strongly enough about your freedom to try new ideas on behalf of 
your station, your show, or your staff. You must be willing to incur a little 
fallout once in a while. Sometimes, the powers-that-be must be obliged, but 
there should be a little give and take here.
If you are immobilized by fear of losing your job, you should ask your-
self the next question.

20         Valerie Geller
If you did lose your job, how easily do you think you could ﬁ nd another one?
If the answer is that you could not easily replace this job, then you may 
need to express your creativity in other ways. Technology has made it 
easier to do some of the work of our business outside of a radio station 
or broadcast facility. Many hosts, producers, and sales people have studios 
and ofﬁ ces in their own homes. That has cut down on some of the need 
to become a migrant worker for the sake of a broadcasting career. Still, if 
 having to make sacriﬁ ces in the form of a move, pay cut, lifestyle change, 
etc., is something you are not willing to do, then seek out a job where you 
are more properly cast.
Managers
Are you willing to risk? Do you feel uneasy when you hear the format 
being broken?
If you know that nine times out of ten your format is going “out the 
window” for a good reason, then you are demonstrating the kind of ﬂ ex-
ibility that can come only when you have conﬁ dence in your air staff and 
are comfortable with your job.
Talent
Do you feel ruled and restricted by the station’s format clock, or do 
you feel you have enough control and discretion to structure your show 
according to the needs of the moment?
If you are able to work within the conﬁ nes of your format, yet have 
enough leeway to pursue the occasional “magic moment” or news emer-
gency, you are probably working with supportive management in a role 
that ﬁ ts you.
Talent/Producers/Management
Do you ever get ideas for somebody else’s show or feature? If so, do you 
usually share them with the talent or keep them to yourself?
If you can pass material along or be of assistance, you are demonstrating 
courage, leadership, and a generous personality. You have a vision of the 
total health of the station. You are a team player. This attribute would serve 
you well either as a manager or as a member of a team show. You might do 
better working with a few other performers rather than ﬂ ying solo.

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         21
Talent
Do you have total control of your show?
Almost nobody has that, unless you own the station. But, your goal should 
be to leave the studio each day feeling: “That was me. That was what I 
wanted to do on the air today.” If you ﬁ nish your show feeling as though 
you executed somebody else’s agenda, with no personal stake in the out-
come, you are probably miscast.
Managers
Do you feel you or your producers are constantly forcing ideas on the 
 talent? Do you feel you must hold the reins tightly to ensure that he or she 
will do a particular type of show every day? Do you feel you are in a 
 wrestling match with the talent for control of the show?
If so, you are controlling the show out of fear the talent is inept, or you are 
trying to put a square peg in a round hole and the talent is miscast, or you 
would prefer to do the show yourself.
Talent
Do you believe the work you do matters?
Having a microphone is not something one should take for granted. Because 
aspects of the job can become routine or mundane, it is easy to forget that 
listeners are giving you their most valuable resource—their time. There is a 
commitment on the part of the broadcaster to offer information, entertain-
ment, inspiration, or whatever your station has promised to provide.
Talent/Managers
What is the best thing about your manager? What is the worst thing 
about your manager?
If you make an honest inventory of your manager’s good and bad qualities, 
you may ﬁ nd that your job is better than you thought it was. What seems like 
an unsatisﬁ ed boss may actually be someone who is working very hard to bring 
you to the next level of performance. He or she may see potential where you 
see none. Although you might feel miscast in a certain job, you may be there to 
learn skills for the next position your supervisor has in mind for you.
However, you are probably miscast if you feel that your manager is the 
radio police, if he or she consistently makes you do things you don’t want 
to do, or you work in fear of being caught making a mistake.

22         Valerie Geller
Managers
Are you proud to sell this product?
Would you be just as happy selling something more tangible or less contro-
versial? While running a broadcasting operation gives you prestige, it also 
makes you a target. If you would be more comfortable managing a differ-
ent type of company, give yourself permission to move on.
Managers/Talent
Finally, everyone should ask: Do any jobs at the station, other than the 
one you now have, seem interesting to you?
If they do, why not learn them? There are always vacations, emergencies, 
and ﬁ ll-in opportunities. You may ﬁ nd another area of the business that is 
a better ﬁ t for you—one where you would be better cast.
If radio does not fulﬁ ll your need to be heard and to express yourself 
creatively, if it drains rather than energizes you to create something new on 
the air each day, if you ﬁ nd you are upset or tired of taking irate calls from 
a community leader or offended politician, there may be some other work 
that might be more suitable.
Most creative people have a lot of artistic abilities, and radio may not 
be the right creative venue for you.
Similar Goals
Part of right casting is making sure that your goals and the station’s objec-
tives work together. Broadcast consultant Andy Beaubien puts it this way:
As much as personalities would like to think that their show is their own 
exclusive artistic responsibility, it is nevertheless part of the station’s  overall 
effort. It ultimately must satisfy the station’s goals. If the personality’s 
goals and the station’s goals are out of sync, the result will be  frustration 
and bitterness on both sides. In almost every case where there is a seri-
ous problem between management and an air personality, the underlying 
cause is usually a conﬂ ict between goals or, to put it in the language of the 
trade publications, “philosophical differences.”
Talent may also have philosophical differences with the audience. That 
is ﬁ ne in many cases, and some talent build careers by ﬂ ying in the face of 

Creating Powerful Radio: Finding and Developing Talent         23
convention, but it can be a tough road. Does this mean you should alter 
your true self to keep your job? Programming consultant Jaye Albright 
speaks from experience when she says:  “Radio does reward the craftspeople 
who most accurately reﬂ ect the  current cultural realities. If you can ﬁ nd it 
within yourself to respect the prevailing value system, while still being true 
to your own unique creative voice, you may be more successful.”
Tips for Finding and Developing Talent
Radio can be taught, but talent is rare. If you ﬁ nd the real thing  .  .  .  MAKE 
THE HIRE!
1. Look for talent in nontraditional areas.
2. Make your choice and then stick by it.
3. Don’t pull the plug if you don’t see immediate results.
4. Have faith.
5. Motivate the talent with honest feedback and encouragement.

This page intentionally left blank

Creating Powerful Radio 
Generators and Reactors
“It’s not what you say, it’s what they hear.”
— Red Auerbach
Putting Your Personalities in Power:
Are You a Generator or a Reactor?
Have you ever noticed that some on-air personalities, while they may be 
completely professional, are somewhat boring by themselves? But the 
 minute someone else walks into the studio, they seem to come alive and 
get much better. Some personalities seem more talented when they are 
performing live in front of an audience. Others are funnier, sharper, and 
more creative by themselves. It turns out that talent usually falls into one 
of two categories, generators or reactors.
In order to coach talent effectively, it helps to identify the talent’s 
strengths and natural abilities. Sometimes that can be achieved by clearly 
deﬁ ning the talent’s roles. Consultant Dan Vallie advises, “There must be 
an anchor or director, a creative chief, a producer, etc.” But before you 
deﬁ ne the role, knowing the type of performers you are working with lets 
C H A P T E R  3
25

you guide them toward their maximum performance. The programmer is 
then able to design powerful radio by making the shoe ﬁ t the foot, instead 
of trying to do it the other way around.
What Is a Generator?
The natural skill of the generator means that he or she can easily work 
alone or as part of a team. A generative talent visualizes original ideas. A 
generator has a strong, independent imagination. The generator comes up 
with a myriad of topics, undaunted by the blank page.
What Is a Reactor?
Reactors are also creative individuals. A reactive talent takes existing 
ideas and comes up with numerous ways to make them better or more 
 workable.
No less talented than a generator, the reactor nonetheless has a very 
different style. A reactor alone faces the blank page with terror. However, 
the moment a reactor comes in contact with a generator, he or she can 
instantly and very cleverly pick up on remarks, comments, or nuances and 
be very funny.
A reactor is usually the one who responds to just about any stimulus 
with an insightful or witty remark. Reactors can have a lot of fun talking 
back to their TV sets and radios. Reactors work best with other people in 
the room to spark their creative energy.
Both types of talent are valuable and good, but the right casting here is 
the key. Forcing a reactor to carry the show as a generator doesn’t work, and 
forcing a strong generator into an equal or subordinate partnership with 
another generative talent can lead to an almost painful on-air clash. The 
trick is to identify each person’s speciﬁ c strengths and then to  encourage 
the person to develop those strengths.
Putting two generators together as co-hosts or as a team can sometimes 
be a disaster. They tend to battle for the microphone, seldom listen to each 
other, and compete for attention. The show sounds like two kids ﬁ ghting at 
the dinner table. It is hard to listen for very long.
Putting two reactors together is not much better. The audience hears 
them casting a net for ideas over and over again. The process is dull, and, if 
nothing swims into the net, the show becomes weak and boring.
26         Valerie Geller

Electric connection with the audience happens when you have a 
 balance of both elements.
How Do You Tell the Difference between a Reactor 
and a Generator?
It is fairly simple. Generators have a lot of ideas and energy. They take 
huge risks and worry about it later. They have moments of brilliance. They 
sit alone in a room, and their minds overﬂ ow with ideas.
That is not to say that every idea a generator produces is a perfectly 
conceived show, but consistently they seem to be practically exploding with 
new material.
If you are looking at a reactive talent, you will notice that he or she is 
quick with a story, a memory, an imitation or a line for any topic you could 
give him or her. But you must lead the reactor by giving that ﬁ rst push, that 
suggestion, or a good opening. Leave the reactor alone in a room with no 
external catalyst for the show, and he or she is miserable. Reactors may do 
brilliant interviews, or pick things out of the newspaper that are unique, but 
they need some kind of initial stimulus to begin the process. You probably 
have a reactor on the air if he or she is dull until the news person shows up.
Generators are scarce. Most people are reactors. It is a little like being 
left- or right-handed. One is no better than the other. If absolutely  necessary, 
right-handed people can adapt to use their left hands, and vice versa. You 
can certainly force people to improve in the area where they are weaker, 
but in most circumstances, it is best for the station to take  advantage of 
their natural inclinations.
A Cast of Dozens
You might think it takes a generator to host a morning show. That is not 
always the case. One reactor, “Casey,” found a cast of generators in his lis-
tening audience. “Rita” owned and operated a local beauty salon. She was 
also Casey’s loyal fan and listener. Rita started calling in on a semi-regular 
basis to chat about hot movies and goings on around town. She was funny 
and charming and had unique views. Rita became a regular on the show. 
The listeners started calling in wanting to meet Rita. She participated at 
station events and appearances.
Creating Powerful Radio: Generators and Reactors          27

28         Valerie Geller
Next, Casey added another regular listener, a talkative cab driver. Then 
he found a local construction guy with ﬁ x-it tips, who also happened to be 
twenty-eight, dating regularly, and happy to talk about his adventures.
Casey continues to add appropriate players as they appear. He now has 
a winning show with lots of generators to show off his reactive talents. He 
assembled his own generator-reactor team.
As a manager or programmer, it is your job to identify each person’s spe-
ciﬁ c strengths and then to encourage each one to develop those strengths. 
Once you know who your generators and reactors are, you can get onto the 
business of creating powerful radio.

Creating Powerful Radio 
Performance and Formatics
“To escape criticism—do nothing, say nothing, be nothing.”
— William Teacher
“If you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth 
will save you. If you do not bring forth what is within 
you, what you do not bring forth will destroy you.”
— Jesus
Performance
Now that you are on the air on a regular basis, you know what hard work 
it really is. When you listen to the radio, you notice people who sound 
 spontaneous. They make their work look natural and easy. It seems these 
people never make a mistake on the air, or, if they do, you hardly notice, or 
the show takes an unexpected twist and gets even better.
Then there are broadcasters who seem pained and uncomfortable 
when things go astray. It can make you very nervous to listen to people 
reacting to a situation that way. How can you make sure you sound like one 
of the naturals?
C H A P T E R  4
29

30         Valerie Geller
The difference between accomplished professionals and talented 
 neophytes is that the seasoned air talent always give you the feeling that 
they are in control, no matter what happens.
This skill can be learned. The people you admire on the air have 
 mastered some basic techniques that carry them through the most difﬁ cult 
situations. Their experiences—successes as well as failures—are what make 
them so adept now. You cannot avoid some of the unpredictable aspects of 
this business, but you can learn reliable techniques to improve your show. 
You can escape certain traps by practicing a few elementary performance 
points, and there are things you can do to “self-correct” should the show 
begin to take a turn for the worse.
Performance Points
1. Pick Topics about Which You Really Care
A great talent or personality can make selecting a sofa interesting. 
Boring people, on the other hand, could ruin a conversation about the 
discovery of human life on Pluto. If you are interested, you will make it 
interesting.
2. Use a Strong Show Opening or Monologue
Be sure to do the following:
■ Focus the topic.
■ Engage the audience by forming a question.
■ State your opinion or position on a talkable topic.
■ Explain your view through example, experience, or storytelling.
Do not read entire prepared speeches. If you must read on air, do not sound 
like you are reading.
3. Never Be Boring!
Get rid of dull guests immediately. Remember, if you are bored, it is 
 boring. If a guest starts out great, or was selected as an expert, but in fact 
turns out to be stiff, too nervous to think clearly, or is in any other way 
 noncommunicative or inept as a storyteller, get rid of that guest.

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         31
How often have you checked your watch when a guest is talking, or 
have taken a mini-vacation in your head? If this is happening, try a few 
direct questions calculated to raise the energy level in the room. If that 
does not help, dismiss the guest.
If this is a problem for you, have a prearranged signal with your 
 producer just as couples do at parties. News people can be sent in waving 
copy. Anything that allows you to shove a dullard out the door is fair. Make 
a transition, and immediately try doing something else.
Remember, you are probably more interesting than a boring guest. Be 
ﬂ exible and protect your air product. If the guest is great, keep him or her 
with you longer.
Why Is Getting Rid of a Boring Guest So Difﬁ cult?
It is surprisingly hard to speed the departure of a guest because we are 
trained from childhood to consider the feelings of others. As professionals 
in polite society, we do not wish to be rude. But it is ultimately better to 
be abrupt with one guest or caller than to be impolite to an entire listen-
ing audience, boring them because we feel uncomfortable cutting off the 
 discussion. The audience is under no obligation to be polite to you, the 
host. They feel free to leave if things get dull.
What if the expert is in the room staring at you, expecting to go 
on the air for the full show?
With live radio, it is especially difﬁ cult to ask the tough, meaty questions 
or to cut off a boring guest if that person is in the room. Do it anyway. You 
should not have promised a guest more than a few minutes of airtime. Your 
producer can explain the show’s “policy” on the matter.
It is easier for some hosts to exercise the “cutoff” switch if the guest is on the 
telephone rather than live in the studio. Try sacriﬁ cing a little sound quality by 
using a phone connection if this makes it easier for you to end an interview. One 
famous American host has created an  environment designed to simulate the 
listener’s experience. She places the guest in another studio, without eye contact, 
so that the  conversation relies solely on listening and verbal communication. 
You may ﬁ nd there are some advantages to conducting an interview this way.
4. Don’t Take Calls Just Because They’re There
Program director Alan Eisenson has rules for guests and callers. He says, 
“Guests and calls are simply tools for the host to use to make a better show. 

32         Valerie Geller
I would rather hear a strong air personality than boring callers or guests. 
It is up to the host to determine when a guest or call gets boring. Some 
guests could be great for three hours and others are only good for ﬁ ve 
 minutes. Some callers could go on for ﬁ ve minutes, but are only  worthy of 
ﬁ ve  seconds. A good host and producer should be able to tell the difference 
and pace the show accordingly. Only use callers to enhance the show.”
Talk personality Turi Ryder’s theory is that many “callers will make their 
point, then begin to make it a second time if left unchecked. The trick as a 
talk host is to get them off the air when they ﬁ nish their best material, before 
they say: ‘just one more thing’ and before they start to loop around again.”
5. What If the Interview or Topic Goes Wrong?
Sometimes you ask a wrong question, or don’t frame your talkable topic/
engaging question well. If you are not getting the desired response,  perhaps 
it is time to change the story or example a little, or recompose the question 
to engage the audience differently. Do not be afraid to reset your topic going 
into or coming back from a break. But do not repeat your topic exactly. Add 
something new.
6. You Can Change Your Mind
Your opinion may change. As Alan Eisenson points out: “Views may 
change as an issue evolves over days or weeks. Do not be afraid to change 
your opinion as more facts become available or if a caller or guest per-
suades you with a strong argument to change your mind. Do not stick to 
your guns if you ﬁ nd you are wrong. Remember, always tell the truth. And 
don’t be afraid to admit you don’t know something. You’re not expected to 
have all the facts about every issue all the time.”
7. Take a Risk on the Air
Sometimes you head into a danger zone with a comment, view, question, 
or decision you make about what goes on the air. Understand that not 
everything you say will be popular, even if you feel it is true.
A lot of what you can get away with depends on your relationship with 
management. Even more depends on your level of success. Proven  personalities 
can get away with much more than an unproven talent or new arrival.
If you know you are heading into a controversial or “gray” area, some-
times it is better to ask permission from your boss. A powerful show is 

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         33
not one where a host lives in fear of getting the axe. Note to Managers: 
If a  talent calls you and lets you know he or she is about to move into a 
 potentially dangerous topic, make a decision. If you need to take a moment 
to consult a lawyer, or another manager, do it quickly.
Is it better to beg for forgiveness than ask for permission? That depends. 
Trust your instinct or gut feelings, but try not to hold yourself back from 
potentially powerful moments. Do not be so afraid of failure or getting 
into trouble that you lose your spontaneity and sense of discovery, risk, or 
adventure on the air. Live radio is a live experience.
Radio executive Mel Karmazin always backs top multi-media  performer 
Howard Stern. When they worked together at CBS radio, no matter what Stern 
said, if he “crossed the line” and got the network into trouble, Mel Karmazin 
paid the penalty ﬁ nes. As a manager, Karmazin believed in Howard and liked 
the proﬁ ts generated from the show. He understood that talent cannot be 
restricted. If you want the great moments, you must assume some risk.
At this point many stations have increased their “delay” time and have 
someone standing by with a ﬁ nger over the “dump button.” Since stations 
frequently make their on-air product available via alternate delivery sys-
tems, such as satellite or computer feeds, talent are less likely to get upset 
if a few seconds of their shows are deleted from over-the-air broadcasts 
once in awhile.
In America, there is often greater concern over offending special 
 interest groups than over the occasional expletive that may slip out. Either 
way, great talent who have strong management backing them up will have 
a better chance of surviving and achieving success.
The best managers behave honorably. As a manager, if you tell your 
 talent it is OK to do a certain type of show, you are honor bound to live by 
that commitment until you mutually agree to change it. Do not ﬁ re talent for 
your mistake. If you say, “Go ahead and speak your mind, create discussion, 
we do not mind controversy,” then be prepared for the consequences. Your 
phone will ring constantly with angry listeners. Your mailbox will be ﬁ lled 
with hate letters. Fifteen people may march in front of the station,  threatening 
to boycott your biggest advertiser, and your spouse may be embarrassed to 
tell friends where you work. If you are not ready to live with that on a day-
to-day basis, then do not hire people who do those types of shows.
Talent will occasionally do things you would rather they had not done. 
However, not all talent live on the cutting edge—most operate some-
where between the safe and the daring. But the more artistic and creative 

34         Valerie Geller
the talent, the greater the risks that artist is likely to take. The payoff can 
be enormous, but it may cost you your serenity and security.
In Chapter 22, Airchecking, you’ll ﬁ nd various examples and methods 
of guiding talent to say what they want to say while generating less  hostility 
or controversy. It is best to establish a line of communication where man-
agers know what is happening and can choose what ﬁ ghts to support. 
Managers do not like unpleasant surprises.
8. Use Your “Off” Switch
From the wisdom of consultant Jaye Albright, “Master the use of the most 
difﬁ cult piece of equipment in the control room: the ‘off ’ switch on your 
microphone. Practice moderation. Learn to recognize when a bit is over, 
and stop talking at that point.”
9. The Day You Wished You’d Stayed in Bed
Not every show will be your best show. Even your favorite air personality 
has the occasional bad day. Sometimes you just can’t hit the ball, no matter 
what you do. Your rhythm may be off, or you may not be feeling well.
When you had a show that did not work, it is important to do a quick 
analysis. Look for an easily identiﬁ able reason why your show didn’t work: 
Not enough sleep? Hungry? Inadequate show prep? A ﬁ ght with your 
former spouse just before you went on the air? If it is ﬁ xable, ﬁ x it. Do it 
differently next time.
Perhaps you simply did a poor job of it. There are two things you can 
do: you can choose to pick it apart over and over and beat yourself with the 
aircheck, making yourself feel terrible, thereby ensuring you will do a worse 
job tomorrow, or you can let it go. Regular listeners who like you will forgive 
one bad show. Tomorrow someone will be listening who has never heard you 
before. That person will not know about today’s bad show. Forgive yourself 
and move forward.
10. Treat the Staff You Work with Respectfully
Whether you know it or not, they have a lot of impact on your  performance. 
The station’s staff can help you or sabotage you in a million ways. A mis-
erable team will cost you more than you think.

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         35
“Art lives from constraints and dies from freedom.”
— Leonardo da Vinci
Formatics
Listeners like formatics. They provide structure, like the walls of a house. 
People want to know to whom and what they are listening, and they like to 
know what time it is. Jaye Albright says:
For most of us in most situations, formatics are absolutely essential. They 
are like “the blocking and tackling” exercises of our sport. And, as in the 
NFL, where spring drills begin with the statement, “This is a football,” 
before you dispense with formatics, you must execute them naturally, 
 ﬂ awlessly. Formatics are all about memorability, habit, and familiarity. It is 
these things that make ratings, unless your content is constantly superior 
and compelling.
For a programmer, making sure the formatics are properly done is 
the easiest part of an aircheck session. The aircheck tells all. If anything 
is  missing after a performance, follow it up in the session. Call attention 
to it and make it a goal for the next session. Sometimes new talent do 
not understand the importance of formatics to ratings results. Explain the 
necessity of getting this part right. As long as ratings are counted by recall, 
this is one element of success that is up to each host.
It makes sense to do everything we know to win. Repetition stimu-
lates recall. It is that simple. Your station will be marketing itself to 
advertisers with hard data about website visits, store trafﬁ c, etc. Make 
sure you are doing your part by giving the information you are asked to 
communicate.
Overcoming Resistance
Programmers around the world share a common frustration and ask the 
same question of talent: “Why don’t you simply do the formatics as you 
are told? How hard can this be? We have talked about this over and over 
again!”
Talent says: “You care more about call letters and time checks than 
you do about content! A monkey or a robot could do formatics. I am an 
 individual. I got involved in what was happening at the moment.”

36         Valerie Geller
Some managers take it too far and become obsessive about the num-
ber of call letter and dial position mentions. Although it is my belief that 
you can never say the name of a station enough times, New York City pro-
gram director and personality Scott Shannon makes this important point: 
“Great stations are not built on hot clocks and contests, they are built on 
heart.”
Why rebel with formatics or forget to do them? The reason is that many 
on-air personalities do not believe it is important. Because they already 
know who they are and where they work, it becomes boring to them to 
repeat their name and the station’s dial position and call letters.
If the talent does not understand the absolute importance of  formatics, 
they will not be a priority. Ask talent to imagine how they would feel if 
someone heard their show in a cab and wanted to listen again at home, but 
couldn’t, because they couldn’t remember the station’s dial position and 
call letters. Not giving your call letters is like asking someone to ﬁ nd your 
house when you have no street sign or address out front. It is to everyone’s 
beneﬁ t if talent understands how listeners listen. Make it clear that the 
audience has a short attention span and often uses radio as background. 
As a last resort, if a talent continually forgets to do formatics, try helping 
out with produced elements.If you have ever listened to a radio show and 
wondered, ‘Who is this person and who is he talking to?’ you understand 
the need for resetting and formatics.
Credit Where Credit Is Due
I once consulted a station with famous, historic call letters. Everyone 
 associated with it was proud to work for this radio legend. They assumed 
that people were familiar with their station. Many were, but most of their 
actual listeners seldom heard the call letters or station name and had 
 trouble remembering where they were tuned.
We increased that station’s ratings 70% in one ratings period by  saying 
the call letters and the name of the station every time we took a call, gave 
the time, started the news, opened the microphone. I would love to say 
we added 70% to our listening audience, but the truth of the matter is, 
we  simply made it easier for people writing in their Arbitron diaries to 
 remember where they were tuned. You can never say the call letters or the 
name of the station too many times.

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         37
Be responsible for eliminating what Arbitron terms “Phantom Cume”—
i.e., those people who listen but can’t exactly remember the dial position, 
Internet address, or name of the personality or of the station. Every ﬁ fteen 
minutes you are judged by what the diary keepers write down. That means 
every ﬁ fteen minutes hammer home:
■ YOUR NAME
■ NAME OF THE SHOW
■ NAME OF THE STATION (“The Talk Station”)
■ CALL LETTERS AND DIAL POSITION
Repetition is the way we learn and memorize. Think of television’s 
Sesame Street. Repeat and repeat and repeat until the audience learns it.
Talk-Radio Formatics
Each format in radio has a slightly different structure. They all have one 
thing in common: Your listener should never feel the pressure you feel to 
execute formatics correctly.
Never Let a Listener Feel the Format
Don’t use “radiospeak.” Try not to use those words and phrases you say 
only when you are in front of a microphone, e.g., “segment,” “this  program” 
or “forecast.” Try to keep your formatics as natural-sounding as possible. 
Always answer the question, “Why should someone listen to this?” Only 
mention the “clock” if there is a beneﬁ t to the listener.
If you say: “Here’s your trafﬁ c on the eights,” it is helpful because the 
audience needs to know that you are keeping your promise to bring them 
trafﬁ c every ten minutes. You may also have a break at twenty minutes past 
the hour, but listeners should never feel your formatic restrictions. That’s 
our problem, not their problem. They don’t need to know when it’s time for 
us to take a commercial break.
The structure of your show is there for a reason, mostly to market your 
station. But listeners care only whether it is interesting or relevant to them. 
Your audience should simply feel they are spending time with you. 

38         Valerie Geller
For talk radio, the structure is more or less like the one Alan Eisenson 
uses:
■  Open the hour with your name, the time, and the call letters.
■  Do some short opening comments, if you have any that day 
which may or may not be your main topic.
■  Launch into your monologue, i.e., engage the audience with your 
opinion/position and storytelling.
■  Ask the question. This is your tightly focused topic.
■  Give out the phone numbers.
■  Take a break, using proper formatics: Use the term “up next” 
instead of “take a break.”
■ Open the ﬂ ood gates (the phones) after your ﬁ rst break.
■  Reset the topic by asking the question going in and out of each 
subsequent break (again, using proper formatics).
Resetting and Teasing
Radio Computing Service’s Tom Zarecki spent years as a programming 
consultant. He says:
Since new people keep tuning in, the host needs to frequently recap guests’ 
names, what group they represent, and showing how the topic is interesting 
to a listener. Keep teasing upcoming show segments or features. Waiting 
ﬁ ve minutes in a drive-time interview to recap what’s going on, or only 
teasing once or twice an hour, is simply not often enough.
Formatics do not have to be dry and boring. If you do them well, they 
can become a creative and exciting part of your show.

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         39
Here are more speciﬁ c ways to use formatics to engage your audience 
from Tommy Kramer’s Coaching Handbook.
Pull the listener into the radio with you
If you say “It’s 72 degrees out there” you tell me, the listener, that I’m out 
there and you are not out there with me. You are somewhere else. In  reality, 
I am in my car or at my desk and you are with me when I am listening. Why 
push me away? I’ve heard talent in Fort Worth [a suburb of Dallas, Texas] 
say “over in Fort Worth.” Why? Just saying “in Fort Worth” will say it with-
out distancing yourself from the Fort Worth listener. Avoid saying anything 
that pushes the listener away.
Sell the benefit
Always sell a beneﬁ t of the show or station. “Soft easy favorites” is not a 
reason for me to listen to you on my way home from work. What is the 
beneﬁ t to me? But “soft easy favorites to make your drive home easier” 
gives me a reason to listen.
Use real language
What is more effective? “For further information and details, call 456-1111” 
or “You want to know more? Give me a call.” How about, “It’s just about 
forty-ﬁ ve minutes after the hour of twelve o’clock.” Would you ever say 
that if I asked you what time it was? Wouldn’t you just glance at your watch 
and say 12:45? Talk on the air the way you talk in life.
Formatics Tips from Consultant Tommy Kramer
Be sensitive to repetition. A good talent varies the way everything 
is done. The listener wants consistency but not predictability. Even if 
positioning phrases or branding should require that things be said in 
the same words all the time, the talent can still vary the inﬂ ection of 
the words. Repetition becomes boring quickly and is also an indicator 
of the deadly “automatic pilot” mentality that can bring down a talent 
or a station fast. Do your part. Keep the talent energized by pointing 
out good examples when they occur, or freshening things up that may 
have become tired sounding.

40         Valerie Geller
Connect with the listener
Tell me—don’t read to me. Let your language and manner pull the listener 
into the radio. Newsman Paul Harvey writes about a dozen key words on a 
card, and tells you the story.
The rule of one
Do one main thing per break. Obviously, you need to identify the station and/
or music, give the time and whatever your station’s “formatics” are, but do 
that stuff brieﬂ y and then do the one thought you set out to do this break.
Hit the target
Many stations ﬁ nd it helpful to draw up a speciﬁ c proﬁ le of your listener, 
complete with a picture if possible. Post it in the on-air studio. Speak to that 
one target listener every time the mike opens. Say things that will appeal 
to and interest him or her. For instance, if it is a soft adult contemporary 
station, you might not want to dwell on the hockey scores. And keep it 
singular. Do not say, “If some of you listening would like to go . . .” Instead 
say, “If you want to go . . .” Always talk to one listener at a time and aim at 
the target.
Promote ahead
Promote anything of beneﬁ t coming up on your show. Be truthful. Instead 
of “I’ll have tickets to give away in a few minutes,” try “This hour, you will 
have a chance to win James Taylor tickets!”
If you tell me something is coming up in a few minutes and I only have 
twenty minutes until I get to work, I’ll be mad at you if you don’t get to it by 
the time I shut off the car radio. But if you tell me it’s coming up within the 
next thirty minutes, and I only have twenty, I won’t hold it against you. Never 
promote anything as, “coming up after the break.”  That is like  saying, “I’m 
going away now.”
Don’t tell the listener what to think
It is irritating. “Here’s one you’ll really like” (How do you know? What if 
I don’t?) or “You’ll have a great time” (What if I have a lousy time?). Tell 
me that you like it and why (or why some people like it). Let me decide for 
myself. You may know the Chinese saying: “Tell me and I’ll forget, show 
me and I may remember, but involve me and I’ll understand.” We do a lot 

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         41
of “telling” on air, which never seems to work as well as ﬁ nding the way to 
“involve” your listener in your subject or topic.
Sell the dream first, before you give the information
In advertising, they say, “Sell the sizzle, not the steak.” Seek an emotional link 
with the listener. Help me see why I want to win before I have to hear all the 
junk about how to do it. If you do not make me want what is being offered, 
there is no reason for me to care about all that technical information.
Have a road map
Know how you are starting. Have a destination in mind. Know how you are 
ending. Move on to the next element.
Often a talent takes way too long to get to the point. We have all heard 
breaks like: “WZXT 99 with Elton John and Rocket Man from 1973. You 
know, he’s done a lot of great work over the years and this one is deﬁ nitely 
one of the all-time favorites. Now let’s go to the phones—Jennifer’s on line 
three. Let’s ﬁ nd out what her most embarrassing moment was. Jennifer, 
how are you this morning?” Tighten it up, cut to the chase! “WZXT 99 
with Elton John. Jennifer is on the phone. Jennifer, what was your most 
 embarrassing moment?”
How to edit phone calls
Keep the unnecessary parts of the calls off the air. “OK, Jane, thanks 
for  calling in today” or “Thanks for having me on, taking my call,” and 
other superﬂ uous stuff does not need to be on the air. It is boring, slows 
 momentum, and no one cares. Instead identify the station and keep to the 
point, “Jane you are on Sunny 98.5. What weird gift did you get on your 
birthday?”
Reset the stage
Adopt an egg-timer attitude, and every couple of minutes brieﬂ y reset the 
stage for anyone who may just be joining the show. (One talent coach I 
know actually leaves a ﬁ fteen-minute hourglass on the studio console.) If 
the listener cannot quickly get what is going on, he or she might choose 
another station. If I tune in and hear “Florida’s winning coach Steve Smith 

42         Valerie Geller
on Sports Radio 540, The Team,” . . . this morning, I won’t feel confused. Let 
the new listener know which voice belongs to which person and what that 
person’s role is! “Celluloid Mike, our ﬁ lm critic is here. Mike, what should 
I take the kids to see this weekend?”
Break the habit of “taking a break”
Please do not use the word “break.” It comes from TV, where they regu-
larly do stop the action and break away from programming to do other 
things. But because everything on your radio station is a part of your total 
format, you are almost never “breaking away.”
Do not “break now for the news.” Each time you tell the audience 
there is a break, they think that they, too, can “break away.” The whole 
show is yours. That includes sports, news, and anything else inside your 
show. Stations are rated not only on how many listeners show up, but 
also on how many listeners stick around. Try something along the lines of 
“Let’s ﬁ nd out what else is going on. It’s 6 o’clock and you are listening 
to WXXX. News is next.” Do not throw away a single minute of your air-
time, even if your station requests that you give a standard introduction 
to other elements. The mark of a professional is the ability to make every 
word his or her own.
Don’t panic if you need a moment
Have you ever heard someone on the radio chattering aimlessly, verbally 
casting about for clarity of thought or direction? That talent has likely been 
taught to “keep the meter moving. Whatever else happens, keep talking.”
However, that fear of “dead air” can provoke meaningless, manic 
 episodes that will actually lose your audience. Do not be afraid of a moment 
of silence. The listeners will understand, and it beats the alternative. Do not 
panic. Take a pause if you need a few seconds to collect your thoughts.
Taking a moment of silence can also become a tool. Veteran New York 
radio host Bob Grant learned this trick and often paused for a few  seconds 
after stating a powerful message to get the listener’s attention. Grant, 
among others, learned that nothing can get the attention of the listeners 
more quickly than a second or two of “dead air.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Performance and Formatics         43
Content Plus Formatics Equals Ratings
In addition to your content and style, here are some talk-radio basic 
 formatics that can make a difference and get you ratings.
Before Each Break
■ Remember to tease what is coming up or reset your talkable topic 
or engaging question.
■ Involve your audience. Use a cliff-hanger to keep them coming 
back for more, staying through a break, or just listening longer.
After Each Break
Brieﬂ y reset your topic. A reset should include:
■ Your name
■ Dial position
■ Topic: Ask your focused question or tease—preferably one that 
everyone listening to will have a burning desire to answer.
■ Phone number
■ Time check (if relevant)
Example: “In case you’ve just joined us, it is 6:21, I am James Johnson 
and you are listening to WXYZ AM 690. Our guest is supermodel 
Christie Christensen, talking about her new book, Sleep Your Way to 
the Top. What do you think about using sex to get your job? Call us 
at 666-8255.”
At ﬁ rst, working with formatics is a struggle. Aircheck yourself  regularly. 
Keep practicing and you will notice improvement. When someone comes 
up to you in the hall and says, “You make it all sound so easy,” you will 
know you have mastered formatics.

This page intentionally left blank

45
Creating Powerful Radio 
Morning Shows
“An artist’s working life is marked by intensive 
application and intense discipline.”
— John F. Kennedy
Why Is the Morning Show Different 
from the Rest of the Day?
Morning drive is traditionally the most listened-to daypart in radio. It starts 
the day, commands the highest ad rates, and requires the most up-to-date 
information so the listener can get out the door and face the day. A solid 
morning show can set the foundation for a solid radio station. On music 
stations, morning drive is the last bastion of personality radio.
Most stations come up with the basics of trafﬁ c, weather, music, news, 
and sports scores, and other elements that drive a morning show. But what 
is unique to each show are the hosts and personalities. That is what the 
other stations cannot duplicate.
C H A P T E R  5

46         Valerie Geller
“Toothbrush Radio,” or “I hate to get up 
in the morning”
A favorite research survey asked people in a Midwestern American city 
about their morning routines. The purpose was to look at listener needs, 
i.e., how each used his or her time in the morning, in order to improve 
 programming during morning drive.
This survey showed listener habits.  The list on the next page shows what 
that study found to be a “typical morning routine” for a “typical listener.”
Of course, habits vary, and the list is a sample composite, but the 
research did show that people are creatures of habit and rarely vary from 
their  personal morning routine. Based on my years of experience, here is 
an analysis of listener’s morning habits:
Attitude
■ People do not like to get up in the morning. They are tired, groggy, 
and do not feel like hopping out of bed on a dark, cold winter 
morning if they do not absolutely have to.
■ People feel that from the moment the alarm rings to the moment 
they get to their jobs, they are on their boss’s time, not their own. 
Many people do not love their jobs and there is resentment of the 
morning rush. Because of this, humor on the radio in the mornings 
is especially important. If you can make a bunch of grouchy, groggy 
people smile or laugh when they don’t feel like moving, you can 
keep them listening!
Reality
■ If the radio gets boring, there’s more to choose from. Listeners tune 
out and turn on TV in the background. TV has gotten smarter, too. 
Those morning or “breakfast” shows now offer all the elements a 
radio show has—with the option of pictures.
■ People want and need to know what time it is. Yes, they do 
have clocks in every room and some even wear watches. But 
it is easier if the radio tells you every couple of minutes what 
time it is so you know if you are on your morning schedule or 
 running late.

Creating Powerful Radio: Morning Shows         47
 
The Routine
5:30 a.m. – the alarm clock rings
5:45 a.m. – the snooze alarm rings
5:50 a.m. – actually get up
5:51 a.m. – go to bathroom
5:55 a.m. – start coffee
6:00 a.m. – feed dog
6:02 a.m. – enter shower
6:08 a.m. – shave/brush teeth/blow dry hair
6:20 a.m. – drink ﬁ rst cup of coffee, look at newspaper headlines
6:21 a.m. – listen for weather report
6:32 a.m. – wake the kids
6:35 a.m. –  get the kids in and out of bathroom/get dressed for 
the day
6:58 a.m. – feed the kids and eat breakfast
7:15 a.m. – pack lunches
7:25 a.m. –  organize the kid’s stuff for school and various other 
activities for today
7:30 a.m. –  organize your own stuff for the day
Find kid’s lost item
7:35 a.m. –  ﬁ nal house check, grab jacket, check for wallet, 
cell phone, keys/lock door/out
7:40 a.m. – drive to work

48         Valerie Geller
What They Need
■ When people wake up to face the day, they need to know basic 
information: What happened while I was asleep? Did anything 
explode? Are we ﬁ ghting World War III? Can we drink the water? 
Is it safe to go out and pick up the newspaper? What will everyone 
be talking about today at work? If I don’t have time to read the 
paper this morning, I still don’t want to look like an uninformed 
fool. What can I hear on the radio that will put me a bit ahead of 
my colleagues?
■ Give the time and weather a lot; listeners want to know: How cold 
is it out there? Where are my boots? Do I need a raincoat? Do I 
need an umbrella? How do I dress my kids? Will it take extra time 
to get to work?
More Reality
People are creatures of habit. Personally conservative, they do not like 
changes at any time, least of all in the morning, when they are tired and 
cranky.
Powerful Morning Radio
Up the pace, not the volume, for morning drive. Move it along. The people 
listening now are in a hurry and don’t have the time to get deeply involved 
in long, in-depth interviews or ongoing sagas.
Understand your listeners; less is more in the mornings. But make what 
you do count.
Mornings are when show prep and planning your time on air matters 
the most. Your awareness of the brevity of the listener’s attention span in 
this daypart is key.
Air personality Jonathon Brandmeier explains his method for a 
 successful morning show: “I break my show down into hours. Every hour 
should be a different show. If you continue something you did from 6 to 7 
all the way until 9 to 10, the guy from 9 to 10 just waking up doesn’t know 
what you’re talking about.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Morning Shows         49
Small Packages
Consultant E. Karl wrote in his report State of the Art:
In the morning, if you get your listeners listening for an average of  ﬁ fteen 
minutes an hour, you’re doing pretty well. So, look at each hour as a  package 
that has four ﬁ fteen minute shows in it. . . . Each segment [should] contain 
all of the key elements you would have in any one whole hour of a morning 
show, e.g., entertainment, music, news, weather, and the other services.
 Remember, it’s important to
 ■  Prepare
 ■  Read everything
 ■ Make it matter
 ■ Have things to say
 ■ Be real
 ■ Have fun
It’s Hard to Get Up in the Morning
Don’t mention how tired you are. It’s your job to get the listeners out 
the door with your morning show, to motivate and get them going. If it is 
already a drag to get up early and get out, the least you can do for people 
is give them some help in facing the day. Maybe they’ll feel better about it 
because they heard your show. And don’t get too wired on coffee. Frenetic 
energy makes people nervous.
What Time Is It?
Give the service elements a lot: time, weather, trafﬁ c updates and quick news 
headlines. Give people what they can use both now and during the day.
Morning drive radio is the place where music radio and talk radio most 
intersect. Here are some thoughts and ideas from those who know what it 
takes to create a powerful morning show.

50         Valerie Geller
Boston morning man and air personality Matt Siegel offers the 
 following points, important in Creating Powerful Radio, no matter what 
your format or daypart:
What It Takes
■ Be Honest. Praise what you like . . . rip up what you hate . . . don’t 
lie for the sake of a joke. This is how the audience gets to know you.
■ Use your own life as a source of material. It’s amazing how the audi-
ence always seems to know what’s real. If they don’t get to know 
something about you, they won’t be loyal.
■ Be funny. Don’t forget you are entertaining them. This is radio, not 
therapy.
■ Be speciﬁ c. Name names—your wife’s name, your boss’s name, your 
friends’ names, etc. That’s what makes it real, thus scary, thus inter-
esting. (In my opinion it is better to use a pseudonym or leave out 
identiﬁ able details. Be aware of the rules about slander and libel 
and the possible legal ramiﬁ cations when naming speciﬁ c people, 
companies, products, etc., in your show.)
■ Be vulnerable. Say something that you think might be inappropri-
ate or a little personal. Be a grown-up. You can play the latest teen 
band’s hit song and you can talk about the artists, but if you act like 
you are 18 when you are 35, you sound like a jerk.
■ Don’t put women down. It’s cheap and you are better than that.
■ Be nice. No matter how far you want to go, no matter how wild your 
act is, let the audience see something in you they like or, eventually, 
you will start to annoy them.
■ Don’t be a wimp. If you think it’s funny or important, say it. Stop 
looking over your shoulder.
Ross on Radio
Edison Research and Programming consultant Sean Ross has worked as 
a program director and record company executive. He writes a weekly 
 column as well. Ross’s thoughts on Creating Powerful Radio are valuable 
for programmers and morning shows of any stripe.

Creating Powerful Radio: Morning Shows         51
Sean Ross’s Top Ten Tips for Powerful Radio
■ Program for yourself. Despite all the dogma about thinking like a 
listener and not a radio programmer, if you don’t enjoy the product 
yourself, how can anybody else?
■ Use your special gift. If you are going to do something anybody else 
can do on the radio, why did they need to hire you?
■ Some of those old wives were pretty smart. Do not reject the “old 
wives tales” of programming out of hand. A station will not live or 
die if there is a power record out of the stop-set, tempo at the top of 
the hour, etc. But it WILL sound better.
■ When you become the 800th person to defy a cliché, you’re not defy-
ing a cliché. If your taxi driver is really a natural, put him on. But if 
799 others have already cluttered the airwaves with local politicians, 
punk rockers, and orthodontists, a good DJ will be just ﬁ ne.
■ Hire writers. Only somebody who can write is going to be able to 
sell the same record, the same contest, the same crossplug thirty-
seven times and do it thirty-seven different ways.
■ Yes, talented people ARE supposed to be difﬁ cult. But don’t waste 
your time on anybody who abuses the privilege.
■ If you are lucky enough to be working in live and local radio, use 
the station you now have to do great local radio that entertains or 
touches the listeners with every break.
■ You gotta believe. The world is full of successful stations with no money, 
bad signals, etc. Clearly, nobody told them they had a  problem.
■ Don’t use the signal to hurt people. There ARE listeners who will let 
their dog eat dog food out of their mouth to win concert tickets if 
you insist on searching them out. It’s no big deal to them, because 
many folks with REAL jobs endure degrading existences anyway. 
But wouldn’t you rather make people feel better than feel stupid? 
The latter takes a lot more talent, especially now.
■ Every generation’s music will become an Oldies format someday.
American music industry icon Dave Sholin is a legendary disc jockey, 
program director, executive, and editor. He has helped a lot of budding 
young talents become more powerful broadcasters. Sholin ﬁ gured out early 
on that the secret to success in radio is to be yourself.

52         Valerie Geller
Dave Sholin on Creating Powerful Radio
■ Always keep in mind the ﬁ rst eight letters of the word “personality”: 
P-E-R-S-O-N-A-L. Whether one million listeners or one hundred, 
each one should feel that the conversation is being directed to them.
■ Trendiness has a short shelf life. Reﬂ ecting trends is quite different 
from embracing the ﬂ avor-of-the-month approach.
■ Origination always beats imitation. Allowing unique and likable 
qualities of your personality is the goal.
■ Don’t feel the need to be funny on every break. Forced humor 
often sounds that way.
■ Try and avoid the echo technique, repeating what the caller just 
said. 
 Example:
  “Hi, who’s this?”
  “John.”
  “Well John, where do you live?”
  “Hillview.”
  “Oh, Hillview, etc. . . .”
■ Don’t be afraid to push the envelope and try different or improper 
techniques. Though batting a thousand is unlikely, play the 
 percentages.
■ Anyone in a music format needs to remember that the music is the 
star. Leave the negative personal opinions at the door. The songs 
must be great; otherwise, why play them?
■ Become an expert on the varied interests of the local community. 
Get connected to those in the know. Before mentioning any well-
known local ﬁ gure or local town, make sure your pronunciation is 
correct.
■ Less is more. The fewer the words, the greater the impact.
■ So-called rules should be considered as guidelines. In some cases, 
they need to be twisted or broken.

Creating Powerful Radio: Morning Shows         53
Air personality Ross Brittain has been on stations around the country 
combining humor, heart, and reality with an edge. This list comes from his 
days of doing mornings on Z-100 in New York.
Ross Brittain’s Tips for Jocks
■ Over-prep the day before.
■ Do the things your listeners do.
■ Make things bigger than they really are. Use theater of the mind—
produce BIG or overproduce.
■ Structure your breaks BEFORE the mic opens. Use Post-it notes to 
remind yourself.
■ Remember your audience composition when building in features.
■ Don’t get caught up in “information overload.” DELEGATE!
■ Cluster your commercials correctly and clean up your talk breaks to 
avoid clutter.
■ Speak concisely. Edit copy or write down important items so you 
won’t get lost. Remember to use your sense of forward motion to 
move, or not move, your show.

This page intentionally left blank

55
Creating Powerful Radio 
From Rock to Talk 
“The great ‘end’ in life is not knowledge but action.”
— T. H. Huxley
In the United States, it’s been a long time since the truly “Full Service” 
radio station disappeared. Most in the United States have only heard of, 
but never actually heard, a station where music, interviews, news, sports, and 
personality call-in segments were equal parts of the programming day.
Not only that, even the highly formatted stations have narrowed their 
focus into subcategories of their genres. For example, in talk radio there 
are “Hot Talk” stations, “Lifestyle Talk” stations, “Truck Talk” stations, 
Political Talk stations (which includes its own sub-genre, some political sta-
tion formats are geared toward either the left or the right wing), Sports 
stations, Religious stations, and Women’s Talk stations, just to name a few. 
With the advent of high-deﬁ nition, online, and satellite radio, formats now 
target audiences in ever greater detail, and the trend is likely to continue. 
If a “full-service” station appeared today, it would probably be researched 
and designed to ﬁ t that small subsector of the listening audience who have 
been determined to need nightclub music, political polling data, volleyball 
scores, and agriculture reports.
C H A P T E R  6

56         Valerie Geller
In music-based formats, personality elements tend to be restricted to 
morning drive, or have been done away with altogether. Morning shows 
tend to be ﬁ lled with so many commitments—news, sports, commercials, 
business reports, trafﬁ c, weather, and promotions—that there is often little 
time for personalities to emerge.
One of the last bastions of personality radio seems to be in the talk for-
mats. That is where people perceive an opportunity to be free to creatively 
express themselves. Consequently, we’re seeing an inﬂ ux of people who 
want to do talk radio, many of them smart, hardworking, and funny, but 
often having no experience in the format. And they all have one thing in 
common: They think it’s going to be easy. After all, anyone can talk. It must 
be simple. Right? Wrong. As with any other demanding occupation, from 
pro football to ballet, the great ones make it look effortless, but if you’ve 
ever tried to toss that ball ﬁ fty yards or do a grand jete, you know that’s not 
the case. This book can train you in powerful radio methodology, and the 
craft of broadcasting. You can improve your skills. But the one thing no one 
can teach you is talent. That is a gift you were born with. And even the most 
talented broadcasters work very hard if they’re successful.
Talk show hosts as individuals are a diverse group, with a common 
 element. They all tend to have strong opinions, they are funny or at least 
have a sense of humor, and they have original things to say. They stay 
 topical, are interested in listeners’ opinions, and enjoy interacting with 
people. These hosts connect with people in a real way. It is a real relation-
ship, even though it often happens with one person in a small room with a 
microphone and the other in a kitchen, at a desk, or in a car.
It hit me years ago hosting overnights on talk station KOA/Denver. 
Taking late night calls from people in thirty-eight states all over America, I 
learned how people needed to be heard, how talk radio eased the collective 
loneliness of those glued to their radio dials all night long. How powerful 
radio could be. In his book Radio Waves, Jim Ladd writes about “sitting 
around the glow of the radio campﬁ re, hungry for the sound of the tribal 
drum.”
If you are working in a music format, you are ahead of the curve when 
it comes to launching a talk radio career. Many music radio air  personalities 
turn out to be just the right people to handle talk radio. They have a range 
of interests and understand the time constraints of radio. They also have 
been schooled in the basics of formatics and why they are important.
Maintaining an audience requires great storytelling. In music radio, the 
songs are often the stories. When music hosts decide to become talk radio 

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         57
hosts, it is often a case of wanting to talk about the stories that are inspired 
by stories that songs are telling, or the stories behind the songs.
Music radio hosts are comfortable working with all the properties of 
sound. Most of the good ones know how to edit sound, use it to set an emo-
tional tone, understand how sound affects thought and mood. Those skills 
are a great asset when making the transition to personality radio.
Among the better known of the “rock-to-talk” personalities is syndicated 
host Rush Limbaugh. His show advocates an agenda in much the same way 
music radio in years past picked up on politics, pop culture, and issues of the 
day. Rush adds excitement to his show by employing music radio production 
 values, produced bits, jingles, and parody songs, all mixed in with a heavy dose 
of his conservative politics. A talk radio pioneer, Limbaugh took the format of 
“serious” or political talk radio, something that had been traditionally stodgy, 
and added the element of fun to a format previously unblemished by humor.
People ask me all the time, “What’s Rush like?” When I worked with 
Rush at WABC in New York, the thing I remember best about him is that 
he was a pro and he worked hard. He’d be in the ofﬁ ce hours before his 
show, going through dozens of newspapers looking for material and doing 
show prep. He didn’t make life difﬁ cult for management, and he was a fun 
guy to have a cheeseburger with.
Limbaugh explains his success this way in his book The Way Things Ought 
to Be: “[On station KFBK in Sacramento, California] I was allowed to be 
myself.” He says it was the ﬁ rst time in seventeen years on the radio he was 
allowed to be who he was on the air. Limbaugh warns, “You’ll never be your 
best doing it someone else’s way.” He says his show has been so successful 
because he entertains audiences, not because of his right-wing politics.
One of the few other conservative political radio personalities with the 
same kind of following is venerable newsman and commentator Paul 
Harvey, and for almost the same reasons. Harvey is a master storyteller 
and is fun to listen to. You can see people parked in their cars, captivated, 
during the lunch hour listening to Paul Harvey.
The moral for success here: No matter your politics, be unique. Be 
yourself. Create your own style.
Play the calls like you play the hits
Another secret of Rush Limbaugh’s success is that he “plays” callers like a 
DJ plays songs. Talk radio is not public service radio. Rush understood that 

58         Valerie Geller
you have to entertain listeners. Just because someone calls the show does 
not mean he has a God-given right to be heard on air. Rush says:
The primary purpose of callers on my show is to make me look good, not 
allow a forum for the public to make speeches. I, after all, am the reason 
people listen.… Two minutes of a boring caller is the same as playing a 
record nobody likes. What do you do when a song you don’t like is played? 
You go looking for a song you do like.
Despite a long-running emphasis on targeting a youthful  demographic, 
it’s a mistake to let age be a prominent factor when judging talent. It pays 
to remember: Whether a person is eighteen or eighty, if he or she captivates 
you with original thought and storytelling, can relate his or her own take on 
the truth, and communicate an interest in life, you’ll have a winner!
What else does a rock jock bring to the talk table?
Talent can take you a long way, but it must be strengthened by experience. 
Good voices in talk radio are secondary. It’s what you say that matters most.
Timing
A real advantage the rock-to-talkers have is timing. You can hear the polish 
and experience of a personality trained by years of short segment breaks 
on the air. They know how to hit the point, get to it fast, and get out of it.
Less is more
Former music jocks have learned when to end a bit. In listening to audition 
material, you can hear the difference between an experienced talent who 
has fought the clock and won and a talented beginner who doesn’t quite 
get the timing. That training, which only comes from experience, is invalu-
able and shines through in talk radio, even without the tight restrictions 
of short songs and a format clock. The lesson here: Just because you get a 
couple of hours to play with, don’t waste it!
How to Rock the Talk
Another DJ who made the transition is broadcast personality Phil Hendrie. 
After a successful twenty-year career in music radio, Hendrie was  feeling 
cramped by the lack of freedom and formatic restrictions while doing 
morning drive at a Los Angeles rock station. When his  station decided to 

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         59
make a change, Hendrie begged for a chance to try his hand at talk. A new 
L.A. talk station gave him an opportunity to host a weekend show.
Back then, Hendrie was a creative guy with huge potential. He spent 
years as a radio vagabond, honing his talk skills. Hendrie has become 
famous for his amazing talent of hosting a show where he plays his own 
callers, using dozens of voices who take on their own personalities. Callers 
become the “hits” of the show when they take the bait and phone in to 
argue with one of Hendrie’s characters. Hendrie observes life, ﬁ lters what 
he sees, adds his unique talent, and lets it roll. His career path has moved 
toward television and movies.
Phil Hendrie on CREATING POWERFUL RADIO
■ Get in there and ﬂ op. Try everything. Powerful radio is experimen-
tation. If the station you’re now at doesn’t appreciate it, sooner or 
later you’ll ﬁ nd one that does.
■ Be a popular culture junkie, but not just TV and movies. It means notic-
ing dress, road signs, vending machines, faces, accents, window tinting, 
houseplants, snippets of conversations, drool, etc. Record all of it.
■ Forget callers. Prep your show so that the material is interesting to 
you ﬁ rst, your listeners second, and your callers third.
■ Be absolutely clear and focused as to what your show is about. 
Management tends to push around and overconsult talent that isn’t. 
You’ll be getting and taking a lot of bad advice.
■ Keep your show lean. It’s about you. If you don’t need them, lose the 
sidekicks, the happy talk with the newsperson, the chronic callers.
■ Don’t pre-record bits. Do them live. So what if you screw up a sound 
effect or a line. Your chances of succeeding with a bit go up a hun-
dred percent when you do it live. And don’t overwrite. Keep your 
ad-libbing skills sharp.
■ Throw away the listener mail. If they have something to say, they’ll 
call. Listeners who write to talk show hosts are oddballs.
■ Listen to one aircheck a month maximum. Listening to too many 
airchecks will only depress you as you nitpick every little thing. If 
you hit a home run on the air, you’ll feel it.

60         Valerie Geller
Music Hosts
Are You Ready to Make the Move 
From Rock to Talk? 
 Do You . . .
■ Listen to talk radio and like it better than music radio?
■ Get really mad when things are clipped out of the newspapers 
or you can’t ﬁ nd anything heavier than USA Today or People 
around the station?
■ Have a home subscription to 10 or more magazines or 
newspapers?
■ Find yourself calling talk shows?
■ Resent your program director telling you to “shut up and read 
your liners”?
■ Hate the “hits”?
■ Check your watch a lot and feel mostly bored during your 
airshift?
■ Enjoy taking calls on the air or do more phone bits than you’re 
 supposed to?
■ Like doing interviews and wish you could do more?
■ Long for more airtime to talk about things that matter—what’s 
 happening in the news, in town, etc.?
Trial by Fire Is Not for Everyone
Even if you get a chance for that on-air audition, it may not be the best 
way to strut your stuff. An audition is not the best of circumstances. Being 
on the hot seat is a nervous thing. It’s been my experience that people who 
audition well are a bit like people who do well on tests at school. Those 
who “ace the tests” are good test takers, but they are not necessarily the 
smartest or best and brightest talents. Programmers can be fooled. They 
can hear a great demo or audition night, hire the person, and then be very 
sorry later when they are not as good as expected.

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         61
Ex-music jock Turi Ryder expresses it another way:
Every person in the world is capable of three good talk shows. Each indi-
vidual has a few things that he or she cares passionately about, at least for 
a few hours. After that, it gets much harder. Creative people constantly 
ﬁ nd new interests, new subjects they need to entertain themselves. That is 
how they come up with different shows every day.
Ryder was working as a disc jockey for a well-known music station when I 
met her. Her Top 40 DJ days included some of the best stations in America. 
She was bright, fun, loud, and lovable, but with a deﬁ nite dark side. I thought 
she’d be perfect for talk radio. She has enjoyed a career as a major market 
talk host and a writer.
 
Tips from Rock-to-Talker Turi Ryder
■ Audition as the entertainer you are, not as the host you think “they” want.
■ Don’t be afraid to say “I don’t know” on the air. Audiences prefer 
honesty and ignorance to artiﬁ ce and arrogance.
■ A little silence can be a valuable thing.
■ “Nice” is a luxury you can’t always afford.
■ Establish rules for your show, then play by them.
■ You have 50,000 watts and a microphone, the callers have only a 
phone and a radio. Give them a break.
■ Never make fun of a caller after he or she is gone. Exception: If he 
or she hung up on you.
■ Changing the names of businesses and people lets you tell either 
more of the truth or bigger, better lies.
■ Not everyone who has done something interesting IS interesting.
■ EVERYTHING IS MATERIAL.
How Do I Break into Talk?
As a radio consultant who is constantly on the lookout for talent, while lis-
tening to airchecks is important, the best way to ﬁ nd tomorrow’s stars are 
not necessarily airchecks. Airchecks can be heavily edited to sound great, 

62         Valerie Geller
especially since many people now have home editing software. But from a 
talent’s perspective, all that home audio capability can be a great thing. You 
can use it to put together an “audition” show and post it on your Web site. 
Talk programmers are also giving audition opportunities to podcasters and 
bloggers in their quest to ﬁ nd new talent.
Whether you have a studio available, or some simple computer record-
ing equipment, it’s what’s on your audition effort that counts.
I often ask the host to interview himself or herself and record it—by this 
I mean starting with a question, then moving to a descriptive  monologue 
from the potential host’s unique point of view. That’s how most actual 
talk shows open every day, and you don’t need callers to come up with an 
 interesting ﬁ fteen-minute conversation.
I’m also listening for the likability factor. An air talent may be brilliant, 
but if you would not want to take a ﬁ ve-hour car trip with them, why would 
you put that person on the radio and ask your listeners to do exactly that?
Think of your audition as a spoken autobiography or narrative, where 
you are free to tell your favorite stories about yourself and your life. This 
not only showcases your storytelling ability—a very important part of talk 
radio—it lets people get to know you in a very personal and powerful 
way. Some of the best auditions tell of meaningful experiences that have 
changed or moved people, experiences that have made them the way they 
are. The more personal a story, the more universal it often is.
Another method for programmers who are considering an untested 
talent is to ask the host to do a hypothetical talk show. Ask, “What would 
you talk about if given a few hours on air?” Ask the host why he or she 
cares about those subjects—why would they be interesting? Ask the host 
to do an opening monologue for his or her “show” with opinions and per-
sonal stories or about some event of the day. You can offer a studio for 
recording this if you have one available.
I once had a client—a news anchor, author, and expert in ﬁ nance—who 
had never before hosted a talk radio show and wanted to try it. She recorded 
a charming story of two little old ladies who came to her for ﬁ nancial help 
and discovered they were nearly millionaires as a result of their hobby of 
collecting antique dishes. A ten-minute recording got her the opportunity 
to audition and substitute-host on some of the top stations and networks in 
the country, without any actual talk radio experience.

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         63
Still, without an aircheck, it’s deﬁ nitely harder to ﬁ nd a program direc-
tor who will risk putting you on the air. So how do you come up with some 
kind of presentation that will showcase your personality and potential as a 
talk host? How can you convince a programmer to put you on as a substi-
tute host to “audition” on the air? Your best weapon in getting a shot at an 
audition shift on air will be a powerful demo.
How to Create a Powerful Demo
No one likes making a demo. Talent will take any excuse to hem and haw 
and procrastinate when a program director says, “Send me your stuff.” The 
general feeling is “I don’t know what to put on my demo. I am the worst 
judge of my own work. How will I know what is good and what is garbage? 
What really represents me?” I once waited ﬁ ve years for a talent to send 
me his aircheck! This is where having your own Web site can really help 
you. When you have your own site, you don’t have to choose one particular 
type of show or talk format to submit, you can post several, with descrip-
tions, and a program director can simply click on the topics and styles that 
seem to work best with his or her needs. You will have to sort through or 
create work that you feel represents you at your best. Even the most expe-
rienced talk hosts tend to avoid this task.
Here are some ideas and techniques to help hurry along those facing 
the excruciating dilemma of creating an audio demo.
1. The aircheck should always leave the listener wanting more. The 
worst thing you can do is offer too much. It’s like overfeeding a ﬁ sh until it 
dies. If you are sending a disc or posting audio ﬁ les, be sure to segment them 
into tracks or subﬁ les. That way the PD can skip around more easily, or dip in 
and out of your show. If you leave your audience just a little bit hungry, it will 
pique their interest in you. Your goal is to get the PD to ask for more.
2. Don’t get paralyzed deciding what to post or burn. If you have an 
hour showcasing your versatility, use that. If you have a great hour show-
casing only one aspect of your personality, use that. Then let me ask you for 
more. Most PDs look for talent who are equally good with humor, substan-
tive issues, interviews, and breaking news.
3. Show your heart. Show what you care about on your demo.
4. Show your stuff. Showcase your technique. News executive Bernard 
Gershon suggests: “If you are the person preparing that demo, put your 

64         Valerie Geller
best stuff up top—even a montage of some highlights—then more details. 
If you are weeding through audition audio tracks,  listen for that spark—the 
edge that, with your guidance, will make that person a pro.”
5. This is your self-portrait. This demo should be exactly as you want 
to be perceived by a potential employer. As air personality Turi Ryder 
advises, “Make your demo or audition not for the job you currently have 
but for the job you want to have or the show you want to do. Keep in mind, 
the people listening want to hear not only what you have done, but also 
what you can do for them.”
6. There is nothing worse than being told that “you were never as good 
as your demo.” As Ryder puts it,
It should be like a good, but not a rare, hour—one where you really do 
not want to edit anything out, but not as if a perfect human being with 
your voice was sitting in for you. I want whoever hires me from that 
demo to know what they are getting before I move my furniture.
On your Web site you can create a perfect self-portrait, but for your 
own good, make it an accurate one. Ryder warns music and talk hosts, “If 
in your typical day, a caller changes your mind or you must admit ignorance 
of which drug the murderer was on, or screw up the name of the Afghani 
foreign minister, then that is the show you do.”
She points out that the exception is in the case of news. There, an error-
free audition is preferable.
7. Showcase your most individual work. I like to hear shows that 
 originate in people’s lives. One example I use for coaching came from 
Swedish radio personality Jesse Wallin.
Jesse decided that he wasn’t going to mix the formula for his new baby’s 
bottle. He said it was easier to just spoon in the powder. That way, when 
the kid spit it up, all you’d need for cleaning would be a dust-buster or a 
vacuum. It takes a father who has cleaned up a lot of baby spit to think of 
that. I laughed, I was moved, and I cared about him.
8. Think like a program director. Imagine your disc arriving in the mail. 
Now it is in the player, with an attentive, hopeful, and open-minded program 
director beginning to hear your work. Then the phone rings. Ask yourself, 
would the PD stop listening and get the phone, or ignore it because he or she 
was too absorbed in hearing your work?

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         65
Looking for Talent
Make an audition that commands attention. Music radio consultant Guy 
Zapoleon puts it this way: “There is an ‘X’ factor. It is the feeling I get from lis-
tening to the talent.” What do I listen to? Everything that comes in. As Bernard 
Gershon says, “You have to review demos, place ads, network, and listen to your 
competition in both smaller and larger markets. Try to ﬁ nd someone who you 
think ‘gets it,’ who has an original sound. If the person truly has  potential, the rest 
can be learned.” With most stations and satellite radio  available via the computer, 
it’s easier than ever to hear any host in any market in real time. Hosts should 
always remember, when designing their Web sites, to make it as easy as possible 
for a potential employer to connect to their stations during their airshifts.
What am I listening for? Anything that keeps me in a parked car in a 
dark garage with the groceries melting in the back seat, because I have to 
hear the rest of the show, is a keeper. If I cannot leave until I know what is 
going to happen next, you’re in.
When listening to a personality music show, consultant Guy Zapoleon asks:
■ Do they “connect” with the audience?
■ Are there great phone calls where you get the feeling from the 
listener that they and the jock are truly friends?
■ Are they creative at selling the radio station, using promotions, 
using liners?
■ Do they still get excited by something that radio pros take for 
granted, but the listeners don’t .  .  .  the music?
Programming executive Denise McIntee sifted through New York 
City’s radio applicants for years. Here is what she looks for in demo 
 airchecks:
Do I laugh? First and foremost, I want to know if the host has a sense 
of humor. Do I want to keep on listening? Would I want this person as a 
friend? What did I learn from the host? Did I walk away from the show 
with a new perspective on a topic? Was the host able to persuade me to 
change my opinion? Is the host respectful to those who disagree? Can 
he or she “ﬁ ght fairly” with a strong, intelligent caller?

66         Valerie Geller
 The host should have talent walking in the door. That is a given. But, 
developing energy, communication, and humor is tough. If a host does not 
possess these important vital traits, you should re-examine your hire. Very 
few people have it all. That is why there is a shortage of “genius-level” 
talk-show hosts and entertainers. Most times, a leopard does not change 
his spots. If you start without the basics, you could end up stuck with a host 
you are constantly trying to change, rather than coach.
News executive Bernard Gershon has hired many news writers, anchors, 
and reporters. Most of what he wants in a candidate would be necessary 
qualities for anyone working on the air as well as for managers.
When searching for talent at any level, look for three primary qualities:
■ Intelligence
■ Desire
■ Sense of humor
Intelligence does not just mean being book-smart or having a high IQ. 
Intelligence means the ability to solve problems; to complete complex 
tasks with resourcefulness, initiative, and resolve. A good job candidate 
also needs to be intuitive; to understand what is on listeners’ minds, what 
will get them to tune in.
So, if you are interviewing potential talk-show hosts or newscasters, 
you need to ﬁ nd out what they are interested in, what stories push their 
 buttons. Even if those story ideas sound boring to you, let them explain. 
They may win you over. That is what makes a talk host or newscaster 
great—the  ability to communicate and excite.
An intelligent job candidate will also be looking for new challenges
If you are interviewing someone who has seen it all, done it all, knows it 
all—move on. Curiosity is key to intelligence.
Do not be fooled by a long resume with important-sounding 
titles and degrees
I look for job candidates who have traveled, and have taken an eclectic mix 
of courses in college. I hold nothing against history or economics majors, as 
long as they have the ability to communicate.

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         67
Look for a sense of humor
You are not looking for a wiseguy or a stand-up comic. But you are looking 
for someone who can roll with the punches, take criticism, and still take his 
or her job seriously. Someone who can relate well to fellow employees and 
diffuse difﬁ cult situations with humor and aplomb.
Getting a Job: The Demo Is Done, Now What?
You have made the perfect aircheck. It represents your best work. Your 
personality shines through. It is visual, informative, inspiring, funny, has 
tons of truth in it, and you know if you can just get the right person to hear 
it, it will get you a job.
You will now learn one of the most disheartening lessons in radio: getting 
someone to listen to your work is harder than you thought. Programmers, 
consultants, station group heads, and everyone else who can actually hire 
you are very busy men and women.
Jaye Albright explains, “It takes time to do justice to material people 
send. That is why I do not have time to do this sort of in-depth listening and 
thinking about more than one or two auditions per day.”
Talent is very sensitive. If a talent calls a programmer, sends a demo, 
calls again to follow up but doesn’t hear back, he or she is likely to get 
 discouraged. My advice? Don’t be.
Jock auditions tend to be three to ﬁ ve minutes long, and they arrive 
by the pound. Many of the people who send them have at least some 
 experience, though not always. Talk airchecks are longer—around thirty 
minutes. It takes longer to listen to them. Whatever the format, there are 
always a lot of airchecks waiting to be heard, and the number of auditions 
I receive from complete amateurs is staggering.
Talk radio is an art, not a science. Finding those artists requires spend-
ing time sifting through the plethora of auditions that are e-mailed, mailed, 
handed out, or even dropped off at your door.
Here is how it happens for me: Typically, whenever I attend a talk-
radio conference, I collect around ﬁ fty CDs or weblinks in less than six 
hours—all personally handed to me by hopeful talent. When I return to my 
ofﬁ ce, there are dozens more waiting in my e-mail and regular mailbox, and 

68         Valerie Geller
my voice mail is ﬁ lled with broadcasters asking, “Have you heard my show 
yet? I sent it a month ago!”
When I walk in the door after three weeks on the road, jet-lagged, 
hungry, and exhausted, that is not the time you want me to hear your work. 
Please cut consultants and PDs some slack. You want me to listen when I 
am “in the mood.” And that mood is not on a reliable, methodical time-
table. When I was an air talent, I never understood that things happened 
on their time, not mine.
Don’t Rush Me
Programmers generally listen to new material when they are in the market 
for talent. It would be nice if stations’ needs always coincided with hosts’ 
availabilities. Unfortunately, it seldom works that way. Sometimes PDs 
miss their chance at a great hire.
I once did a talent search where I listened to dozens of shows I had 
stowed away, and found a young guy I really liked. I heard a lot of poten-
tial there. I called him in St. Louis, and he picked up the phone just as the 
moving van was arriving to pack up his stuff. He had accepted a job in 
Milwaukee two weeks before and was on his way. Although his work had 
come to my ofﬁ ce four months earlier, I hadn’t gotten around to hearing 
it—my loss.
Don’t Develop “Attitude”
Unfortunately, when a programmer fails to respond promptly to an  aircheck 
and resume, the talent can get really mad. Many lean toward the touchy side 
anyway. They take it personally. Some simply give up. If they are extremely 
annoyed at you, they could ruin great opportunities for themselves.
Talent may think: “I have called, written, e-mailed, and faxed. I put 
in a lot of work on that demo. My work is good, and I want somebody to 
hear it and ﬁ nd me a job. Hire me, or at least tell me ‘no.’ It has been two 
months.” Or, “What a jerk this guy turned out to be. He [or she] never 
even acknowledged receiving my materials. They couldn’t pay me enough 
to work there now!”
In truth, it is entirely possible that the programmer has been busy, has 
not gotten around to hearing your work, and does not want to call and say 
“no”—at least not yet. However, if you call ﬁ fty times, you may get a “no” 
from a programmer just to get you off the phone. You can be sure if you 

Creating Powerful Radio: From Rock to Talk         69
become a pest, your audition has very little chance of being heard at all. 
Most PDs would interpret an overeager host as someone who would be a 
pain to have around the station if he or she were actually hired. The goal is 
to be politely persistent, not obnoxious.
Sometimes It Pays to Be Aggressive
Decades ago I went after a job I wanted very much. I knew the PD had 
offered it to someone else, but I wanted him to hear me before he com-
mitted to the hire. I called him up and played my aircheck for him over the 
phone. It was too late to get that job, but my tenacity impressed the pro-
grammer enough that he recommended me for other positions.
When to Send Out Your Work
A logical time to start looking around is when you know people are 
 hiring, unless you just want to make a connection for later. In the 
United States, it generally happens twice a year, like clockwork, just 
before the fall and the springtime Arbitron ratings periods. Although 
some  stations do post openings, not all of them will. Be sure you have 
every e-mail  subscription to every trade you can. If you can’t afford 
some of the pricier newsletters, ask a trustworthy friend in the business 
to forward any leads to you.
Pay special attention to the Web sites that show the ratings for markets 
where you want to work. If you see a station on a downward path, chances 
are they may be open to making some changes. Do a little sleuthing when 
you’re trying to contact station management. With a little ingenuity you 
should be able to ﬁ gure out the e-mail addresses of anybody you want 
to ﬁ nd. Make sure you read online the newspapers from the cities where 
you hope to work, particularly their media columns. You can contact those 
 writers directly through their Web sites, and they may have some good 
leads for you.
“Sorry, Your Show Is Garbage”: A Programmer’s 
Horror Story
When I programmed WABC in New York, I was fairly organized about the 
hundreds of applications that came in, especially because we had a well-
publicized opening. It is my policy to listen to everything.

70         Valerie Geller
I had a system that included three big brown cardboard boxes. In the 
ﬁ rst box, which I kept on the ﬂ oor by my desk, I had the “keeper shows.” 
Next to it was the second box, where I kept the “possibles” or people 
from whom I wanted to hear more. I kept the third, the box of “unlikely” 
 candidates, on top of my desk so that my assistant could write polite “no 
thank you” letters to them.
Late one night, a new cleanup crew, thinking that the two boxes on 
the ﬂ oor were trash, threw them away. I came in on Monday morning and 
looked around for the “good” batch, but it was gone. Of course, the demos 
in which we were not interested were still there, right on top of my desk.
It was humiliating to have to put an item in the trades saying, “If you 
sent material and an application for our morning show, please resubmit it. 
The janitor threw it out.” On the other hand, if you really want to hear all 
about certain  individuals, by all means put their discs or business cards on 
top of your desk. It won’t be long before you hear, “Oh I see you’re talking 
to Brian . . . he’s looking for work again?” Or “Is that Sue Smith’s demo? 
Her auditions sound great. Too bad she can never do a show to match 
them!” And here is the best comment I heard from a staffer who noticed a 
package on her boss’s desk: “Oh him . . . he’s great on the air, but let me tell 
you about the time we had to bail him out of jail for drunk driving after he 
hit an old lady. Another time he showed up for work handcuffed to his date, 
and we had to hire a locksmith to get him out so he could do his shift.”
Heed this warning: Unless you truly want feedback from the staff on 
potential candidates, and do not mind if they go ballistic reacting to what is 
on your desk, do not leave anything out for them to see.
If you are a talent who cannot risk having the world know you are 
looking to move on, use e-mail and a Web site, or, when you send your 
work, try saying, “I know some of your staffers. Whether or not you decide 
to hire me, I’d appreciate it if you kept my application under wraps.” Most 
program directors will respect your conﬁ dentiality.
Finally, be sure to fully label everything you send with your contact 
information.
REMEMBER, materials get separated. WRITE 
YOUR DATA ON EVERYTHING!

71
Creating Powerful Radio 
Talk Shows
“A picture is nothing but a bridge between the soul 
of the artist and that of the spectator.”
— Eugene Delacroix
“Talkradio – Because all great minds don’t think alike.”
— T-shirt slogan
Talk radio in America evolved from full-service personality music radio. 
Here is how it happened: At ﬁ rst, a few music hosts began taking calls on-
air between records, particularly on AM stations with strong personalities. 
Soon, there were fewer records and more listener phone calls. When it drew 
the listeners and advertisers, a few stations allowed the talk to stay, either 
in selected dayparts or, in rare cases, around the clock.
Talk Radio, When Talk Radio Wasn’t Cool
When I entered the talk radio arena years ago, it was a format perceived 
by many as expensive, boring, and of no interest to younger  demographics. 
Conventional wisdom held that talk radio was something your grand-
mother would listen to, and only dealt with events in her hometown.
C H A P T E R  7

72         Valerie Geller
Those of us doing talk knew this wasn’t true. Our listeners were savvy, 
upscale, and worldly. Many were exceptionally well-read and well-informed. 
Generally, talk stations offering interesting programming  produced healthy 
ratings, high revenues, and strong response for advertisers.
Even so, traditional talk radio stereotypes persisted until the early 
1990s. That’s when satellite program distribution and station economics 
helped to propel a talk radio revolution.
The “Rush” to AM Radio: The ‘90s
News-Talk Explosion
One important catalyst was personality Rush Limbaugh, whose unique 
combination of politics and wit brought unprecedented success to the for-
mat. Rush proved that a lot of the stereotypes about talk radio were wrong. 
The seismic impact of Limbaugh’s nationally syndicated talk show, which 
drew large daytime shares on hundreds of stations, many of which had been 
steadily losing listeners up to that point, collapsed the notion that talk had 
to be local. Content matters, addresses don’t.
Previous talk offerings such as the radio incarnation of the Larry King 
Live show had applied this principle and succeeded by syndicating on large 
numbers of stations in nighttime hours. Limbaugh ampliﬁ ed it and shat-
tered the network talk taboo in the lucrative daytime hours.
The critics of talk radio were wrong and the numbers proved it. 
Limbaugh’s talk listeners were young, hip, and savvy. And, as station 
 managers quickly noticed, there were lots of them.
When Limbaugh’s syndicated show debuted in the late eighties, it was 
 carried on fewer than 100 stations; by the mid-nineties, it was on more than 
650 stations. Program suppliers rushed to meet the demand, offering station 
operators easy access to satellite-delivered talk programming at all hours.
The News-Talk format exploded. Once-dominant AM music stations, 
whose audiences had deserted them for FM, suddenly began doing talk. In the 
United States, markets that had one talk outlet suddenly found  themselves 
with as many as ﬁ ve. News-Talk is now the second most  popular format in the 
United States. Hundreds of stations have switched to the News-Talk format.
Talk saved many moribund stations from oblivion. But, prospering in 
an ocean of talk competition means providing a better product than one’s 

Creating Powerful Radio: Talk Shows         73
competitors. Fortunately, like all good radio, talk radio doesn’t have to be 
more expensive to be more powerful.
Curious People
Talk radio listeners are curious people. They want to know nearly every-
thing: what is going on in their town, their country, their world. They tend 
to listen when they are by themselves, so the more personable the host is, 
the better it works.
Talk radio is intimate while being anonymous. It allows listeners and 
callers to interact without exposing themselves to the dangers that might 
arise in a real-life confrontation. It’s a strange sort of freedom and can 
result in a deeply honest conversation. Maintain control, and remember: 
You own the show. When a personal truth is well articulated, it touches the 
caller, host, and listener. It has universal and mass appeal.
Who Will “Make It”?
It’s difﬁ cult to predict who “has it” as a host and who does not. Talent does 
shine through, but talent must be combined with a skill for communicating, 
watching, and listening.
Some of the best, most talented, and original “talkers” are lousy com-
municators because they don’t listen. For example, stand-up comedians 
are often hired on the assumption that because they are smart, funny, and 
observers of life, they will be naturals on the job, but unless they are also 
good listeners, they will fail miserably.
On the other hand, some of the most brilliant minds and greatest 
 listeners are boring in a talk radio setting because they can’t have a com-
fortable conversation in front of a microphone. The only way to know 
whether someone will make a good talk show host is to see how host and 
the  audience respond to one another on the air.
Jack Swanson, program director of KGO-AM/San Francisco, one of 
the most successful talk stations in America, gives this sage and important 
warning, “Never be fooled into thinking that what you like is what your 
audience likes.” An example is KGO’s overnight personality. He gets huge 
ratings, but many sane and reasonable people ﬁ nd him hard to take for an 

74         Valerie Geller
extended period. However, he pulls in 25 shares, and you can’t argue with 
that.
As a program director, you need to determine what you want from 
your talk show and what your listeners expect.
Listeners expect a talk show to present a point of view. Audiences also 
expect a talk show to expose them to new ideas so that they can learn new 
things. Famed CBS journalist Edward R. Murrow said of TV, but it is true 
for radio as well, “This instrument can teach, it can illuminate and it can 
inspire.” A listener once commented in an Arbitron diary, “I didn’t go to a 
college or university—talk radio is my college education.”
NPR’s Susan Stamberg writes in her book Talk:
Talk radio is a ‘rear view mirror’ [of our time]. The talk comes from rage, 
frustration, pain, pride, exhilaration. It’s public talk absorbed in private. 
That private experience called radio. It’s also talk between strangers, 
although it can sometimes sound like friends. The “unearned intimacy” 
[photographer Richard Avedon’s phrase] of a call or interview on a radio 
show can make deep connections, two people who have never met—trying 
together in a brief period of time for clarity, understanding.
Listeners expect talk radio to both validate and challenge their beliefs. 
Most of all, they want it to be interesting and fun. They want this entire 
process to be entertaining and a little bigger than life. When these expecta-
tions have been met, you have created powerful talk radio!
The Formula
Broadcast consultant and program director John Mainelli says: “Entertain 
informatively and inform entertainingly.”
The following sections describe how to select and handle topics on the 
air. This will make your approach both personal and powerful.
Set Powerful Bait
The talk show monologue, or “churn,” sets the scene for the show. The 
monologue, like the ﬁ rst page of a great book, should capture the audience 

Creating Powerful Radio: Talk Shows         75
with an original approach to your subject. There is no such thing as a boring 
topic, just boring hosts, and dull, unimaginative approaches to the stories.
Much like a ﬁ sherman baiting his hook and then casting the ﬂ y, the host 
must ﬁ rst tempt the listener to engage and then think about the informa-
tion, so that he or she wants to hear more. The churn must entice listeners.
It’s up to you as the host to make everything you use work. Peel back 
each subject like an onion and ﬁ nd the most interesting ways to present your 
ideas. If the topic is truly interesting, it will also be genuinely  interesting to 
you. And if it is interesting to you, you will ﬁ nd a way to make it interest-
ing to the audience. Only use material you care about. If you can’t make 
yourself care about it, don’t use it.
Don’t waste a minute of the listener’s time on a list of boring stuff you 
feel you must discuss. The talk radio police will not be waiting outside to 
take you away should you forfeit discussing some big story of the day. 
For instance, if your show starts at 10:00 p.m., and the TV news and the 
 morning and afternoon papers have covered a story, CNN’s been hammer-
ing it for 24 hours, and it’s been on your station all day, do you really want 
to keep talking about it? Do you have a unique view of what has been hap-
pening? Anything else to add or to say?
Think of how your audience must feel. Think twice about using some-
thing of which you are already sick and tired. Don’t be an “actor.” Real 
always works. Keep it fresh for you. Tell the truth. Focus. Use effective sto-
rytelling techniques and your show will never be boring.
As in Life, on the Air: Picking Topics That Work
Ever hear that old expression, “God gave you two ears but just the one 
mouth”? The most effective and powerful talk show hosts talk less and 
listen more to the world around them. Start each and every day with this 
question: What are people doing—really doing—and what are they talking 
about—really talking about? What people are talking about off air will 
work as topics on the air.
You can also USE YOUR OWN LIFE as show prep. If you spent an 
hour waiting in a wrong line for a new driver’s license, chances are other 

76         Valerie Geller
people have too. If you have something to say about it, use it. If your child 
is having trouble learning a new school curriculum, chances are you’re 
not the only bleary-eyed parent. 
In all radio, but especially in talk, the audience feels they know you 
personally. You and your views are the product here. You have your life to 
work from. You are the quarter-hour maintenance. Being personal works.
It doesn’t take much to see how it works. A popular talk host had a 
baby. After a brief announcement on the air that she would be taking extra 
time off because her new baby girl had to undergo a complicated surgical 
procedure, she was ﬂ abbergasted to receive thousands of cards, letters, and 
gifts from listeners. 
Most of the cards and letters began, “You don’t know me, but I listen to 
your show every night and consider you a friend .  .   . ” This host could not 
believe the level of support and, yes, even love, that came from total strang-
ers who felt they knew her from listening to her talk show.
In addition to your personal life and experiences, you can, and should, 
scan the wires, newspapers, magazines, and the Internet for stories that 
 outrage, sadden, amuse, or frustrate you. If it makes you laugh, cry, or bang 
your ﬁ st on the steering wheel, chances are it will have the same effect on 
your listeners and send them ﬂ ying to the phones.

Creating Powerful Radio: Talk Shows         77
Creating the Powerful Opening 
Monologue or “Churn”
At Geller Media International’s Creating Powerful Radio seminars or 
working individually, here is the method I work with:
Do:
■  Find your focus. What is the issue or topic? What are you trying 
to say? Know your subject and know why you are talking 
about it.
■  Engage the listeners. What do you want them to do with it? How 
do you want them to respond?
■  Give an opinion. What is your position on this subject? What do 
you think about it? Why do you care?
■ Tell the truth. Find your truth. It works every time.
■ Personalize the opinion . . . with your own storytelling.
Do Not:
■ Ramble.
■ Appear aimless, scattered, or out of control.
■  Talk about topics you don’t care about (even if you feel you 
should care).
■ Go too long before the punch.
■ Be boring!

78         Valerie Geller
When Scott Borden managed public radio station WNYC in New York, 
he used the following techniques.
 
Scott Borden’s “Creating Powerful Talk Radio” Tips
■ Radio is totally personal. When I listen, I should feel like it’s just me 
and the person on the other end of the radio.
■ People listen to radio in groups of one. Never talk to a bigger group.
■ Radio, especially talk radio, is part of the “information age.” We 
have to deﬁ ne our unique information niche and work it like crazy.
■ Every listener letter or e-mail represents exactly one listener. Every 
listener phone call represents exactly one listener.
■ Talk show callers do not represent the talk show audience. They are 
NOT as important as the host, who is the thing that all the listeners 
have in common. Callers are only good if they help the host.
■ The late American radio legend Rick Sklar pointed out that the 
problem with modern research is it asks people to tell you what 
they think and do. When asked, people often lie about these things. 
Actions speak louder than words.
■ Good radio is like obscenity—you can’t deﬁ ne it, but you know it 
when you hear it. Sometimes you have to trust your gut instincts.
■ People treasure memories. And the things we remember are the 
things that go really right or really wrong. Make the most of these 
moments.
■ It’s radio, not brain surgery. Failure does not equal a dead body on 
the table. It has to be fun for us too!
■ You have to have a great plan for every moment on the air. And 
you have to be prepared to scrap this plan entirely the ﬁ rst chance 
you get.

79
Creating Powerful Radio 
Integrating News and Talk
“Art—A means of communication by which mind reaches mind 
across great gaps of space and time.”
—Francis Hoyland
“Share, and share alike.”
—R. Edwards’s “Damon and Pithias,” 1556
Research tells us that most audiences for news-talk radio perceive both the 
news and the talk elements as equally important. In America, due to tight 
budgets and restrictive formats, many full-time news-talk radio newsrooms 
consist of only two to four people, sometimes fewer, and not all of them 
are full time. It is not the ideal situation. Image is not reality. Of course, 
it would be better to have a bigger news staff. But if you have a couple of 
dedicated, talented news reporters and anchors, you can make it work.
It is possible to maintain a news image with very little actual news report-
ing, because when talk hosts discuss news stories and current issues on their 
programs, the station conveys the impression of being “on top of the news.”
News-talk stations short on people use a lot of smoke and mirrors. They 
may have any or all of the following: several network news services, special 
reports from the ﬁ eld, people with mobile phones calling in to report trafﬁ c 
C H A P T E R  8

80         Valerie Geller
tie-ups or as eyewitnesses to breaking news stories. Some stations use their 
talk hosts in live remote or outside broadcasts from places where news is 
happening. Savvy radio news people and talk hosts call on their friends and 
connections at newspapers, TV stations, and magazines to debrief them on 
the air about stories they may be covering.
Good reporters and news presenters work very, very hard. The fact that 
most stations now have smaller news staffs does not mean less work—it means 
more. Being number one is never an accident. Radio news is not for the lazy.
Break Down the Brick Wall
Have you ever noticed a psychological “brick wall” between the news and 
programming departments? It bears mentioning because news and talk 
should always work together, but often don’t. News and talk presenters are 
often surprised to learn that audiences don’t differentiate if they have heard 
a certain item on the news or in the talk shows. Somehow, the news depart-
ment got separated from the rest of the programming. This is the old “Let’s 
take a break for the news” routine. In the news-talk format, this is not a good 
thing. You must break down that brick wall, or at least put some holes in it.
Remember, your audience does not know there are two “camps” at 
work here; they only know that their radio is on, and if you are lucky, they 
know which station they are listening to. They want interesting, relevant 
talk. Listeners do not care whether they get their information from a guy 
wearing a news hat or a talk hat. Fight the war against the competition, 
not each other.
Failure to Communicate
Why don’t we talk to each other? Because:
■ Talk and programming says: “The news writers, reporters and pro-
ducers are always so busy, we don’t want to bug them.”
■ The news department says: “The talk hosts are in their own world 
and don’t bother to talk or listen to us.”
■ Management says: “Keep them separate because news is fact, talk is 
opinion and entertainment. Mixing them would damage our news 
credibility.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Integrating News and Talk         81
On winning talk stations, however, news reporters, anchors, and hosts talk 
to each other both on and off the air.
They share resources, knowing their product is a marriage. In fact, the 
best news-talk radio happens during times of crisis. That is when the lines 
of demarcation blur, and everyone pitches in to do what they can to help 
each other get the full story on the air quickly.
News is the chronicling of events. Talk is the discussion, the “why” 
behind the events and how people feel about them. But, your audience will 
be well served if they hear the truth, no matter who tells it to them.
A perfect example of integrating news and talk is New York syndi-
cated morning host Don Imus and his newsman Charles McCord, a cred-
ible “news personality.” There are no brick walls here. Imus is at his best 
discussing the news of the day, and McCord is an integral part of the show. 
McCord retains total news credibility. One of the most important parts of 
the Howard Stern Show is when Robin Quivers does the “news,” albeit 
in a nontraditional style. Long-time syndicated radio commentator Paul 
Harvey has blurred the lines between personality and newsman as well.
A word about the credibility factor: Audiences today are much more 
sophisticated. They know the difference between a newsperson being seri-
ous and one who is fooling around. Some newscasters even read commer-
cials and manage to keep their credibility. Audiences know when they are 
seeing product placement, and they can spot a commercial, even if it is 
delivered by a newsperson, a mile away.
When a huge event affects the lives of listeners—a war, an earthquake, 
a ﬂ ood, radioactive leaks—there is no fooling around. News anchors today 
have come to understand that much of the news is in place as an insurance 
policy. It is there in case you need it. Of course, when you need the news, it 
had better be there.
Look for Talkable Topics
Another way to build the relationship between the news and talk staffs is 
for the news people to keep a lookout for “discussable” news items. There 
is not much to say about a ﬁ re, ﬂ ood, or breaking story other than giving 
the facts and information as they become available. After the facts are in 
about the massive car crash on the bridge, the talk show topic may actually 
be: “Why are citizens willing to endure life-threatening conditions to save 
ten minutes on their commute?”

82         Valerie Geller
A hard news story can generate a softer talk topic. Train your people to 
save the stories about Supreme Court decisions or any polls or items about 
which people are likely to have strong views. Peel the “onion” that is your 
story to ﬁ nd material for an in-depth, open-phone talk show.
The Crossover Talents
Opinion traditionally had no place in the news. On the other hand, talk has 
not been a forum for chronicling the facts. So, hybrid news-talkers such as 
Dave Ross are rare. Wearing both hats, they manage to bridge the gap. When 
Ross does a newscast, the listener can tell what he thinks; on the other hand, 
listeners know what an objective and conscientious newsman he is when 
hearing Ross’s talk show. Ross hosts a daily talk show on KIRO/Seattle and 
presents news feature commentaries on the CBS Radio Network. Over the 
years, KIRO has sent Ross around the world to cover big news events such as 
the fall of the Berlin Wall. Dave Ross has found the equation to marry news 
to talk: keep a unique voice and retain credibility in both.
It is impossible to describe Dave Ross’s creativity. Sometimes he sings 
his commentaries, often uses humor, and has a cynical “bright eye” on the 
world around him. If you have not heard his work, a sample script—archived 
from a CBS Radio commentary—is on the next page. It is an interesting twist 
on the health care cost issue in the United States.
Develop a Daily System
If you want to integrate your news-talk product, it takes extra effort. The 
list that follows is a system to develop news-talk integration:
■ Work together. Meet with the producers, talk show hosts and the news 
assignment manager or news director every day. Compare what you 
know about the news and events of the day. If it cannot be done in 
person, do it for ﬁ ve minutes on the phone, instant messaging or e-mail.
■ Take today. Go through the list of today’s topics, discuss:
● What will news do with the stories? What will talk do with the 
stories?
● Any ideas that anyone else has.

Creating Powerful Radio: Integrating News and Talk         83
■ Prospect for gold. Share the loot. Everyone should look through the 
wires, newspapers, and any other usual source materials. Talk about 
multi-version reports or anything that can be done in short-form 
news, then moved into a long-form talk.
■ Pick the right talent for the subject. If a newsperson or host has an 
afﬁ nity for a speciﬁ c topic, he or she will do a better job. Why not 
send your baseball fanatic out to do the baseball story? Utilize your 
talent’s natural interests, background, and experiences. This means 
Health Care That’s Always There
The simple solution to health care costs. 
I’m Dave Ross on the CBS Radio Network.
It’s an appealing motto, “Health care that’s always there.” The big unknown 
is, at what cost? The President says that the savings are obvious. You can 
cut paperwork to one claim form, encourage preventive care, and end the 
billions of dollars of unnecessary medical tests.
Well, I understand the paperwork, the insurance industry is ready to do that 
anyway. I understand preventive care, but how will you stop the testing? If 
a patient wants a test, does a doctor say “no” and risk a lawsuit? The key 
is to get the patient not to want the test. But how?
I was talking with Dr. Nancy Dickey with the American Medical Association, 
also a family physician in Texas, and she told me an interesting thing. 
Whenever she offers her patients a medical test, the ﬁ rst thing they ask is 
not, “How much will this cost?” since the cost is usually covered by insur-
ance. What they ask is: “WILL THIS HURT?” That’s what they want to know: 
“Will this hurt!” And I suddenly realized that’s it!
We’ve been going about it all wrong. For years, doctors have been say-
ing, “This won’t hurt a bit.” WRONG! The doctors should say, “Well, yeah, 
this is gonna hurt a little,” and he kinda glances toward a big old four-inch-
long needle sitting over by the sink.
That’s why people didn’t have as many tests thirty years ago, because those 
tests hurt! “Health care that’s always there” is a great quote, but here’s 
another one: “You bet that test is paid for, I’ll just go and get the needle!”
I’m Dave Ross on the CBS Radio Network.

84         Valerie Geller
you will really need to get to know your talent. If you don’t 
know, ask. “Is anyone interested in alternative medicine?” Again, 
interested is interesting and powerful.
■ Be ﬂ exible. Things change quickly. You’ve got to be ready to change 
plans.
■ Listen to everyone’s ideas. If people are assigned stories or topics 
they do not like, ask them to give you better ideas. People always 
work better when the idea is theirs.
■ Communicate. If things change news-wise or events happen 
throughout the day, talk to each other. This is a team effort, and the 
listeners are not necessarily aware that there is a brick wall between 
the newsroom and the talent area.
■ Listen to each other. News departments, when they can, ought to be 
aware of the content of the various talk shows and whatever else 
is on air. Keep the radio on at the station. Talk hosts: Listen to the 
news!
■ Create a future ﬁ le. When notices arrive regarding future events, 
designate a person to ﬁ le them in the computer in daily calendar 
form. Both news and talk should utilize these lists for topic and 
story ideas. Newspapers work these types of ﬁ les as much as ﬁ ve 
years ahead.
■ Create a follow-up ﬁ le. On dull days when not much is going 
on, look back. Did the station cover any stories that need to be 
updated? An updated news story might ask:
● “Where are they now?”
● “Did the child in the custody ﬁ ght live happily ever after?” 
“What happened to the neighborhood after the rapist was 
released?”
 Looking ahead is good, but you can also do mighty powerful radio 
when you look backward.
■ Do not ﬁ ght over guests. If there is a guest or an interview that a 
newsperson has set up and the talk host wants to interview him herself, 
work it out. Protect the on-air product, not your territory. Perhaps bor-
rowing a clip, or piece, of that interview audio from the news depart-
ment will be enough to get discussion going for a powerful talk show.

Creating Powerful Radio: Integrating News and Talk         85
Conversely, if something noteworthy is said during one of the station’s 
talk shows, use it in the news. You’ll have an exclusive. Producers, endear 
your host to the news staff by getting that audio to the newsroom fast!
Be a Team. Be a Station. Be Number 1!
Work together. Cooperate. Powerful radio is a collective effort. William 
Shakespeare said, “The play is the thing.” Put egos aside. Forget the play-
ers. Focus on the play.
Let the news people know what types of material you are seeking for 
your show. Ask them to save anything they come across. Talk hosts, do the 
same for your news team.
People are usually glad to help, and may have a lot of ideas and mate-
rial that may not be appropriate for their own department or show but 
could work for you.
Break Format When News Breaks
This is when news-talk is at its best. During times of national or local 
catastrophe, go ahead and break format. Have a procedure (whom to call, 
commercials to move, etc.) in place in the event of an urgent news story. 
Get the information on air right now. Nobody cares about your “cover 
story” or “topic A” when all hell is breaking loose and lives and property 
are at stake.
Drop what you had planned and go with the breaking story. Debrief 
news reporters on the air. Ask them questions about the story. If it makes 
sense to do so, have them stay on the air and take calls. Talk hosts: Give the 
news department all the time it needs to get information on the air, even if 
it cuts heavily into your show.
Always Archive
Remember to keep audio ﬁ les. If you have the archived audio accessible, 
you can easily re-purpose magic moments on air for promos or later for 
awards submissions.

86         Valerie Geller
Some of the most effective news-talk managers are those who have 
worked on the air themselves. Bob Christopher is one of those people. 
Christopher ran the Florida State Network, anchored at KTAR in Phoenix, 
Arizona, and was a manager at WWL radio in New Orleans, where one 
integrated newsroom served four stations.
Bob Christopher’s Creating Powerful Radio Points
■ Understand your listeners: where they live, where they shop, and 
what they want and need from you.
■ Create an emotional bond with your audience.
■ As often as possible, deliver more than you promise to listeners and 
advertisers.
■ Surround yourself with people who want to win.
■ Take time to talk to them and smile at them in the hall.
■ Develop personalities your listeners will love.
■ Focus on the positives in your corner of the world.
■ Dream up fascinating promotions or special events.
■ Remember, it’s marketing!
■ Know your competitors.

Creating Powerful Radio 
Interviews
“Men are born with two ears, but with just a single tongue, in 
order that they should hear twice as much as they say.”
— Charles Caleb Colton
Interviews are a necessary part of the information-gathering process for 
both news and talk. A powerful interview can rivet the audience to their 
radios; a boring one can make them disappear.
Remember, your guests—whether rock stars, artists, politicians, experts, 
specialists in their ﬁ elds, or just “common” men or women with stories to 
tell—may be nervous when they show up at your radio station. You go 
on the air every day and it seems routine to open the microphone and 
talk to thousands of people. However, this experience can be terrifying to 
“civilians,” who may be nervous or forget what they want to say. They can 
become unsure of where they’re heading with a point and become bor-
ing—talking endlessly, and saying nothing.
The purpose of an interview is to get the interviewee to open up and 
tell you things of interest. You may even get the person to reveal things he 
or she does not ordinarily discuss in a public forum. You want your guest to 
share information, to tell stories.
C H A P T E R  9
87

88         Valerie Geller
A good interviewer knows that in order to get the most out of any 
interview, the person being interviewed must feel comfortable. Ideally, he 
or she should forget about the microphone. He should feel heard. If you 
catch your guest looking at her watch, there’s a problem because during a 
good interview, time should ﬂ y.
It is up to you, as the interviewer, to maintain control. If the interview 
heads in a dull direction, grab it and steer the discussion elsewhere. For 
example: “I’m sure there are people listening now who fully understand 
the details of the photosynthesis process, but in layman’s terms, could you 
explain why it’s a bad idea to cut down the rain forests?” Your audience 
will appreciate it if you can keep your guests away from intricate and 
technical answers.
Often, you will be faced with an uncooperative interviewee, particu-
larly in news situations. For example, politicians are notorious for not want-
ing to tell you anything substantive. They have their own agendas and want 
to use you and your airwaves to promote their ideas. Dealing with this 
tactic can be tricky.
Here is one method to get them to talk. It comes from Swedish 
newsman Stig-Arne Nordström. His technique is “getting it a little bit 
wrong.”
Let’s say you have a politician who is downplaying the signiﬁ cance of a 
proposed tax hike. You might say, “So your plan means no tax increases 
for anyone?” The politician will then feel frustrated and misunderstood. 
People in his profession can’t stand that. He might come back with some-
thing like, “No, no, no, my plan would mean a uniform tax increase for 
almost everyone!” You’ve accomplished several things here. You got him 
to talk and explain it in a short form that is easily understood and you’ve 
landed the perfect radio interview sound statement. It is short, to the point, 
and cuts through the smoke and mirrors your interviewee was trying to 
use to hide his true agenda. Don’t worry about the audience thinking that 
you are an idiot for “misunderstanding” your interviewee. If the interview 
is pre-recorded, you can cut out the “dumb” question and just air the tight, 
succinct answer.
CNN’s Larry King is notorious for asking the “dumb question.” He 
claims he doesn’t read the books of the authors he’s interviewing. He also 
doesn’t admit to much in the way of show preparation. Larry King’s key 
is to ask the questions members of his audience would ask as if they had 
the chance to sit down and interview the guest. His  audience  loves it.

Creating Powerful Radio: Interviews         89
This is how Larry King works, and while it’s effective for him, it should not 
be construed as an argument against show prep, in which I strongly believe.
Here is another, somewhat controversial, trick for pre-recorded inter-
views. If a guest is nervous and the answers are too formal, stilted, long, and 
boring, try this: Wrap up your interview. Leave the recorder running (hope-
fully your guest won’t notice). Then say, “Just to make sure I’ve got this 
right, could we go over it one more time?” The guest, now relaxed because 
the interview is “over,” will often tell you, in a very conversational way, 
what the key points were. You can then “notice” that you left the recorder 
running and ask permission to use that interview, instead of the ﬁ rst, formal 
session. I don’t believe this is an unethical technique. After all, your guest 
knew that he or she was talking to you for a broadcast interview, and this 
audio is often much better. Interview subjects are frequently grateful and 
will thank you for making them “sound so good.”
The Art of the Interview: Powerful Listening
National Public Radio’s Susan Stamberg got it right about interviews in 
her book Talk: “Talk always begins with a question. Listening. Listening for 
what’s being said and for what is NOT said, listening for the silences, the 
cracks between the words, the hesitations, the contradictions, the glorious 
expositions.”
Stamberg, like all good interviewers, understands that in an interview, 
the “star” is the topic or the guest, not the host. It helps if you, as the host, 
can sublimate your ego somewhat and focus completely on what your guest 
is trying to say. Listening is the key.
The interview will go much better if the topic is something you care 
about, as opposed to something you think will be of interest to your audi-
ence. Remember, “interested is interesting.” If you are bored by the topic, 
odds are your audience will be, too. Listeners can tell the difference between 
affected and genuine curiosity.
Like a ﬁ sherman going for the catch, it is sometimes necessary to use 
a variety of baits and lures for different types of interviews. Your opening 
questions will depend on the circumstances. Sometimes it pays to be tough. 
Other times, kindness, empathy, or humor serves you best. There is no one 
right approach to getting a great interview. Part of the skill and art of the 
job is to gauge the method needed to get the interviewee to open up and 
talk. That “sense of approach” is a skill you develop by listening.

90         Valerie Geller
Uh, Uh, Uh . . . Nervous Guests?
Some stations actually hand out a list of helpful hints for guests to read 
before going on the air. If you would like to try this, here are some points 
to include.
Dear Interviewees . . .
■ Please be available and ﬂ exible. If the interview time has to be 
changed, be gracious. The station may call you in an emergency, 
if another guest has canceled, or if the station is in need of your 
expertise right now. Be willing to appear. The host and station 
will appreciate and remember you.
■ If you want to make sure you get a copy of the show, have some-
one record it for you off the air.
■ If you’re an author, PLEASE don’t repeat the name of your new 
book over and over. Listeners will get annoyed. Your job is to be 
so fascinating that the listeners stay until the end of the interview 
because they want to hear the host repeat the title of your book. 
We will put your information on our station Web site if you give it 
to us in advance.
■ Forget there is a larger audience. You will be much more effec-
tive if you speak to the host one-on-one, instead of addressing all 
those listeners “out there.” The audience listens one at a time.
■ Try to relax. Be yourself. Radio is personal and intimate. Listeners 
like to be spoken to that way.
■ Watch your language. This is not a living room and certain 
expressions could slip out if you aren’t careful!
■ Keep to the point. If you don’t have anything interesting to say, 
ask the host for another question.
■ Do not bring in a lot of notes to the studio and read from them. 
Hosts hate this and it can be boring.
■ Ask for what you need. Do you have your reading glasses? A 
pen or pencil? Tissues? A glass of water?

Creating Powerful Radio: Interviews         91
■ Do you understand the process? You should feel in control as 
much as possible. Ask how to use the cough button, just in case.
■ Can you stop anytime? Is this being recorded, or is it live, direct, 
and “anything goes”?
■ By the way, have you eaten? There’s nothing more embarrassing 
than a microphone picking up the growling of your hungry stomach.
■ Do you need to use the bathroom? It’s better to be comfortable 
than to be sitting there squirming around.
■ Don’t be rigid. As in normal conversation, the interview may take 
a turn that has nothing to do with your agenda. Be a good guest. 
The discussion may lead to even better things than you were 
originally prepared to talk about. A skilled interviewer does not 
stick to a script.
■ Listen to the questions and answer them. If the host seems unpre-
pared or unfamiliar with your topic, don’t express anger or frustra-
tion. The audience is probably in the same boat. Just speak to the 
host as you would to a friendly, but uninformed, stranger you meet 
at a cocktail party or in the next seat on an airplane. If you can 
genuinely interest the host in your topic, you will also interest the 
audience, and will have a very good chance of being asked back.
 
Thoughts for Hosts and Interviewers
■ Forget the long hello. Keep the introduction and greeting short and 
to the point.
■ Listening is the key to successful interviews. Don’t stick to a list. 
Often the best next question will come from the answer to the last 
one.
■ Try not to ask “yes or no” questions. Ask the “how” or “why” ques-
tions. Ask how people feel, and have them explain things.
■ If you didn’t get enough of an answer, don’t be afraid to ask again. 
This is especially important in recorded interviews when you are 
looking for that perfect sound bite.

92         Valerie Geller
■ Curiosity counts. If you are genuinely curious about the topic, the 
interview will work.
■ Ask “dumb” questions. Do not be embarrassed if you don’t know 
all the answers, the audience probably doesn’t either. That’s why 
you are doing the interview.
■ Get to the point. Don’t clutter up the interview with lots of chit-
chat. The audience cares about how what is being said affects their 
lives.
■ Control the interview. Steer the subject in a better direction if the 
interview starts to get boring. Don’t let slick-talking, verbally skilled 
guests get around you and not answer questions. Ask your questions 
again and again until you get answers, then move on.
■ Focus on solutions, not just problems. Even if your guests have 
some pie-in-the-sky solutions or can offer nothing more than a 
phone number to call, that’s better than ending an interview on 
some hopeless, downward note.
■ Respect responses. Everyone is entitled to an opinion. If he or she is 
an idiot, that will come through loud and clear all by itself.
■ End your interviews cleanly. Do a short good-bye. You don’t need 
to recap points made during the interview. Trust that listeners got 
what was discussed and move on.
On Listening
Because listening is such a part of creating powerful radio, it’s worth look-
ing at separately. Years ago, at UCLA, a friend gave me a book called On 
Listening by psychologist Carl Faber. When I read the following passage, I 
was stunned. On Listening expressed what I felt in my heart about radio—
about connecting and communicating.
On rough days, I still go back and read that book again. It always helps. 
Creating Powerful Radio is about creating powerful communication. That 
means powerful listening.
Dr. Carl Faber taught courses on relationships, myths, men, and women. 
His early UCLA lectures were broadcast on Paciﬁ ca Radio in Los Angeles. 
The following is an excerpt from Faber’s book.

Creating Powerful Radio: Interviews         93
From Carl Faber, On Listening
Most people have never really been listened to. They live in a lonely 
silence—no one knowing what they feel, how they live or what they 
have done. They are prisoners of the eyes of others, of the stereotyped, 
limited, superﬁ cial and often distorted ways that others see them.
There are no words to adequately describe what it is to be free 
with another person. It is most often a sensing that someone will let 
us be all of what we are at that moment. We can talk about whatever 
we wish, express in any way whatever feelings are in our hearts. We 
can take as much time as we need. We can sit, stand, pace, yell, cry, 
pound the ﬂ oor, dance or weep for joy. Whatever and however we 
are at the moment is accepted and respected.…
This experience of freedom and communion helps us to feel that 
someone is for us. And it is this deep sensing of someone, somewhere, 
being for us that breaks into the silent loneliness of our lives and encour-
ages us in the struggle to be human. It helps us to break the tyranny of 
the strangers’ eyes and to give to our lives all that we are capable of 
giving. Because listening can bring about such powerful healing, it is 
one of the most beautiful gifts that people can give and receive.

This page intentionally left blank

95
Creating Powerful Radio 
Show Prep
“Creating is never given to us all by itself. It goes hand in hand with
 the gift of observation. A true creator may be recognized 
by his ability to ﬁ nd about him, to the commonest and 
humblest thing, items worthy of note.”
— Igor Stravinsky
“All truly wise thoughts have been thought already 
thousands of times; but to make them truly ours, 
we must think them over again honestly, until 
they take root in our personal experience.”
— Goethe
Why Is Prep Crucial?
A general would never go into battle without a plan. A surgeon would never 
go into the operating room without a preliminary work-up. Yet it is surprising 
how many air personalities show up for work and just wait to see what hap-
pens. Some days they might get lucky, but for winning over the long haul, 
C H A P T E R  10

96         Valerie Geller
show prep is essential. If a talent is prepared, it does not matter if he or she 
slides in a minute before airtime. The prepared host can still do a great show.
It is never an accident when a show is number one. It takes very hard 
work. The best personalities compile a stack of material from various 
sources: articles from magazines or newspapers, written ideas, and material 
collected from the Internet along with stories they have picked up from life 
or have observed or overheard.
Syndicated talk show host Rush Limbaugh is a master of show prep. 
He’s disciplined. When I worked with him at WABC radio in New York, 
Rush would come in hours before each show. He didn’t go on the air until 
he’d gone through dozens of newspapers, discussed ideas with his producer, 
and spent time on the phone talking with anyone from disc jockeys to polit-
ical leaders. 
Rush had concepts and stories, but no guests. He found things that 
interested him, collected them, and shared them with his audience. No one 
made him do this. Rush did it on his own, because he wanted his show to 
succeed. He realized the value of show prep.
Everyone has his or her own way of organizing show prep materials, 
but if a host sounds consistently disorganized on the air, try coming up with 
another system. If a host is prepared but cannot access an item during the 
on-air performance, all that prep is wasted and the show will wander.
Some talent are fortunate enough to have trustworthy people, usually 
producers, who do their show prep and planning for them. It then becomes 
the talent’s job to creatively execute someone else’s plan. Nevertheless, a 
plan still exists.
Creative talent are constantly doing show prep. Everything in their 
lives—what they read, eat, feel, experience, and even dream—all goes into 
their shows. Broadcaster Melissa McConnell-Wilson says, “Twenty-four 
hours a day, seven days a week—every conscious waking moment, I’m 
gathering information to recall later to use on my show.”
How personal can it get? With some air personalities, the best you 
can hope for in terms of conﬁ dentiality is that your name stays out of 
it. Managers beware: your meetings or conversations with talent could 
become material.

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         97
There is a difference between personal and private. No one should 
be allowed to endanger others or personally harm them in any way. Not 
only can there be legal consequences to giving speciﬁ c information about 
people’s private lives, but there can be security issues as well. When in 
doubt, try asking: Will the story of the car with the Picasso in the back seat 
be as compelling if I don’t give the car’s make and model? 
Oftentimes a little camouﬂ age, using the essence of a true story, enables 
more creative and dramatic storytelling without risking someone’s physi-
cal well-being or emotional embarrassment. What is your point? If enter-
taining your audience is the goal, then does it really matter if something 
happened to your wife or to “a woman I know . . . ?” 
Try television’s Dragnet approach: “The story you are about to hear is 
true, but the names have been changed to protect the innocent.”
Using Humor
Humor always attracts listeners. Some people are funny; others may not be 
funny but have great senses of humor. There are those who are hilarious in 
private but are not able to access those parts of their personalities on the 
air.
You can do show prep that improves your ability to be funny on the air. 
For example, you can learn to become a better storyteller. Consultant Jaye 
Albright offers this advice to those who would like to grow and develop in 
this area:
Read every book in the library about humor. If possible, attend improvisa-
tion workshops. These can be mind-expanding releases of creative expres-
sion. [When telling a story] memorize speciﬁ c and colorful details. There is 
nothing funny about the abstract—comedy emerges from speciﬁ cs. Make 
note of them and use them; allow the child who lives within you to emerge. 
Tell your truth.

98         Valerie Geller
“When you start to take this job seriously, you’re in trouble.”
— Jimmy Buffet
“Use everything in your life to create your art.”
— Stanislavsky
Rules for Powerful Prep
Here are some ideas and questions to look at when doing show prep.
1. Go with the Moment
This is also known as the rule of “out the window.” If something sponta-
neous happens on the air that is better than what you have prepared, go 
with it! You would happily take a “side trip” to see the Grand Canyon 
while traveling through Arizona. The magic moments on radio—a break-
ing news story or a fabulous caller—happen when you least expect them, 
and when they occur it is wonderful. Although there is no substitute for 
walking into the station thoroughly prepared, you must also be willing to 
throw that stack of stuff “out the window” when something irresistible 
turns up.
2. Always Ask Why—Avoid Slot Filling
Always have a speciﬁ c reason for wanting a guest. Avoid “guest-o-mania.” 
If a guest has been booked for you, know the reason. Ask the producer, 
“What has this person done? Why is he or she special?”
Ask: “Will we enjoy this guest even if we are not familiar with his or 
her latest book or area of expertise?” Is this someone you would want to 
talk to off the air? Think twice before you take the easy way out and book a 
guest to ﬁ ll an hour of airtime. If you have always wanted to meet someone, 
and he or she lives in your town or is coming to your area, it is perfectly 
acceptable to invite that person to be a guest on your show, providing that 
the goal remains to entertain or inform your audience.
Never promise a guest an hour. Instead, just ask for a few minutes of 
his or her time. Make it clear that because this is live radio, it is always 
possible that a guest may be preempted by a breaking story. You have now 
protected yourself from the potentially embarrassing situation of having to 
dump a guest if he or she is boring or if a bigger opportunity arises.

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         99
I am frequently asked for a rule about how to use guests. Unless you 
are doing an interview-based show, I advise using guests as spice. Like great 
seasoning in a bland meal, guests can be wonderful. Good guests can make 
a show, but they must be gifted communicators with passion, offer new 
information or have something relevant to say. The best guests are people 
who have personal experience, with a story to tell, rather than being just 
experts in their ﬁ elds.
A guest can also serve as an unwitting foil for savvy hosts with barbed 
tongues. “John and Ken” in Los Angeles are famous for ﬁ nding “village 
idiots” and using them on the air for comedic purposes.
Warning to Managers
Many managers like to hear guests on the air. It demonstrates that the 
host and producer have done some work to book the show and justify 
their salaries. They like to see bodies at desks for eight hours a day. Sales 
reps are asked to turn in lists of people they have called on, called back, 
or visited. Managers feel comfortable seeing people working. It’s that “all 
in their places with bright shiny faces” song we learned in elementary 
school. We are accustomed to believing what we see. Management has a 
hard time accepting that a talent reading a newspaper, getting a hair cut, 
or ﬁ ghting with his or her auto mechanic is actually doing show prep, but 
it can be true.
Broadcasting is not school, or a factory job where we punch in our 
eight hours a day. Radio work is different, more like art than manufactur-
ing. A gallery owner would not call an artist at 8:45 in the morning and ask, 
“Are you at your easel yet? How many brushes have you used?”
The only hard rule for powerful radio is: Be prepared and on time for 
your show. What listeners respond to is the ﬁ nished product. Our product 
is what comes out of the speakers on the radio. Our preparation is real but 
often invisible.
Be Prepared
Carry a recording device or note pad at all times. Don’t forget spare batter-
ies for that device. If we were working as photographers, we would always 
have a camera ready. But we work in radio and our platform is sound. 
When was the last time you thought to yourself, “I wish I had a sound 

100         Valerie Geller
recorder right now?” They are small and light. Get one. Carry it. If you are 
not comfortable carrying one, at least keep paper and pen handy so that 
you can jot down a great idea before it is gone. Great ideas come in the 
shower; the car; wake you up at night. Write them down.
Make Friends Outside of the Business
Spend time with normal people. If you only associate with journalists 
and broadcasters, you limit your vision. Expand your horizons. Talk to 
everyone. Your inner circle should contain people who work outside of 
radio and have a variety of interests and experiences. Listen to them. 
Find out what they are thinking, worrying, and talking about. It will help 
your show tremendously. Read everything. Watch everything. Find men-
tors. As consultant Randy Lane says: “Hang out with creative people, 
and learn from them. Study creative performers outside of radio.”
Know Your Target
Know your audience. Do the listeners have a different lifestyle than the 
program host? Probably so. Perhaps the host lives in a busy urban center, 
whereas the bulk of the station’s listeners are suburbanites. You need to 
know what goes on where they live, too. Read the local press. Drive around 
to get a feeling for your area. Attend neighborhood functions. Meet people. 
Get to know your city.
This is not Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous. Even if you do not fre-
quent your local Wal-Mart, Ikea, or Home Depot, you should at least know 
people who do. Eat where your listeners eat; shop where they shop. Stay 
curious, alive, and interested.
Take a Test Drive
Discuss show ideas with somebody else. Prep is much easier when you have 
the luxury of working with a talented producer. He or she can help you 
focus ideas to help form questions you will ask on-air and points you will 
make to engage your audience. Try bouncing the ideas off people around 
you: the call screener, the PD, the newsperson, or the station’s security 
guard. It may help you focus on what is really interesting about the topic, 
or take it in a different direction.
Prep Warning
Do not do your show before the show. Testing out an idea should not be 
confused with rehearsing a monologue. Save your actual performance for 

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         101
the live microphone. It will never sound as good or as natural the second 
time around.
Pre-produce
Prepare the soundtrack for your show. Any bits, music, etc., that you think 
you might want to use should be close at hand. Inform your engineer or 
board operator well in advance if you will require any special technical 
assistance or equipment. Make sure your equipment is working.
Double-Check
Before you go on-air with a topic, ask: Is it relevant? Does it matter? Do 
you care? Do your listeners care? What will I do if this topic gets boring? 
Do I have a fall-back plan?
Be Generous
If you have found a topic that would be perfect for somebody else at your 
station, pass it along. Leave the article, book, note, etc., in that person’s 
mailbox. E-mail him or give him a call. The success of your station depends 
on the efforts of all its creative members.
Experiment
Break rules if you can come up with a more successful method. Take what 
works for you, and leave the rest.
Tale of Total Show Prep
The following “tale of total show prep” comes from consultant Tommy 
Kramer’s Coaching Handbook. It illustrates what can happen when you do 
not do your homework thoroughly.
A talent called with a problem: He had overslept on Tuesday, had no time 
for show prep, and just barely made it in time for his morning-drive show. 
Yet he and his partner had a great show that day. The next day, the talent 
did two hours of show prep and arrived on time, but the show was difﬁ cult 
and out of synch. His question for me was, “Do I really need show prep?”
 This guy got lucky on Tuesday. His creative side bailed him out. But it 
won’t and cannot every day. Wednesday he did tons of prep, but all the 
work was informational. He had lots of things on tap but had not thought 
about where to go with them.

102         Valerie Geller
 The answer is, “Yes, you need to do your show prep. But look for balance 
and prep your creative as well as your informational side.”
Prep and Topic Selection
Method acting teaches that the actor must convince himself before he con-
vinces the audience. If the on-air personality is genuinely interested in the 
topic, it will work better. Broadcasters organize their show prep in  different 
ways. There is no “right way,” just the way that works for you.
Dig Deep for Talkable Topics or Engaging Questions
Remember to look beyond page one for stories. Take notes from conversa-
tions you’ve had or overheard. Try to come up with at least one story or 
observation from your own life for each show.
Andy Beaubien and Jeremy Millar’s Prep Methods
Basic preparation techniques are similar for every format. The actual pro-
tocol works as well for music as it does for talk radio. International con-
sultant and researcher Andy Beaubien programmed many of America’s 
top-rated Album Rock music stations. Beaubien, along with Australian 
Radio Network’s Jeremy Millar, outlined the following method for prep-
ping and running a well-organized show: “Show prep is usually a team 
effort and not a task assigned to just one person. In most cases, the program 
producer becomes the ofﬁ cial collector of show-prep material, since he or 
she is often more objective than the show’s anchor.”
Review
Ideally, show prep begins with a review (aircheck session) of the previ-
ous program. This is often accomplished at the daily meeting with the PD. 
Decide which segments worked and which did not.
Update
The producer updates the team on new material that has arrived. This may 
include items from publications, syndicated-radio services, press releases, 
the Internet, and so on. The update should include a brieﬁ ng on the latest 

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         103
news items that may ﬁ t the show. The availability of in-studio (or phone) 
guests should also be reviewed and the producer should be prepared to 
provide background information on them. It is also good to look at upcom-
ing major news, sports, and show-business events.
Sources
On the Internet and elsewhere, the local newspaper need play only a mod-
est role in your show. If you ﬁ nd that you are depending on the newspaper 
for most of your topics, try a “newspaper-free” week.
Some teams hire writers who will generate exclusive material for their 
shows. You can often ﬁ nd talented freelance writers who will regularly 
deliver fully written, customized material for a surprisingly nominal fee.
Topics
Decide on a list of topics for the day’s program, and assign a priority to 
each item. Gather additional information about items that have caught 
your attention. Often you may ﬁ nd that a topic which originally sounded 
interesting turns out to be a dead-end street. On the other hand, research 
may uncover amazing facts about a subject that had seemed limited.
If scriptwriting or prerecorded material is to be used, the producer can 
assign these tasks to others on the team. Most talents prefer an outline to a 
written script, so they can deliver material in their own style.
Production
Prerecorded material may include interviews with guests not available at 
airtime, on-the-street interviews, musical excerpts, sound effects, novelty 
voices, feature intros and outros, and highlights from previous programs.
Schedule
Schedule the program elements on paper. Make sure everyone involved 
gets a copy. Each program should be planned in quarter-hour segments 
(or smaller if necessary). Interview guests are also placed on the schedule 
at this time. The program schedule should be maintained on a daily and 
weekly basis. A good producer should always have a contingency plan, as 
last-minute guest cancellations are common.

104         Valerie Geller
Archives
An essential part of show prep is the maintenance of complete and accu-
rate ﬁ les. Include the following:
■ A ﬁ le of previous daily program schedules
■ Copies of scripts and program ideas
■ Background material by subject
■ Audio ﬁ les, including full-length recordings of previous programs 
and edited program excerpts
Accurate records allow the team to recycle successful program features. 
Great guests and new show topics are not always available. A good library 
will keep the show aﬂ oat through slow periods.
Tommy Kramer points out that another nearly effortless way a team 
show continues to prep outside the station is to “communicate with each 
other off the air. An advance phone call or e-mail can prepare your partner 
or producer for a bit you want to do tomorrow. It gives the other person 
time to turn it over to his or her subconscious and think of creative ways to 
contribute. Time spent going to lunch or a ball game together can teach you 
things about each other’s speech patterns, outside interests, etc., that could 
otherwise take months to learn.”
Be Selective
It is great when you have ten fabulous ideas for a show but only need four. 
But how do you know which topics should make it to the air? Is there a set 
criteria for topic selection? Consultant Jaye Albright says it very well:
Do something that has something to do with me and my life. It can’t be a 
cliche. It must be original and speciﬁ c. If it is from your life, I hope that it 
becomes a metaphor for something about mine. Something that moves me 
emotionally, touches me personally, yet is delivered with spontaneity and 
the knowledge that my time is important. The less it has to do with me, the 
briefer or the more moving it must be.
WABC TV’s assignment editor Howard Price chooses stories that air 
on top-rated Eyewitness News in New York City. Price knows how to spot 
popular issues and trends and, like many top producers, incorporates Frank 

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         105
Magid and Associates research ﬁ ndings from years ago, which still hold 
true: three subject areas listeners and viewers always respond to are sto-
ries about “health, heart and pocketbook.” He uses these criteria for topic 
selection:
■ You work for “WIFM”—“What’s in it for Me?”—and the “me” 
means your listeners.
■ Every day ask: What are people really doing? What are they talking 
about right now at their desks or on the checkout line? How can my 
program engage in and advance the discussion? Explore problems 
and solutions. Unite your listeners with stories of personal crises or 
extreme viewpoints.
■ Have the vision and vigilance to spot trends, take risks, and exploit 
opportunities. Do one thing, or a small collection of things, better, 
faster, and more reliably than any of your competitors. That is what 
builds your image in the minds of your listeners.
■ When selecting topics, ask: Will people expect us to cover this? If 
your listeners know that you can be counted on for great coverage 
of sports, health, or politics, then they tune to you for those things.
■ People care about things that are close to them physically, emotion-
ally, spiritually or intellectually. They care about the security of their 
jobs, the education of their kids, the health of their parents, the cost 
of their homes, their favorite celebrities, etc. They care about the 
consequences of the decisions their leaders make. They want the 
answer to the question “What does this mean to me?”
■ Use radio’s immediacy. Radio can still get more places faster than 
TV. Do as much live as you can. If there is a current event where you 
can get a direct call through to the people involved, radio has the 
advantage while TV is still trying to push their camera in someone’s 
front door. Pick that topic. Everyone has a telephone in the house, 
but hardly anyone has a satellite hookup in the living room.
■ Use the news. Scan the wires, newspapers, magazines, newsletters, 
online services, and the Internet for stories that sadden, outrage, 
inform, enlighten, amuse, or frustrate.
■ Have a friend who has a friend. Always get a phone number. Keep 
your database updated. Hang on to phone numbers of all sources. 

106         Valerie Geller
Take advantage of all the sources that offer free directories: the 
government, universities, TV and radio stations, public relations 
ﬁ rms, etc. Keep “hot lists” of relevant phone numbers. Today’s 
guests may be tomorrow’s sources. Ask them to call you when 
things are happening.
■ Get a life. There really is more to life than news, weather, and sports. 
Explore a broad spectrum of interests. Become a dabbler who 
knows a little about a lot of things. Be as worldly as your guests and 
listeners!
■ People want more than just the facts. They want to understand why 
something is happening.
There is also a basic philosophy behind hiring air talent who can spot 
a good subject for air. Programmer Alan Eisenson has the following ideas 
about choosing topics.
Topic Selection 
The deepest I ever get into content is when I think a host is doing the same 
topic too often or if I think a host has missed a major top-of-mind issue. 
Beyond that, I stay out of it. I have found that it can harm true talent if you 
micro-manage them. Of course, I suggest topics all the time, but they are 
only suggestions.
 When you ﬁ rst hire a talk talent, you should set the overall criteria for 
content on your radio station. My criteria is that the shows should hold up 
a mirror and reﬂ ect life.
 Keeping the target demo in mind, topics should include a wide range of 
issues. News and politics (local, national, and international), should be there, 
also general life, pop culture, relationship issues, sports, etc. Hosts should also 
be able to cull material and stories from their personal lives and translate 
them into relatable talk shows. Self-disclosure is very important. Anything 
that affects your life should be covered on your talk show.
Do Not Stifle the Creative Process
My approach to content is that it is not the program director’s role to take 
authority over topics. I never mandate a topic, and I never veto a topic. It is 
vitally important that the content of a show be solely up to the talk-show host. 
The host is the one who has to engage the audience, so the topics have to come 
from his or her gut. His or her opinions and passions cannot be dictated by a 
program director, general manager, client, or consultant. The host is the artist; 
the airtime is his or her canvas. Do not take the brush from the artist’s hand.

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         107
Content Execution
I believe that, as a program director, you must hire talent you can count 
on to pick topics based on your criteria. You expect them to be creative, 
interesting, and original, have a sense of humor, and be relatable. They 
should be interested in a wide variety of things, have strong opinions, a 
deep knowledge base, be articulate, paint pictures with words, really live 
life, do incisive interviews, make people think, make people laugh, and act 
appropriately in a variety of prickly situations. If you do not have that trust 
from the outset, you have hired the wrong talk-show host.
 If you truly demonstrate that you trust your talk talents with their own 
content and you do not interfere with their creative processes, the faster 
they will trust, respect, and respond to you when you direct and guide 
them in aircheck sessions.
Prep for the Dull Day
Radio is easy when there is a lot going on and plenty to talk about. The real 
challenge of creating powerful radio is making it work on those days when 
nothing is happening. Sometimes it’s hard to ﬁ nd things to talk about that 
are meaningful, entertaining, relevant, and signiﬁ cant.
The last thing you should do on a dull Monday is to start scouring last 
Thursday’s paper for material. The urge to do this is often overwhelming. 
Resist! Use your own life experience instead.
Look Inward
Try using stories you have heard from family members or friends. One host 
got on the air and told about his grandparents, both in their eighties and 
somewhat forgetful. They resolved to keep lists of things to do. One day, 
Grandma asked Grandpa to pick up some ice cream at the store.
“Do you need to write it down?” she inquired.
“No. Just the ice cream?” he asked.
“Yes,” she replied.
“I’ll remember,” he said.
Grandpa came back with a dozen eggs, orange juice, a loaf of bread, and 
wafﬂ e mix.
“I told you to write it down,” said his wife. “You forgot the bacon!”

108         Valerie Geller
This sort of thing goes on in every family, and the more personal the story, 
often the more universal it turns out to be.
When I was running a news department, one of our reporters went 
through a bad night, waiting for her boyfriend to come home. She was a mess 
at work the next morning. I suggested she make a story out of her jealousy 
and put it on the air. She came up with an award-winning series called “Can 
a Man Be Satisﬁ ed with Just One Woman?” The more personal you get, the 
deeper you go, and the more likely you are to strike a universal chord.
Big Ears and Eyes
Sometimes you may overhear usable material. A writer who was supposed 
to meet her husband at an appointed time showed up hours late. He was 
rather upset when she ﬁ nally arrived, but she offered this explanation: “I’m 
so sorry, but I was riding the bus and when my stop came, the people sitting 
in front of me were right in the middle of a story, and I just had to hear how 
it ended. I couldn’t get off the bus!” 
Sparked by this story, she wrote a book that was then turned into a 
movie. She became fabulously famous and wealthy, all because she over-
heard a conversation on a bus that she could use as material.
If a story interests you, ﬁ nd a way to make it interesting on the air. 
Real-life stories are all around us. Train your ears and eyes to catch them.
Bring an Idea to Work
After you have used up everything in your own life, create powerful brain-
storming sessions. Contrary to rumor, genius is sometimes a collective 
thing. Ideas can be built upon, and they can come from anywhere. A “bad” 
idea can quickly become a good one if a couple of heads get together on it. 
Some of the best ideas come from the least likely sources.
Imagine that the “price of admission” for every employee at your sta-
tion each day is to bring in one idea. They wouldn’t necessarily have to be 
good ideas, just something someone noticed, thought about, or even expe-
rienced in the past twenty-four hours. All the ideas would be written down 
and go into a ﬁ shbowl.
Get the creative group together, then look at the ideas. Not all of the 
ideas would be good ones. Some might be truly awful. But if one or two 

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         109
were usable, you would be ahead. This works for programming, sales, pro-
motion, research—just about everything you do, on the air and off.
One example from San Francisco: Our news department had just com-
pleted a ten-part documentary program on the slump in the  computer 
business in the Silicon Valley. My entire brilliant, creative staff sat around 
racking their brains over a name for it. Overhearing us, our front desk recep-
tionist looked up and asked, “How about, ‘When the chips are down?’ ” 
There was silence, then applause. That informal brainstorm session led to 
a catchy title for our series. You never know  .  .  .  and that’s part of the fun.
More ideas on brainstorming come from broadcast consultant Michael 
Haas, who programmed Munich, Germany’s Antenne Bayern. He taught 
his staff that an effective “bit” on the radio includes:
■ Statement (headline)
■ Elaboration (details)
■ Kicker (climax and punchline)
The seeds of an idea can be for any of those three.
 
Michael Haas’s Brainstorming Rules
■ During the brainstorm, there must be no judgment of ideas. No 
evaluation or criticism is allowed.
■ Freewheeling is allowed and encouraged. The wilder and more 
 outrageous the idea, the better.
■ Look for quantity rather than quality. Try to end up with a long 
list of ideas. In brainstorming, quantity produces quality.
■ Combine ideas. Make each idea better. In this case, only positive 
building is allowed.
■ Every idea must be written down. If you choose not to write 
 something down, you will have judged it, which violates the ﬁ rst 
rule.
■ Every person taking part in the brainstorm is equal in rank. There 
are no bosses, no leaders, no hierarchy.

110         Valerie Geller
In order to come prepared to the brainstorming table, Haas reminds broad-
casters to get a life. Listen to people and other stations. Read newspapers, 
books, and magazines. Watch TV. Notice billboards, commercials, and labels 
to get ideas. Use your life’s experience, both private and professional, for 
material. Make friends outside the media world. Maintain your health with 
physical ﬁ tness and watch for stress. Bring some fantasy and idealism to 
the session. Have a positive attitude. Use empathy and people skills. Watch 
for trends. Keep in contact with listeners—drink at their bars, shop where 
they shop, etc.
Ideas
Do not underestimate the value of living in the world as a source of show 
prep. Consultant Jaye Albright embraces this idea as well:
Communication is more about listening and observing your target listener 
than it is about talking. Live a life. Build off-air relationships. Learn to 
expose your true feelings. Be vulnerable. Explore your own beliefs. Listen 
to others talk about their values and beliefs. Open a window to the inner 
workings of varying points of view. Experiment with safely expressing 
these differing points of view and then listen to what happens.
Scott Shannon on Show Prep
One man who never seems to run out of show-prep ideas is New York 
City’s WPLJ (95.5 FM) PD and morning man Scott Shannon. You feel you 
know him when you listen to his work. In an interview, Shannon explained 
his philosophy:
There is no cookie cutter formula. You have to hit the listeners over the 
head with what you are doing  .  .  .  make your station sound different. I’ve 
always been able to ﬁ gure out what people like, what’s going to catch on 
and be popular  .  .  .  stay ahead of the curve. You could call me a “super-
active consumer.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Show Prep         111
Scott Shannon’s List for Creating Powerful Radio
■ Carry a recording device at all times.
■ Carry spare batteries for the recording device at all times.
■ Read everything.
■ Watch everything.
■ Learn your computer and all your equipment.
■ Answer your own telephones and talk to listeners.
■ Hang out with normal people.
■ Seize the moment.
■ Create talk.
■ Always remember these three words: PREPARATION, 
CONCENTRATION, and MODERATION.

This page intentionally left blank

113
Creating Powerful Radio 
Producers
“The artist makes life more interesting or beautiful, 
more understandable or mysterious or in the 
best sense, more wonderful.”
— George Bellows
Producing is a tough gig. When the show goes well, the host gets the credit; 
when it fares poorly, often it is the producer who is blamed. Good producer 
jobs are difﬁ cult to get. Most demand long, stressful hours for little reward 
and low pay. Although many music DJs and presenters produce their own 
shows, in talk radio, particularly in major markets, a producer can add 
signiﬁ cantly to the success of the program.
Finding the Right Producer
I frequently get calls from station managers and talent looking for the 
“right” producer. I also get calls from producers who are looking to move 
on for a variety of reasons, but mostly because they hate their hosts. They 
want the equivalent of a “radio divorce” but don’t necessarily want to leave 
their “child,” meaning the show itself.
C H A P T E R  11

114         Valerie Geller
As with any good relationship, the producer and the host must listen 
to each other. Both should share the same goals for the show. Hosts and 
producers spend a lot of time together. One of my favorite hosts in talk 
radio once said, “It was easier to ﬁ nd my wife than the right producer.” So 
how do you ﬁ nd the “right” producer?
When you are on the air, it’s almost like being naked in public. You 
are exposed and vulnerable. It is just you, the phones, and that big micro-
phone. You need a producer who is on your side, supportive when you feel 
alone on the air, a presence beyond the glass wall. A producer is someone 
who believes in your show and wants to make you and the product sound 
great.
That is not necessarily the same thing as agreeing with the host’s point of 
view. Some great producers give their all for hosts who are not of their own 
political stripe. Professionals can work with just about anyone. Of course the 
producer does not have to like a host or presenter to produce a successful 
program, but there must be respect. If the host knows that he or she has the 
support of a sharp and talented producer, the show works better.
Grow Your Own
Great producers are not born, they are developed. Look for potential 
producers with their promise. Ask: Is this person bright? Good at handling 
pressure? Fearless? Can this producer pick up the phone and get the White 
House as easily as the local dogcatcher? Can he or she get along with 
the news department? Have ideas? Can this person say no? Does he or she 
like listening to talk radio and like listening to you?
Do not hire someone who wants to be on air. It usually does not 
work out. The job of producing is more “directing” than acting. Successful 
producers enjoy the behind-the-scenes aspect of making things happen. 
Hosts should not have to worry that their producers are coveting their jobs 
and secretly working toward that goal, instead of putting energy and skill 
into producing a great show.
Sometimes you get lucky and the right producer ﬁ nds you. Often the 
best producers are listeners ﬁ rst, people who enjoy the show. One such 
listener and fan was Nuala McGovern, who became the senior producer 
for WNYC’s Brian Lehrer program. She volunteered as an intern, learned 

Creating Powerful Radio: Producers          115
the job, and then was hired to produce one of the most popular public radio 
shows in New York City.
Keep the Good Ones
Many American radio stations are sloppy about hiring and hanging on to 
good producers. They tend to promote secretaries, hire minimum wage stu-
dents, or relatives. Good producers are often forced to go to TV or leave 
the industry if they want to be paid what they are worth. There is very little 
producer training or job security available. It is a trial by ﬁ re.
If you ﬁ nd a good producer, do whatever it takes to keep him or her. 
A good producer can contribute tremendously toward making your show 
powerful radio. A bad or angry one can damage you. Try not to upset them 
for no reason, and try to ﬁ nd it in your budget to pay them for the valuable 
work they do. When the right combination of host and producer comes 
together, it’s a wonderful event. On that lucky day and forever after, the 
most important thing to remember about the host/producer relationship is 
this: Be patient. Be willing to work it out, not walk out.
Make your producer feel valued. Today’s producers are tomorrow’s 
program directors. When I am searching for program directors, I always 
take a serious look at who is behind the scenes screening and producing 
the best shows.
Share the Wealth
If you are a host, treat producers nicely. You get the glory, they’re 
underpaid. You get the credit, they get yelled at. Share the perks, the books, 
the free tickets, and free meals. Take them to lunch or dinner. Give them 
honest feedback. If you blow up at them, apologize, and don’t wait too long 
to do it. And if you get a ratings bonus, share some of that as well.
Thank Them Publicly
Lots of hosts take a few minutes at the end of every show to thank the pro-
ducer, screener, writers, and the board operators by name. You should do 

116         Valerie Geller
this at the same time you thank your guests and listeners. Your producing 
team will feel appreciated, and that is worth it.
Don’t Hire a Blind Date
Get to know your producer. Try him or her out before you make the ﬁ nal 
hire. Interns sometimes work out very well as producers after they get to 
know the ropes. Insist on having input into the hiring process. Again, get one 
who actually likes to listen to your show. Be open to working with some-
one who is not like you. Life-stage differences can be valuable. Let’s say for 
example that you are an older male and your producer is a young female 
student. Now you have a couple of perspectives that can only help the show.
Hire Someone with Good Judgment
You should respect your producer but still be able to have an argument 
with him or her. Expecting not to have huge disagreements with your pro-
ducer is unrealistic—as if expecting never to ﬁ ght with your spouse. The 
producer–host relationship is intense. The disputes are never really fair 
because most of the time, the host wins. Conﬂ ict can be healthy. A host 
should be able to freely express himself with the producer. The producer 
should be able to do the same if the relationship is a fairly honest one. 
A “kiss up” trying to please you or agreeing with you all the time does not 
really help your show.
This Is Show Biz
Choose a producer who knows you are doing a radio show and knows 
that the show must be fun and entertaining, rather than a forum for long-
winded guests. Again, your job is to keep the audience engaged. Your pro-
ducer should never promise a guest more than a few minutes on the air. If 
guests are boring, have the producer dump them. Thank them and get rid 
of them. Great guests can always stay longer or ﬁ nish out an hour. Make 
sure your host has enough material to talk about, whether or not you have 
guests or calls coming in.

Creating Powerful Radio: Producers          117
Get a Flexible, Not a Rigid, Person
Make sure your producers understand that a great talk show does not 
always stick to one topic or move from point “A” to point “B.” Sometimes, 
it meanders like a river. A spontaneous incident on the air or a wacky call 
can take the show in a whole new, and better, direction. But if you have 
hired someone who can only move on a set schedule, you could miss a great 
radio moment like this one:
Three politicians were on-air discussing economic reform. A listener called 
in with a question. In the background dogs were barking so loudly, they 
could not be ignored. The host asked what size dog made such a racket. 
It turned out to be a rottweiler, and there were several, because the caller 
was in the rottweiler-breeding business. After some discussion of pets, 
another listener, this one a psychologist, rang through. He wanted to know 
what type of pets the politicians had. This psychologist had a theory about 
power and pet ownership. He reasoned that “cat people” need less control, 
because cats “do what they want.” On the other hand, he felt control freaks 
would have dogs because dogs respond to commands. So what kind of pets 
did these politicians have? They all had dogs.
It’s a good thing the screener-producer put through that psycholo-
gist, even though he was slightly off the point. It generated a magic 
moment.
Is There a Formula?
Although there is no crystal ball to see whether a host and a producer will 
take to one another, there are some personality traits that make for better 
matches.
Take a look at Chapter 3, “Generators and Reactors,” in this book. 
A reactive host will work best with a generative producer. To do his or her best 
work, a generative host needs a reactive producer. A generative producer, even 
one that is not on the air, must still come up with original ideas and be respon-
sible for feeding the host talkable topics that can be worked into a theme for the 
show. There isn’t a formula for choosing show topics either, but experience has 
taught me a few things that deﬁ nitely do and do not work.

 
118         Valerie Geller
Avoid the Manufactured Hour
The closer the show sounds to real life with genuine people having real 
conversations, the better it works. Try to avoid “easy” stories from head-
lines or from press releases—anything that sounds like: “And now another 
topic manufactured to ﬁ ll another segment of radio . . . ” Audiences prefer 
programs that sound as though the conversation could just as easily be 
taking place off the air.
Throw Out Stale Bread
Creating Powerful Radio means never being boring. If a subject or topic 
has been extensively covered and there is nothing new you can add to it, 
ask yourself whether this is really “powerful radio.”
Resist the temptation to book celebrity guests or experts just because 
they are available to you. Never book a guest without a reason. Ask: “Why 
should the listener care?” Your job is to get and keep audiences. Theirs is 
to publicize or try to get the people in your listening audience to buy their 
latest movie, book, project, and so on.
Don’t book a guest just because you think he or she will generate 
phone calls. Sometimes a great show has few or no calls, and a bad show 
can have a full board of calls. Psychics on the air will net a full board of calls. 
Mostly it’s boring. The only person interested in hearing the program is the 
person talking to the psychic. Why would the rest of the audience care? 
Meanwhile, the scientist with information on how to avoid Armageddon 
may not get any calls, because the audience is simply listening. They are 
taking in the information. Book guests and pick topics as though you had 
no phone in your studio.
Know Your Source
It is ﬁ ne to use the Internet, prep services, current events, and news stories 
for content, but producers should also bring their own original ideas for 
the program. Producers should read widely, listen to the competition, and 
generate ideas based on life.
A cautionary word about the Internet: The Net is not necessarily a 
reliable source of accurate information. The beauty of the Internet is that 

Creating Powerful Radio: Producers          119
everyone has equal access. A lunatic in his garage can put up a Web site or 
create a blog that looks as convincing as a major university’s. Some sites, 
such as those belonging to major newspapers, are more trustworthy than 
others. Sites with rumor, gossip, innuendo, and urban myth can still be 
useful, providing you acknowledge the provenance of the information and 
ﬂ ag it accurately. 
Do not undermine your credibility by presenting uncorroborated infor-
mation as fact. There is room on radio and television for an entire range of 
sources and subject matter, from front page news to obscure phenomena, 
but be clear about what kind of a show you are doing.
In the Creating Powerful Radio Workshops, producers are asked to 
bring in three items to work into talkable topics for show prep. The follow-
ing simple techniques should bring several topics to the host that no else 
will be able to cover in the same way.
1. One idea from your own life, something that has happened to you.
2. Something you’ve observed or overheard.
3. One item from the news that you would actually talk about with 
another person in real life, that is, if you did not have a radio show 
to produce.
In each case, ﬁ nd the “universal angle.” A universal angle is a common 
thread or dynamic that affects everyone. Often the details of a story are 
interesting only to the participants and are no one else’s business. While 
the personal is universal, the private can be boring.
Eavesdrop—Be a Snoop
Here’s an idea where being a snoop paid off.  On her way to work, Sara stopped 
for a take-out cup of coffee. Standing in line, she overheard a woman ahead of 
her in line on her cell phone, apparently breaking up with a boyfriend:
 WOMAN: No. John, it’s really over. No, please don’t do this . . . A weekend 
at the lake house is not going to change my mind. We are through. John, this 
is the right thing to do. I am releasing you so that you can get on with your 
life and ﬁ nd the person who will be right for you.

120         Valerie Geller
The other customers were staring at their shoes, appalled and embarrassed. 
But it gave Sara, the producer, an idea for a question to engage an audi-
ence. She relayed the idea to her host and the show opened this way:
What possesses you to think you are alone in your living room when you 
are talking on your mobile phone? Have you ever overheard one of those 
excruciating conversations? You know, the kind where you would like the 
earth to just open up and swallow you because it is so embarrassing to 
hear? What is the most awful conversation you’ve ever overheard in public 
when someone has been on their cell phone?
The ﬁ rst caller to the program was a man who had had an experience 
that morning. On his way to work he, along with everyone else on the bus, 
overheard a fellow passenger being ﬁ red. The guy answered his cell phone 
and said:
 MAN: What do you mean report to human resources? But what about the 
promotion? Jim got the job? But what about my PowerPoint presentation and the 
report? I have it ready to go here in my briefcase. Jim gave the report? Jim is 
in my ofﬁ ce? I need to see Elaine in human resources?
It was a silent bus. Nobody could look at anyone else.
And that is how one producer’s morning coffee stop led to a “universal 
angle” that created powerful radio—real people sharing real stories.
Use Your Life
Another producer helped his host get to the “universal angle” of a topic 
that came from the host’s private life. “Bob,” the host, had promised his 
wife he would paint their garage. But because Bob preferred to watch foot-
ball on Sundays, they got into a huge ﬁ ght. Bob and his producer decided 
that the paint, the garage, and the argument were Bob’s private life . . . but 
there was a “universal angle.”
Bob’s question: “Why do women nag? Why is it a woman will ask you 
over and over again to do something when you’ve told her ten times you’d 
get to it . . . it’s on your list, you intend to do it?” A female caller responded:
 WOMAN: Well, if you guys would just DO the things we asked you to do, we 
wouldn’t have to turn into these nagging shrews!

Creating Powerful Radio: Producers          121
Meanwhile, the producer found a psychologist who had just published 
a study on male–female relationships. It seemed most men didn’t care 
whether a woman gained weight or was a lousy cook—what they hated 
was nagging. Why? Because their mothers nagged them. The topic went for 
two hours, with lots of humor. It took a talented producer to help ﬁ nd the 
“universal angle” and focus it for air.
Formatics Count
It is important to have a producer who understands the logic behind for-
matics. Lots of producers know the basics but are never told why they mat-
ter so much. Why is it crucial to mention the station’s name or call letters 
before each call goes to air, and to reset the topic every few minutes—
before and after commercial breaks?
As long as ratings are based on recall, what your listener remembers 
and reports to the ratings or research service will matter. Memory is not 
reliable. If people don’t remember what they ate for breakfast, how can 
they remember what they were listening to at 7:17 last Thursday? How can 
they be expected to report accurately what they have heard to a monitor-
ing service or market research interviewer? Of course they cannot. 
Because of that, some radio listening, referred to as “phantom cume,” 
is never counted in the ratings. Your staff needs to understand the impor-
tance of helping the listeners retain and write down your call letters by 
repeating them on air as often as possible.

 
122         Valerie Geller
Geller Media International 
Producer’s Ten Commandments
 1. Know your host/presenter, and his or her audience as well.
 2. Do not covet your host’s air shift, but be a faithful listener to it.
 3. NEVER put a boring caller or guest on the air.
 4. Have only ONE director or programming manager giving input.
 5.  Pay close attention to details so your host/presenter will not 
have to, and remember your address list or database and keep 
it and up to date.
 6.  Be organized, able to easily and quickly locate a contact, 
and ﬁ nd the things your host/presenter puts down and loses. 
Never throw away a phone number, e-mail address, or a good 
 take-out menu.
 7.  Know the Internet world and the real world. Read about and 
live in both of them.
 8.  Have a life outside the radio station. It will serve you as show 
prep, twenty-four hours a day, every day, providing you with 
creative topics and angles nobody else is doing.
 9.  Study the station, and learn to do everything—the payoff will 
go to the producer who can run the board, edit and assemble 
audio, set up a remote, screen calls, make coffee, and plan 
events or travel.
10.  Foster good relations between your host/show and the rest of 
the radio station, especially the news and sales departments.

123
Creating Powerful Radio 
Call Screening
“Talent hits a target no one else can hit; 
Genius hits a target no one else can see.”
— Arthur Schopenhauer
The Art of Call Screening for Producers
If you take calls on your show, you already know that a great caller can 
make a show; a boring or bad call can be a show killer. You can almost feel 
the listeners tuning out. Like many tasks in life, screening appears to be 
easy. Answer the phone and put the call on the air? Not exactly. Screening 
involves being able to manage people. This job takes both art and skill.
Most producers have had the experience of putting what seemed to be a 
great call on the air and then watching it bomb. Sometimes a caller who seems 
like a long shot, slow-paced, slightly out of your demographic target, a little 
weird, will surprise you with his humor, passion, and a good story to tell.
How do you screen out bad or boring callers while attracting great 
ones? Are there methods to coach average or mediocre callers to become 
better and more powerful on air?
C H A P T E R  12

124         Valerie Geller

Creating Powerful Radio: Call Screening         125
Contrary to popular belief, getting to speak on a talk show is not a 
given right in a free and democratic society. In order to qualify: You must 
have something to say. No matter what callers think or tell you, making it 
to air is not “their right.” It is a privilege. Not everyone who demands to be 
on air is going to get on air, nor should they. Use your callers to the show’s 
advantage, not the other way around. Do not put on a bad caller.
Hosts may panic when they see they have very few or no callers waiting 
to go on the air, but it is the producer’s job to remind the host that less than 
one percent of the listening audience will ever call a talk show.
Sometimes a great show has very few or no calls. A bad show can have 
a full phone board for hours at a time. The number of blinking lights is a 
false indicator of how well a show is going. Unfortunately, hosts like to see 
a lot of calls or they get nervous. One solution is to cover the call lights so 
they cannot see who is waiting.
The job of the host is to focus the issue in such an engaging manner 
that interesting people with strong opinions and something to say actually 
want to call the show. But having no calls is not an indication that the sta-
tion or show has no listeners. Sometimes a host can be so compelling, calls 
are not even needed.
Screening is a way to give power to a show by ﬁ ltering out the elements 
that can hold it back and make it boring. It works best if the host does not make 
a big deal out of the screening process. Don’t read off the computer screen.
Avoid ruining the fun for the listeners and for the host by telling them 
in advance what they will hear. Just give them a hint. There is no journey 
if the host gives the story away: “Mary on line three, my screen says you 
have a dog that found a million dollars in a garbage can?” That eliminates 
the surprise.
Keep a bit of the magic of radio. Work with and encourage hosts not to 
reveal what is happening behind the scenes. Try it this way: “Mary, tell us 
about your amazing dog.” Or simply, “Mary, you are on WABC.”
What Makes for a Good Caller?
You always know one when you hear the caller. A successful talk show 
may reject as many as ﬁ fty percent of the calls that come in. A good caller 

126         Valerie Geller
is relevant, interesting, funny, or poignant. This is a person who adds to the 
show and makes it better. Remember, normal people don’t call talk shows. 
Sometimes so-called “normal people” aren’t all that interesting. Often it’s 
the weird ones, with the strange experiences and vision and stories to tell, 
who create those “magic moments” on air. A few tips:
■ If you are bored screening the caller, how interesting will your audi-
ence ﬁ nd her?
■ If you are discussing a human experience, it often works better to 
put on callers who have lived through that experience and have a 
story to tell rather than an academic or expert who is removed from 
the experience. 
■ Avoid multipart questions or a long, rambling preamble.
■ Before you decide to put a caller on air, make sure the point the he 
or she wishes to get across is concise, clear, and focused.
■ If you are targeting a young audience, then it makes sense to avoid 
“older”-sounding callers. However, those who are under eighteen 
must be extremely articulate to be “good.”
■ In the United States, callers who sound between twenty-ﬁ ve and 
ﬁ fty-four are optimal. But vital, passionate, interesting callers who 
have good questions, a sense of humor, are great storytellers, or 
have had a personal experience with what you are talking about will 
always work, no matter their age.
The Short Hello
Train your callers. Avoid “greeting cards” such as “Thank you for taking 
my call” or “We love your show.” Avoid “How are you today?” The host is 
ﬁ ne. The caller is ﬁ ne. Everyone is ﬁ ne. Congratulations or greetings are of 
no interest to the listener. Get to topic. Don’t be afraid to say, “Get to the 
point.” We are very happy you love the show. The long hello is boring. This 
is a radio show, not a phone conversation, even though it may feel that way 
to you because you are holding a phone.
Give the callers your rules. “No reading of prepared statements or 
articles. You’ll need to ask your question or make your comment without a 
long preamble. No multipart questions.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Call Screening         127
The Host Will Hang Up on You
To avoid callers calling back after they’ve been on the air and complaining 
that the host rudely hung up on them, alert callers prior to going on air that 
when the host is done, he or she will abruptly disconnect the line, and while 
this may seem impolite, this is how it works.
The Pep Up
Before a caller is about to go on air, check back to be sure he or she is still 
waiting on the line and ready to go. You may need to remind the caller 
about the original point if they have been on hold for a while. Remind 
them again to turn their radios off.
Listen to the Show
Stay in communication with the host throughout the course of the pro-
gram. Although you may be busy screening, do try to listen to the show and 
follow the thread of the program.
There Are Many Nice Ways to Say “No”
A screener needs a backbone. That does not mean being rude, but it does 
mean being ﬁ rm. Get a screener who can tell people “No.” Hire someone 
who can make a fast decision to get rid of a boring call. Ask: “Would this 
person keep a listener engaged?” If you think the caller or guest would be 
boring to a listener, do not put him or her on air.
Sample Script for Screening Calls
■ Answer the phone with the station’s name or the name of the show: 
“KFIX John Johnson Show, what is your comment or question?”
■ If the caller does not immediately come across with a concise point 
or opinion, help them focus. Ask: “What is your opinion?” “Why is 
this important to you?” “Can you give me a brief summary of your 
point?”
■ If the caller still does not meet your criteria, he or she should be 
rejected.
■ Remind the caller to speak clearly into the phone!
You need to work quickly in order to have the next call up and ready to go. 
There should never be a time when the host cannot move on to the next call.

128         Valerie Geller
If the caller meets your criteria, summarize his or her point and opin-
ion on the computer screen for the host. That allows the host to take calls 
in the order he or she prefers.
No one likes to say no, particularly if the caller is a sweet lonely old lady 
who lives by herself with no friends and this call to your show right now is the 
only adult conversation she’s had all week. But you must protect your prod-
uct. Serve thousands, not one. It’s hard to do, but it is your job to take care of 
the show, not the caller. Politely say, “No, I am sorry, but I am not going to be 
able to take your call, not today. Perhaps another time. Thank you.”
Other Polite Rejections
“We are running out of time this hour,” “Thank you, I’ll pass your comment 
along” or “We cannot use your call today, but we appreciate you taking the 
time to call.” Do not give them time to respond—politely disconnect.
Be tough but professional. Should a rejected caller become angry or try to 
engage you in an argument, do not get upset or rattled. If there is time, hear the 
caller out, and then hang up. The management has hired you for your ability to 
judge what will make a winning show. Most reasonable management will sup-
port you in your decision to protect your show from boring callers.
Avoid speakerphones or bad cell lines. If the reception is poor, do not 
put the call on air. Avoid callers with heavy accents who can’t be easily 
understood.
You certainly don’t want a producer to anger your audience. But your 
audience is really the 99 percent of your listeners who will never phone.
A Rule about the “Regulars”
The only real rule about “regular callers” is this: Bad regular callers should 
not get on. Good regular callers should. In fact, we sometimes hire hosts 
who have been regular callers.
Your callers are your “active listeners.” They are loyal, listen regularly, 
and are not too shy to call. One sharp producer made up a database of 
the “characters” or powerful callers to his show. He kept this list in the 
 computer. Every now and then, when the board was slow and the night 
was long, he’d phone those people and ask them, by chance, if they were 
 listening. If not, they’d tune in right away and usually come up with some 
good comments to move the show forward.
This producer also had a second use for his list of phone numbers and 
e-mail addresses. When the host was scheduled to make a public appear-

Creating Powerful Radio: Call Screening         129
ance or speech, he would e-mail an announcement to those listeners, who 
had asked to be included. Many enjoyed attending these events.
Sequencing Calls
To best determine the order of the calls, keep track of the show topic and 
be aware of the points of view of the host and each guest.
Conﬂ ict makes for interesting dialogue. If your host enjoys it, and it is 
appropriate for the program, move calls that do not agree with the host to 
the front of the line.
If the show has guests representing several points of view, then alter-
nate the caller’s points of view whenever possible. In reality, you may not 
get an equal division or balance of callers reﬂ ecting pro and con on any 
issue, but you can try, through the screening process, to eliminate clusters 
of similar callers and opinions. Push the interesting ones, the ones with pas-
sion, to the top.
The ﬁ rst call on the show should be the best available caller. That ﬁ rst 
call often sets the tempo for the rest of the hour.
Come out of each break with the strongest, most energetic and pas-
sionate caller you have waiting.
“She’s Been Waiting for Forty-Eight Minutes . . . ”
So what. The point is to make a powerful broadcast for the listeners. So if 
the host chooses to go with another topic or go long with a caller or guest, 
let them wait. Even if they get mad and yell at you, the ﬁ rst priority at all 
times is to protect the product on air and make sure it’s powerful.
“He Sounded Fine When I Pre-interviewed Him . . . ”
People get nervous when they actually go on air. Every call screener has 
had the experience of listening helplessly as a caller, who sounded so great 
before he or she hit the airwaves, ﬂ ounders when the host takes the call.
Here’s why: We are around live broadcasts all the time and forget that 
it can be a terrifying experience for someone who doesn’t do this every day. 
Coach callers to take a breath, get right to the point, don’t read from notes, 
be as you would in a normal conversation, forget the others listening, and 
don’t worry about looking foolish.

130         Valerie Geller
Usually people lose the nervousness as soon as they get onto a familiar 
topic or subject about which they feel passionate. That is why we need to 
work with callers to help “get them there” as soon as possible in the call.
Put Yourself “On Hold”
If you as a producer or screener have not had the experience of calling a 
radio or television talk show, try calling somebody else’s show. See how the 
process feels when you get screened. When the shoe is on the other foot, you 
will be amazed. When you understand what it feels like to be on hold, then 
it’s your turn … and you are on air with a question for a host or guest, it will 
add another perspective and allow you to be more effective as a screener.
Messaging and E-mail
Hosts like to use interactive media, but the criteria for including e-mails 
and instant messages is: “Is the content relevant?” During the business day, 
some people cannot use their phones to call a talk show, so you may be able 
to get more opinions on the air using e-mail or messaging.
Be aware that reading messages on the air is not as interesting as having the 
actual person delivering his or her thoughts in his or her own voice. Reading 
messages should be a second choice if you have a good call waiting.
If you do use text on the air, read it with drama and introduce the sender 
this way: “Carol, you say in your message that you have been watching 
shoplifters at your neighborhood market … ” Using a “you” to address the 
sender makes the message sound more like a conversation with a caller.
Go to Our Web Site for More
Stations that run edited interviews or performances on the air are allow-
ing listeners to access the long form or complete versions from their  Web   
sites.Your Web site should also be used to move detailed content, such as 
a guest author’s mailing address, a recipe, contest rules, etc., out of your 
broadcast and make it available to the audience at their convenience.
As a producer, if your host promises listeners they will ﬁ nd a piece of 
information on your station’s Web site, it is your job to make sure it gets 
there. If you don’t, you make your host and your station look bad.

Creating Powerful Radio: Call Screening         131
Tips for Talk Show Producers and Screeners
Here are some methods and ideas that have emerged from the Geller 
Media International Producer’s Workshops over the years:
■ Focus on your audience, not the one percent of the listeners who 
call in.
■ Make sure your host has material to talk about if there are no calls 
coming in. Plan your show as if there will be no calls.
■ Don’t let all your lines jam. Screen out weak calls and keep some 
lines open so better calls can come in.
■ If you don’t understand a caller, nobody else will either. Get rid of 
the call!
■ Get your callers relaxed and talking, but don’t promise them that 
they will be on the air.
■ Build a database of sources that you can use during shows for 
alternate/opposing opinions, or for emergency guests if the planned 
guest cancels. Cross-reference by areas of expertise, afﬁ liations, etc.
■ Build a database of great callers. On a quiet day, a savvy producer 
can use the list to ﬁ nd one to go on the air.
■ Be sure to give guests speciﬁ c instructions on how to get to the 
studio and phone contact information. What if the station door is 
locked?
■ Guests should fax or e-mail background materials ahead of time 
for the host to study. Guests should understand who their audience 
will be.
■ Make sure guests know that the host will take care of any promo-
tion for their book, their seminar, and so forth. There’s nothing 
worse than a guest doing an awkward job of self-promotion.
■ Develop a good relationship with your news department.
■ If something major occurs, don’t be afraid to cancel a guest! Radio’s 
greatest asset is immediacy. Go with what’s happening now and 
reschedule.

 
132         Valerie Geller
Caller Criteria
 1.  Can he or she offer an interesting personal experience pertaining 
to this topic?
 2.  Do you or the audience care about this person? Does this person 
sound like a distinctive “character?” (Hint: If you can “see” this 
person in your mind’s eye, it’s a good character!)
 3. Is he or she a good storyteller?
 4. Does he or she have a sense of humor?
 5. Does this caller have strong passionate opinions on the subject?
 6.  Is this a person you would ﬁ nd fascinating or enjoy talking with 
off air?
 7.  Can this caller take the audience on a journey they cannot get to 
on their own?
 8. Does he or she have something interesting, or of value, to say?
 9.  Can he or she offer new information about a story or subject or 
add speciﬁ c knowledge or special expertise?
10. Is he or she entertaining?

133
Creating Powerful Radio 
High-Ego Talent
“Creativity takes courage.”
— Henri Matisse
Perhaps you have had the experience of knowing people in the business 
who were great on the air, always got big ratings, but never kept a job 
for any substantial length of time? Many of these people “station-hopped” 
because they had demanding personalities and were tough to deal with off 
the air.
Often, great radio personalities have large egos and are not the easi-
est or most tranquil people to be around. But allowing your station’s 
professional atmosphere to be blighted by tantrums is ultimately damag-
ing. While managers need the skills to deal with touchy talent, no one can 
save a truly self-destructive host. Remember this when considering hiring 
a personality who has a “reputation.”
One day, I was taking a break in the lunchroom of a client station. 
In between bites of sandwiches, staffers were talking about one of the 
station’s most talented and successful broadcasters. Actually, he was one of 
the station’s most talented former broadcasters, because he had just been 
ﬁ red.
C H A P T E R  13

134         Valerie Geller
“But he was so good on the air. I just don’t get it,” lamented the newest 
member of the staff. “I listened to him all the time. What happened?”
The room went silent. Had this guy done something truly terrible or 
maybe even illegal? Then one of the producers said, “Well he was kind of 
hard to work with  .  .  .  ”
Another staffer chimed in, “Yeah, he could really get on your nerves. 
He complained all the time about everything.”
A quiet young woman who had been working as an assistant producer 
to the ousted personality added: “If you weren’t a big shot, he’d ignore you. 
He treated me like I was dirt, instead of a professional there to help him 
with his show. He made me feel like his personal slave. He’d order me to 
move his car or run outside to put money in the parking meter. He’d never 
ask or say please, just ‘do it!’ ”
Having worked herself into a righteous frenzy, the young producer 
continued: “Whenever something went wrong on the show, like missing a 
network join, or a spot, or losing a guest on the phone, it was never his fault. 
He made a huge stink about it and blamed other people. He went through 
six producers in a year and a half.”
“But the audience loved him!” argued the new guy.
“We didn’t,” said the PD, who walked into the lunchroom at that point, 
ending the discussion.
It has always been my belief that if people are difﬁ cult but truly tal-
ented artists, then it is worth some extra effort to put up with their non-
sense, to a point. Talent is special, and artists are different. Gifts in this life 
are not distributed evenly. A person with abundant talent may have an 
equal lack of social skills. In her song about singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, 
Joan Baez wrote, “A savior’s a nuisance to live with at home.” And she’s 
mostly right. True artists can be challenging to be around day to day. We 
love and respond to their originality, creativity, and art, but we have little 
use for their anger, insecurity, need for attention and approval, and lack of 
respect for authority.
The PD at the aforementioned station admitted that his former staffer 
had made him so anxious that he shut his door quickly or picked up the 
phone when he saw the “problem” air talent walking down the hall. Even 
so, he felt the dismissal was a loss both to the talent and to the radio station. 
It was a bad situation. However, I’m just the consultant and only looking 

Creating Powerful Radio: High-Ego Talent          135
at what went on the air. The rest of the staff had to put up with this guy 
every day. The station succumbed to the temptation of hiring a lesser talent 
because he was easier to live with.
How can managers effectively handle this type of personality? The 
answer is, very carefully. The ﬁ rst thing is to recognize that while the per-
former in question is an adult, legally speaking, that 40-year-old body 
may hide the emotions of a six-year-old. Don’t be fooled by the long legs 
and beard. You can learn a lot about managing difﬁ cult talent by hanging 
around kids. Like children, they may be very insecure.
I walked in a day too late to save that situation. Had I had the chance 
to sit down and work with this talent and his manager before the situation 
blew up, here are a few of the points I would have communicated:
■ Don’t be a talkaholic. People are busy. Don’t distract them. Let 
them go about their work.
■ Do it yourself. If you need special equipment and the station doesn’t 
have it, consider buying your own headphones, microphone, etc.
■ Be selective, don’t ﬁ ght every battle. Save your energies for the 
important issues.
■ Don’t question authority until you’ve given the matter proper con-
sideration.
■ Have a little patience. Don’t overreact.
■ Your boss is not a mind reader. Tell your manager when you need 
attention. Set a time. It can’t always be now.
■ Don’t ignore or mistreat those “below” you.
■ Be a human being. Have a heart. Be sensitive to others.
■ Save your show for on air, not in the hall!
One of the challenges for overworked GMs and PDs is coping with 
the air personalities. Top radio talent can be sensitive, volatile, ego-driven, 
self-absorbed, insecure, and infantile. In other words, they are difﬁ cult to 
manage. They need a lot of time, attention, and positive feedback. These 
same “pains in the neck” can also be likable, charming, and tremendously 
talented. They perform and connect with the audience, and can potentially 

136         Valerie Geller
 
TALENT 
 
MANAGEMENT
Pay attention to me! 
vs. 
 Your listeners love you, what 
more do you want?
I’m important. Make me feel  vs. 
I have ten other things to do 
that way, NOW! 
 
right now.
I’m a creative person, I  
vs. 
We talked about this: I’m not 
don’t like anyone telling  
 
changing my mind.  
me what to do. 
 
 
I want you to listen to my  
vs. 
You leave me emotionally 
show and respond every  
 
exhausted. I have a radio 
day. 
 
station to run and you’re only  
 
 
 one part of it.
I need positive feedback;  
vs. 
Why can’t you just do your job 
nobody appreciates me! 
 
and be happy with your big 
 
 
 paycheck?
Pay attention to me. I want  
vs. 
I can’t deal with this right now.
to make a difference. I  
 
I just spent a half an hour on the 
want to be great! 
 
phone with an angry listener.
I want input, look at me!  
vs. 
I get this from my three-year-old
Listen to me! I want 
 
 at home. I do not need it from
to count! 
 
 you at work.
bring in huge numbers of listeners. It may be up to you to decide to make 
the effort to manage them.
It’s worth developing people. If you can afford it, ﬁ nancially and emo-
tionally, try it. When it doesn’t work, remember right-casting: Someone 
who is not right in this job may be very successful in another situation. 
Even the failures can teach you something. Don’t dismiss it, or worse, give 
up, just because it is the more challenging, risky route.
Talent vs. Management: Two Worlds
For a group of professional communicators, we often don’t do a very good 
job of it amongst ourselves. Here is a typical unspoken dialogue between a 
manager and an on-air talent.

137
Creating Powerful Radio
 News
“The essence of entertainment will not change. What has always 
counted is the story and the skill with which it is told.”
 
—Michael Eisner, former CEO, The Walt Disney Company
“Storytelling is a basic part of every human culture—people have 
always had the need to participate emotionally in stories.”
 
—Marlon Brando
News broadcasting is really two separate jobs. The ﬁ rst is covering the Big 
Story, an event of such magnitude that it affects the lives, well-being, or 
safety of your audience. The other is covering everything else.
On those “big news” days, it is not so important to worry about being 
creative. On those days, just gather the facts and get them on the air quickly. 
Give your listeners what they need to know. On those other days, the slower 
news days (that is most of the time), the news is like an insurance policy. 
Your newscast is in place, covering the day-to-day events of life, so that 
people know where they can ﬁ nd the information and where to go on the 
big news day. And those big news days are often the days that journalists 
live for, when the adrenalin is pumping and the stories just seem to write 
themselves.
C H A P T E R  14

138         Valerie Geller
But it’s important every day to choose stories that are interesting and 
affect your audience in some way. Every day, the stories you choose should 
be interesting and affect your audience in some way. Pick items that con-
nect listeners to what is happening in the community, what is new, inter-
esting, or absurd. Give audiences talkable topics and entertain them with 
information.
Radio news can be much more exciting than many people realize. By 
doing what radio does best—getting on the air from a scene quickly, and 
describing an event so listeners can visualize what is happening—we are 
using the most powerful tools we possess: immediacy and imagery.
Building a Great News Team
Network News Executive Bernard Gershon looks for these traits in a 
newsperson:
Desire or hunger is crucial 
The best employees always want to improve their performances. They 
display this by asking for additional assignments, wanting to learn differ-
ent parts of the business, asking to be sent to training seminars. They also 
understand that getting better requires hard work and long hours. Look 
for people who are aggressive when it comes to getting interviews, going 
after callers, going ‘prime time.’ 
What we look for
An effective newsperson is a storyteller who exudes “energy,” someone 
who can generate enthusiasm and excitement from listeners and is inter-
ested in the topic, the caller, the job. My deﬁ nition of dull? Demos of news-
casters who sound like they are reading. Those can be identiﬁ ed in about 
30 seconds—out they go. Yes, it is a cruel business, but everyone is busy.
Warning: I have seen far too many job candidates who expect to become 
radio or TV stars—or both—overnight. These people are usually too ego-
tistical to understand that they have to work as a team, pay their dues, and 
gain a reputation. My suggestion … pass!
If a newscaster tells the truth in an interesting and, when appropriate, 
entertaining way, he or she can keep the attention of the listeners. A good 
reporter can cover a ﬁ re so descriptively that the listeners should almost 

Creating Powerful Radio: News         139
be able to taste the smoke in the backs of their throats. When you create 
“word pictures,” your news story is almost like a movie. It should be great 
storytelling. Then it will never be boring.
There is concern within news organizations, especially in Europe, 
about keeping the news very serious and credible. While the journalists 
have been trained to report accurately and credibly, there has been little 
emphasis on teaching journalists to attract or keep the attention of audi-
ences. Their focus has been entirely on keeping journalistic integrity. This is 
admirable, but it does no good to be serious and credible if the results are 
so dull that listeners tune out.
Imagine being presented with a 14-course meal of totally bland cuisine. 
Nobody wants to eat it. What is the point of doing all the work of assem-
bling a half-hour newscast that is so dry or arcane that most people cannot 
pay attention to it? Sure, there will always be somebody who can make 
it through to the bitter end, but most of your potential listeners will have 
given up and gone elsewhere. By making it interesting, powerful radio, you 
can have both credibility and interest.
Don’t Be Interchangeable, Be an Individual
Information is available everywhere: over the Internet, in the paper, and 
on TV. So why should a listener come to you for information? Because 
that listener cannot hear you, the storyteller, anywhere else. Storytelling 
is the power you have to make the listener experience an event or take in 
information in a unique way. Be creative. Put yourself into it, keep your 
opinion out of it, and get your facts right—but ﬁ nd the way to make the 
story yours.
Here is an example from a Creating Powerful Radio news seminar that 
took place in Nairobi, Kenya. In this exercise, we gave the facts of one story 
to a dozen reporters. Here is the story we used:
A young woman had been arrested, tried, and jailed with a life 
 sentence for murdering her father. She became pregnant while in 
prison, and gave birth to a baby girl. The question now was, “What 
will happen to that baby?” Should the authorities let the mother keep 
her baby in the jail? Or should they take away the child and give 
her to another family to raise? The woman’s family wants nothing 
to do with this innocent baby. After all, the woman killed her own 

 
140         Valerie Geller
father. Her mother, who was his wife, had not forgiven the murder-
ing daughter. Perhaps the people who run the jail ought to allow 
the baby to stay for a little while until she reaches school age, then 
make a  decision?
And who is the father? No one knows, and the woman won’t say. 
This was a new situation for the jail. Everyone had an opinion as to 
what should happen.
Several journalists got to work, with this assignment: “Take these 
facts and report the story, but ﬁ nd your own unique and creative way to 
tell it. Use your voice, your personality, in the storytelling.”
The result: One reporter, writing in Swahili, introduced the story 
this way: “The last immaculate conception happened two thousand 
years ago. The latest was yesterday, at the Nairobi jail. … ”
Another reporter, a woman in her early twenties, wrote the 
story from the imagined perspective of the baby: “I do not know 
my father. I will never know my grandfather because my mother 
has killed him, and I may never see the light of day, for I am born in 
Nairobi jail. … ”
The Sound of the Story
The power and glory of a story often lies in its sound. Whenever possi-
ble, record and use natural sound. If you are covering a parade, festival, 
or demonstration, this is obvious. Use the sound of the event underneath 
your report to give listeners the feel of “being on the scene.” Less obvious, 
and less frequently heard, are the sounds of more routine events. Think 
creatively. Use sound to help you tell your story. If you are doing a story 
on day-care centers, it makes sense to record children at play and run that 
underneath your report.
Here’s a story everybody does twice a year, done two ways:
“Daylight saving time is over. Don’t forget to turn your clock back an 
hour at 2 a.m.”
But when a reporter went to a clock store and recorded the clocks at noon, 
the story came alive with the sound of chimes, bells, and cuckoo clocks 
under the lead:

Creating Powerful Radio: News         141
“This is the sound of time. Remember to turn your clock back 
an hour tonight.”
That’s more powerful. The sound makes it work better, even for a story 
that happens twice a year like clockwork. Don’t settle. It doesn’t have to 
be boring.
Television has pictures, but in radio we have something even more 
powerful in our arsenal. We have imagination. By using sound and describ-
ing events and people in detail, we can stimulate imagination in a way tele-
vision simply cannot.
One example comes from my former newsroom in San Francisco. A 
young reporter had spent all night covering a ﬁ re and was now at the sta-
tion recording his reports for the morning newscasts. While the ﬁ re he’d 
covered was exciting, his reports were rather dull. I chalked it up to inexpe-
rience, and made a note to talk with him about it later. His story sounded 
like this:
The fire burned throughout the night at the intersection of Powell 
and Main. The home was completely destroyed. No one was injured. It 
took two fire companies to extinguish the flames. The damage is esti-
mated at four hundred thousand dollars. No one knows what started 
the fire.
When the reporter was done recording his story, he picked up the 
newsroom phone and called his girlfriend. Since he had been out all night, 
he needed to explain his whereabouts:
You should have seen the ﬁ re! It was incredible! There was a full moon 
and you could see the black smoke billowing for miles around! All 
these people were out in their bathrobes and underwear watching it 
burn, with kids and dogs running around wild. They needed two ﬁ re 
companies to put out the ﬂ ames because the ﬁ rst company couldn’t get 
their hoses to work. So they lost the house and everyone had to wait for 
backup ﬁ reﬁ ghters to show up. At one point, they thought there was a 
cat in the house, so all these ﬁ remen went in with oxygen masks to ﬁ nd 
the cat, but she was hiding under a car a block away! You could hardly 
breathe because the smoke was so thick and the wind kept changing, 
and they still don’t know what started it. And that house! It’s com-
pletely destroyed—nothing but ashes. They say it was worth four hun-
dred thousand dollars! Can you imagine, even in that neighborhood, 
prices are up that high?

 
142         Valerie Geller
I impolitely grabbed the phone from the reporter’s hand and asked why 
he couldn’t put all that good stuff in his reports, instead of saving it for his 
girlfriend.
That reporter learned a lesson. Now he works for two national net-
works and has a wall covered with awards for making powerful radio.
Trying to convince a group of journalists that news does not have to be 
boring can be tough. They assume that some “important” details of a story 
have to be included, even if those details are not interesting. If such details 
do not interest you at the human level, it’s likely that those details won’t 
interest your listeners and they will probably tune out, leaving you and 
your “important” details behind.
If you feel you have not done your duty to your community unless you 
make every fact available, stash the minutia on your Web site, where those 
who are interested can ﬁ nd and peruse them.
Again, if news is presented in a boring manner, listeners tune out or 
“zone out.” Once, at a workshop in Finland with a group of radio journal-
ists, I played them 10 minutes of their newscast from the previous day. The 
group was sitting quietly and appeared to be listening intently. When it was 
over, I asked them, “What was the ﬁ rst story?”
Dead silence hung over the room. Not one journalist could remember. 
By the way, these were the same people who, the day before, had written, 
produced, and presented this newscast.
“What about the second story?” Silence. “How about the third?” No 
one said a word. Even though the group had just heard the newscast, 
the stories were so boring nobody remembered them. They had mentally 
tuned out.
Finally, I asked, “Does anyone remember anything from this news-
cast?” The only story anyone remembered concerned a church that was 
urging people to cremate their dead because it was cheaper than burial and 
the cemeteries were ﬁ lled to capacity. The only story they could recall was 
a weird, interesting piece about cremation. Lesson: If you don’t make the 
news interesting, listeners may “hear” the stories, but they won’t sink in.
One broadcast reporter who is never boring is Mike Sugerman. At 
KCBS in San Francisco, he has been known for taking the dullest sto-
ries and bringing them to life. Because he is creative, Sugerman’s work 
is equally good on the hard news and lighter features. For example, take 

Creating Powerful Radio: News         143
a “perennial” story like America’s Academy Awards. Every year, report-
ers cover that story the same way: celebrity interviews, clips of the mov-
ies, and lists of nominees. Sugerman adds a dimension by doing his own 
“Oscar Poll.” He asks guys named “Oscar” who ought to win. Nobody 
else does that.
When Sugerman does a story on the homeless, he gets into their world; 
he lives among them, gains their trust, and gets unique perspectives. Once 
he did a story about garbage by accompanying an apple core to the dump. 
He uses sound and humor. He retains his humanity and is never above 
the audience. Sugarman uses imagination and is a master storyteller. He 
advises reporters to take risks:
First, learn the rules of traditional journalism. Then break them. After you 
learn what you are supposed to do, you can cover a story and ﬁ gure out 
what all the other reporters will be doing. Then do something different. 
Often, the resulting story will generate comments such as, “What the hell 
was that?” But eventually the comments turn into, “Hey, that was good. 
How did you think of that?” Occasionally, you’ll still hear, “What the 
hell was that?” But, if you don’t make mistakes now and then, you aren’t 
 pushing the envelope far enough.
Mike Sugerman has only one warning: “Avoid making mistakes with actual 
facts. If you are factually challenged too often, you’ll lose credibility, which 
is all a reporter owns.”
Another amazingly creative reporter is Warren Levinson, head of the 
Associated Press Bureau in New York City. Levinson is a master of taking 
seemingly boring stories and making then fascinating. Because of his cred-
ibility and expertise as a newsman, Levinson has managed to do some of 
the best work on the Associated Press.
Warren Levinson has some great tricks to make even an older story 
new without compromising any of the facts, like the time a water main 
burst in the city of New York had left some neighborhoods without water. 
Several streets and subways had been ﬂ ooded for days. Because the prob-
lem was ongoing, people in New York were sick of hearing about it even 
though their city was still a mess. Warren gave them what they needed to 
know in the following poetry-style report. Try reading it aloud.

 
144         Valerie Geller
Warren Levinson’s AP Poetry-Style Report
(Opens with sound of jackhammers, running water, construction noise.)
There are time bombs under New York,
aged a century or more.
The one that went off Thursday was put in in nineteen-four.
The water mains under Forty-Second Street gave way …
[Gaynor] ‘Some of our older mains, that’s safe to say’
Dick Gaynor is a deputy of H-2-0 supply.
Half gainer is the sort of thing that you or he or I
might have been tempted to attempt instead of catch the train,
since what subway tracks were under equaled forty weeks of rain.
And subway riders feeling more than usually harassed
sought detours. Were they mad?
[Martinez] ‘No, New Yorkers are adaptable, they adjust fast’
Manuel Martinez got them round the crippled four and ﬁ ve train
while road and track were closed to anything that has a drive train.
We don’t whitewater raft here, but you could bob like a cork,
as you whoosh down Forty-Second, Warren Levinson, New York.
(Close with the sound of more running water, jack hammers, construction noises.)
The story has all the required news information—who, what, where, why, 
when—and it is fun to listen to, even if you’ve heard it all day or all week!
Levinson says, “Newsmakers in their own words and their own voices are 
vital to good radio, but never forget that you are the storyteller. I have seen 
any number of reporters do verbal backﬂ ips just to work in a piece of audio 
better left on the cutting room ﬂ oor. If you think that your voice cannot carry 
a story by itself, look to improve your writing or delivery.”
Levinson emphasizes the importance of ambient sound. “Don’t overlook 
the sound that does not come in quotes: the street sounds of a ﬁ re rescue story, 
the special acoustics of an art gallery or museum.” Levinson advises, “Don’t 
use background sound for its own sake, but ask yourself, ‘Are there sounds that 
can tell an aspect of this story more concisely than I can do in words?’ ”
Sometimes it works very well when a reporter expresses genuine feel-
ings about a story. It would have been almost shocking to American view-
ers and listeners if reporters had managed to seem emotion-free during the 
events of September 11, 2001, or Hurricane Katrina. Stay objective with the 

Creating Powerful Radio: News         145
facts, but if you can personalize the story in some way, the audience will be 
more likely to remember your work.
Wherever there is a personal connection to a story on the part of the 
reporter, there is the potential for more powerful radio. One example comes 
from Sweden’s Radio Jämtland. There had been a “mobbing” in a local 
school. A child had been forced down and beaten, then nearly drowned 
when his head was held in a toilet. The reporter remembered mobbing 
attacks from when she was a schoolgirl and how scary they had been. As it 
turned out, her daughter attended the school where the incident occurred. 
Like any decent mother, she was afraid for her child. She reported the story, 
but also told the audience she had special concerns about the safety of 
her own child. She brought her own life experience to the job. Any  parent 
could relate to this story.
The Art of the Interview
The interview is the heart of the news story. When a reporter comes armed 
with a list of questions for an expert, spokesperson, or victim, it’s easy to 
forget the most important thing—listening. The reporter is so eager to get 
to the next item on his list, the real story might be missed.
How many times have you heard an interview like this?
NEWSPERSON: So Dr. Thompson, I understand you have discovered a new 
species of snake?
DR. THOMPSON: Yes, its venom can be used to cure certain kinds of can-
cer, and the coating on its skin seems to protect it from radiation as well as 
heat.
NEWSPERSON: Interesting. Are you scared of snakes?
While this is a slightly exaggerated example, the failure to listen is not 
unusual. Your most important interviewing tools are your listening skills 
and natural curiosity.
Often, if you dispose of your list and simply hear what your interviewee 
has to say, you’ll ask better questions, get much better answers, and present 
a better story. Ask simpler questions to generate simpler answers.

 
146         Valerie Geller
When interviewing experts, there is a tendency to let them get away 
with giving long, drawn out, complex, and incomprehensible answers. The 
problem is that journalists don’t like to admit that they don’t know some-
thing or don’t understand a complicated answer. But if you, a broadcast 
professional, don’t “get it,” what are the odds your audience will?
Nobody likes to feel or to look foolish, but it is your job to make sure 
that you get straightforward answers to your questions. Better to admit 
you don’t understand something and try again for a simple answer than 
to leave your audience in the dark. After all, even your expert wants to be 
heard and understood.
If you present the news in an interesting, topical and relevant way, the 
audience will consider it a reason to tune in, not tune out. Listeners will feel 
that they can’t go a day without ﬁ nding out what’s going on, as explained 
through your newscast.
Top Tips from Reporters
Reporters from various newsrooms share their most important lessons:
■ Talk to one listener at a time.
■ Use silence, it’s powerful.
■ Avoid clichés.
■ Get new ideas from calling on old story sources.
■ “Off the record” means off the record. Don’t “burn” your sources.
■ Is collecting audio actuality or doing an interview worth the effort? 
Can you better use what little time you’ve got on another story?
■ Localize. Know your city and use familiar terms for things.
■ Keep a tease a tease. Make them want more later.
■ Don’t use the same lead that the reporter uses. It’s lazy and boring 
and makes you look stupid.

Creating Powerful Radio: News         147
■ REWRITE all source material and use multiple versions. Don’t use 
the eight o’clock copy at nine o’clock.
■ Use one thought per sentence, one thought per actuality.
■ Write to be heard. Maintain a sense of speech rhythm in your 
 writing and read it out loud before you read it on air.
■ Avoid statistics if you can. Listeners don’t usually remember them.
■ No one knows what is in your recorder but you. Only use the best 
and most powerful sounds.
■ Save time by listening to recorded audio on the way back to your 
studio. Mentally have your multi-versions ready to go before you 
start editing.
■ Make decisions. You will never get every detail into the story. 
Decide what goes in and what to leave out of each story version.

 
148         Valerie Geller
Valerie Geller’s Top 10 Tips 
for Creating Powerful Radio News
 1.  In the case of an urgent news story, get your facts ﬁ rst, and then 
worry about your presentation.
 2. Describe things visually—paint word pictures.
 3.  Write shorter! Use fewer words but make them count. When in 
doubt, leave it out.
 4.  Use effective storytelling techniques; tell stories the way you 
would tell them to friends.
 5. Use natural sound.
 6.  Stay objective! Keep your opinion out of the story, but put your 
humanity into it.
 7.  Really listen when you are interviewing. Ask simpler questions. 
Know when to ask a “what” and a “how” question versus a 
“yes” or a “no” question.
 8.  Understand your story well enough that if the copy blew away, 
you could continue the report.
 9.  Make the news part of your station’s programming, not an 
 interruption. Tease upcoming news between newscasts.
10. Present a solution for every problem, if possible.

Creating Powerful Radio: News         149
More great ideas come from veteran newsman Ed Walsh. Walsh has 
worked with top stations and networks in Boston, Phoenix, and New York:
■ Know when to ﬁ le! In the United States, radio news deadlines are 
rarely more than an hour away, and the appetite of the news monster 
is insatiable. Better to give it something accurate to chew on while 
you’re collecting more information for a follow-up report.
■ Wearing comfortable shoes cannot be overemphasized.
■ The value of most press releases received through the mail or 
e-mail rarely exceeds the price of the postage.
■ In real estate, the top three attributes of a property are “location, 
location, location.” In radio news, it’s “local, local, local.” That often 
means developing local angles to national or international stories.
■ No verb in news writing is more overused than “say,” as in, 
“Ofﬁ cials say …” Put some life into your copy! They don’t “say”: 
They “insist,” “maintain,” “claim,” and so on.
■ Avoid overattribution. The name of the press ﬂ ack for an agency is, 
in the vast majority of stories, not necessary to report. Ofﬁ cer Smith, 
in his capacity as spokesman, is “the police.”
■ Never lapse into nonconversational transitional phrases such as 
“closer to home” or “in other news.” If you can’t develop a clear, 
declarative lead, pose an interrogatory: “Have you ever … ” It makes 
a much more plausible transition between stories.
■ Establish presence by pre-ﬁ ling when you won’t be able to phone 
in, radio in, or send an audio ﬁ le at the time of an event. If a 
reporter is to be at the airport for the Pope’s 11:00 arrival, he can’t 
ﬁ le at 11:00; pre-ﬁ le “The Pope is expected here shortly … ”
■ Remember, we’re doing news, not history. Use the present tense 
wherever possible. Don’t refer to “yesterday” unless chronology is 
crucial.
■ Tell me a story—a true one, but a story.
■ Never pass up a chance to go to the bathroom. Ever staked out a 
story in the early morning after having had too much coffee?
■ Always say, “Yes!” when they offer you free food and drink.

 
150         Valerie Geller
Another experienced reporter with a lot of useful ideas is Sharon Katchen. 
Sharon, works with Los Angeles’s KFWB, the 24-hour-a-day all-news for-
mat, designed in 22-minute segments. Their slogan is, “Give us 22 minutes 
and we’ll give you the world.” Katchen has picked up several Golden Mike 
awards for running the Los Angeles Marathon while broadcasting live.
Sharon Katchen’s Creating Powerful Radio News Tips
■ Quality never goes out of style.
■ Don’t run with rumors.
■ Keep your views out of the news.
■ Take notes; sound recording devices can fail.
■ Accuracy; accuracy; accuracy.
■ Report fully and fairly. Omitting major facts or viewpoints is bad 
reporting.
■ It’s not news to barge into a disaster or crime scene and ask a 
 victim, “How do you feel?”
■ Listen. The best questions come from answers.
■ Good reporting and good sound make good radio.
■ If it is not clear to you, it’s not clear to the listeners.
Newsman Mark Howell also has good ideas to share. His career has 
taken him from reporting in San Francisco to directing the award-winning 
news department at KCWR/KUZZ in Bakersﬁ eld.
Mark Howell’s Creating Powerful Radio News Tips
■ Grab ’em with the lead. If you don’t get their attention with the ﬁ rst 
sentence of a story, you’ve lost them.
■ Don’t pull punches. Reject euphemisms. Speak the language of the 
common people, but clean up the grammar.
■ Do not trust the police or the politicians.
■ Natural sound is often better than interviews in helping you tell a story.
■ A good newscast has a subtle, almost subliminal rhythm created by 
phrasing and proper placement of sound.

Creating Powerful Radio: News         151
■ When interviewing, concentrate more on what your interviewee 
says than on what you are going to say next. Use each answer to 
lead to another question. The only stupid question is the one you 
did not ask.
■ Read out-of-town and alternative papers. Surf the Internet. Listen 
to shortwave radio. You’ll ﬁ nd story ideas that haven’t been 
done in your town. Keep them in a ﬁ le and pull them out on slow 
news days.
■ Don’t waste time pursuing a story the local newspaper or TV 
has already done unless you can genuinely advance it, not just 
repeat it with a sound bite. Spend your time on stories they have 
not done.
■ Get professional voice training if you need it; it is worth the cost.
■ Understand the technical basics of sound reproduction and develop 
an ear for high ﬁ delity. Then, don’t accept bad audio in your own 
work. Make sure you know how to use equipment, and be very 
meticulous about maintenance.
Denise Jimenez-Adams has worked in both TV and radio as a reporter 
and anchor, at WBBM in Chicago, WCBS in New York, and others.
Denise Jimenez-Adams’s Words of Advice
■ Work as hard at communicating with your bosses and co-workers 
as you do with your audience. Communication is not an art well-
 practiced in the broadcast business.
■ Know your boundaries—and those of the station.
■ Practice, practice, practice ad-libbing factually so that your 
 spontaneity with the news doesn’t tarnish your station’s reputation 
or your own.
■ Words can be swords. Choose them carefully for an impact that 
enhances understanding of the story, not of you.
■ Wire services are important resources, but not always an appropriate 
style to emulate.
■ Read, read, read, for content and style, for emulation, and for 
 information. Be a sponge forever.

 
152         Valerie Geller
■ Don’t assume:
a) That you know more than your audience.
b) That your audience knows more than you.
c) That your opinion is welcome or important.
■ Create your own style in writing and delivery.
■ Experience what your audience experiences so you can ask the 
questions that matter. Communicate the facts that are needed and 
tailor the emotion to the situation.
■ FEEL … and they will feel with you.
Award-winning broadcast journalist, personality, and author Lynn 
Jimenez has worked at top stations, including KCBS and KGO in San 
Francisco.
Lynn Jimenez’s Creating Powerful Radio News Tips
■ Take a breath.
■ Pace yourself.
■ Learn how to ﬁ x any equipment you use.
■ Never throw away any phone number—EVER.
■ The news crew is not your family, no matter what management says.
■ Be comfortable with change. Versatility means survival.
■ Have a conversation; don’t lecture.
■ You are a human being. You are worthwhile and so is everyone else.
■ Remember that broadcasting is a small world.
■ Have fun.

153
Creating Powerful Radio 
Traffic and Weather Together
“The ability to communicate color, content, and drama 
in thirty seconds is rare and glorious.”
 
—Doug Harris
Trafﬁ c and weather “together” are important. Trafﬁ c and weather are often 
the reasons people tune in regularly to news and news-talk radio. Trafﬁ c and 
weather reports should be accurate and delivered consistently during key 
drive times. Some stations provide this service twenty-four hours a day.
Since most trafﬁ c and weather information can be instantly obtained 
from a variety of sources, the advantage radio has is in the personalities who 
deliver the data. It is useful to know that there has been a four-car collision 
on the road ahead of you caused by a sudden hailstorm, but it feels better to 
know that the person giving you the information understands what it is like 
to have your new car hit by a piece of ice the size of a golf ball.
Another Hot One
Listeners respond to and seek accurate information. While many radio sta-
tions or networks may choose to have a relationship with a TV meteorologist 
C H A P T E R  15

154         Valerie Geller
or an accredited weather service to provide forecasts, trained meteorologists 
may not be the most scintillating personalities.
It is best if your station can have weather reports given by someone 
who sounds likeable and conversational. If possible, help train your weather 
presenters. Make sure they talk as if they are speaking to only one person, 
and not “all you folks out there.”
A lot of explicit data about high-pressure systems or other technical 
information may be very interesting to the meteorologist and his or her 
colleagues, but unless the forecast concerns something extreme, such as a 
tornado, ﬂ ooding, snowstorm, stick to the basics.
What would most people say if someone asked them, “Is it going to 
rain?” “How hot is it going to be today?” or “What’s it like outside?” The 
answer is what should be in your report. Listeners need to know what to 
wear, how to dress their kids. or whether to bring an umbrella. Toward the 
end of the week, people begin to plan their weekends. Tell them what they 
can expect, in plain language.
Non-meteorologists often do a great job with the weather because they 
are not experts. One Los Angeles announcer consistently engages his lis-
teners with creative brief weather updates, such as: “Aren’t you glad you 
got that haircut? Another hot one today. Sunshine, high of 83.”
Traffic: Bad for Commuters, Great for Radio
If you have ever been stuck in a trafﬁ c jam, you know how vital the infor-
mation can be. Even satellite radio networks offer local trafﬁ c updates. 
Stations have found ratings and ﬁ nancial beneﬁ ts by promoting and deliv-
ering frequent reports at speciﬁ c times. Audiences will tune in at the exact 
minute they have been trained to expect the latest trafﬁ c report.
Since so much of the information that radio provides can be found 
elsewhere, once again, it is the presenters who can make a big difference 
here. Personalities make your information not simply accurate, but genu-
inely powerful radio. Personality Caroline Feraday was the “Flying Eye” 
over London, ﬁ rst for Capital Radio, then for BBC Radio’s Five Live.
Your listeners are counting on you to make them feel better. If they are 
stuck in a jam, they need you to validate their frustration, anger, or annoy-
ance with that delay.

Creating Powerful Radio: Traffic and Weather Together         155
I know this sounds obvious, but it is easy to be blasé about a trafﬁ c jam that 
will really mess up someone’s day. Every single person that is in their car is there 
for a reason. Maybe it’s because they have to be somewhere on time? Perhaps 
they have to pick the kids up? Or that they want to make a good impression at a 
job interview or a ﬁ rst date? Maybe their favorite TV show starts soon.
Whatever the reason, listeners want to know if they are going to be 
late and they want to know why. It makes them feel better. Maybe they can 
call ahead? Perhaps leave extra time for the journey or travel a different 
route? Maybe they can do nothing but wait, but either way, that mention of 
their problem works psychologically.
Credibility Matters
Be on time, get it right. Never say, “There are no stalls or accidents.” You 
are tempting fate. Instead try “No reports of any stalls or accidents.” If you 
declare, “It’s all clear,” the situation may immediately change and you’ll 
lose credibility. What you said moments ago may no longer be correct.
On the other hand, some facts do not need to be repeated day in, day 
out. Caroline Feraday says this:
A gripe of mine is telling a bunch of commuters the stuff that they can 
work out for themselves. Don’t waste their time. If there is always a half a 
mile back up at the Blackwall Tunnel, then do you need to tell them every 
bulletin? At the very max—remind them sometimes, “Usual jam at the 
Blackwall Tunnel. How do you put up with that every day?”
One frequent listener complaint is: “I tune in to ﬁ nd out what is happen-
ing on the roads, but they almost never report on the mess I’m stuck in, or 
they’ll report an accident that doesn’t exist. While I’m hearing that, I’m 
sailing through that area. They just don’t get it right.”
To counter that complaint, if you report trafﬁ c, make sure to check peri-
odically to ﬁ nd out if accidents you have reported have been cleared or not.
Keep your listeners from becoming bored during trafﬁ c reports. Each 
person should be able to “see” what it is you are talking about. Caroline 
Feraday stresses the importance of making a movie in the listener’s mind:
Try to talk in pictures, and say what you see. If you can’t see the crash but 
you can see smoke, then tell the listener that. If you can see the ambulance 
coming along the hard shoulder, then tell them. Make it visual.

 
156         Valerie Geller
Very rarely will a story change as rapidly whilst you are on the air, nor will 
it matter to people as much as the travel news does. How we are all addicted 
to watching those car chase tapes on the television! Have you watched how 
the trafﬁ c slows down to see a crash? We’re naturally voyeuristic.
Very few of your listeners will actually be stuck in a trafﬁ c jam at the 
moment you mention it, so for the rest of them—make it interesting.
I once did a travel bulletin for BBC Radio Five Live in which I men-
tioned that a church roof had blown off in high winds. A famous ﬁ lm direc-
tor, visiting the studio remarked, ‘What an amazing vignette of life.’ It was 
true—you can say so much about life in those 60 seconds. That church roof 
was now blocking the main road through a sleepy Devon Village.
“Where” Before “What”
Give the location of the trafﬁ c holdup before you detail what happened. People 
ﬁ rst want to know, “Is this near me?” Caroline Feraday puts it this way:
Travel the listeners’ journey with them. If there’s a queue, or backup, on 
the motorway, it’s no good saying, there’s an accident on the M25, causing 
it to back up. As a driver, you’ll hit the back of the mess ﬁ rst. ‘You’re going 
to come to a halt at around Leatherhead. I know it’s miles up, but I can 
see that the trafﬁ c doesn’t really start moving again until you’ve passed 
the accident the other side of the Staines turning!’ Oh, and people don’t 
know the numbers of the junctions, so tell them exactly where they are. On 
what road is it? Where on that road? In which direction? Also, listeners 
hate a mispronunciation. Plus if there’s a colloquial name for a junction, 
or landmark, learn it.
 By the way, if you know the roads where the problems are, then I’ve 
found it helps to be able to picture it in my head. If you can do that, then 
you’ll barely use your script. “Heading around the M25—you know the 
stretch where it goes down to two lanes just before the A10? Well, I know 
you get stuck there most days, but actually, it’s going to take you about 
twenty minutes more today because some poor guy has broken down in 
the inside lane.”
What Is Your Source?
Trafﬁ c presenters, make sure you know where your information comes 
from and how old each item is. Cultivate a healthy relationship with the 
police department or highway patrol. Can you easily contact them to obtain 

Creating Powerful Radio: Traffic and Weather Together         157
the fresh, updated information? Does your newsroom monitor police and 
highway patrol scanners or Web sites and check press releases from the 
state about highway construction projects?
Maintain an accurate phone and contact list with twenty-four-hour 
emergency numbers and keep it where anyone who might need it can ﬁ nd it 
in the event of a big problem during off hours. Your list should include not 
only highway patrol contacts but ﬁ re department, power and gas, and airport 
and railroad contacts, since these are all areas where an unusual incident can 
affect trafﬁ c and you may need to gather relevant information quickly.
Calling on the Cars
Does your station use “trafﬁ c spotters,” listeners who call from their mobile 
phones to report on various trafﬁ c jams? If so, credit your valuable resource, 
the caller: “NEWS 105 trafﬁ c spotter Ben in Hampton says he’s looking at 
the big rig truck that lost its load of chickens on Highway 5, Ben tells us he’s 
watching the police try to round up the birds. It sounds like it may take a 
little while to get everything back to normal since the chickens are outrun-
ning the cops.” To keep current, ask the spotters to call you back or ﬁ nd out 
if it is all right to phone them back, to see if there is new information.
There is a place for personality and humor in trafﬁ c and travel reports. 
Obviously you never fool around with a serious situation when lives are at 
stake, but there is a lot of room in the mix for having fun and playing off 
the show personalities and presenters.
I once heard a trafﬁ c report about an accident involving an overturned 
truck carrying condoms. Not only did the spill cause a twenty-minute 
backup, it generated lots of comedy in the studio and for listeners stuck 
behind the “road full of rubbers” as well. The trafﬁ c story also became a 
news report.
Career On-Ramp
Trafﬁ c announcing and reporting can also be a great “entry” into broad-
casting. Many have found, if you start out reporting trafﬁ c and do a profes-
sional job, that it may open doors to other parts of the business for you.

 
158         Valerie Geller
Caroline Feraday moved from reporting travel conditions in the United 
Kingdom to more prominent on-air roles. She offers some lessons she has 
learned.
If you want to be part of a team, you simply have to play. Any anchor wants 
to be sure that you will make their show sound good. If you sound good 
when they ask you a question, then they will do it again and again until 
that is part of your role. If they feel nervous that you won’t spark when 
asked to deviate from your script, then they will deﬁ nitely try it less. It is 
worth trying, and you will soon get a feel for how much or how little you 
should say in a segment. Don’t feel you have to show off or be wacky for 
the sake of it. The listeners simply want you to be good company.
What about that script then? I reckon the fewer words you have on it, 
the better you’ll be. It’s not a memory test, though, so keep any facts you 
need at hand. If you can keep the information in front of you down to the 
basics and chat around it, then you’re more likely to speak like a normal 
human being.
Lots of on-air personalities have worked as trafﬁ c reporters. It is a good 
way either to start your broadcasting career or take it in a new direction. 
Many trafﬁ c services also offer newscasts to their client stations. If you 
work for a trafﬁ c service, you may have a chance to add news writing and 
anchoring to your list of skills. This area of the business tends to provide a 
little more job security than other parts of broadcasting. As long as there 
are people in cars, there will be a need for trafﬁ c reporting.

Creating Powerful Radio 
Newswriting
“Write to express, not to impress.”
—Mervin Block, Writing Broadcast News
The Long and Short of It
Anyone who writes knows it’s harder to write shorter, but less is often 
more effective. Newspapers specialize in detail. Radio cannot  compete for 
sheer tonnage of information. Radio’s job, and yours, is to get  information 
out quickly and succinctly. When you hear it on the radio, it’s news. When 
you read it in the paper, it’s history. Put in the big stuff, the important things 
that you would tell friends. Give enough  information so listeners can think 
about a story and discuss it at their dinner tables.
Author George Orwell was deeply concerned with the effect of words, 
especially those that cause confusion. In his essay “Politics and the English 
Language,” Orwell set down the following writing rules that will probably 
serve you well, regardless of which language you are using.
C H A P T E R  16
159

160         Valerie Geller
Never use a metaphor, simile, or other ﬁ gure of speech you are used to 
seeing in print. Never use a long word where a short one will do. If it is pos-
sible to cut a word out, always cut it out. Never use a passive phrase where 
you can use the active. Never use a foreign phrase, a scientiﬁ c word, or a 
jargon word if you can think of an everyday English equivalent. Break any 
of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous.
Mervin Block is America’s newswriting guru. He wrote the news for 
CBS television for years. Many generations of American news journalists 
have read his books or attended his television newswriting workshops at 
Columbia University in New York. He has written several books. What 
 follows is from Block’s Writing Broadcast News:
Bad News
■ Don’t label news as good or bad. What may be bad for some 
 listeners is good for others. Heavy rain may be bad for  pedestrians, 
 motorists, and sunbathers, but it can be good for farmers, taxi drivers, 
and umbrella vendors.
  “Good news” abounds on broadcasts when the prime rate drops, 
but for listeners, a drop in the prime can be either positive or negative. 
Anyone who takes out a home improvement loan will beneﬁ t from 
lower prime rates and could save on adjustable rate home mortgages 
and similar borrowings.
  However, for other listeners, lower rates are “bad news.” Many 
 consumers like high interest rates because they are able to earn 
strong returns on investments like money market funds or U.S. 
 government securities.
■ Don’t tell your audience that a story is distressing, interesting, or 
 amusing. The best policy is to stick to the facts, tell the news, and let 
the listeners decide.
  If the “good news” or “bad news” is tied to a speciﬁ c person or 
group, characterizing the news may be valid. For example: “Mayor 
Murphy received good news today from his doctor,” or, “The IRS has 
bad news for taxpayers.”
Lead-Ins, Lead-Outs
There are some deﬁ nite do’s and many don’ts for writing into and out of 
correspondents’ reports and actualities. In Writing Broadcast News, Mervin 
Block advises:

Creating Powerful Radio: Newswriting         161
■ Don’t use the same key words the reporter uses, and don’t introduce 
him or any speaker with the very words he starts with. Violation 
of this rule produces “the echo-chamber effect.” It sounds—and 
resounds like this: “Good evening. Governor Goober warned today 
he’s fed up with state employees who loaf on the job.” Instantly, we 
hear Goober say: “I’m fed up with state employees who loaf on the 
job.” Listener: “Haven’t I heard that somewhere before?”
■ Don’t steal the reporter’s thunder. Although the lead-in for a hard 
news story should hit a few highlights, the anchor shouldn’t skim 
off all the reporter’s best material. Otherwise, the reporter’s account 
will seem anticlimactic and will seem as though the reporter got his 
news from the anchor.
■ Don’t write a soft lead-in for a hard news story. A soft lead-in may 
work for a feature story, but a hard news story calls for a hard 
lead-in. A lead-in is something like a store’s display window. A dime 
store doesn’t dress a window with diamonds, and a diamond 
merchant doesn’t display dimes. Hard news, like diamonds, 
deserves an appropriate showcase.
■ Don’t write a lead-in that conﬂ icts with the reporter’s script. This 
may seem basic, but every once in a while we hear a reporter say 
something that contradicts what the anchor’s lead-in has said. That’s 
a mislead-in.
■ Don’t overstate or oversell. The lead-in should not promise or 
suggest more than the reporter is going to deliver. It should adhere 
to standards of journalism, not hucksterism or showmanship.
■ Don’t be vague. Sometimes, because of the way newscasts are put 
together, we don’t know precisely what the reporter in the ﬁ eld is 
going to be saying, or which segment of a speech is going to be used. 
We have to write “blind” (i.e., without saying anything speciﬁ c). We 
put down only enough words to allow the report to start: “The 
chairman of the city transit agency, Lionel Train, spoke out today on 
the agency’s problems …” Writing “blind,” like ﬂ ying “blind,” can be 
risky. Wherever you can, say something substantive: “The chairman 
of the city transit agency, Lionel Train, said today he’ll clean up the 
agency’s problems within six months …”
■ Don’t use a faulty “throw line” at the end of the lead-in to intro-
duce a reporter. If the next voice we’re going to hear is not that 
of the reporter but of a woman taking an oath of ofﬁ ce, you’d 
confuse a listener by saying, “Jerry Jarvis has the story.” One way to 
handle that “throw line” is to say, “Jerry Jarvis looked on as Mary 
Barton took the oath …”

 
162         Valerie Geller
Most lead-ins run less than twenty seconds, and a few run barely ﬁ ve 
seconds. No matter what it takes to do the job, no matter what the length, 
every word matters. The shorter the lead-in, the greater the need for every 
word to carry its weight.
Words Count
Everybody complains about bad writing. Broadcast journalism trainer 
Deborah Potter worked for years as a news reporter on CNN and CBS-TV 
and radio. Potter maintains:
Your staff won’t learn if no one teaches them. Much of what we hear on the 
air is badly written. Good writing is not magic. It is a craft. It can be learned 
and it can be improved, but ﬁ rst everyone has to know that it matters.
Potter adds it is important to offer regular feedback about writing. 
“Words count. If you want listeners to tune in and believe what they hear, 
you need to care about what is being said. Praise good writing and you will 
get more of it.”
Deborah Potter’s “Write Stuff”
1. Take time at the front end to understand the story. Candy Crowley 
of CNN puts it this way: “The less time you have to write, the more 
time you should take to think about it.” Try telling someone in six 
words or less what your story is about. If you can’t, you will have 
trouble writing it.
2. Choose information that will tell the story best. Avoid the 
cramming impulse. Select speciﬁ c details—the brand of beer, 
the make of the car—that will bring the story to life. Leave the 
rest out.
3. Organize your information in a logical way. If it helps, make an out-
line. Keep related facts together. Answer questions as they come up. 
Know where you are going before you start.
4. Tell it, don’t report it. Imagine that every story you write begins, 
“Hey Mom, guess what I just found out!” Or, “Honey, you won’t 
believe what happened today!”

Creating Powerful Radio: Newswriting         163
5. Rewrite. Revise what you have written by looking at it backwards. 
Look closely at the end of every sentence, paragraph, and story. 
That is where you want the strongest words, because that is where 
they have the strongest impact. Crisp endings are one simple way to 
sharpen your writing.
6. Put your writing on a diet, and think of adjectives as empty calories. 
Particularly the adjectives so overused in broadcast news: senseless, 
 horrible, tragic, ironic, and the like.
7. Do use active verbs that add energy to your writing. The right verbs 
do more than convey information. You build understanding and 
make the audience care. It’s the difference between a story saying 
that a bus was involved in an accident and a story that tells how the 
bus skidded down an embankment, rammed into a guardrail, and 
ﬂ ipped into a ravine. Active verbs in the active voice are the hall-
mark of writing that communicates clearly. The active voice tells you 
who. Then leave out all the words you do not need.
See It on Your Radio
People do not think of radio as a visual medium. But a talented storyteller 
who writes with dazzling detail can tap into all of the imagery and emotion 
stored in the listener’s brain and make him feel that he really is “seeing” 
the story. While telling a story in just a few words is key in writing power-
ful news copy, the visual element is important to keep listeners engaged. 
Many songwriters have mastered this in their lyrics. Take for example, Bob 
Dylan’s “Mr. Tambourine Man.” When you hear the line “To dance beneath 
a diamond sky with one hand waving free,” you can see it. And that makes 
it more powerful.
In 2004, I was in Australia during the Athens Summer Olympics. Part of 
my job was to listen to some of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s 
coverage of the events. I didn’t have much enthusiasm for an item that 
began, “Up next, it’s the women’s archery competition …” until I heard the 
reporter tell the story.
REPORTER: This young woman picked up a bow and arrow when she was 
just a child. Her parents are right here beside me. Now here’s what she’s got 
to do: Hit a black target the size of a grapefruit, across three football ﬁ elds.

 
164         Valerie Geller
Two minutes ago, I could not have cared less about the women’s archery 
competition. Now I was paying attention and fully engaged in the story 
being told. If you can get a listener to “see it” or “feel it,” then they will care 
and pay attention.
Visual descriptions are especially important to men. Brain research 
shows that men are more stimulated by visual details, and language that 
describes events with accurate visual elements tends to make them pay 
closer attention to a story.
Sports announcers are the best in the business at visual description. 
They are mostly men, talking to men, in a way that men understand. If you 
have ever attended a baseball or football game, you will notice men listen-
ing to radios while they watch the game with their own eyes. The play-by-
play announcers enhance the visual experience for these men.
Women, on the other hand, are emotive. If a woman can “feel” an emo-
tional connection to a story, she is more likely to listen closely and take in 
the information. For a story to appeal to both men and women, it should 
deliver information using both visual and emotional language.
Here’s an example from England. A reporter, working from a camera 
phone video taken by a bystander, paints the visual and emotional scene of 
a pit bull attack on a small child. He uses both kinds of language to make 
men and women see and feel what happened in this story:
The boy and the pit bull were about the same size. The dog had its jaws 
embedded in the little boy’s neck. The child screamed in terror and pain. 
Within moments you couldn’t tell the difference between the red-and-
white pattern in the child’s shirt from the blood. And can you imagine 
how his mother felt, standing by helplessly as the vicious beast attacked 
her child?
You can improve your visual writing and learn to speak more visually 
by imagining you are talking to a blind person. Start by seasoning your 
everyday off-air conversations with descriptive details. Use all the colors 
in your verbal paint box. Make observations of little things in life a part of 
your normal speech.
Get out to places where you will have a lot of interesting things to see. 
Find new places where you will experience things to talk and write about. 

Creating Powerful Radio: Newswriting         165
Build and stockpile ﬁ les of mental imagery. Describe events so loaded with 
sensory information that the audience actually feels transported.
Where Have All the Writers Gone?
Newswriting expert Mackie Morris is an advocate and teacher of effective 
broadcast newswriting. In an article for Radio-Television News Directors 
Association’s Communicator, Morris warned managers that it is up to them 
to encourage good broadcast news writing: “The best writers are those who 
have something meaningful to say. Unless our newscasts begin to commu-
nicate . . . with clear and effective writing, we may not have any audience left. 
Our audience will have gone elsewhere for information and inspiration.”
Mackie Morris offers three suggestions to managers who are training 
their staffs to write better news copy:
1. Require your people to read.
2. Challenge them to think, and reward them when they write well.
3. Establish a standard of good writing that applies to everyone in 
the newsroom.
Mackie Morris ﬁ rst put out the “Good Writer’s Dazzlin’ Dozen” dur-
ing his teaching years at the University of Missouri–Columbia School of 
Journalism. The “Dozen” is a list of what to look for and how to do both 
radio newscasts and news reports right (see next page). Even if you broad-
cast in a language other than English, there is much usable wisdom here.
What Listeners Want
The essence of news is the well-told story. If informative, entertaining, and 
up-to-the-moment, the story will always work. Most listeners turn on the 
news and want to know: Is my world safe? Did a nuclear bomb land some-
where or can I go about my business and lead my life today?
After that, audiences want to hear about the world they live in, their 
community, and what is happening. They want “talkable topics,” weather, 
sports scores, and updated trafﬁ c reports. Breaking news aside, research 

 
166         Valerie Geller
Mackie Morris’s Dazzlin’ Dozen
 1.  Write factually and accurately. The best technique and the ﬁ nest 
form mean nothing if the copy is wrong.
 2.  Write in the active voice. Your copy will be tighter, complete, 
easier to listen to, and more interesting. Do whatever you must 
to avoid the passive voice or past tense (examples: “He says” 
instead of “He said”; “tells” instead of “was told”)
 3.  Write in the present or present-perfect tenses. They make your 
copy more immediate—and immediacy is more interesting
 4.  Keep your writing simple. Write one thought to a sentence. Do 
not search for synonyms, since repetition is not a sin. Do not 
search for complicated intellectual language. Give the audience 
a better chance to understand the story.
 5.  Be complete. Make sure your quest for brevity and conciseness 
does not cause you to omit necessary information.
 6.  Be creative. Stick to the rules, but develop your own style. Try to 
say the same old thing in a new way. Make use of the “rule of 
threes” (“Lions and tigers and bears, oh my!” or “Life,  liberty, 
and the pursuit of happiness”) and other effective writing 
devices that cause copy to be more interesting.
 7.  Write to be heard. Maintain a sense of rhythm in your  writing. 
All life has rhythm, and rhythmic writing is easier to hear. 
Be careful of confusing homonyms. Always, always test your 
broadcast copy by reading it aloud.
 8.  Avoid interruptives. Do not force the listener to make difﬁ cult 
mental connections. Put modiﬁ ers next to what they modify. Do 
not split verb phrases.
 9.  Avoid commas. A comma demands a hitch in your reading and 
the result is a jerkiness that frustrates the listener. Avoiding commas 
also will eliminate awkward subordinate clauses. Such clauses kill 
the impact of copy, especially if they come at the top of a story or 
sentence. Put a comma only where you intend to pause.

Creating Powerful Radio: Newswriting         167
shows that listeners shut off news, talk, or information broadcasts for the 
following two reasons:
1. “It’s too depressing.”
2.  “It’s boring.”
Using the Powerful Radio methods takes care of the problem of being 
boring. The other challenge is to work to keep audiences who ﬁ nd the news 
depressing, who say, “I just can’t take any more. There is nothing I can do 
to ﬁ x this problem.”
A steady stream of stories detailing human suffering, environmental 
destruction, homelessness, war, and natural disasters can overwhelm peo-
ple. Audiences become uneasy, then shut down or tune out.
Find a Solution
You can do something to prevent the listener fatigue that results in listener 
tune out. Each time you report a “problem story,” try to ﬁ nd and present some 
sort of solution. That will lift the audience and be more effective in keeping 
your listeners.
One example of this was the American coverage of hurricane Katrina 
in New Orleans in 2005. The ﬁ rst images of ﬂ ooding and human suffering 
were followed by details of the disastrous ofﬁ cial response. After days and 
weeks of watching and listening to the suffering of the newly homeless, 
many turned away. They simply couldn’t stand hearing any more.
10.  Avoid numbers. The listener has trouble remembering them. 
Instead of “48 percent of a population consisting of nearly 
nine-hundred and eighty-seven thousand people,” try, “About 
half the population of nearly a million …” It is easier to “see” and 
remember.
11.  Avoid pronouns. If you must use a pronoun, make sure it agrees 
with its antecedent.
12.  Create word pictures so the audience can “see it.” Use the 
medium of imagination.

 
168         Valerie Geller
But one reporter found a few uplifting stories in the midst of misery. 
First came hopeful stories of animal rescues. Then the story of a 9-year-
old boy who had been living in New Orleans with his unemployed, drug-
addicted mother. Malnourished and barely able to read due to sporadic 
school attendance, he had few friends. He told the reporter that in his old 
neighborhood, the other kids had regularly beat him up.
But now everything was changed. The boy had reached an emergency 
relocation center in Houston where his mother was given medical care. He 
was attending school and had made some friends. His new teacher asked 
him to stand up and tell the class what it was like to survive a major hur-
ricane. With a donated backpack ﬁ lled with books, this child was now in 
an individualized reading program and eating a hot nutritious lunch in the 
cafeteria every day.
Hurricane Katrina gave this boy a new chance. That little bit of good 
news uplifted the audience, giving them a small but much needed break 
from the horror they had been witnessing for weeks. Presented with a 
“solution” story, people could listen longer.

169
Creating Powerful Radio 
 News Anchoring
“Stories are as essential as the air we breathe and the 
water we drink. They captivate our imaginations, 
enchant our minds and empower our spirit.”
 
—Matthew Kelly
“May you live in interesting times.”
—Chinese saying
If you anchor or present the news, whether you or someone else on your 
staff did the actual writing, it’s you that the audience connects to. Yours is 
the name the public knows and yours is the voice they hear. If the job is 
well done, listeners stick around, ratings result, and management applauds. 
If you do not communicate powerfully, listeners leave.
Zen Rules of News Anchoring
KOA and KTLK Denver managing news editor Jerry Bell could paper the 
walls of a mansion with the awards he has won for news excellence. The 
following are Jerry Bell’s “Zen Rules of News Anchoring.”
C H A P T E R  17

170         Valerie Geller
Background, Not Foreground
It is shocking for some talent to realize that the listeners do not sit 
with their hands cupped to their ears to make sure they are hearing 
everything you say on the radio. A good newscast demands attention 
and must cut through the clutter of everyday life. Imagine your news-
cast as it is being heard on the car radio. Mom and Dad are driving 
their three screaming kids to school. At least three different conver-
sations are going while the radio is on. What is going to come out of 
that speaker that will silence the crowd for even a few seconds? That 
is your challenge. Guess what? Your audience is not hanging on your 
every word!
To Err Is Human
Get your facts right, but cast off the nasty baggage that it is unacceptable 
to ﬂ ub now and then in your on-air delivery. What is more important is 
taking risks and being able to put yourself out there without fear. The 
beauty of radio is that mistakes travel quickly to the void of outer space 
and are soon forgotten. So you make a goof—no big deal. It is not the end 
of the world.
Radio Is a One-on-One Medium
Use the word “You” in a newscast. You are storytelling to one person at 
a time. If your news copy is written in a detached way and you speak at and 
not to your listener, you miss the essence of the medium. Radio is portable 
and personal. It travels with people. Aim your newscast at the individual, 
not the collective group.
What, Why, and How before  
Who, When, and Where (Most of the Time)
As mentioned, good radio leads are not good newspaper leads. The 
newspaper gives you the old who, what, where, when, why, and how. In 
newspapers, the most important part of the story is where and when it 
happened, and who was interviewed. But in radio news, the more compelling 
radio leads usually deal with the effect the story has on the listener. Quite 
simply: (1) How will the story affect you? (2) What is the reason for it? 
(3) Why is a change taking place?
Here is a good radio lead: “Your taxes are about to go up.”

Creating Powerful Radio: News Anchoring         171
That works better than: “Legislators at the State House voted last night 
to raise the property tax levy …”
Be a Person, Not a Newsperson
Read this lead:
Police are beginning a probe into a probable homicide at 361 Elm Street. 
A 35-year-old woman was found slain. The suspected murder weapon, a 
Colt 45 revolver, was found next to the woman’s corpse. Homicide detec-
tives say the slaying reported has similarities to ﬁ ve other homicides in the 
neighborhood this year.
What is wrong with this lead? Everything. You have words no one 
ever uses in normal speech and it sounds so pompous as to be almost silly. 
Instead, try this lead:
A murder on Elm Street—and the cops say the killer left his gun at the 
scene. Police are investigating the death of a thirty-ﬁ ve-year-old woman 
and think it may be the work of a serial killer. Five other murders in the 
neighborhood have the same M.O.
Sound Paints a Picture and Creates Energy
A good radio story should have sound that imprints pictures in the mind 
of a listener. You could read a story about a ﬂ ood and get all the facts. But 
if you add the sound of the ﬂ owing water, a cry for help, or the motor on 
a boat going down what used to be a highway, then you use our medium 
best.
Sound is not just sound effects. Most stories you hear on the radio have 
an audio segment somewhere in the middle. That is predictable and very 
dull. Clever news anchors will lead with sound or even use multiple sound 
bites to tell a story.
A Pause Refreshes
The small nuances of announcing separate the men from the boys and 
the women from the girls. Use a fraction-of-a-second pause for empha-
sis. The ever-so-slight elongation of a word will stress its importance. 
These are techniques used for centuries by the best orators in the 
world.

 
172         Valerie Geller
Take the “I Have a Dream” speech of Dr. Martin Luther King, and 
imagine how it would have sounded being read by a dull monotone news 
reader. The beauty of this speech is in the power of its words, the ups and 
downs. The elongation of key words and the changes in volume and pace 
give the speech motion and emotion.
These speech techniques, toned down a bit, can make your newscast 
come alive.
Fight Your Fears
Jerry Bell adds:
Everyone wants to do the perfect, ﬂ awless newscast. That is a good 
goal, but a fear of making mistakes may end up being just the thing 
that keeps you from being a good news anchor. How? If you fear mak-
ing a mistake, you will never take a risk with your voice. You will be so 
uptight that you will constrict your voice and cut off all the power and 
fullness that can come when you use your full vocal instrument. If you 
read every word individually, while being oh-so-careful, you will sound 
like a robot instead of a human being. You will be boring and lifeless 
on the air.
If It Were So Easy, There Would Be Tons 
of Great News Anchors
The sad fact is that most news anchors sound exactly the same: dull and 
predictable. Here is why:
■ Fear to go beyond the acceptable to reach the exceptional
■ Lack of hard work
■ Lack of coaching or airchecking
Final Zen Notes
If you are learning this trade:
■ Make airchecks of your work, constantly.
■ Send your work to people you know and trust. Ask for and accept 
their harshest critiques.

Creating Powerful Radio: News Anchoring         173
■ Acquire mentors who can coach you to greatness.
■ Make daily airchecks, and listen back to your own work. Be your 
own worst critic.
■ Becoming a good news anchor does not just happen. You have to 
work at it to make it happen.
Mystery List
I picked up the following list years ago. When I found it, tucked inside an old 
journalism reference book at a public library, it had already been well used. 
It was covered in coffee stains and torn at the corners. I never knew who 
wrote it, but I carried it in my wallet, copied it for fellow broadcast journalists 
and friends, and used it all the years I worked in broadcast news.
■  Create radio news with “ear appeal.” Open your news with a 
sounder or great story to grab attention and set it apart from the 
other entertainment on the station.
■ Use the station name or call letters at the:
● opening of the newscast
● close of the newscast
● going into the commercial
● coming out of the commercial
● in the sports segment
● in the weather segment
● within at least one story (“Mayor Grover tells KIOI 
News . . .”)
■ Ditch all wire service copy. Rewrite every story in your own words. 
Tell the story—do not read the story. Rewrite multiple versions for 
ongoing stories.
■ Put “what” before “who.” Never start a story with a source. Phrases 
like “Police say . . .,” “Senator Joe Jones says . . .,” or “The Red 
Cross reports . . .” make weak openers because these guys say 
things all the time. Most of the time it is what they say, what is in it 
for  listeners, and what happened that is important, not who is 
saying it.

174         Valerie Geller
■ Open with action words. Use powerful verbs that clearly tell 
 immediately what the whole story is about.
■ Keep actualities and sound bites short and colorful. Avoid using 
sound just for the sake of using audio. Remember, a good movie 
director leaves a lot of ﬁ lm on the cutting-room ﬂ oor. Try to put 
only the great stuff on the radio. A rule of thumb is “one thought 
per actuality.”
■ NEVER put on a dull spokesperson. If you can say it better and 
quicker than a boring expert, do it yourself.
■ Commercial radio is a headline service. No matter what a newswriter 
thinks, a story becomes bulky and hard to digest after about three lines 
unless it is an ultra-hot breaking event. Research indicates listeners feel 
most satisﬁ ed when hearing a lot of items, rather than a lot of details on 
a few items. In your newscast, try ﬁ tting in more short stories instead of 
a few longer ones.
■ Promote your newscast about ten minutes before it airs. Bring on 
the newscaster to deliver a couple of quick teases. In talk radio 
these can provide many magic moments. The best two stories to 
tease are usually the top story and the kicker.
■ Don’t sweat it. How long should it take to write a story? Not long. 
If you understand your story, it should take about as long to write as 
it does to tell. Read it out loud as you write to make sure it sounds 
conversational.
Basics
Use a checklist when training new broadcast news anchors, reporters, and 
producers. Just as a pilot does his or her checklist before taking off in an 
airplane, double-check the “list” before you go on air. Avoid the “disaster” 
of incomplete stories or items without purpose or focus that are boring.
Make sure all your news stories contain all of the following: who, what, 
where, why, when, and how (how it happened, how it affects people, how 
much it costs, how it can be solved). And ask a ﬁ nal ‘how’: How would you 
tell this story to a friend?

Creating Powerful Radio: News Anchoring         175
Checklist: Powerful News
■ What is the subject? 
■ Is this new information? 
■ Who cares? How will this matter to your audience?
■  Would you have a conversation with someone about this story 
off air?
■  Does this story affect health or safety, human emotions, money, 
or other concerns of our listeners? How?
■  Who are the “characters” or people involved in this story? 
Do you care about them? Will the  audience care?
■  Is it visual? Can a listener “see” this story in his or her “mind’s 
eye”?
■  Is the writing clearly understandable? Do you understand this 
story? Could you tell the story on air without reading it?
■  Go global: How big can the story be? Can a huge national or 
international story be told with a local angle? If so, how? Think 
local:
  Example: “One hundred million dollars is the amount that Best Oil 
Company will have to pay for cleanup of the largest toxic spill 
ever to hit the American Southwest. But right here in Franklyn, 
the Environmental Protection Agency reports some dangerous 
 pesticides leaking into our own groundwater. The cost of cleaning 
that up will be high.”
■  If there are several angles to the story, can multiple versions be 
made? Does this story have a second-day angle or potential for 
Monday morning? Can it be used on a slow news day?
■  Double-check your work before it goes on air. When you are 
pressured or in a hurry, it is easy to leave out one or more 
important elements. Make sure the story contains everything 
important.

This page intentionally left blank

177
Creating Powerful Radio 
Multi-version News
“One theme with endless variations, like life itself.”
— Photographer Alfred Stieglitz
Multi-what ?
It is a given that good newsrooms update stories as new information 
becomes available. The multi-version method is different.
Multiple-version or multi-version reporting is the evolution of a news 
or feature story over time; or the retelling of a single news story in a vari-
ety of different ways by using a different mix of writing and sound in each 
version. The story takes on new forms, angles, and voices each time it is 
presented to the audience. This replaces the former technique of simply 
recycling and repeating the identical story in full detail for hours at a time.
Any one version of a story written in this manner will leave out some 
details and include others. In this way, each multi-version piece should be able 
to exist alone, containing who, what, why, when, where, and how. However, if 
listeners hear all the parts of a multi-version story, they should have a deeper 
and more complete comprehension than one could get from any single part.
C H A P T E R  18

178         Valerie Geller
In America, multi-version reporting is fairly standard. It is not uncom-
mon for a news reporter on his or her way out to a story to ask the assign-
ment manager these two questions:
“When do you need it?”
“How many do you want?”
Why Multi-version?
Multi-version became popular in America in the 1980s. For years, news 
had been the venue through which most stations fulﬁ lled the majority of 
their federally mandated public service requirements. When the Federal 
Communications Commission deregulated, many of these long-standing 
rules disappeared.
Because news was expensive, many stations immediately cut their news 
staffs down to the bone. Thousands of FM stations were left with just one 
morning news reader. It became clear that if news was going to be part of com-
mercial radio at all, it would have to earn its keep by generating both audience 
and revenue, just like any other element of a station’s programming. Public 
radio has also adopted multi-version. They want to attract listeners too.
Why did they put the news back if they didn’t have to have it? Some 
stations discovered, after shaving their news departments down to nearly 
nothing, that people in the audience wanted their radio news back. They 
preferred radio as their source of news and information. When news hap-
pened and no one was around to cover it for radio, stations lost listeners 
and credibility. It is no accident that the top-rated stations in the top ﬁ fty 
American markets are news-talk. Talk programmers and hosts are grateful 
for the interested and informed audience that a successful multi-version 
newscast can bring.
The Theory of Evolution: Adapt or Die
The result is that American news is now packaged better than it was before 
deregulation. People want news, and they know how to get it. They can pick 
up a newspaper, go online, turn on CNN, or they can use their radios. Your 
station is competing with these and many other news sources. Your presen-
tation must be shorter, sharper, faster paced, and very interesting.

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         179
Let Them Know
In any market, it’s not uncommon to ﬁ nd a station proudly proclaiming—
on buses, billboards, and, if the station can afford it, TV—“If it’s happening, 
you’ll hear it here on Z-97.” Since for many stations the ﬁ ve-minute seg-
ment has been cut to three, two, or even one minute of news every half-
hour or hour, that news better be darn good radio. If your station has a 
news commitment, work hard to promote it.
What Can Multi-version Do for Me?
There is a lot of European interest in American-style multi-version report-
ing. Why? News broadcasting in Europe was historically dominated by 
public service radio. With the success of commercial stations, there is com-
petition to earn listeners with news.
The multi-version method gives a report variety. It breaks the story up 
into pieces to keep people listening longer. A good multi-version report is 
powerful radio; it prevents the audience from being bored and tuning out.
Multi-version can serve as an audience teaser enticing the listeners to 
stay tuned or come back later. For example: “Coming up in the news at ﬁ ve, 
more of our report on man-eating alligators loose in city parks. How did 
they get out?” Who would want to miss that?
Builds Local on National
Here is another way multi-version can work for you. Your local newsroom 
can now build on what national network news is sending. For example, if 
there is a big trial involving a violent gang, your local newsroom might add 
the hometown angle of that story in a multi-version format. You can promote 
that hometown angle and save some feature pieces for the next day’s morn-
ing news: “Our neighborhood schools, overrun by gangs. Join us tomorrow 
morning for part four of ‘Your Kids and Crime’ after the news at seven.”
Multi-version can also be your secret weapon against Monday morning 
“no-news” doldrums. Leaving a multi-version feature in progress guaran-
tees a few minutes of interesting material on a day when there may not be 
much happening.
Multi-version can be applied another way. When a story is going to be 
part of your news all day long, you don’t want the audience to get tired of 

 
180         Valerie Geller
it, even if the basic information isn’t changing. By rewriting lead-ins and 
changing the actualities, you can make it sound different enough to hold 
the audience’s interest.
The Method
Everyone ﬁ gures out his or her own way to do multi-version. I actually take 
four sets of notes, on paper, one for each version, before putting them into 
the computer. I like to have four versions when I begin, instead of going back 
four times to write the different versions. I plug in all the facts about the story 
on each page, and then assign each page a different angle and its own sound 
bite covering a different part of the interview. No two pieces should be the 
same. If a listener hears only one version of your report, he or she should feel 
 “satisﬁ ed,” but if listeners hear all of the parts, they should feel “full.”  Taken all 
together, the collective minutes of your multi-version reports should resemble 
an in-depth documentary piece.
In the case of a feature story, you can think of multi-version reporting as 
a miniature soap opera. Build your audience through the morning and leave 
them with a “cliff-hanger” to bring them back tomorrow. Multi-version is 
ideal for features that can be held.
For example, “Now that we’ve told you about the shocking death of the 
baby monkey, be listening tomorrow at eight as the drama of animal abuse 
at the city zoo continues to unfold.”
A caution: If you bring your audience back for a second helping, there 
must be something new and substantial in your next feature segment. Don’t 
just rearrange a few words.
Lee Harris is the morning anchor on all-news 1010 WINS in New York 
City. His job requires a constant updating of news stories. Harris offers his 
tips on the multi-version method as applied to breaking news:
While covering a news conference or other event, start writing the story in 
your head while the information is conveyed. Listen for usable cuts. Mark 
them. When you have ﬁ ve or six of them, presumably the most exciting of 
the bunch, you have the ingredients you need to produce multiple versions 
of your story.
Here’s how you can crank out three or four versions of the same  simple 
news story in a hurry: Use a lead-in, then an actuality (prerecorded 
 interview statements). In the next story, paraphrase that actuality, then use 

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         181
a new actuality. Work your way through your best audio in this fashion, 
 creating as many versions as you need, or until the story changes.
Advanced Techniques
Sometimes on a “charge and reaction” story, you can create several ver-
sions by focusing alternately on the charge, then the denial. Let us say an 
attractive, successful fashion model has mysteriously disappeared. Police 
are investigating the photographer of her last known assignment.
Story one could be an interview with the police investigator talking 
about why evidence points to the photographer. At the end of the story, 
you would mention that the photographer has hired an attorney and denies 
all charges.
Your second piece could feature an interview with the suspect’s attor-
ney talking about what an insult it is that his client is under suspicion. At 
the close of version two, mention that the police continue to investigate the 
photographer as their prime suspect.
In both stories, the information conveyed is essentially the same, but 
the stories will sound different because the narrators are so diverse in their 
voices and views.
Another multi-version technique that can give your reporting depth 
and set it apart is to brieﬂ y give the meat of your story, then focus on 
an interesting element. For example, a building with many housing code 
violations bursts into ﬂ ame. One of the ﬁ reﬁ ghters working on the blaze 
is killed. Sad as the story is, it doesn’t take long to give the hard facts. You 
have a sound bite of a resident who is sobbing that the building was a 
deathtrap.
Using that audio adds depth to your story without detracting from 
the necessary information that must be conveyed. With this technique, the 
entire story can be colorfully told in several different ways, each less than 
a minute long. Multiple versions might include sound of the reactions of 
the ﬁ reﬁ ghters, eyewitnesses, the arson investigator, and housing ofﬁ cials, 
along with a spokesperson for the Red Cross describing emergency ser-
vices available to those displaced.
If time permits, you can let the news anchor handle the hard news story and 
select one of the angles with or without an accompanying actuality. The anchor 
will then hand the story off to a reporter, who can add yet another angle with 
or without audio.

 
182         Valerie Geller
By mixing the angles and assigned introductions, still other multi-versions 
of a story can be created. If there’s not much time, the anchor can handle the 
hard facts, and the sidebar multi-versions can be done by the reporter in the 
ﬁ eld. Again, this works best if the anchor can handle the basics of the story in 
his or her lead. Remember, the key to multi-version is alternation.
Example: “A seven-year ﬁ re department veteran is dead. Twenty-six-
year-old John Jones was killed while ﬁ ghting a ﬁ re in a downtown apartment 
building this morning. The building had multiple housing code violations 
and the ﬁ re is considered suspicious.” Now that the anchor has given the 
basics, the reporter is free to do multiple versions of follow-up.
The following pages contain a few multi-versions of a single story 
about a blizzard in New York City that aired on 1010 WINS. The station 
had already broadcast reports on the trafﬁ c tie-ups, interviewed storm 
experts and city ofﬁ cials, and reported on electrical outages. In short, all 
the “hard news” on the blizzard had been reported, yet the snow still came 
down. Harris’s assignment was to get the “human angle.”
Harris went underground to one of the more central subway stations 
in Manhattan, where people were sheltering from the storm. He ﬁ led these 
four reports, which work well with all the parts together, and equally well 
with the individual pieces alone, the hallmark of a good multi-version.

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         183
New York Blizzard Multi-version One
This ﬁ rst version does not use an actuality. It just describes 
the scene.
The Columbus Circle Station is a pretty strong argument for placing the 
rest of the city underground and having New Yorkers evolve into a race of 
mole people. I mean it’s dirty and you can’t understand the announcements, 
but at least there’s no slipping and sliding down here, because there’s no 
snow down here. About the only hint of the weather above is that a lot of 
folks are dressed in clothing usually associated with Arctic exploration. 
But nobody looks any more testy or miserable than they usually do.
Lee Harris, 1010 WINS, at the Columbus Circle Station.
New York Blizzard Multi-version Two
Lee uses a quote here, but the woman is difﬁ cult to understand, 
so he repeats her statement and leaves it in the report.
Well, there’s no snow down here in the Columbus Circle Station. In fact, 
there’s very little indication of the situation topside at all, other than the arctic-
explorer look favored by many of the commuters this morning, and the 
above-average number of homeless people who came down to get out of the 
storm. This 35-year-old woman says she actually likes this kind of weather 
because it tends to make people more generous, and she needs the help:
WOMAN: I’m off the streets and I’m eight months pregnant. Welfare’s 
ﬁ nding me a place pretty soon.
HARRIS: You are eight months pregnant and you slept on the street 
last night?
WOMAN: I sleep on the street, that’s right.
HARRIS: And she says she slept on the street the last time she was 
pregnant.
Lee Harris, 1010 WINS, at the Columbus Circle Station.

 
184         Valerie Geller
 
New York Blizzard Multi-version Three
Well, on top of everything else, the weather is apparently making a bad 
impression on some of our foreign visitors. This businessman from Hong 
Kong just doesn’t see the charm in having his ﬂ ight delayed thirty-six hours, 
and waiting almost that long to get a cab.
MAN: Well, it’s interesting. But it’s not . . . very impressive.
HARRIS: Oh, uh, I suppose the weather is better in Hong Kong?
MAN: Well we are having a tropical climate over in Hong Kong. 
So hot, wet, wintertime you are up to like 50 to 60 degrees!
HARRIS: That’s OK if you like being comfortable. And that sort 
of thing.
Lee Harris, 1010 WINS, at the cab line at the Sheraton, New York.
New York Blizzard Multi-version Four
We’re back at the subway station with the woman who’s pregnant 
and homeless.
One of the reasons the subway was put below ground was to make it 
impervious to days like today. And below ground it looks like just another 
day. Including the usual contingent of people who call the subway home 
night after night. This woman says she’s been homeless for eight years, but 
weather like this has its advantages.
WOMAN: Even though it’s colder, street people have a tendency to be 
more friendlier—if it’s snowing, if you’re homeless. And they do help you 
out more than when the weather’s nicer.
HARRIS: By the way, that woman claims to be, and appears to be, eight 
months pregnant.
WOMAN: With my last kid, I slept on the street also.
Lee Harris, 1010 WINS, in the Columbus Circle Station.

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         185
Fitting It All In
Most news professionals have found individual ways to make their news 
fascinating and brief, yet thorough. If you have written news for broadcast, 
you know how much harder it is to write short.
An expert at the craft is CBS News Anchor Jim Chenevey. Chenevey’s 
talent is understanding that you cannot explain every detail of a story. He 
wrote and anchored eight newscasts per morning. Each averaged ﬁ ve or six 
stories, a kicker of some type, plus a piece of sound, all in one minute. His 
advice to newswriters and anchors: “Cut out extra words, write the piece, 
then go back and CUT.” Chenevey is a master of the six-word story: “Guess 
who turns eighty? Hugh Hefner.”
Jim uses the culture for material. His style is conversational. He varies 
the tape and rotates the good stories, just as is done with the music in music 
formats.
Chenevey includes “A,” “B,” and “C” stories in each cast, varying the 
rest. He adds the new, breaking stories into the mix but uses multi-versions 
of the ones that will run all morning. The best way to illustrate this is to 
actually show you his scripts that he read over the course of one morning.
The newscasts on the following pages aired years ago. While the copy 
is dated, you can still pick up the basics of multi-version methodology from 
the Chenevey news scripts. 

 
186         Valerie Geller
CBS Spectrum 
Chenevey Newscast 
6:00 AM
Good morning. This is a CBS Newsbrief. 
The Toronto Blue Jays have won the American League pennant . . .
‘. . . It was a tough year and they came through for us . . .’
One of the ecstatic Toronto fans. The Jays will play either Philly or 
Atlanta in the World Series beginning Saturday night.
Bell Atlantic has scheduled a news conference this morning, 
reportedly to announce it’s agreed to buy Tele-Communications 
Incorporated, the nation’s largest cable TV outlet. This would cre-
ate a mega-media company, number six on the Fortune 500.
President Clinton has cleared 65 million dollars in emergency 
funds to help ﬁ ght public health problems resulting from the 
ﬂ ooding in the Midwest.
In Sydney, Australia, a twin-engine cargo plane crashed after 
hitting two kangaroos on the runway. No one was hurt.
In Concord, California, voters will cast ballots for or against a 
school voucher program. But one group plans to cast spells. A 
coven of witches wants to open a pagan school under the voucher 
program and hopes to whip up some votes with a little black 
magic.
From CBS News, I’m Jim Chenevey.

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         187
CBS Spectrum 
Chenevey Newscast 
6:30 AM
Good morning. Here’s a CBS Newsbrief.
Two more Americans are Nobel Prize winners. Russell Hulse and 
Joseph Taylor of Princeton have won the prize for their studies of 
gravity. Doctor Taylor I presume?
‘. . . It certainly is a great honor and it’s a very humbling one.’
Bell Atlantic reportedly wants to buy Tele-Communications 
Incorporated, the nation’s biggest cable company. The deal would 
create a sixty-billion-dollar media giant.
Toronto has won the American League pennant, beating Chicago 
last night six to three to take that series four games to two.
Several students at Oakland University in suburban Detroit are 
being tested for HIV. They were not informed that a lab they were 
using was also being used for AIDS research, utilizing a live virus. 
So far, none has tested positive.
Police in Schenectady, New York, are looking for a few good 
“Johns”—men who would be willing to hit the streets looking for 
sex, as part of an undercover prostitution investigation.
From CBS News, I’m Jim Chenevey.

 
188         Valerie Geller
CBS Spectrum 
Chenevey Newscast 
7:00 AM
Good morning. Here’s a CBS Newsbrief.
A “monster merger” is in the works. It could be the biggest ever:
‘. . . Bell Atlantic Corporation, Tele-Communications Incorporated, 
and Liberty Media Corporation today announced that they have 
signed a letter of intent to merge.’
She’s with Bell Atlantic. If approved, the deal would create a sixty-
 billion-dollar multimedia giant. Number six in the Fortune 500.
American scientists Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor of 
Princeton University have won the Nobel Prize in physics. This 
for their work on the study of pulsars and Einstein’s theories. 
Relatively speaking …
Toronto has won the American League pennant, beating Chicago 
last night to win the series in six games.
Fire ofﬁ cials in Austin, Texas, say three recent ﬁ res were set by kids 
who say they got the idea from MTV’s “Beavis and Butt-head” 
cartoon.
The mayor of New Haven, Connecticut, says it felt like a bee sting, 
but it was a bullet that hit him in the leg. Police say it went through 
two steel doors and a wall before it bounced off Mayor Losure’s 
leg. He’s OK.
From CBS News, I’m Jim Chenevey.

Creating Powerful Radio: Multi-version News         189
CBS Spectrum 
Chenevey Newscast 
7:30 AM
Good morning. Here’s a CBS Newsbrief.
Bell Atlantic has announced a major merger. It plans to buy cable 
giant Tele-Communications Incorporated and its Liberty Media 
subsidiary.
Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor, both of Princeton University, 
have won the 1993 Nobel Physics prize for their studies on 
Einstein’s theories.
Some students at Oakland University in suburban Detroit are 
upset about not being informed that a lab they were using was also 
home to AIDS research using a live virus …
‘. . .  We have absolutely no indication that any of these students were 
exposed, however we are discussing this matter with the students to 
alleviate their concerns.’
The school’s David Dissen.
Rats are nothing new to ships, but this ship is the space shuttle 
Columbia. Forty-eight rats are now on board the orbiter, preparing 
for tomorrow’s scheduled launch.
Deputies in Citrus County, Florida, were chasing Daniel Benock, 
wanted on a probation violation, when Benock jumped into a lake 
and tried to swim to freedom—That was until he saw a seven-foot 
alligator ﬂ oating nearby. He’s now in jail. Glad to be there.
From CBS News, I’m Jim Chenevey.

 
190         Valerie Geller
CBS Spectrum 
Chenevey Newscast 
8:00 AM
Good morning. Here’s a CBS Newsbrief.
Somali warlord Mohammed Farah Adid has today vowed to 
release captured U.S. pilot Michael Durant and a Nigerian peace-
keeper. Adid says the two hostages will be released today or 
tomorrow.
The Philadelphia Phillies will take on Toronto’s Blue Jays in the 
World Series beginning Saturday night. The Phillies beating the 
Braves six to three last night to win the National League pennant. 
Phillies manager Jim Fregosi:
‘. . . I guess we’re going to be the underdogs again. It’s not a bad way 
to go.’
The space shuttle’s fueled, and so far all systems are go for the 
launch later this morning.
The Rite-Aid and Revco drugstore chains are expected to 
announce today they’re suing several drug makers for alleged 
price-ﬁ xing.
Quite a scene during a radio debate featuring Nylo Yuri, a can-
didate for mayor of Hialeah, Florida, and suspended incumbent 
mayor Raul Martinet. Yuri claims that during the debate, Martinet 
stood up and spat at him. Martinet says he was just blowing. A 
third candidate, Salvatore De Angelos, says it was all very 
embarrassing.
From CBS News, I’m Jim Chenevey.

191
Creating Powerful Radio 
 Integrating Radio and TV News
“The business of every art is to bring something into existence.”
 
— Aristotle
Every TV news director I work with says the same thing: “Our best people 
come from radio.” That’s because radio people know how to communicate, 
tell stories, and spontaneously improvise.
Smart broadcasters use TV for what it does best, presenting pictures 
to show events as they happen. Radio is great training if you want to 
make the move to television. Many broadcasters have found they enjoy 
doing both, and a lot of TV people look back wistfully, remembering 
their days in radio as their happiest, when they did their best work.
Radio broadcasters are often curious about working with pictures and 
would like to give television a try. I’m seeing more and more TV and radio 
newsrooms around the world moving toward combining their efforts into 
an integrated product. In Europe, they call it “bi-media.” Bi-media, or com-
bined newsrooms, started as a cost-cutting measure, but it can be beneﬁ cial 
overall. When a TV and radio station are under the same roof, or even on 
the same ﬂ oor, it makes little sense to send two sets of reporters to the 
C H A P T E R  19

same press conferences, the same ﬁ re stories, and to interview the same 
local ﬁ gures or celebrities.
“A Face for Radio?”
Talented radio people can and do make it on television. Radio broadcast-
ers should take it upon themselves to do as much as possible not to discour-
age television stations from utilizing them. If your radio station is often a 
source for TV footage, always be ready to make an appearance. The audi-
ence no longer expects their TV news to be delivered by people who look 
like movie stars. A small amount of coaching, grooming, and effort may 
be all it takes to convert a successful radio talent into a shining television 
personality.
Producing the Pink Elephant
A lot of TV interview, discussion, or “talking head” programs are really just 
talk radio shows with cameras pointed at them. Managers can enhance the 
level of creativity for personalities doing these types of shows by allowing 
them to work in both media. Talented TV people can be taught to speak 
“visually” for radio reports.
Radio people can be taught to leave space in their writing for pictures. 
A good assignment manager for either TV or radio can decide which stories 
ﬁ t best with either medium. There’s another great beneﬁ t in using reporters 
who work in both media: TV and radio can promote each other, increasing 
visibility and audience.
CNN (Cable News Network) was ﬁ rst to try the all-news radio format 
on TV. CNN hired a lot of radio reporters. They worked cheaper, and they 
had the necessary skills. CNN realized that the basics for both radio and 
television are the same: You must tell an interesting story in a fascinating way. 
Each medium has assets and drawbacks. On radio, if you want to talk about 
a pink elephant, all you need to do is describe one and people “see” it. On 
television, if you want to talk about a pink elephant, you must  actually 
produce one.
In the early days of television, reporters and hosts alike had back-
grounds in either print or radio. Where is it written that broadcasters 
cannot be great at both TV and radio? Here are some techniques that we 
192         Valerie Geller

use at Geller Media International to help make the transition from TV 
news to radio news easier.
From TV to Radio
1. When on radio, speak visually. Paint word pictures. Don’t refer to 
pictures—the audience can’t see them. Use details, small things that 
you notice.
2. If you are stuck for a way to begin a report, pretend the anchor has 
just asked you a question or write the question into your report: 
“Why are six hundred nursing mothers converging on a small the-
ater in suburban San Francisco? To get into the Guinness Book of 
World Records—it’s the Third Annual Nurse-in.”
3. Use TV to promote radio and radio to promote TV. On morning or 
“breakfast” TV shows, try saying, “When you get in your car on your 
way to work this morning, don’t miss the interview coming up on 
Z-97. The mayor, his mistress, his wife, and his mother will all be on 
live with host Jim Smiley.”
4. It’s OK to promote your TV news coming up on the radio. Most 
people now in their cars will be checking out the pictures tonight on 
the TV news anyway. Why not send them to your channel?
5. Whether on radio or TV, promote within your programming. Let 
your audience know what is coming up next. Tease them with excit-
ing tidbits about upcoming stories so they stay with you.
6. Use TV anchors and special reporters as regulars on radio shows. 
They get a chance to express themselves as people instead of stick-
ing to a tight script. Conversely, television viewers are often curious 
to see what their favorite radio personalities look like. At many sta-
tions, the meteorologist, the sports guys, and the trafﬁ c reporter all 
do both radio and TV. If you have talent, that is all that matters. If 
someone has talent, he or she can make it on radio or on TV.
7. Even though you can hear most radio stations over the Internet, 
people are often busy at their computers doing other work. Make 
sure there is a radio monitor that comes in clearly in your  television 
newsroom so the reporters can actually hear themselves on the air.
8.  Use multi-version. We’ve covered this for radio (see Chapter 18), but 
it’s an important tool in television as well. Remember, you may need
Creating Powerful Radio: Integrating Radio and TV News         193

 
  extra footage and additional comments. Use details and small 
things you notice.
 9.  Remind the audience how the story affects them, whenever pos-
sible. Try to present a solution to every problem when you can.
10.  Remember to make it matter. Ask yourself: “Why is it important?” 
Make sure your story explains.
From Radio to TV
Consultant John Catchings’s background includes both radio and televi-
sion. He managed newsrooms at KGO-TV and KPIX-TV in San Francisco. 
Catchings is a brilliant problem solver, never taking “it can’t be done” for 
an answer. I asked him to contribute some of his ideas to help radio people 
create powerful television news:
■ Play to the visual. You witnessed it, but the photographer missed it! 
Never assume that because you saw it with your own eyes, the picture 
was taken. Look at what the camera is capturing. Do this while you 
are on a story. Do not wait until you are back at the studio editing 
to realize you do not have the right shots. It is better to make your 
photographer mad at you than your news director—or worse, not do 
your best for the story.
■ Start with the best video. Be the director of your piece and use your 
best pictures. Avoid the temptation to start the story with a stand-up 
shot.
■ Put movement into each shot. Do not be a human mic stand! Be 
involved in your shot. Choreograph the shot, be engaged, demonstrate 
your points. Keep it moving forward. Walk around, move, point.
■ Let the pictures tell the story, but let the story breathe. Do not 
allow it to become boring. Watch for length.
■ Make good use of natural sound.
■ Do not overwrite.
■ Use graphics, charts, and your own imagination to jazz up less 
 interesting stories.
194         Valerie Geller

■  When you edit, do not hang on too long to the good shots. It’s 
tempting, but keep it moving. Be creative.
■  The essence is storytelling. Never forget that. Do what it takes to tell 
the story.
Grab the Spotlight
Money can’t buy happiness, but it can buy TV exposure. If you can afford 
it, purchase commercials to advertise your radio station on TV. A TV ad 
campaign is expensive, but if it draws in new listeners and brings higher 
ratings, it is worth it.
Still the most time honored use by American radio of American televi-
sion is and has always been the free “plug” or mention on the air. Get all 
the free TV publicity you can! Do things on your radio station that are 
newsworthy and attention-getting, and the TV stations will come knocking 
on your studio door. When they come in, make sure they see your call let-
ters. American radio stations learned the “mic ﬂ ag” trick long ago. Mic ﬂ ags 
are designed with television coverage in mind.
When your station is taking calls from listeners on issues of the day, it 
makes a good TV “public opinion” story. Many TV assignment managers 
have learned to send a reporter and camera in to tape live radio talk shows 
for multi-versions of hot news stories. Radio managers, don’t be shy. Call 
up the TV stations in town when a particularly controversial or important 
subject is being discussed on your airwaves, especially if TV coverage on 
the story has been intense. You will ﬁ nd more about promoting your radio 
station on TV in Chapter 23, Promotions, of this book.
Benefit from All Information Media
People do not make distinctions about where they get their news. Television, 
radio, and the Internet are all part of their information network. Broadcasters 
should take a lesson from our audience and eliminate the barriers that 
keep us from using our resources to bring listeners and viewers the most 
compelling product we can produce.
Creating Powerful Radio: Integrating Radio and TV News         195

 
196         Valerie Geller
Be generous with your airtime. If a TV station in your community has 
done something worthwhile, there is no reason for a local radio station not 
to mention it. If a radio station has made a contribution to the local com-
munity, then the local TV station should cover it. Anything that enhances 
the idea of your station as a “good neighbor” is useful  promotion.

197
Creating Powerful Radio 
Public Service Announcements
“Artists who live and work with spiritual values cannot and should 
not remain indifferent to a conﬂ ict in which the highest 
values of humanity and civilization are at stake.”
 
— Pablo Picasso
“It is better to give than to receive.”
 
— Acts 20:35
It’s generally understood that radio stations are licensed to serve the pub-
lic. It can be radio at its best, or worst. In Europe, as well as in the United 
States, some radio stations exist entirely to perform public service, but what 
that means is open to interpretation. Most stations continue to solicit input 
from the community to determine its needs. These information-gathering 
efforts are called ascertainments.
Smart commercial broadcasters know that assessing the true concerns 
of a community and addressing those issues can enhance a station’s image 
and raise its public proﬁ le. Public service works best when the entire sta-
tion is involved and the campaign is tied in to news, features, sponsor-
ships, announcements, liners, and long-form programming to achieve a 
speciﬁ c goal.
C H A P T E R  20

198         Valerie Geller
Fit Your Public Service to Your Target Audience
Let us say your target audience is adults twenty-ﬁ ve to ﬁ fty-four years old 
and you discover that their principal worry about their community is the 
school system. Your station might “adopt” a local school. Your promotions 
department, sales department, and even programming can put together a 
campaign to bring in volunteers, supplies, money, computers, and so on. 
Teenage listeners might have different concerns about their community. 
When you are deciding on content for your public service campaigns, try to 
ﬁ nd issues that not only are of importance to your listeners, but that also ﬁ t 
your target audience.
“Community service activities can be of tremendous beneﬁ t toward 
developing listener loyalty,” says broadcasting manager Chris Berry. Here 
are some examples: WBBM-AM/Chicago, runs the “Wreath of Hope” 
campaign every year to raise money for a variety of local nonproﬁ t agen-
cies. The show’s hosts broadcast live from shopping centers around the 
area while volunteers accept donations for the charities. Heavily pro-
moted on air, the appearances help the charities, increase awareness of 
the station’s personalities, and bring the call letters into the listeners’ 
backyards.
At KGO/San Francisco, an entire programming day each year has been 
devoted to the “Leukemia Cure-a-thon.” It raises money for research and 
victims of the disease. Producers and hosts design shows explaining the 
 illness, the latest research ﬁ ndings, and the need for funding.
KGO’s sister station, WLS/Chicago, has been holding its Cure-a-thon 
in a public place so listeners and organization volunteers can feel that 
they are a part of the event and meet their favorite personalities. Doctors, 
researchers, survivors, and families of victims are interviewed. The Cure-
a-thon always has some very moving moments as family members describe 
the struggles of their loved ones. This special public service programming 
raises hundreds of thousands of dollars and the staff really feels good about 
participating.
WABC/New York is among many stations helping listeners ﬁ ght fraud 
and wrongdoing by directly connecting them with attorneys or volunteer 
agencies such as Call for Action. Aggrieved listeners can call a volunteer-
staffed consumer line with their complaints. The station then uses its ﬁ re-
power and contacts the business, employer, or other parties involved on the 
listener’s behalf. They usually get results.

Creating Powerful Radio: Public Service Announcements         199
Years ago KFWB/Los Angeles made earthquake preparedness its 
issue. Entire broadcast days were turned over to reports and inter-
view shows devoted to earthquake safety. The station published a free 
newsletter outlining everything from safety precautions to earthquake-
prooﬁ ng. The pamphlets were available free from the station or at spon-
sors’ stores. Several stations in earthquake-prone areas have launched 
similar campaigns.
Take advantage of your staff’s creativity. One way to encourage hosts 
to support your public service commitment is to have them come up with 
their own ideas for a promotion. Sam Walton, who founded the Wal-Mart 
chain of stores, said, “People always support ideas they help create.” Most 
hosts already have a “pet” charity or cause they feel connected to or would 
like to endorse. If your host feels the organization or issue is important, he 
or she can really get listeners excited about joining it.
The key to community service is to approach it like all other forms of pow-
erful radio. Powerful public service programming is interesting and relatable, 
and it matters. Bad public service programming is wasted airtime. Nobody will 
hear about your good efforts if the presentation on the air is boring.
Include public service events on your daily or weekly calendar. Hold 
up the mirror that is your station and reﬂ ect back the true needs and con-
cerns of your community. Be known as the station that always has some-
thing going on. Radio executive and station owner Virgina Morris says she 
would not even consider hiring a manager who was not involved in the 
community—that is how strongly she feels strongly about it.
Local or Not?
There is no wrong way to do good work. Local concerns or issues usually 
work better, but stations that raise money for food drops in Africa or medi-
cal supplies in Bosnia also create good feelings.
Since the Internet makes it possible to see extreme emergencies and 
disasters around the world, stations can easily get involved in helping peo-
ple in their town or on another continent. Whether your station is sending 
a truck full of supplies to hurricane victims ten states away or rebuilding a 
home for a burned-out family on the next block, you can use your station’s 
Web site as well as its airtime to show need, organize help, and chart the 
difference your support has made. There are no rules here, but by ﬁ nding a 

 
200         Valerie Geller
charity or cause about which your staff feels passionate, you’ll do both your 
community and your station some good.
The Powerful Public Service Announcement
Most people hate “PSAs,” and with good reason. They’ve traditionally been 
used as ﬁ ller and treated that way. This need not and should not be. Every 
moment on the radio counts, even those devoted to public service. Here are 
two public service announcements on the same subject. They were heard 
within minutes of each other on different stations in the same market.
Which do you think is more powerful?
 
Station 1
St. John’s Hospital needs type O blood. If you are type O, here’s the phone 
number to call …
 
Station 2
There’s a little girl, six years old, who’s been badly hurt in a car crash. 
Both of her parents were killed. She’s lying in a bed right now at St. John’s 
Hospital ﬁ ghting for her life. She might not make it, because she needs 
type O blood and the hospital has a shortage. If you’re type O and want to 
help this little girl live, call us here at Z-97, and we’ll tell you what to do. 
Z-97, the station that cares about our town.
If you can bring life to the story, your listeners will care about it, too.
You’ll probably want to shy away from “produced” PSAs provided 
by outside agencies, unless they are great campaigns. For samples of some 
classics, you might want to listen to some of Dick Orkin’s Radio Ranch 
spots or vintage Stan Freberg. If you can customize a campaign to make it 
sound like part of your station, you can make it work.
By being selective about the kind of public service announcements you 
use on your station, and by adding human and dramatic touches, you will 
turn what has long been perceived as a “tune-out” into an audience and 
image builder for your station.

201
Creating Powerful Radio 
Avoiding Burnout
“What was any art but a mold in which to imprison 
for a moment, the shining elusive element which 
is life itself—life hurrying past us and running 
away, too strong to stop, too sweet to lose.”
—Willa Cather
In your quest to create powerful radio, it is important to look at what can 
move radio forward, as well as to understand what can hold Powerful 
Radio back. This is why creative burnout is worth talking about. Burnout 
is an occupational hazard that sometimes happens to a performer under 
the daily demand of public scrutiny and constant pressure for consistently 
original output. While burnout can be a type of exhaustion, or energy drain, 
it is different from genuine clinical depression. While burnout can lead to a 
performer becoming depressed, the good news is that it can also be ﬁ xed.
Talent
How can you tell when talented people are suffering from burnout? They 
complain, they call in sick, they are late for work. Ideas don’t come to them 
C H A P T E R  21

202         Valerie Geller

Creating Powerful Radio: Avoiding Burnout         203
as easily. They watch the clock, counting the minutes until the end of their 
shifts. They fear the blank page and begin to rely on other people’s ideas 
more than their own. They want more guests, interviews, and “easy” stuff. 
Their shows aren’t as good as they used to be, and they just don’t seem too 
excited anymore.
Managers
Exhaustion can lead to burnout for managers as well as on air and produc-
ing talent. For economic reasons, many broadcast companies’ resources have 
been stretched thin, making it necessary for individual managers to take on 
more and more responsibility. Even with improved time-management skills, 
many frustrated managers still feel overloaded with too much to do in a day. 
Unless companies provide realistic goals for managers, they can burn out as 
well.
Battling Burnout
When I wanted to learn more about ways to deal with creative burnout, 
I hosted a dinner party. Invited guests included actors, artists, a psychol-
ogist, a singer-songwriter, a ﬁ lm director, a textile designer, an architect, 
and some radio and TV people. Everyone in attendance made his or her 
living by facing the blank page and ﬁ nding things to ﬁ ll it. What did they 
do when the ideas stopped ﬂ owing? I gave everyone a pencil and paper. 
They began to write, talk, and argue. The following is what emerged.
Lower your expectations
No one is at his or her most creative all the time. Now may be the time to 
tap into the creativity of those around you. If your ﬁ re is burning low, try to 
rekindle your spirit and your ideas at the ﬁ res of others.
Are you doing the right work for you, right now?
Determine what you enjoy about what you do. If the list is short, it may 
be time to rethink your job and ﬁ nd something else. As scary as change 

 
204         Valerie Geller
can be, it’s better to make the switch than burn out in a job that’s not right 
for you.
Artists, on the radio or elsewhere, need the right environment to grow. 
Managers need to understand that creative people are sensitive, introspec-
tive, and insecure. Talent needs to understand that since you don’t come 
with a list of “care and feeding” instructions, open communication with 
management is critical. Supervisors who don’t take this into account will 
contribute to burnout.
Live a balanced life
It is easy to become driven to accomplish in this career and lose perspec-
tive on the rest of your life. Remember, you can love radio, but radio will 
not love you back.
Do not become your work. Do other things that make you feel good 
and give you a sense of accomplishment. Create a balance in your life. 
Burnout occurs when you can no longer grow as a person. Don’t let 
that happen. Challenge yourself to do new things outside of work.
Avoid energy vampires
You know the type, people who seem to suck the life right out of you by 
overwhelming you with their problems. Surround yourself with people who 
nourish you, who give, not just take.
Nourish your brain
Look at art. Go to a movie or attend the theater. Read. Talk to your kids. 
If you don’t have kids, talk to someone else’s or browse children’s books. 
Play. Get out that set of watercolor paints in the closet and make some 
art. Listen to music. Try gardening. 
Do something, anything, that will stimulate your own creativity and 
sustain you, even if you are not “in the mood right now.”
Be inspired by reading
Take advantage of the plethora of books that inspire creativity. Important 
books for me include Julia Cameron’s The Artist’s Way and Vein of Gold, 

Creating Powerful Radio: Avoiding Burnout         205
and Anne LaMott’s Bird by Bird.  You can also ask a friend to recommend 
a biography or favorite book that might inspire you.
Do what you want
On the air, whenever possible, follow your heart. Give others assignments 
that you don’t particularly care about. Stick to what interests and matters 
to you. Look at what really makes you feel energized and passionate about 
life. Do those things. You’ll minimize the risk of burning out if you maintain 
the integrity of your show.
Remember why you came
Rediscover your professional and personal roots. Take a look at what moti-
vated you at the beginning of your career. What got you interested in doing 
this work in the ﬁ rst place? Why did you like being on the radio in the 
beginning? Why was it fun? Remember what led you down this long and 
winding road.
Take a break
The root of the word vacation is “vacate,” to leave. Take some time away; 
a day, a week, a month, a year. You may just need a brief change of pace in 
order to get new input, have experiences, meet new people. Do  something 
that will break the monotony of your daily routine and put it back in 
 perspective.
Focus on the positive
One station manager found that the right attitude can make a big differ-
ence and set a good example for the staff: 
I could easily become consumed by budget constraints, destructive corpo-
rate directives, any number of distractions, and the ever-decreasing amount 
of decision-making latitude I have as a PD. But I try to stay focused on the 
positive elements of my job: I have the rare luxury of a large and talented 
staff to work with and we are still the number one station in this commu-
nity. The way to survive is to stay focused on the positive.

 
206         Valerie Geller
Managing against Burnout
Program directors and other managers of artists and broadcasters have a 
special responsibility to guard against talent burnout. Radio Sales Analyst 
offered some worthwhile suggestions in this area under the heading 
“Principles of Motivation”:
■  The employee’s behavior is functionally related to the way you 
treat them.
■ People don’t resist their own ideas.
■ People will live up (or down) to your expectations of them.
■ You must know the individuals you are trying to motivate.
■ People will change only when they think they have to.
■ Productive activity that is ignored will tend to decrease over time.
■ Achievement and recognition are the top motivators at all levels.
Get a Life
The life of a performer is not always easy. A lack of stability can cause anxi-
ety that can lead to burnout. Singer-songwriter Christine Lavin has lived 
through the ups and downs of the performer’s life and offers this advice on 
what it takes to make it in a creative profession when times are tough: 
There is no dignity in starving. If you are not presently making enough 
money to support yourself with your [work], get a day job that will pay the 
bills while you work on your craft at night and on weekends.
Lavin worked temporary jobs for years while performing on weekends. 
Her ﬁ nal words of wisdom, “Don’t borrow money if you can help it.”
Lavin’s experience is especially applicable for radio performers. 
Weekends are often the easiest route to getting on the air, trying out in a 
new format, or working with new partners on the air. Weekend shifts will 
not interfere with your “day job,” whether you have one in radio or an 
entirely different ﬁ eld.

Creating Powerful Radio: Avoiding Burnout         207
The Radio Life Can Be “Rootless”
If you have been in the business for any length of time, you may have heard 
some variation on the following:
“The only job security is the ability to ‘secure’ another job.”
“Radio is like winning a video game. If you win, you get to play 
another round.”
“You can always tell how well a broadcaster is doing by the size 
of the U-Haul trailer behind his car.”
As you may be aware, commercial radio in the United States is not the 
most stable of careers. Often, you must move to a new city to have a chance 
to move up. You might ﬁ nd yourself out of a job at any time for just about 
any reason.
This insecurity adds stress and havoc to the already fragile life of the 
radio artist. A sense of humor helps, but some broadcasters can’t take it 
and ﬁ nd other work. It follows that making your job a bit more secure 
would cut down on some of the stress-related burnout.
Writer, editor, reporter, and broadcast journalist Sheri Inglis warns: 
“To pursue a career in radio and live to tell about it, be a whole person, not 
just a radio or TV person.” The following are Sheri’s ideas for people who 
“want to work in broadcasting and survive.”
■ Look for a career in radio as you would a marriage partner. Don’t 
get in because you think you can live with it. Get in only if you feel 
you can’t live without it.
■ Diversify! This is the single most important key to surviving the 
long haul in radio. Someone told me when I ﬁ rst began my career, 
“There ain’t no gold watch in this business.” Aside from a few rare 
exceptions, that is true. Resist the temptation to launch headlong 
into an “exciting career” as a disc jockey, talk host, news reporter or 
anchor, etc., and leave it at that.
  While you’re pursuing your radio career, also learn and grow 
another professional skill. Whether it is public relations, marketing, 
script writing, real estate sales, ﬂ ower arranging, court reporting, or 
giving scuba lessons, you need something else to fall back on. I don’t 
know of a single radio veteran who hasn’t nursed a bruised ego at 

 
208         Valerie Geller
least a few times following an ownership change, budget cut, format 
shift, or political fall from grace.
  Pursuing a second career admittedly takes extraordinary 
 determination, but you’ll save yourself and your family added 
 ﬁ nancial devastation if you have a backup plan up and running. 
By not putting all of your “eggs in one basket,” you also empower 
yourself to move on and, often, up in your radio career rather than 
simply accepting a bad or unchallenging situation out of fear of 
unemployment.
■ Be prepared. Always have your résumé and updated demo materi-
als ready at all times, no matter how happy or popular you are in 
your present gig. New opportunities will often arise on short notice.
■ Don’t get involved in station gossip or politics. You increase your 
chances of being spared through ratings dips and managerial 
changes if you keep your mouth shut and your nose clean.
■ Keep a good attitude about the station. No matter how messed up 
things are, avoid complaining to management or coworkers. Be very 
selective about the battles you want to ﬁ ght, then ﬁ ght them with 
the highest level of dignity, professionalism, and maturity possible. 
If you are unhappy at a given station, move on.

209
Creating Powerful Radio 
Airchecking
“No one can make you feel inferior without your consent.”
 
—Eleanor Roosevelt
The Aircheck Session
Talent Is Hungry for Feedback
“Management rarely fails to let me know when I screw up, do something 
wrong, or make a mistake, but then they can’t seem to tell me what to 
do to get it right.” This is a typical complaint I hear all the time from on 
air talent throughout the world. Surprisingly, hosts often hire me at their 
own expense to conduct aircheck sessions with them, craving direction that 
their program directors cannot or do not have time to give.
Airchecking is more than just a show critique. One-on-one coach-
ing, or airchecking, is a speciﬁ c, focused way of working. It is not the 
only tool that can be used to develop, improve, and advance talent, but 
it is the best one. Airchecking is the process of listening to a show and, 
C H A P T E R  22

210         Valerie Geller
using speciﬁ c criteria, determining what worked and what did not work. 
With a guide, airchecker, coach, or PD as your witness, you then decide 
what can be improved.
Even if you listen to archived audio of your shows religiously, you are 
likely to miss many nuances of the total performance. One air talent I work 
with says, “When I listen alone, I focus on how I did. I get critical of just 
me, not how the whole show went. When I listen with other people in the 
room, I focus on everything that is happening on the air: the guest being 
interviewed, sound effects, callers, and audio quality. I hear it all.”
It can’t be helped. Think of your school or family group photos. When 
you see one, the ﬁ rst thing you do is look at yourself. It is the same in radio. 
The natural thing is to pay attention to how you made a certain point or 
handled a particular caller. You are less likely to be aware of the subtleties 
of that caller’s comments or the newsperson’s clever contribution. There 
is something about listening to your show with a witness in the room that 
forces you to hear your work differently. Airchecking should be done in 
such a way that each talent sets achievable goals to fulﬁ ll his or her creative 
potential.
The Mirror
Talent, if you do not know what you sound like on the air, you are already 
in the danger zone. You are working with a handicap. Watch a child play 
by making faces in a mirror: “What do I look like if I’m mad?” “What do I 
look like with my tongue out?” “Can I see myself from the back?”
Airchecking is like a mirror. It allows you to determine the answers to 
the following: “How do I sound when I am sad or angry? How do I behave 
with a difﬁ cult guest? What happens when I try to sound smarter than my 
partner? Am I smarter than my partner? What happens when I pretend to 
know something about a topic I know nothing about? What happens when 
I’m bored on the air? How do I sound if I didn’t get enough sleep? What 
kind of a show will I have if I have not been out of my house in a month 
except to go to work?”
Your audience knows, but without your aircheck as a mirror, you do 
not. Sitting alone with and listening to your show is like a single mirror. 
Working with a talented aircheck coach can give you multiple reﬂ ections 
of your work. There are other angles you cannot see with only one frame 
of reference. Viewing those other angles is the power of a good aircheck 
session.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         211
What Exactly Is an Aircheck?
That depends. One New York DJ deﬁ nes an aircheck session as “a way for 
the program director to yell at us periodically.” Says another: “Isn’t it like a 
report card?” From a manager: “Oh yes, we do that once a year with talent. 
We analyze audio of a past show. The meeting takes an entire day. You can 
read the report in their ﬁ le.” And one industry professional simply asked: 
“Isn’t it some kind of postmortem after a dead show?”
These comments all have a grain or two of truth, but try thinking of 
your show as a garden and airchecking the show as a weeding process. 
In order to maintain its health, growth, and beauty, you should regularly 
walk through your garden and take note of which plants are thriving and 
which need attention. Some parts of the garden ﬂ ourish, some struggle 
to survive. But always you check to make sure your plants have the right 
sun, soil, etc. Your aircheck is like that walk to see how well your garden is 
coming along.
When done correctly, airchecking can be a solution to the dilemma fac-
ing managers and programmers around the world who complain: “I can’t 
ﬁ nd any good talent. I’ve listened to dozens of on-air auditions and shows 
and they are all bad or mediocre.” Or, “This is a good station in a reason-
ably sized market, and the job pays a decent salary. Why can’t we ﬁ nd the 
right people?”
Exactly where are all those talented and creative people hiding? Where 
is the next generation of talent? You may get lucky and ﬁ nd a genius on the 
doorstep of your radio station, but one important task of radio program-
mers and managers is to ﬁ nd and develop new personalities.
Anyone who has done it knows that it is hard work to develop on air 
personalities. Often it is less expensive and easier for stations to broadcast 
a syndicated national or network show than to have live, local talent on 
the air. But it is important to note that most syndicated programs were 
once local success stories. That is another reason it is important to work to 
develop new local talent now.
Even the strongest syndicated shows can be beaten by hot local talent. 
But looking to the future, what will stations do once today’s syndicated 
shows run dry or move to television? Airchecking and developing 
talented people is one way to ensure that creative and powerful radio 
will continue.

 
212         Valerie Geller
“One must be permitted to be clumsy and fail.”
—May Sarton
Basic Aircheck Rules
1. Always work from the audio of the show you are discussing. You 
may wish to transcribe it word for word to emphasize speciﬁ cs. Keep in 
mind that a transcript can destroy context. Sarcasm, irony, and humor can 
all get left behind with the loss of vocal inﬂ ection. This often happens when 
a manager receives a nasty call or complaint letter with speciﬁ c quotes 
included. Inevitably the context is missing. A discussion can degenerate 
quickly if the actual facts of the case are in dispute. Having a copy of the 
show on hand allows you to look not only at the content, but also the con-
text of an event.
2. Focus on one thing at a time. Sometimes an aircheck session turns 
into a “dump” session, in which talent unburdens him or herself of a lot of 
thoughts having nothing to do with the show. A double standard applies 
here. It’s acceptable, to a point, for the host to digress. After all, a PD is 
uniquely able to understand pressures talent may be under, and even, in 
some cases, to do something to alleviate them. 
As a manager, however, you are there to aircheck, not to vent. Listen 
to the talent. Should you hear the makings of a great show taking place in 
your ofﬁ ce, encourage the talent to put that on the air.
Don’t let these diversions distract you from the aircheck session; just 
move the subject back to the archived show at the most appropriate 
moment.
3. Tell the truth. Trained communicators sense when you are ﬁ bbing.
4. Reinforce the positive by starting with the good stuff. Remember to 
acknowledge goals achieved.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         213
 5. Be fair. Criticism goes in very deep. No matter how angry you are, 
avoid verbalizing your negative reactions to a piece until you can express 
yourself calmly and rationally.
 
6. Let the talent discover along with you what needs to be improved. 
On air personalities are often their own harshest critics and can mercilessly 
rip apart their own programs during an aircheck session, recognizing and 
identifying speciﬁ c areas where they can improve.
 
7. Outline strengths. Ask a lot of questions. What worked? Why did 
you want to do this on the radio? What were you trying to say here? Did 
this connect? Was the language visual? Did you talk to the individual and 
involve your listener? Did this make you laugh?
 
8. Have faith. Believe in your talent’s ability to improve.
 
9. Always end an aircheck session with one or two mutually agreed 
upon “achievable goals.” Pick at least one thing that can easily be accom-
plished by the next scheduled session. Try to let the talent initiate goal-
setting.
 
10. Is there anything in the aircheck of your show that you could use 
as a promo?

 
214         Valerie Geller
“Managing creative people is an oxymoron. You don’t manage 
them at all. Instead you provide an environment in which 
they can be simultaneously stimulated and protected, 
challenged and encouraged, exposed and private.”
—Nicholas Negroponte
The Method: How to Aircheck
Unfortunately, there is no airchecking school for programmers. You learn 
by working with people, seeing what is effective and what is not. Some 
aspects of airchecking will vary greatly, depending upon the individuals 
involved. It is in the best interest of programmers and managers to learn 
to aircheck effectively. If the talent wins, the station wins. There are a 
few things one must never do, but the only right way to aircheck is the way 
that works.
Without an understanding of what is required for an individual air tal-
ent to succeed, even the most gifted new hire may not reach his or her 
potential. In a case like that, it takes a year or two for the talent to leave or 
be asked to move on. What went wrong?
Let’s go back to the garden analogy. You came home from the garden 
center with some big, fancy bulbs. The picture on the box showed a huge, 
exotic ﬂ ower, but, unfortunately, the box was without instructions. How 
much water was needed? How much sun?
There may have been nothing wrong with the talent you chose, but 
when you have to play a guessing game, there is a good chance of damag-
ing the talent, or at least failing to create an environment where talent, like 
that fancy ﬂ ower, can blossom.
If you found something you did not recognize in your garden, you 
would not cut it back without knowing what it was. It could be something 
wonderful. The same goes for air talent. Consultant Dan Vallie puts it well 
when he advises programmers to “let talent go out on a limb as far as they 
can. Do not restrict them until you ﬁ nd their range of potential and limita-
tions. It’s better to reel them in after a while than to have to keep pushing 
them out there.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         215
Fix It Today
A great aircheck session with a trained program director or consultant can 
move talent along faster than any other tool. Progress may be painstakingly 
slow. Talent improves step by step, day by day. Frustratingly, the process may 
sometimes seem to be working in reverse. There is a period of intense growth, 
followed by what sound like patches of mediocrity, where all coaching seems 
to have been in vain. What you may really be hearing is the talent searching for 
ways to implement suggestions and ideas you have discussed. Have faith and 
continue the process. If you are on the right path, positive change will come.
Several other experts have contributed their aircheck rules and phi-
losophies to this book, including consultant Dan Vallie, a big believer in 
spending time to coach talent.
Dan Vallie’s Talent Development Steps
 1. Talent is the product. You can’t develop talent if you do not 
spend time together. The talent will improve more quickly if time 
is taken for coaching and direction.
 2. Do not criticize talent or tell them something was poorly done 
unless you direct them on how to do it better. If you cannot give 
them a better way, at least approach the issue with a team attitude, 
working together to come up with a solution.
 3. Make yourself part of the show, as the director. Directing involves 
making sure the talent play to their strengths. Help to assist and 
make up for their weaknesses. Give guidance in those periods 
where the talent is at a loss as to how to grow next or how to 
handle an immediate topical event on the air. If your feedback 
is useful, talent will not feel the session is a waste of time.
 4. If the expectation is not clear, the delivery will not be on target.
 5. You can learn from the talent, just as the talent can learn from 
you. Do not direct by doing all the talking. It is frequently more 
important to listen. Be sincerely interested in the talent’s views 
and understand their perspectives.
 6. Be a good facilitator. Draw talent out and get them to verbalize 
their feelings and thoughts. Watch their body language. Show 
them that you care about them and the show’s success.

216         Valerie Geller
 7. If yours is a music-intensive station with most of the personalities 
on the morning show, meet with them every day. It does not have 
to be an aircheck session. The format and length of the meeting 
can vary. If everyone sees it as helpful, you will all make time to 
meet. If any of you thinks it is a waste, the meeting will frequently 
be canceled or dreaded.
 8. Do not try to impress the talent with how much you know, where 
you have worked, or the fact that you are the boss. Just be honest, 
encouraging, supportive, and consistent with your direction and 
approach.
 9. Great coaches give talent credit when they perform, and share 
the blame when something fails. These are the people who can 
get you to the Super Bowl or World Cup, but only when you work 
as a team.
 10. Praise often in public and private—but criticize only in private.
It Cuts Both Ways
Mistakes occur when an aircheck session is mishandled. Just as a talent 
can get a reputation for being difﬁ cult to work with, your reputation as a 
programmer can be severely damaged by a bad relationship with a host 
in your employ. These people do talk to one another and to managers. It 
is possible that the person whose aircheck session you botched years ago 
can keep you from getting your next job or warn a show you are actively 
courting.
There are a lot of ways to mess up an aircheck session. If you have 
worked in the business for a while, you are probably familiar with some 
of them. Consultant Lorna Ozmon provides an all-too-accurate picture of 
what can go wrong:
Let’s examine the state-of-the-art model for critiquing air personali-
ties. Typically air personalities are critiqued, on average, monthly. The 
aircheck sessions are often canceled or rescheduled due to an “emer-
gency” usually having to do with sales. The talent and the PD meet in 
the PD’s ofﬁ ce with all its inherent disruptions and distractions. The 
talent hands the PD a copy of a show the PD has never heard, which 
the PD plays.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         217
 As the show begins, the PD is thinking, “I hope I can come up with 
something to say and not look like I have nothing of value to offer.” The 
talent is thinking, “I hope this is over soon and it doesn’t hurt my feelings.” 
After a few breaks, the PD stops the audio and, with a quizzical look, says, 
“There’s something about that break that bothers me.” At this the talent 
silently wonders, “What does that mean? and says, “Could you give me 
something a little more speciﬁ c?”
 Feeling slightly inadequate, the PD gives the talent a healthy dose of 
“don’ts” and sends the talent out feeling confused, unmotivated, clear on 
what not to do but clueless about what to do. This traditional approach to 
airchecks has done much to close the minds and hearts of talent at radio 
stations everywhere.
How Airchecking Can Damage Talent
Lorna Ozmon takes a psychological approach to airchecking and has devel-
oped her own techniques. She has found that before she can begin to make 
progress with a personality, it is essential to explore what has been said to 
him or her over the years that created both the good and bad habits he or 
she carries. Ozmon’s cardinal rule for airchecking comes from Hippocrates: 
“Make a habit of two things—to help or at least to do no harm.”
Ozmon explains:
Before talent can move forward, you’ve got to get rid of the unnecessary 
baggage, stuff they’ve been told by bad PDs or people who inﬂ uenced 
them when they were just starting out. That stuff really sticks.
 I usually ask them to make a list of all the “orders” they have been 
given through the years. Then we look at the list and ask, “What no 
longer works?” The idea is to get rid of the “old tapes” from pre-
vious programmers. Old-time journeymen broadcasters have been 
hammered by dozens of PDs. It is time to get rid of what no longer 
works for the talent. It is not enough to haul out the clichés and tell 
someone to “be an individual,” “just be yourself,” or “be more con-
versational.”
 In order to be effective, you have to be very speciﬁ c when you guide tal-
ent. You have to ask questions and point out what you hear and what you 
think it means.
Ozmon particularly warns against the “Frankenstein syndrome,” a per-
sona copied from “pieces of others.” She advises: “It is OK to use tactics 

 
218         Valerie Geller
learned from others, but do not cobble together pieces of what works for 
other people and imitate it. That doesn’t work.” Ozmon continues:
There is much harm being done to the performances, psyches, and potential 
of broadcast personalities today. Management tends to forget that people 
who are asked to risk parts of who they are every day must be managed dif-
ferently than those who work on the assembly line at an automotive plant.
 Many air personalities are now being managed by cops, not coaches. Cops 
punish people for mistakes and misjudgments. Coaches train, instruct, and 
inspire new behavior. Cops tells us what not to do. Coaches explain what to 
do and demonstrate how to do it. The result of the “cop mentality” in radio 
air personality development is a lot of time wasted in attempting talent 
development with disappointing on-air results.
What follows are ten complaints from talent who have expressed to 
Lorna Ozmon what they feel is wrong with the traditional aircheck or “cri-
tique” process:
■ No, or too few, aircheck sessions
■ Contradictory or inconsistent input
■ Lack of praise for progress
■ All negative feedback
■ Lack of “how-to’s” and creative input
■ Vague input without speciﬁ c examples
■ Autocratic edicts without rationale to support or explain them
■ Perceived personal attacks
■  Criticism from a higher authority delivered as though it came from 
the program director
■  Program directors who critique dishonestly, either because they do 
not believe a personality ﬁ ts the station, or do not believe in his or 
her ability to succeed
Lorna Ozmon’s list spells out the damage that can be done to talent. 
Clearly, air personalities who have experienced some of these difﬁ cul-
ties will be less trusting of the process than those with positive aircheck-
ing experiences.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         219
A Cautionary Tale
Here is what can happen when you ignore the preceding list: John considers 
aircheck sessions just this side of a torture chamber. He has good reason:
I know my PD uses these aircheck meetings to jerk me around. He makes 
me feel small, and he gets off on belittling me. He keeps these stupid lists 
of minutiae. I dread these meetings. They wreck my whole day. I hate being 
airchecked. Even if I make a change, he never says anything positive about 
my work. I’m not convinced my PD knows why my show works when it 
does. I wish he would leave me alone. I get ratings, and I have been doing 
this for years.
If John works for you, you are either a sadist or something is terribly 
wrong with your airchecking technique. Because they are already in a very 
vulnerable situation, talent should be made to feel as much in control of 
their sessions as possible. Here is how:
■ Let the talent choose the audio.
■ If there are notes from the session, let the talent keep them.
■ Give the talent access to positive feedback from anyone whose 
input is going to matter during the session.
■ Always acknowledge progress and positive changes.
There are differing opinions as to the beneﬁ t of revealing research 
results to talent. Be careful. You do not want to withhold information, but 
you do not want to beat talent down with audience ratings so that they 
become discouraged. Consultant Randy Lane advises: “Keep the emphasis 
on the performance, regardless of the numbers.” If there is a reason you are 
calling a meeting, let your talent know, if possible, what it is.
Why don’t more programmers aircheck? Here are a few of the million 
reasons:
■ No time. It takes as much as a two-hour session for each hour 
of programming.
■ Emotionally draining. You are dealing with people’s personal 
qualities and deepest feelings.

220         Valerie Geller
■ No conﬁ dence. Most programmers have little training in this area 
and fear doing harm. Also, talent can get pretty defensive about 
their work. Lorna Ozmon counsels PDs to prepare for this using a 
tactic called “Objection Busting.” She says:
You must mentally prepare for every possible objection to what it is you 
are trying to sell. In the case of an aircheck session, it is usually a change 
in behavior. If you have a logical response to every reason why the talent 
does not agree with your position, you will be more relaxed, focused, and 
effective while conducting your aircheck sessions.
■ No crisis. Some only aircheck when things go drastically (think 
lawsuit) wrong.
■ Burnout. Most PDs are overworked and overwhelmed with 
demands for their attention. (See reasons No. 1 and No. 2.)
■ Don’t like them. Sometimes managers have a show or host that 
they ﬁ nd personally distasteful.
Using these reasons, many PDs recite an internal monologue such as this one:
Who am I to pick apart this show? These guys are professionals and 
have been doing it pretty well for a long time. I don’t want to say 
 anything to them that will break their stride. I know the show isn’t as 
good as it could be, but I’m not sure why.
What if I’m just nitpicking on the little stuff?
What if I’m wrong?
What if I antagonize them? Then they will rebel and won’t do anything 
I want them to do. I’m better off leaving them alone.
The end result of this internal discussion is that the aircheck session 
never happens, and the talent is deprived of an opportunity to improve his 
or her craft.
For program directors, the ﬁ rst step in making an effort at airchecking is 
acknowledging your areas of discomfort. Trust and truth must be established 
from both sides. This book cannot help you if you do not have good faith, 
a kind heart, and a desire to help your talent improve. If you are willing to 
overcome your resistance to airchecking, the rewards can be great. If you 
simply want a quick and easy way to strong-arm a performer into giving you 
the show you want to hear, this information won’t do you any good.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         221
Do not attempt to manipulate talent with false praise or threats. It is 
not right, it is not fair, and most of these folks are smart enough to know 
what you are doing. If you can only do one thing in your ﬁ rst aircheck ses-
sion, pick out something you really did like and be speciﬁ c about why. That 
would be an excellent start.
Knowing When the Time Is Right
Managers can aid talent by being sensitive to the right time for an aircheck. 
Educators call it the “teachable moment.” Aircheck regularly at a mutu-
ally agreed-on date and place. As a guideline for newer talent, plan on a 
weekly session. Those getting started tend to require more attention from 
programmers, while more seasoned professionals may need only periodic 
airchecking to stay on track.
For talent who are not used to airchecking, the very idea of having to 
go through past shows with a PD can be unsettling. That is why consul-
tant Tommy Kramer suggests: “Have your talent record every show. That 
way, you will always have access to a current show and your talent will get 
relaxed with the idea of being recorded. Plus, if something great happens 
on the air, you can have it on hand for a promo or sales presentation.”
Lorna Ozmon feels strongly that full-time personalities should be air-
checked once a month. She says:
People need time to process input and put it into practice for a reasonable 
period of time before they are ready to tackle a new concept or take the 
next step. Try to, as much as is operationally possible, make monthly ses-
sions ﬁ rm commitments. Although air personalities may say they dislike 
the aircheck process, nothing makes them feel less valued than canceling 
meetings with them.
For music program directors, Randy Lane uses this rule of thumb: “Have 
as much contact with your morning show as you do with the music and pro-
motion directors.” I agree with consultant Andy Beaubien when he says:
It is more desirable to brieﬂ y connect with an air talent on a very fre-
quent basis than to rely on extended but infrequent meetings. The 
important thing is to maintain a continuing relationship. Some meetings 
should be in-depth discussions, while others may be brief and social in 
nature. Artistic growth can only come from the development of one’s 
talent. Too often, once all the negatives in a person’s style have been 
eliminated, there is nothing left but a bland and lifeless corpse.

 
222         Valerie Geller
Create a Safe Setting
For some, a “safe setting” may be a private ofﬁ ce across a desk. Others 
prefer using more relaxed and casual settings away from the station with a 
glass of wine or cup of coffee. It does not have to be formal, but it does have 
to be regular and consistent.
Lorna Ozmon suggests:
Get away from your phone, the sales department, and other distractions. 
Focus only on the air personality and the review. Go somewhere quiet and 
private enough to conduct the sessions effectively. Also, look for oppor-
tunities to be among people and observe life in your market at the same 
time. Meet over a meal if possible. People tend to be much more open to 
ideas when they are being fed.
Set the Scene
Tom Zarecki, consultant, programmer, and former Radio Computing 
Services (RCS) executive points out: “The goal is to get the talent to enjoy 
aircheck sessions.” He agrees that the setting for an aircheck is crucial:
If you don’t have a private area, use your car. Sit in the parking lot or go 
for a drive and critique the show along the way. No interruptions, no calls, 
very private. In case the talent needs to raise his or her voice, other staffers 
will not hear yelling from behind a closed door, which fosters gossip.
Never go through a host’s work with other hosts present. The only 
time aircheck sessions should be in a group is with a team show, like a 
morning show, where two or more people interact. Otherwise, do not 
review airchecks at an air-talent meeting. It is fatal. Don’t try it.
What Can Kill a Session?
The absolute worst thing you can do is turn a session into a personal 
attack. No matter what you have to say to an air talent, if he or she feels 
berated or treated disrespectfully, you will make no progress at all. Lorna 
Ozmon advises, “If you are not clear of the difference between an asser-
tive and aggressive statement, remember it is easy to add the words ‘you 
idiot’ to an aggressive statement. Continually remind your air personali-
ties that it is what they do on the air and not who they are that is being 
airchecked.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         223
1. Avoid airchecking just prior to the show. It always takes some time 
to digest new information, and, if the session was disturbing in any way, it 
could hurt today’s show.
2. Never ever, ever “hotline” a talent during his or her show. Resist the 
temptation unless your station’s license is in jeopardy or lives are at stake. 
Receiving a “hotline call” from the boss during the show is a sure way to 
frighten the host and throw the remainder of the program off rhythm. He 
or she stops thinking creatively and begins worrying. This is to be avoided 
at all costs. The hotline is not a rolled-up newspaper with which you may 
strike the talent on his or her nose. Even if the manager is calling with 
praise (and he or she should), it destroys the host’s concentration to hear 
it during the show.
 The right time to aircheck or make any comments is once the show has 
concluded. It is best if the manager makes a note, considers the problem 
overnight, and then requests a meeting with the talent the following day. 
Try not to let a host worry for hours with an “I want to see you in my ofﬁ ce” 
call that does not make the purpose of the meeting clear. If the show takes 
place outside of normal business hours, make an extra effort to aircheck at 
the host’s convenience. Be ﬂ exible. Many top programmers are willing to 
come in on the weekends. An aircheck of the program in question should 
be available for the meeting. No matter how strong your feelings may be, 
come prepared to listen to a talent’s reasons for handling something in a 
particular way.
3. Don’t build unnecessary resentment. Be sensitive to your talent’s 
schedules. For example, do not ask your overnight host to appear at a noon 
meeting when he or she would normally be asleep. If you aircheck the morn-
ing show, do not pounce on your team as they leave the studio. You are just 
getting to the station, but after several hours on air it is their lunchtime. They 
are probably hungry. They might be more receptive to your comments if their 
stomachs are full. Try taking them out or ordering breakfast. Hosts appreci-
ate your willingness to take their odd hours into consideration.
4. Airchecking is hard work. All too often programmers hire and ﬁ re 
talent without ever having invested the time and energy that might have 
made a good host great, or enabled a talent to see the power of his or her 
work as well as its shortcomings.

 
224         Valerie Geller
If you are a radio program manager and your air talent asks you, “What 
did you think of the show?” and you didn’t hear it; did hear it but didn’t 
like it (but can’t pinpoint exactly why .  .  . ); or don’t have time to deal with 
it now, this is the time to schedule an aircheck meeting.
Isn’t There an Easier Way to Develop Talent?
Airchecking gets easier the more experience the talent and the coach have 
with it. Consultant Dan Vallie reminds us, “Coaching takes talent, too.”
Airchecking is the power of one on one. It’s being heard. It is someone 
rooting for you, being on your side. In sports it is the coach who pushes the 
athlete to maximum potential. Exercise makes sore muscles, but in the end 
it is worth it when you win.
Not only will you be pushing the talent on your staff to excel, but they will 
also be pushing you. A healthy aircheck session frequently features some strong 
differences of opinion. Most experts believe this should be encouraged.
Consultant Jaye Albright works with personalities who have differing 
styles and goals.
At best, I hope to get the personalities talking about what they were trying 
to do. That way, I can base my feedback on how well they accomplished 
what they wanted to do in terms of my responses. I try to communicate one 
or two key reactions I had in as nonthreatening a manner as possible. It is 
not important to me that they always do what I suggest, but it is important 
that they know why I feel as I do.
I ask that they hold me to the same standard. Was I prepared or on auto-
pilot? Did I offer clichés, or did I spend time thinking about the work? I hope 
they will be as direct about these things with me as I try to be with them.
The longer I have worked with someone and the better I know that 
person, the more I tailor what I do to his or her communication style. Some 
people are so controlling that critiques only happen on their turf, and they 
change very little over the years on the things I fervently believe would 
beneﬁ t the individual.
In these cases, I keep singing my song to them in hopes that eventually 
the air talent will realize that there is a recurring theme in my advice and 
perhaps some grain of my truth will imprint.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         225
In other, more common situations, even the slightest word can injure. 
In those situations, I attempt to be subtle and always carefully watch for 
body-language indications of hurt, defensiveness, or misunderstanding.
It Does Get Easier
Sometimes a seasoned pro can be airchecked in a single word. A good 
example is an aircheck session that Los Angeles news presenter Susanne 
Whatley had with her news director.
He was trying to get me to “brighten up” my performance. He gave me 
one word—“energy.” Inside my own head I thought I was using enough 
energy, but when I tried it out his way, and then heard it back, my work 
sounded better! There is a lot of trust involved in doing what is suggested. 
When I ﬁ rst made the change, and pumped it up a little on the air, using 
higher energy, power, and pacing, it sounded silly to me inside my head, 
but when I heard it back on the tape, he was absolutely right.
Susanne is right. Things sound different in your headphones than they 
do coming out of a speaker. Encourage talent to grow independently by 
trying new ideas, experimenting on the radio, and “self-checking”; that is, 
listening to recorded shows on their own. You can also learn a lot from 
hearing others whose work you admire. You can even aircheck people you 
have never met by listening to their shows. It is a good way to see what 
qualities in their work are effective and might be adaptable to your indi-
vidual performance.
Music radio consultant Guy Zapoleon “inspires hosts by playing a 
great talent example—past and present.” A talent might wish to listen to a 
personality she looks up to in another market or, better still, someone who 
is on the staff who is philosophically aligned with her, and who can also be 
a mentor.
Every coach has a different method. Jaye Albright warns:
Listening to your own work can be devastating. Seek objective feedback 
from as many directors as possible. Use what resonates truthfully with 
your own inner voice. Carefully consider the reactions of others, but do 
not ever take them personally. Their guidance is about their life experience 
and response to what you did. Try the things that seem sensible. Reject that 
which does not.

 
226         Valerie Geller
If there were an easier way, we would embrace it. Learning from others 
is something everyone does, but do not try to become someone else. Make 
it your goal to ﬁ nd your unique voice.
Getting It
The sections that follow contain some real stories of ways in which talent 
recognized and overcame obstacles using aircheck sessions.
“You Big Meanie!”: Aircheck Success Story No. 1
Before her death, Mother Teresa, the nun who dedicated her life to caring 
for the sick and dying in India, was the subject of an hour’s discussion. The 
host began the show by saying:
I think Mother Teresa is a fraud. I have an article in front of me docu-
menting her luxurious lifestyle, the money she has been given, private jet 
travel, and other perks of celebrity. It says here she accepted a huge con-
tribution that turned out to be from stolen funds, and then, when asked, 
refused to give the money back. After all that, is she really a saint?
The host then took an hour of calls on what a fake he considered 
Mother Teresa to be. The following day, the program director was deluged 
with negative mail and angry calls. Much of the correspondence began by 
saying, “I usually love Dan’s show but . . .” and ended with “I’ll never listen 
to this radio station again!”
Why, the PD wondered, would this well-liked host generate such 
a heated reaction? The PD requested a copy of the show and found the 
problem immediately: Dan had introduced his supporting data only at 
the beginning of the hour. Listeners joining the program following the 
break, without having heard the show’s opening, would have no idea what 
motivated him to say such angry things. It sounded like he was picking on 
Mother Teresa for no reason at all.
It would have been possible to listen to an entire half hour of Dan’s 
show and hear him and the callers going back and forth about the saintli-
ness or depravity of a prominent religious icon without ever knowing the 
revelations and allegations of her worldly shortcomings.
Using the audio from the program, the PD was able to explain to Dan 
that he had no problem with his opinion, however unpopular it might be. 

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         227
But he pointed out that Dan had not been heard or understood by a major-
ity of his listeners, because he had not reset the topic on the air for the new 
audience tuning in. The host was so busy being angry and outraged, he for-
got to mention periodically what had sparked his initial reaction. Dan had 
failed to explain again the reasons for his anger. The result: To a majority 
of his audience, he just sounded mean. With the aircheck and letters from 
people who usually liked his show, the host could clearly see the result of 
not resetting a topic: He had been misunderstood.
Formatics Count
Resetting your topic at a minimum of every ﬁ fteen minutes is like giving 
your audience an on-ramp. Without resetting, it is like watching trafﬁ c on 
the freeway. You can see it go by, but you have no idea how to join in. Your 
show becomes accessible only to those who already got on the highway at 
the top of the hour.
Have you ever walked into a room where people were in the middle of 
a big ﬁ ght screaming at one another? You wouldn’t want to be involved and 
would either avoid entering the room or leave as quickly as possible. But 
if they stopped ﬁ ghting and someone said to you, in a reasonable tone of 
voice, “Wait a minute. She says: ‘Don’t eat the butter, the bacon, the choco-
late mousse; it will give you a heart attack.’ But I say enjoying my life is more 
important than living an extra ten years. What do you think?” You have now 
been invited in and may be willing to contribute your opinion.
As for Dan’s show, the reset could have been done this quickly:
I have an article that says Mother Teresa kept stolen money, 
demanded ﬁ rst-class air travel, feather pillows in hotel rooms, and 
gourmet food on the road. I have lost all respect for her. Some of 
you are telling me: “She is entitled to royal treatment for all the 
good work she does.” What do you think?
Now the audience knows what is generating all that heat. They might not 
agree with the host or the callers, but they have a handle on what is going on. 
It no longer seems like an unfounded nasty attack against a saintly old lady.
“What Happened to You?”: Aircheck Success Story No. 2
Rick had a weekend interview show covering serious issues. Around the 
station, he was charming and funny. Rick told such wonderful jokes and 
stories that management decided to give him a daily talk show of his own. 

 
228         Valerie Geller
It didn’t work. Although his weekend show hadn’t been a lighthearted 
affair, this new job was meant to be a smart, yet entertaining program. 
Unfortunately, every time Rick opened the microphone, he sounded stiff 
and authoritarian. Gone were the offhand anecdotes, the wry commentar-
ies, and the relaxed original humor that everyone had enjoyed in the halls.
We scheduled an aircheck session with Rick. Something peculiar hap-
pened. Rick visibly bored himself. He skipped over dull calls. He yawned, 
doodled on a scratch pad, and looked at his watch several times. At one 
point in the meeting, Rick actually dug around in his pocket for change and 
got up to buy a soda. Obviously if the host is bored with his own show, the 
listener is not likely to ﬁ nd it riveting entertainment.
There was another problem. Rick did not notice that his attention was 
wandering. This was the conversation:
PD: “Rick, what did you think of this program?”
RICK: “It’s OK, it’s ﬁ ne, this is how I do my show.”
 PD: “Rick, anyone who spends ten minutes in a room with you knows 
how funny you are. How come that’s not on air?”
Eventually, we got our answer. It turned out that the reason Rick was holding 
back was because he was concerned about his reputation as a journalist in the 
community. He was afraid to have fun or loosen up on the radio for fear of not 
being taken seriously as an intellect. What would people think of him? He was 
worried he would lose his credibility, look foolish, or fail altogether.
At the end of one segment, there was a trafﬁ c report. The reporter got 
the hiccups in the middle of her story. All of a sudden, Rick forgot he was 
on the radio. A simple body function brought out his natural humor, if only 
for a moment, as he suggested possible cures. We used those few seconds of 
audio to demonstrate to Rick how his spontaneity and storytelling human-
ized him and made him a more likable air personality. We explained that 
that could be a powerful connection to an audience. Once Rick understood 
he could be the same person on the air as he was in the halls, he was able 
to make the change.
“Look Out the Window”: Aircheck Success Story No. 3
The sun was shining and ﬂ owers were blooming in Florida, and a weird 
weather phenomenon was taking place. During the night, strong winds from 

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         229
Africa had blown sand from the Sahara desert to area swamplands, absorb-
ing the usual stiﬂ ing humidity in the air. On that day, the weather was dry, 
warm, and clear, instead of Tampa’s usual unrelenting, sticky, tropical heat.
Blissfully unaware of the delightful spring afternoon in progress, the 
host on the air, a trained psychologist, broadcast two hours of carefully pre-
pared and researched material on suicide and depression. The only people 
likely to have sat still for a show like that were probably incapable of physi-
cal movement. Great show. Wrong day.
During the aircheck session that followed, the host was very defensive. 
“I did everything I was supposed to,” she said. “We had powerful stories 
from individuals involved in the experience, presented problems with solu-
tions, painted word pictures. The show was personal without being too pri-
vate, why are you on my case?”
“What did you do for the rest of the day after you got off the air?” I 
asked.
“Oh, it was such a wonderful day that I went sailing with my boyfriend, 
drank wine, had a picnic on our boat—it was bliss.”
“Would you have listened to your own show out on the boat?” I asked 
her.
Silence.
When programming, producing, or hosting a show, it is always a good 
idea to literally take a look out the window and see what the day is like. It 
is part of what people are really thinking, doing, and talking about.
“Focus the Topic”: Aircheck Success Story No. 4
PD Alan Eisenson relates the following story:
We once had a talk host who found a great article in the Las Vegas paper. It 
was about a group of strippers bringing a class-action lawsuit against a chain 
of strip joints for not paying them the minimum wage, while also taking a 
portion of their tips. The host read the short newspaper article, but he never 
really focused it into a talkable topic. The show turned into a meandering 
discussion of stripping in general and ended up digressing into handicapped 
accessibility on public buses. (I still don’t know how that happened!)
 When we were airchecking, I asked the host if he thought this would 
have been a great show had he only focused the issue into a tightly framed 

 
230         Valerie Geller
talk-show topic—for example: Are strippers second-class citizens? Don’t 
strippers deserve the same workplace rights as everybody else?
 It is the job of the program director to coach and direct talk talent and 
producers into thinking this way. Most good hosts and producers can smell 
a hot issue; the challenge is framing it into a talkable topic. When a host 
mentions a topic or issue, I always ask, “What is the point, or what is the 
question?”
 Sometimes it is not so easy to see the point or a question in a subject. 
Then you have to go deeper to ﬁ nd the talkable topic. Peel away the layers. 
It may take careful thought to get to the real heart of an issue.
“Did I Do That?”: Aircheck Success Story No. 5
Syndication executive Denise McIntee has the briefest but probably most 
common aircheck success story: “I once played a tape of a host talking down 
and being curt to a lovely, articulate woman. The host was truly stunned 
when she heard herself and realized how bad it sounded. She never did it 
again.”
“Who Cares If You Don’t?”: Aircheck Success Story No. 6
Here is another story from Alan Eisenson’s ﬁ les: “I worked with a talk host 
who brought up the issue of drug testing. In listening to him, it became 
clear that he really did not care about the topic. Because he had no opinion 
about it, he had no story to tell. In that case, he never should have brought 
it up. He failed to engage the audience in the issue.”
When this happens, the programmer should use the aircheck method 
and ask why the host chose his or her topic. If a show failed to engage the 
audience, the answer to this question tends to be something along the lines 
of “Well, it was on the front page, and I thought it would be good.”
The PD should then ask some key questions to determine if there was 
a reason the host cared which he or she failed to mention. If not, then this 
aircheck session can become an excellent opportunity to learn that you 
must, as Alan Eisenson says:
Always have a strong opinion about what you are discussing. Do not ever 
do a topic when you do not have an opinion, unless you have a guest on the 
show who has a strong opinion.
 You engage the audience with your opinion/position or by telling a rivet-
ing relatable story about how the topic pertains to your life, or the lives of 
your audience. This is the churn, when your passion comes through and you 

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         231
can make your audience care about what you are saying. The show open or 
monologue is where you set the stage for your entire segment. If you do not 
care about your subject, you will not ﬁ nd a way to engage your audience.
 It works better if the topic is something a host might easily discuss with a 
friend off air  .  .  .  and doesn’t sound “manufactured” to ﬁ ll a slot on the radio.
Make Time to Give Feedback
Programmer-turned-researcher Andy Beaubien warns that to neglect the 
talent may be just as dangerous and ineffective as bad airchecking. He 
recalls, “One person told me she made repeated attempts to arrange an 
interview with her newly appointed PD. After two months, she still had not 
succeeded. Various meetings had been planned, but the PD always can-
celed them. Feeling totally ignored and undervalued, she quit the station 
and took an on-air job with a competitor.”
Randy Lane knows a DJ who says, “If you aren’t getting feedback or 
being managed properly to perform at your best, tell your PD or GM what 
motivates you and what demoralizes you.”
Talent Respects Talent
Sometimes an air talent will walk away from an aircheck session feeling as 
though he or she has been stomped by a big boot.
Seattle air personality Dave Ross has worked for several PDs. He 
admits he does not care to be critiqued in the traditional aircheck session. 
Understandably, he ﬁ nds it difﬁ cult to be airchecked by someone whose 
judgment he does not respect. “I resent that it is just one person’s opinion 
of my work. I much prefer to get up in front of a group of people at a live 
remote or performance and get instant, immediate feedback that way.”
New Territory
The ﬁ rst time I airchecked a morning show, I was one of those ner-
vous programmers. I thought, “Gee, who am I to tell these guys what 
is wrong with their show?” The night before, I had listened to hours of 
their work, made lists, taken copious notes, and been too anxious to get 
much sleep.

 
232         Valerie Geller
After the next day’s program, our three morning team members walked 
in, sat down, looked me in the eye, and waited for me to say something. 
With sweaty hands, I put the tape in the cassette player. Before I could 
open my mouth, one host said:
No, no, no, let’s skip over that part, wait until you hear the next part, 
now that was funny . . . and wait, back it up . . . here’s where we 
had that boring caller! Wait, oh here I stepped on you guys and we 
screwed up the call letters, forget that . . . and here’s the part where 
the caller started complaining about the prize because the dinner for 
two was at a restaurant that did not have free parking . . . 
This went on for about an hour and a half. I had not uttered a single 
word. At the end of the session, the guys stood up and smiled. “Valerie,” 
one of them said, “you are great at this. It’s the best aircheck session we’ve 
ever had.”
These three broadcast professionals had known exactly what was right 
and what was wrong with their show. They just needed someone to be a 
visible audience for them and to witness their self-critique.
I learned something valuable that day from those hosts. This was my 
lesson: People already know their own strengths and weaknesses. All we 
as programmers and managers need to do is to help them emphasize their 
strengths and conquer or play down their weaknesses.
Sometimes, as Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab 
Professor Nicholas Negroponte says, “Management can be measured in its 
quality by its perceived absence.”
Our areas of weakness are probably the things that are difﬁ cult for us 
or that we most dislike or avoid. That which comes easily is most likely our 
area of strength. This applies both to talent and to management.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         233
Valerie Geller’s Key Principles of Airchecking
1.  Deﬁ ne objectives and expectations. Outline to the talent what 
you look for in a show. Make very clear what you expect of them, and 
who the target audience is.
2.  Do not lie. If an on air talent does not trust you or respect you, he 
or she will not listen to you. If something is not your favorite bit or 
moment, it can still have merit. Be clear about this.
3.  Know why the show is there. Remind yourself and the talent of 
the program’s value to the station.
4.  Provide necessary tools. Do not expect talent to make up for bro-
ken equipment, inept performances of others, or things beyond their 
control.
5.  Ask more than you tell. Find out why something was done before you 
react. There may be a good reason why somebody did what he did.
6.  Respect the individual. Performers are not interchangeable talk-
ing meat. Do not force your talent to ﬁ t into a format or structure that is 
very wrong for them. Jaye Albright feels it is impossible to get anyone 
to do anything he or she really does not want to do with any degree 
of commitment and conviction.
7.  Preserve privacy. Do not put copies of aircheck evaluations in the 
talent’s personnel ﬁ les. Nor should you discuss an aircheck  session 
with others. Record a session only if the talent wants to listen to it 
again later. For trust to develop, these sessions must be private and 
conﬁ dential.
8.  Look for and highlight powerful moments. What had you 
wanting more? As you listen to the aircheck, try to be aware of com-
ments both on the air and from others on your show. Remember, it 
does not always have to be the star talent having the “power” or 
“magic” moments; they just have to occur during the show. Denise 
McIntee searches out these moments: “If a host is able to bring out 
a poignant story in a caller who was hesitant to tell his or her story, 
I point that out and praise, praise, praise.”
Continued

 
234         Valerie Geller
 9.  Focus only on the show. This is not the time to take up other con-
cerns. Tom Zarecki cautions: “Sometimes the aircheck session spins 
into a discussion of station issues the talent may be concerned about. 
Music, production, news, remotes, advertisers, other talent may all end 
up woven into your aircheck chat. But keep them short. Just like the 
classroom full of kids who keep the substitute teacher distracted so he 
or she won’t get to the lesson, make sure your talent isn’t just trying to 
get you off the track.”
10.  Keep egos out. It is tempting for talent to remind the PD that they 
are superstars in the market. Try to remember that the PD is really 
there to help. Programmers, lower your ego shields. Be willing to 
listen to talent’s ideas. Perhaps they resist direction because they 
think it could work better another way. They might be right. Ask them 
what their ideas are. If they have feasible suggestions, throw out 
your ego and use them. Does it matter where a great idea comes 
from if it works?
11.  Set achievable goals. As Lorna Ozmon puts it: “Avoid managing 
by minutia. When you focus on smaller sub-issues, you are perceived 
by talent as ‘picking on little stuff,’ which they see as meaningless to 
their overall success. To recognize a big-picture issue, ask yourself, 
‘Will this behavior signiﬁ cantly affect the station’s ratings or revenue?’ 
If the answer is yes, it is a big-picture issue. Pick your battles. Fight for 
the big-picture issues, and let the talent win the minor skirmishes.”
12.  Acknowledge accomplishment. Give authentic feedback for 
good work. This is Denise McIntee’s strategy: “I do not use the ses-
sion to point out ‘faults,’ but I might mention that when the host han-
dled a similar situation in a different manner, it seemed to work much 
better.” Ozmon says: “Most performers are ‘pleasers.’ When you 
tell them what pleases you, they will strive to do it again.” Dan Vallie 
recommends following up meetings of substance with a memo to 
recap what was discussed. Internet news executive Bernard Gershon 
stresses that you must “try to make it clear that the memo is a reminder 
for them, and for you—not ‘evidence’ to be kept on ﬁ le so that you 
can ﬁ re them if they screw up again.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         235
Choosing a Show
You are about to read the wisdom of several veteran aircheckers. Notice 
how different they can be. Once again, the “right” way to select audio for 
your aircheck session is the way that works for you. There are several ways 
to do it.
■ Neither the program director nor the talent has heard the recorded 
show. However, because it is advisable for the talent to select 
a program to work with, more than likely he or she has a pretty 
good idea of what is on it. Talent may have notes of problems or 
questions requiring a second opinion.
■ The PD can review the selected program before a session and review 
it, making note of comments and questions he or she would like to 
go over with the talent.
■ The PD selects a speciﬁ c show. He or she may or may not choose 
to preview it. Often the reason for doing it this way is that the PD 
heard it live and noticed an area for discussion.
■ The selection is completely random. For instance, you can send some-
body back to the studio to pull any hour he can ﬁ nd. While at ABC 
Radio, then–news director Bernard Gershon used this as a part of his 
development technique: “We had our on-air talent choose a favorite 
segment, then one of our managers selected a different one, and then 
one was picked at random. Usually, the talent went ﬁ rst. Many times 
they were much harsher on themselves than you or I would ever be. 
They heard their inﬂ ections and imperfections.”
How to Listen
Remember that the reference audio must always be available at the air-
check session.
Tom Zarecki suggests: “Listen with the person in front of you. The tal-
ent at some point will want to respond to you. Maybe not at ﬁ rst, but it 
won’t take long.” Jaye Albright draws a distinction between someone you 
have worked with before and someone who is on a ﬁ rst “aircheck date” 
with you: “With new people whose styles I do not know, I begin by  listening 

 
236         Valerie Geller
to a full, scoped half-hour of the show without comment. Then I solicit 
reactions to what we just heard to learn how they communicate, what they 
try to do on the air, how prepared they are, and what skills I need to focus 
on ﬁ rst.”
Transcription
Consultant Lorna Ozmon favors transcribing a show word for word. Why?
If you just listen back to the show, sometimes the talent gets distracted by 
the sound of their own voice. If the words are written out, it works better. 
Listen to at least two hours of programming. Set time aside to focus on the 
show you intend to use for the aircheck. Do this away from other distrac-
tions, and make detailed notes. Look for patterns. If you have made good 
notes, you will begin to see one or two recurring areas for development.
I use transcriptions only when working in a language other than English, 
but Lorna has speciﬁ c reasons for her method. She explains:
Transcription provides talent with speciﬁ c examples and depersonalizes the 
critique process. The “script” is less threatening than “what I said.” Don’t 
pick out one bad break. Look for and transcribe breaks which show typical 
problems. This will deﬂ ect the impression that you are trying to ﬁ nd the tal-
ent doing something wrong and show that your intent is to help him or her.
Randy Lane favors transcription for slightly different reasons. He says:
Experience the show as a listener. Listen to at least an hour of the show casu-
ally (as listeners do) and get an overall feel for the show. Literally transcribe 
at least an hour of the show while you listen. This enables you to be amazingly 
speciﬁ c. Jot down the elements that you remember from the hour. This will 
give you an idea of what elements might be cutting through to listeners.
Use the Pause
Using a pause is Tom Zarecki’s method.
Try this: Establish the tone of the entire meeting by listening for about thirty 
seconds, then stop. Talk about what you liked and didn’t like about the way 
he or she introduced the hour. Pause mid-sentence to compliment the talent 
on something speciﬁ c. Nobody minds this. You can’t do it too much.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         237
 Nothing is more deadly and dull than pressing “play,” then the two of 
you sitting and listening to a few minutes, or even the whole show, without 
anybody saying anything.
Ask Questions
Whichever way you decide to work with audio, there are some basic questions 
you can ask about any show that will help you evaluate its potential. This is my 
checklist of things I want to hear when I’m listening for powerful radio:
Questions about Powerful Radio
 1.  Are you talking to one person? Can the listener feel connected 
with the presenter, or is the host speaking to “all those listeners out 
there”?
 2. Is the host using visual language? Can you “see” the story?
 3. Is there passion, fun, or humor?
 4.  Does the host sound like he or she would rather be someplace 
else?
 5.  Is this a story affecting the listener’s health, emotion, or money? 
Does the story inspire you to transform some aspect of your life?
 6.  Is there a “talkable topic” the listener can discuss later with 
others? Would the host talk about this off air?
 7. Are there characters we can care about? Can you imagine this person?
 8. Are you taking the listener on a journey?
 9.  Is this information that can’t be found elsewhere? Is this informa-
tion new?
10.  Is it personal without being private? Do I get to know you as 
I listen?
11. Do I like spending time with this person? Would I enjoy a long 
car trip with him or her?
12.  Does the show feel too long? If a topic is powerful, ﬁ ve minutes 
seems to pass in seconds. If a topic or host is dull—a one-minute 
piece will feel like it drags on forever.
13. Was the host in control of his or her show?

 
238         Valerie Geller
Questions to Ask at the Session
1. How does the talent want to be perceived by the audience? Have 
him pick three adjectives. Does she want to be seen as caring? 
 Credible? Edgy? Funny? Intellectual? Is that happening?
2. Did the talent feel that the show worked? What parts were 
especially great? What bombed? Was there a talkable topic or 
engaging question? Was the topic or question focused?
3. Did the talent feel pressured to work with a subject from the front 
page of the newspaper even though he or she secretly could not 
have cared less about it? Did it sound “manufactured for air”? Did 
the show ﬁ t the day? Were there any breaking news stories 
or other events that should have been covered?
4. Was the talent nervous, unprepared, or anxious? Was the show 
accessible to people just tuning in?
5. Was the topic handled on our station in a way that was  different 
or unique? Research shows that one of the reasons people 
leave News-Talk radio is that they ﬁ nd it presents problems that 
leave them feeling hopeless and depressed. Did your host or 
 program offer solutions along with the problems?
6. Was the talent trying to persuade the listener to take a  particular 
point of view? What are the tactics the talent used to attempt to 
convince the audience? Did they work? What drew the  talent 
to this subject? Does the talent have some kind of personal 
 experience with this topic? Did the talent reveal that?
7. If the host could redo today’s show, what would be different? 
Would a listener speak about things heard on your station tonight 
with a spouse at the dinner table? Was there anything that could 
be used to promote upcoming shows?
Ensure that your station always has something real and compelling 
on air to offer your listeners—not something “manufactured for air” and 
 boring—which will result in increased ratings for your station.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         239
Don’t Be a “Call Counter”
Some programmers tally up the number of calls a show took during an 
hour at the aircheck session as if that number alone tells them anything 
about the quality of the segment. Air talent also do this: “It was a great 
hour. I got tons of calls.”
Programmers and talent new to talk radio are often surprised when 
a program gets a lot of calls but is not successful in the ratings. It seems 
that getting a lot of calls should be a logical indicator of listenership, right? 
Wrong. The amount of calls received by a show is not a valid indicator of 
how well a program is working. This can be difﬁ cult to understand for those 
who like to see immediate response. It just seems so logical: If a show is 
working, people will call. But radio isn’t always logical.
Shows are successful when created and performed for the 98 percent 
of your audience who are listening, not for the 2 percent who ﬁ ll the board 
with blinking lights. Personality Rush Limbaugh regularly reminds broad-
casters about the importance of focusing on the content, without obsessing 
on the calls coming in. You could put a psychic on the air and you’ll get the 
phone lines to light up, but the only people who will ﬁ nd the show interest-
ing are the people on hold. Imagine a music radio station that gave concert 
tickets away for four straight hours every morning. The calls would be con-
stant, but the ratings would be a disaster.
That’s why programmer Jeremy Coleman refers to the full board of 
calls as “fools’ gold.”
Quality Callers
It’s natural for some hosts to want to be polite to their callers, especially if 
they are worried about being perceived as “rude.” But when a host allows a 
boring or inarticulate caller to wander on and on, that host is actually being 
rude to the thousands of listeners who are giving him their time. If a trade-
off has to be made, choose your audience.
When airchecking, look for the quality of the calls that got on the air. 
Did the callers provide information, inspiration, or entertainment? Did 
they seem to know when you were kidding, when you were serious? Were 
they emotional? articulate? Are you pleased with the duration of the 
calls? If you think a call went on too long, where should it have ended? 
Air personality (and editor) Turi Ryder applies what she calls “the rule of 

 
240         Valerie Geller
‘one more thing.’ ” She announces her policy of hanging up on any caller 
who utters that phrase, but tells her listeners it’s because she wants them 
to look their best, and the information they’ll give ﬁ rst is usually their top 
material.
Do you feel you understood the callers’ points? If the host didn’t under-
stand, did he or she ask for clariﬁ cation? Did the callers add to the show’s 
momentum or drag it down? Did the host feel or seem to be in control of 
the calls? Did the host change anybody’s mind or the reverse? Were any of 
the calls upsetting? Humorous? Aggravating?
Are you getting a representative cross section of your targeted listen-
ers to call in? Were any of these callers a potential resource for a future 
show? If so, did your producer get their contact numbers? Were you 
pleased with the mix of opinions and the number of calls you took? Do 
you feel the same way about all of this right now as you did during the 
show itself?
It is one thing to avoid confrontation between managers and hosts, but 
quite another to have a host who avoids it on the air. That is a sure way to 
a boring talk show. Tom Zarecki says, “Make the listeners like you, not the 
callers. Your greatest moments on the air may come from encounters with 
people who vehemently disagree with you.”
Room for Risk
Ultimately, because the PD usually wins in a ﬁ ght to the ﬁ nish, it is impor-
tant to allow talent to make a genuine mistake without getting beaten up. 
Talent will make mistakes, but, reminds consultant Andy Beaubien:
Creativity cannot exist in a zero-risk environment. One of the PD’s respon-
sibilities is to encourage personalities to take calculated risks. Mistakes are 
a natural part of the creative process. That process involves dealing with 
unknown factors, the outcome of which is unpredictable. Conversely, mak-
ing the same mistakes over and over again is not a sign of creative risk-
taking but of carelessness and inattention.
If you want to show a talent what a bit could sound like if executed 
differently, you might try what consultant Guy Zapoleon calls the “before-
and-after trick” of playing the original audio and then playing an edited 
version.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         241
Jaye Albright uses the work of others on air to make her points: “It can 
be helpful to hear someone else successfully do the thing you are being 
asked to do.”
Tom Zarecki’s technique for listening includes the following points:
1. Take notes during the meeting. Have your own list of two or three 
points you want to cover. When talent comments on something you 
need to handle (examples: unreasonable demands from a salesper-
son, uncooperative screener, equipment problem), write this down 
and take care of it. Let the talent see you taking notes on their 
comments. This prompts them to make more comments.
2. Create a short, numbered “what-to-work-on” list. Your short list 
might be only one item! A typical list might say:
 
●  Make opening remarks shorter. Get to guest quicker.
 
●  Let callers provide the material. Don’t be so quick to top them 
with your own lines.
3. Make sure to date it.
4. Avoid the novel. Focus on the important things.
5. Agree on concessions. You and the talent may each end up with 
your own short list of priority points to work on.
Tips for Teams
Here are some thoughts from consultants who work with team shows; 
Tommy Kramer advises, “Team shows have some special needs.  The objec-
tive is to avoid ‘train wrecks,’ where the listener cannot tell what is going 
on.” Here are his tips for teams:
1. Deﬁ ne roles. The funny guy has to be the funny guy.  To use a sports 
comparison, the play-by-play person and the color announcer have sepa-
rate, clearly distinct roles. Cast them as you would cast a movie, and then 
get the talent to stay in their roles. Nothing is worse than hearing two peo-
ple try to top each other.
2. Listen to each other. It is horrible to hear two people who each pay 
no attention to what the other says. How can they hope to connect with the 
listener? Tiny things can spur great moments on the air. But if the talent is 
not listening to each other, they will miss the cue.

 
242         Valerie Geller
3. Use hand signals. Most teams think they do not need them. That is 
why so many teams talk all over each other.  There is nothing compelling 
about hearing two people talking at once. Simply pointing at the other per-
son right before your ﬁ nal word can correct this and make it sound seam-
less. It takes only a moment to point at the phone to signal that you are 
going to a caller or the computer for music. Point at yourself to signal that 
you have something to say. Use the slit-the-throat signal to show “cut this 
off.” Most teams get away from hand signals after a while, but if the timing 
gets off, go back to them.
Tom Zarecki’s Thoughts about Airchecking Teams
■ The thing you should not do in these team sessions is severely 
criticize any one person, especially the primary host.
■ Most of any meeting with teams should be positive, upbeat, and 
motivational. As in individual sessions, if something is great, react 
accordingly. Applaud. Play it again. Compliment speciﬁ cs.
■ Continue to meet with your primary host, and other team members, 
separately, to reap the beneﬁ ts of conﬁ dential sessions.
■ Before your meeting ends, make sure to set the date for the next 
aircheck session.
Finally, as Guy Zapoleon says, “Every great team needs to practice; you 
have to dribble before you can dunk.”
Don’t Rely on Unreliable Feedback
The news director and staff of one of the most dreadful and lazy newsrooms 
I have ever seen felt no need to improve or change because they received the 
occasional fan letter. Remember, even the worst show has one listener.
Consider the talk host who opens the microphone and asks for com-
ments on his or her show. Sure, there may be some helpful ideas gener-
ated, but if your goal is to increase your audience, the people you really 
need to ask are not listening at all. The feedback you are generating is 
not germane. If you ask a retired community leader what he thinks of the 
big modern rock station in town, his comments may be heartfelt, but they 
are useless.

Creating Powerful Radio: Airchecking         243
Untutored feedback sources can be deadly. I once worked with a sta-
tion where the manager’s wife was offended by a single remark on the 
station’s morning show. As a result, the morning show was canned. That air 
talent walked across the street, got a job at the competition, and became 
No. 1 in the market!
There is also a phenomenon where people may have a strong reaction to 
a personality and say they hate him or her, but they listen every day. The same 
person who strongly claims not to like a show can often quote you chapter 
and verse what he hated on the air that morning, and the day before.
The moral here is this: Powerful talent causes powerful reactions, both 
negative and positive. If your goal is to get ratings, understand what you are 
really hearing. Don’t react to unreliable feedback.
One general manager actually ﬁ red a top talent because the complaint 
he received “was a particularly well-written letter that made an excellent 
case.” Again, the talent simply packed up his huge audience and went over 
to the competition.
When radio executive David G. Hall was a program director, he loved 
angry listener mail. On any given day, you could ﬁ nd the most vituperative  
letters tacked to his ofﬁ ce door. You could hear the best irate phone calls 
by checking the station’s Web site. Complaints, boycotts, and protests can 
also be a source of great free publicity for your station, ultimately generat-
ing new listeners.
Where Is the Line?
With creative performers, there is a real danger of stepping over the line. 
Andy Beaubien points out that unreliable feedback can encourage talent 
to cater to an ever-decreasing segment of their audience: 
Content must be judged not only in terms of entertainment and infor-
mation value but by legal and public-taste standards as well. Many 
personalities constantly test these boundaries. The PD’s job is to help 
personalities to stay within the necessary parameters without compro-
mising the creative process.
For obvious reasons, content that is offensive to the target audience 
or portions of it is to be avoided. Content that is acceptable to your target 

 
244         Valerie Geller
audience but not necessarily to the overall market may be permissible and 
even necessary.
Personalities often ﬁ nd that certain kinds of “on-the-edge” material 
are very well received by a particular segment of their audience. In reality, 
that segment may represent only a small portion of the target audience. 
However, minority audience reinforcement can be very inﬂ uential. If a 
personality is allowed to be swayed by this narrow audience segment, the 
overall cume, or cumulative audience, will be reduced to an ever-shrinking 
core.
This phenomenon is a silent killer. Because the active core can be quite 
vocal about its preferences, the departure of the greater cume can remain 
undetected until long after serious damage has taken place.
When you drive away your audience—that is the line.
It All Works Together
The aircheck process can actually help with show prep. Lorna Ozmon sug-
gests closing the aircheck session with a discussion of new ideas, including 
prep. She says:
Look at the next month’s calendar, and brainstorm for ways to capitalize 
on holidays or special events within the context of the talent’s work on 
your radio station. Bring new books, magazines, and newspaper articles 
that could serve as new sources of creative inspiration. Even if none of the 
ideas discussed are ever used on the air, this process helps keep the seeds 
of creativity alive.
Everybody’s a Critic
Airchecking works best if there is only one person doing the feedback ses-
sions. It can be very frustrating to hear comments from too many sources. 
The talent already gets feedback from his or her audience, producer, spouse, 
children, and people around the station. If you have clearly established 
your objectives and criteria for deciding what a good show is, adding the 
opinions and standards of others can only muddy the waters.

245
Creating Powerful Radio
 Promotion
“Promotion is the exploitation of opportunity.”
— Doug Harris
What Is Radio Promotion?
Simply, promotion is anything that puts the word out about your station. 
Promotion gets people talking about and listening to your product.
Promotions are events such as contests, publicity stunts, and outside 
advertising on billboards or TV.  “Promos,” on the other hand, are the spots 
or segments you run on your station that support your own programming.
Radio promotion has two goals: To draw in new listeners and to get 
current listeners to tune in more often. Promotion is also a sales tool for 
additional revenue while expanding the station’s audience.
Doug Harris, marketing and promotions consultant, believes that mar-
keting and promotion professionals are often the most misunderstood and 
underappreciated people in a radio station.
C H A P T E R  23

246         Valerie Geller
When operating budgets get tight, all expenses related to marketing 
become suspect, and because the effects of good advertising and promotion 
are not always immediately apparent, these funds are often the ﬁ rst to 
be cut. As the radio industry has become more cost conscious, traditional 
advertising campaigns for radio stations have become scarce, reserved for 
station launches, the debut of new morning shows, and the occasional cash 
contest. The current trend in the marketing and promotion of a broadcast 
property is to “get results with less.”
That’s not an impossible thing to do, but it requires a certain amount of cre-
ativity and planning. Doug has a couple of great stories of stations that launched 
successfully by “out-thinking rather than outspending” their competition:
Alternative rock station KPNT-FM, “The Point,” launched in St. Louis, 
Missouri, with a special press conference. All the invited journalists were 
from local high school and university papers. At the “First Student Press 
Conference,” these amateur journalists got the professional treatment, 
including interviews with the new station’s personalities and a hot new alter-
native music artist. The station awarded a $500 educational grant for the 
best article, resulting in a great deal of press about KPNT in student publica-
tions around the city and an implied endorsement by the writers and their 
papers. Within two ratings periods, KPNT became a Top 10 radio station in 
a crowded marketplace, and a leader among school-aged listeners.
KTBZ-FM, “The Buzz,” in Houston, Texas, was looking for a memorable 
way to inform its listeners about its scheduled move up the dial from 107.5 
to 94.5. Reading from a supposedly “ofﬁ cial” letter from station manage-
ment, the station broadcast announcements that on a certain date, “The 
Buzz would cease to exist at 107.5.” Panic swept through the loyal audi-
ence, and thousands of people called the radio station to protest. The sta-
tion invited people to “Save The Buzz” rallies across the city, encouraging 
them to write, call, and e-mail The Buzz’s management. Weeks later the 
station announced that because of the audience’s support, it would be get-
ting a new, stronger signal. Then the station invited the audience to a free 
“I Saved The Buzz” concert. Although the signal switch and even the free 
concert had been planned months in advance, the station was able to maxi-
mize the impact of these events by giving listeners credit for “saving The 
Buzz.” What could have been a disaster (and indeed was for the station 
that took The Buzz’s place on the dial) helped loyalty among Buzz listen-
ers that has lasted for years.

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         247
Getting into Listeners’ Minds
What does it take to earn a place in the mind of a radio listener? Harris 
says:
People remember what is important to them, that which makes a profound 
impression. These are usually the things or experiences that they perceive 
to be either ﬁ rst, biggest, or best. As an example, many people can tell you 
that the name of the highest mountain in the world is Mt. Everest. Far 
fewer could give you the names of the second or third highest peaks. So, 
the trick becomes to convince your listener, or target listener, that your 
station is or has the ﬁ rst, biggest, or best of something.
What types of promotions make a lasting impression? Harris describes 
them with the amusing and memorable acronym “SAFO SHRIMPS”:
The SAFO SHRIMPS Theory of Consumer Interest
Sex—also romance, love, and relationships
Achievement—songs in a row, award-winning programming
Fantasy—contest prizes or an experience with element of fantasy that 
cannot be bought
Outrage—edgy content, dramatic publicity stunts, and “shock talk”
Spectacle—uses “theater of the mind,” station “roadshows,” and live 
broadcasts; gives audiences something they’ve never seen before
Humor—major personalities, morning shows, comedy bits
Rescue—blood drives, fund-raising efforts, human interest stories
Injustice—news of the day; bad judgment calls by sports ofﬁ cials, 
politicians, etc.
Money—contest prizes, lottery results, stories on government spending
Patriotism—love or affection for sports teams, community, country, 
or home
Scandal—gossip, celebrity news

248         Valerie Geller
To decide which of the SAFO SHRIMPS tactics your station will use 
to lure listeners, Harris advises, “Learn as much as you can about your 
target audience and their needs.” There are, of course, lots of research 
companies you can pay to provide this kind of information, but if you 
don’t have the budget, your station can beneﬁ t from simply reviewing the 
news headlines that other media, like broadcast, print, and the Internet, 
are using to grab the attention of the same people you are looking to 
interest.
Keeping Your Promise
Doug Harris is also an expert on “branding” radio stations. “Branding” 
is often spoken of in hushed tones, as if it were a mystical phenomenon. 
But a one-word deﬁ nition can simplify and clarify the meaning and 
importance of branding. In the world of broadcasting, a brand is a 
“promise.” Every time a listener encounters a radio brand, that station’s 
“promise” must be fulﬁ lled. A station that promotes a safe haven for 
listeners and their families cannot allow its personalities to use racy 
or “blue” humor. Ever. If a listener lured by this “safe and fun for the 
whole family” promise tunes in to hear a dirty joke or even something 
slightly inappropriate, the “promise” has been broken. If a station does 
something out of character from its image, it risks changing that image 
in the minds of the audience and devaluing its brand. A brand is the 
collection of emotions and beliefs that comes to mind when a consumer 
hears the name of that radio station, sees its logo, or meets one of its 
personalities. A successful marketer protects his brand by ensuring that 
all of these contacts promote a single, pure image.
The same phenomenon works for radio stations. A radio station or sta-
tion personality must do something signiﬁ cant in order to be remembered 
by a listener. It must be something that the listener cares enough about to 
form an opinion. Most markets have dozens of radio stations, and most lis-
teners are “button-pushers”. If the station, its personalities, or its program-
ming are going to be remembered, they must send a compelling message, 
from a credible source, in a dramatic fashion. And this message must be 
sent with frequency and consistency.
Doug Harris breaks the process down into the steps described in the 
following subsections.

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         249
Deﬁ ne the Target
“The programming and marketing teams should identify a primary 
 target, describing your intended listener’s age, gender, and programming 
 preferences.” Harris continues:
Your programming team may have purchased research to ﬁ nd the “hole” 
in your market, that segment of the listening audience which is not being 
served by another radio station or another piece of programming.
The research may point out the radio stations from which your new station 
hopes to steal its audience. Your marketing team may visit some of these 
stations’ events to see the audience in person. Other general information 
from research companies may reveal your intended listeners’ tastes in 
reading materials, entertainment, automobiles, vacation destinations, and 
even food. Before you set your marketing strategy, look at all the research 
available. Know as much about your audience as possible.
By knowing your audience, you ensure that you are promoting some-
thing that will be of genuine interest. Address a real need, giving listeners 
a real solution to a real problem. Offering a three-week vacation for two to 
another country may not be as useful to your target listener, a 33-year-old 
mother of two young children, as a weekend at Disneyworld. Promote the 
right thing at the right time to the right person.
It may help you to follow the practice of many radio stations of creat-
ing a proﬁ le of a ﬁ ctitious person with a name and a life story in order to 
imagine your target listener. Some programmers have even been known to 
place a photo of a stylized, ﬁ ctitious family of this type in their broadcast 
studios to keep the on-air hosts focused on the target.
An additional tool for visualizing the target listener is “LifeStage 
Demographics.” You can read more on LifeStage Demographics in Chapter 
25. Whatever strategy you use to create and promote powerful radio, it is 
important to know who you’re talking to.
Identify the Emotional Needs of Your Target
People remember the things they connect with emotionally. A message like 
“Ten songs in a row” or “More music in the morning” would seem to be 
a great selling tool because it is fact-based. It’s true that claims like “The 
Rock Station” or “Hot Talk” tell the listener what to expect and can help 
differentiate a station from its competitors, if the audience cares about the 
claim. But emotional slogans like “We’re with you” and “The sound of the 
city” often connect with a listener’s lifestyle or feelings. Some programmers 

250         Valerie Geller
have found that this emotional imagery is more important than making an 
empirical claim about music or talk.
The very name of your station can add an emotional component to 
its positioning message. “The Edge” suggests a cutting-edge approach to 
music. “The Beat” connotes a rhythmic music presentation and hints that 
the station is in touch with the “beat” of the market. Monikers like “The 
Hawk,” “The Colt,” and “The Eagle” suggest that the station has the char-
acteristics of those animals, like a feisty, proud, or playful spirit. And station 
names like “Jack” and “Alice” are meant to help promote a “we do what 
we want” kind of programming that appeals to a particular audience and 
positions the station as having a “personality” of its own.
The personality aspects of stations are an additional tool in position-
ing your station, as it works to compete with the ﬂ exible and individual 
choices listeners can make using their portable media players and custom 
computer music channels.
With micro-positioned formats on the rise, marketers and program-
mers may be best served by promoting an attitude, in addition to their 
music position and dial position, to earn a lasting place in the listener’s 
memory.
Along with Doug’s thoughts about building an emotional connection 
with creative and meaningful slogans and names, it’s important to promote 
the on-air personalities at every opportunity. The emotional connection 
and relationship that a listener has to an on-air personality or presenter is 
a powerful incentive to select your station. For example, promoting your 
evening host taking requests for love songs at a set time builds an additional 
personal bridge to your listeners.
Give Me a Sign
To get the most use out of your station’s logo as a marketing and promo-
tional tool, Doug Harris makes these suggestions: “Your logo is part of 
building an emotional connection with your listener. Make sure that the 
artwork and the image it represents engage rather than offend or confuse 
your audience.
Take a trip to the grocery store. Companies spend millions of dollars 
researching which colors and packaging styles appeal to different sexes 
and age groups. Learn from their work. Compare a beer bottle or a can 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         251
of charcoal lighter ﬂ uid with household cleaning supplies and shampoo. 
You’ll notice a big difference that you may incorporate into your station’s 
“packaging.”
Be careful. Doug recommends that a logo be unique and distinctive 
but, more importantly, easy to read and identify. “Many stations make the 
mistake of using elaborate artwork that overpowers the call letters and dial 
position. It may look gorgeous, but if it is hard to read and or remember, 
you have not effectively promoted your station.”
Doug mentions some other forms of “logo abuse” that include “use of 
colors that do not read well at night (a concern for billboards), or a font 
size that is too small or too fancy (how’s your audience’s eyesight?). Since 
logos are often reduced to black-and-white versions for use in some forms 
of media, good marketers must make sure it translates well. When it comes 
to creating a logo, stick to professional artists and a simple approach.”
Even though Doug Harris is strong on research, when crafting a mar-
keting and promotional identity, he still points out that “legions of success-
ful stations have been launched on ‘gut feelings’ of brave programmers 
and marketers.” There’s no substitute for life experience. Research alone 
won’t get you there. Your best asset for promoting a radio station is having 
a great product to promote.
Product, Permanence, and Promotion
Your product is what you do. Ideally, you have built a ﬁ ne station with 
creative elements, good shows, interesting news and information, plus top 
personalities.
Permanence involves keeping those shows consistent by running them 
at regular times so the audience can develop the habit of listening.
Now comes promotion—letting the audience know where you are and 
what you are doing. You can promote any element of your radio station, 
as long as it’s good, interesting radio. Don’t knock yourself out barking 
people into the tent if the circus isn’t great.
Promotions have to be as good and creative as the rest of your station. 
If your station is intense, dynamic, creative, funny, and passionate, your 
promos should be too. If they are not, you’re missing an opportunity to 

252         Valerie Geller
generate revenue, get new listeners, and create powerful radio. A powerful 
promotion should:
■ Promote the station’s image as well as its product
■ Build passion, emotion, and listener loyalty
■ Involve your listeners
■ Ensure that people who are not participating will still enjoy 
hearing the contest
Technology makes it possible to monitor listener’s habits in real time. 
This is changing the way stations schedule promotions. In the United States, 
it has made sense to run promotions in connection with the big Arbitron 
ratings books. Many stations have had success starting their promotions 
on Thursdays because that’s when listeners begin keeping track of what 
they’re listening to in the Arbitron diaries.
Promoting the News
Your own airwaves can be one of the best vehicles available for marketing the 
news and information you offer. Take a small excerpt from a reporter’s “magic 
moment” on the air, or a piece of a great interview on a breaking story, and 
create a powerful image-enhancing promo. It might sound like this:
If you weren’t listening to Z-97 news yesterday at noon, here’s 
what you missed: [insert audio of magic moment]. For news as it 
happens, it’s Z-97!
This “performance promo” lets the audience know that if they’re not listening 
to you, they’re really missing out. This method applies to more than news 
programming. Record audio of everything. Save “magic moments” from 
callers, talk shows, contests, and monologues. They make great promos! Magic 
moment promos have an extra beneﬁ t. Often, listeners who hear the promo 
genuinely believe they heard the show from which it came. Your entertaining 
promo can get you credit for listening that didn’t actually take place.
If your production director doesn’t recognize a powerful radio moment 
when he or she hears one, or can’t spend time listening during the day, it’s 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         253
something a good producer should save or note. Make sure your station 
has a system in place to get these creative moments into the production 
studio and back onto the airwaves with a minimum of delay.
You can also create promos around speciﬁ c station personalities. At 
one Arizona station, a news promotion was built around individual report-
ers, including the then-morning police reporter. Here’s the basic script:
While you’re asleep, KTAR’s Rod Petersen is out cruising the streets, 
looking for trouble . . . “And I’ll ﬁ nd it too” [says Rod]. The best police 
and crime coverage on KTAR, Newsradio 620.
A Scoop for a “Scoop”
Another way to engage your listeners while promoting your news product 
is to ask the audience to help you. Most news and talk TV and radio sta-
tions employ some version of the “tip line.” And viewers or listeners may 
do more than just alert you to breaking news stories or events, they may 
be able to provide eyewitness reports or actual video or audio that you can 
use. Don’t underestimate the attraction for many listeners in hearing their 
name on the radio or getting credit for a “scoop.” This works for trafﬁ c tips 
as well. You will hear many radio stations thanking “mobile [or cell] caller 
Bill” for the information on the load of chickens that fell off a truck blocking 
the three left lanes of a major highway.
Many stations take this to the next level and thank listeners who par-
ticipate with modest cash awards or gifts. A promotions director in San 
Francisco, with a limited budget, came up with the idea of “a scoop for a 
scoop,” asking listeners to call with news tips. Whenever the station used 
one, the caller would receive a coupon good for free ice cream. Listeners 
from three counties called in to get those free scoops of ice cream. The tip 
line is not a contest, the “reward” or prize is a “thank you.”
You can look at listener tip lines in one of two ways: as a lot of extra 
work screening the phone messages for veracity and tracking down leads, 
or as an opportunity to eclipse your competition by getting ﬁ rst crack at 
new stories that no one else has.
Let callers know on your outgoing message that this is not the place for 
anonymous sourcing. If a listener wants credit for letting the public know 
that a neighborhood grocer is storing toxic waste in the back room, he will 

254         Valerie Geller
probably receive it. If he wants to keep his job as a grocery store cashier at 
that market, the tip line is not the place to leave a message.
People who call in with news stories are likely altogether different than 
those who would enter a contest or competition. Instead of “winning,” they 
want to be part of the station and believe they have something of value to share. 
And the station gets another promotional opportunity.  When someone’s story 
is on the air, he is going to get all his friends and family to listen. You could not 
ask for a better promotion for your radio station than a personal recommen-
dation from one of your listeners.
“I Won! I Won!”: Doug Harris on Creative Contesting
Contesting is about fantasy, big or small. We live in a cynical world, but 
many dream of winning big. In the best contests, everyone is a winner. 
Listeners get to play a part in an adventure or game, where nothing nega-
tive can happen, and even if you lose, people walk away feeling that it was 
fun to play.
The audience likes to imagine what life would be like if they met their 
favorite star, won a million dollars, drove a red Ferrari, traveled around the 
world, got their dream kitchen, or owned their own home.
The goal for an effective contest: to get people to believe that if they 
listen to this radio station, their lives could change.
Doug Harris breaks contesting into several different categories. He 
points out two factors controlling the likelihood that a listener will par-
ticipate in a contest. “Generally speaking, the harder or more complicated 
your contest is to play, the fewer people will play it, and the bigger the prize 
or payoff, the more people are likely to enter.
The Pros and Cons of Contests
Designated Caller Contests
The on-air personality offers a prize or a chance to play a game to caller X. 
This is easy to do and easy to understand, but it limits participation to the 
most active audience members. Most people never call radio stations and 
believe their chances of winning are very small. Generally it is not exciting 
radio, unless the winner is extremely animated. However, many program-

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         255
mers believe that “teasing” the audience with an upcoming contest makes 
people listen longer.
Trivia Contests
The on-air personality solicits an answer to a question. Because the audi-
ence gets to “play along,” even if they are not actually calling in, there 
is some added entertainment value. This is also a very simple contest to 
explain and conduct.
Recall Contests
This requires a bit more from your listeners. They are asked to tune in at a 
particular time of day to hear a code word, phrase, or song. They must then 
listen again later that day for a chance to call in and repeat the information 
to win a prize. The purpose of this form of contesting is to promote listen-
ing to a number of dayparts.
E-mail, Fax, or “Snail” Mail Contests
In all of these, a listener gets to choose his or her own time to participate. 
With a longer time frame, more people can participate. Mail-in responses 
require more time than fax or e-mail contesting, but all three remove the 
“run to the phone” or “stay by the radio” obstacle. These contests can be 
trivia or recall based, or can simply ask for a listener’s contact informa-
tion for a random drawing. Here you can also get more complex responses, 
such as for an essay or photo contest. (E-mail and instant- or text-message 
contesting can occur in real time and has produced some great talk radio. 
Personality shows can generate content in the form of audio for on-air use, 
photos and videos for the station’s Web site, and stories or information that 
can be used in a variety of ways.)
Performance-Based Contests
Listeners may be asked to perform a stunt or a task over the phone or in 
person at a speciﬁ c location. Of course, the more difﬁ cult, labor intensive, or 
potentially embarrassing the stunt, the smaller the potential universe of players 
becomes. In most cases, a substantial prize is required to get people to partici-
pate in these contests, but when they work, they can be a lot of fun. If they’re 
theatrical enough, they can get your station covered on TV and in print.

256         Valerie Geller
Here are some examples of contests that got a lot of TV and print 
attention:
■ To position its morning show as outrageous, contemporary hit radio 
station WZZU-FM in Spokane, Washington, conducted a search 
for the hairiest back in the city, inviting male listeners to come 
to a nightclub and show off their “pelts” while dancing. The winner 
got a cash prize and a laser hair removal treatment.
■ That’s the same feeling rock station KLOL-FM in Houston, Texas, 
was going for when it invited men who weighed over 300 pounds 
to enter the Fat Man’s Dance Off at a local nightclub by offering 
a $500 cash prize. Over a dozen men participated and the winner 
got a standing ovation and left with a pretty blonde.
■ For years, WEBN-FM in Cincinnati, Ohio, punned on the 
American national holiday of Labor Day by staging a “pregnant 
bikini contest.” It drew huge crowds, and a lot of TV cameras.
All of these contests took advantage of the public’s interest in the 
bizarre and unusual. In addition to all the free press, stations that can post 
photos of these types of spectacles on their Web sites can get more “promo-
tional mileage” out of them.
Performance-based contesting can work over the radio, as well. 
KRBE-FM, in Houston, Texas, challenged listeners to have an on-air tele-
phone conversation with their mothers during which the listeners would 
say something so outrageous that the moms would use foul language. 
“Make Your Momma Curse” has been used by dozens of radio stations 
around the world.
In both on-air and off-air performance contesting, this rule of thumb 
applies: The more difﬁ cult or more potentially embarrassing a contest is, 
the bigger the prize must be.
Can You Buy an Audience?
A Chicago radio station once ran a promotion called “The Million Dollar 
Minute.” It threw a million one-dollar bills on the ﬂ oor of a bank vault and 
a single listener was given sixty seconds to scoop up as much as she could. 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         257
The station calculated she would walk away with about $10,000. But, owing 
to a series of errors, the winner managed to grab $106,083. And the sta-
tion dropped in the ratings. Many stations have tried giving away huge cash 
prizes, cars, and cruises, only to ﬁ nd listeners deserting when the contest is 
over.
While a powerful promotion can initially bring large numbers of new 
listeners “into the tent,” unless you build a connection with them, no mat-
ter how big the prize, no matter how creative the contest, you cannot truly 
“buy an audience.” Over the long haul, unless your station entertains and 
informs, providing a real sense of connection, you won’t keep the listeners 
who have come for the contest. Listeners may love their prizes or sell them 
for a proﬁ t later, but providing content is ultimately the way to keep your 
prize—the new audience you have won.
The launch of a new station or show is one instance where a massive 
promotion or marketing effort can really pay off. Your objective is to bring 
people into the tent long enough for them to get a sample of your program-
ming. Doug Harris calls this the “jet-assisted takeoff,” resulting in a short-
term spike in ratings.
Even though the majority of new listeners are coming to play the con-
test, if your programming is deserving, enough of them will stay to justify 
the expenditure. Another time to spend promotional or marketing dollars 
is when you’ve hired a high-proﬁ le show away from your competition and 
you want listeners to know where to ﬁ nd their favorite host. That expendi-
ture nearly always gets a positive result.
Lots of small prizes often work better than one major prize. More 
people can win, and more importantly, more people believe they can win. 
These promotions can be less costly and they achieve the same goal of get-
ting people to talk about what’s happening on your station. Added up, the 
more winners, the more people are thinking good thoughts and spreading 
the word about your station.
The Bake Sale
Some of the best promotions in radio are spontaneous, developing from 
programming on the air. Here’s a wonderful example: Dan’s Bake Sale.
The idea for Dan’s Bake Sale came from a conversation between talk 
show host Rush Limbaugh and one of his listeners. Rush publishes his own 
newsletter, available by paid subscription. “Dan the Listener” from Fort 

258         Valerie Geller
Collins, Colorado, said he’d like a subscription but was short on money and 
couldn’t afford one. In keeping with Rush’s political philosophy of entre-
preneurship and independence and his sense of humor, Rush decided to 
have a “bake sale,” selling chocolate chip cookies to raise money for Dan’s 
subscription.
It became a huge event. Newspapers reported all ﬂ ights into Fort 
Collins booked for the weekend of the bake sale. People planned camping 
trips just to be there. Rush ﬂ ew into town and thousands of fans turned out 
to meet him. It was huge, it was fun, it promoted Rush’s show, and it created 
a news event covered by TV, radio, and the national press. It also sold a lot 
of subscriptions to Rush’s newsletter!
Other Favorite Promotions
Some of the best promotions tie into public service, beneﬁ ting your com-
munity while getting the word out about your radio station. They don’t 
have to be expensive. A good promotion generates press that your station 
couldn’t possibly buy. Here are a few success stories:
Orange Barrel Holiday
In the early 1980s, Albuquerque, New Mexico, was plagued by road con-
struction projects. Trafﬁ c was a mess. Drivers were going crazy trying to 
maneuver around orange construction barrels, which were closing off lanes 
and streets everywhere.
The market’s full-service station, KOB, decided to have some fun with 
a bad situation. The station contacted the company that made the orange 
barrels and devised the “Orange Barrel Holiday.” Listeners signed up to 
win an all-expense-paid trip to the small town in Indiana where the barrels 
were manufactured. Highlights included a tour of the barrel factory and 
lunch in the plant cafeteria. The promotion worked by combining a sense 
of community involvement with a sense of humor.
The Ugliest Weed
One drought-stricken summer in California’s San Joaquin Valley, radio 
station KFBK/Sacramento urged its listeners to send in the ugliest weed 
growing in their ﬁ elds or gardens. This idea struck a chord in the largely 
agricultural area. Listeners responded in a big way. KFBK got so many 
tumorous growths, many of them enormous, that they ﬁ lled up several 
storerooms and part of a warehouse.

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         259
The grower of the ugliest weed won a cash prize and some free garden-
ing supplies from the sponsor and became a local celebrity. People in town 
talked about the contest, and it generated free publicity for the station on 
local television and in the newspapers. This is a great example of a promo-
tion ﬁ tting a station and its community.
Mystery History
At the same time each day, WABC/New York played bits of audio from an 
actual historic moment. Listeners had to guess who was speaking to win 
prizes. Since politics, news, and discussion of current events ﬁ ll much of the 
broadcast day, “Mystery History” works well on news and talk radio sta-
tions. It helps if a talented production director puts this contest together.
Singles Night at the Supermarket
This promotion combined knowledge of audience lifestyle with practical 
considerations such as sex, food, and revenue. The sponsor was the larg-
est supermarket chain in California. The station, KIOI-FM/San Francisco, 
broadcast live from a store location and invited its target listeners, singles 
in their 20s and 30s, to meet the disc jockeys and each other. The station 
handed out free T-shirts with the station logo, and listeners wore them as 
they pushed their shopping carts through the aisles.
More than a thousand listeners turned out and several romantic 
 relationships and one marriage resulted. The sponsor loved the promotion 
because it brought lots of people to the market. The event created great 
word-of-mouth publicity for the station and its client.
Go to Hell
This falls under the category of “geography joke” promotions. Stations 
often give away trips to the usual places. With a little creativity and an atlas, 
however, you can go the extra mile. WMIR in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, 
created a Halloween promotion.
A check of the map turned up the town of Hell, in nearby Michigan. 
On-air promos promised listeners an all-expense-paid trip to Hell on 
Halloween, complete with dinner at the Devil’s Den restaurant. The fact 
that this particular “Hell” was in Michigan was mentioned only once in 
each promo, and not very prominently.

260         Valerie Geller
The promotion set the town “on ﬁ re.” Thousands of people signed up 
for the opportunity to go to Hell  .  .  .  and come back. A little research may 
turn up many such opportunities within driving distance of your station: 
“Win a free trip to Tokyo (Nebraska),” and so on.
A Promotion Checklist
“The promotions or marketing manager is the ‘PD’ of the off-air side of 
your radio station,” says consultant Michael Hedges.
Michael Hedges’s Tips for Creating Powerful Radio Promotions
■ Ask, “Does this promotion make sense?” Every promotion must 
make sense within the marketing objectives of the radio station.
■ Less is truly more. Choose your promotions carefully. When 
presented with ﬁ ve (major) promotional ideas for a month, choose 
the ONE that has the greatest likelihood of succeeding. Do that one.
■ They remember! Every time the radio station is presented to the 
public, an impression is made. These impressions are cumulative in 
the mind of the listener. Listeners are equally likely to remember 
your faults or your merits. Your very polite listeners will never call 
to tell you how disgusting and dirty the remote van looked, but you 
can bet one will tell ten friends that your station looked tacky.
■ When designing a promotion, always ask yourself how it can be 
made bigger. Radio is show biz. Show it to them!
■ Don’t outsmart yourself. Complicated promotions rarely succeed 
because listeners just don’t have time to participate. You can build 
interest in a promotion only to the extent that the listeners see a 
payoff. The promotion will fail if the length of the rules promo goes 
over thirty seconds.
■ It’s the details. Think thirty times about each step through which the 
gentle listener must pass to play the game, attend the event, and win 
the prize. Use their eyes and ears, not yours. The wrong telephone 
number on an entry form is totally inexcusable.
■ Remember the payoff. Sales promotions can work if, and only if, 
each and every listener-participant comes away from the event 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         261
feeling that the time and energy he or she spent participating was in 
some way compensated.
■ Remember to get paid. Plan for local media coverage. Think of ways 
to make your promotion interesting to them. Make sure that every 
local editor knows about your promotion well in advance. Have 
photos of every contest winner published in the local or community 
newspaper.
■ The promo is better than the bit. Former Dallas radio personality 
Ron Chapman’s “ﬁ rst and only law of promotion”: The production 
must be the best element on your radio station. The writing must 
be tight, smart, and crisp. If a promotion, event, or contest doesn’t 
sound exciting on your radio station, listeners will never hear it.
■ All promotions are equal. Listeners don’t necessarily know the 
difference between programming promotions and sales promotions 
and they don’t mind being sold products or services compatible 
with their expectations of the radio station. Anything sold in an 
entertaining way is, well, entertaining.
Steer Clear of Contest Junkies
Warning: There is a group of people who live to play radio contests. Make 
sure your contest is legal and restrictions are clear. You can tailor your rules 
in order to weed out the contest addicts. Your rules should be structured in 
such a way as to give the average person the best chance of winning.
Avoid Disasters
Whatever your promotion, plan it carefully. Do a little informal research. 
Run your promotion idea by a few people around the ofﬁ ce. See if they can 
spot any obvious ﬂ aws.
A storyline about a contest was dramatized on the 1980s TV show 
WKRP in Cincinnati. Although this contest played out on a network sit-
com, it could easily be an example of a real station promotion gone horri-
bly wrong: It was the standard American “Thanksgiving Turkey Giveaway,” 
with a twist.
Instead of handing out coupons for frozen turkeys, the station would 
drop live turkeys from a helicopter to glide down to listeners waiting in a 
parking lot below. Unfortunately, the promotion department overlooked 

262         Valerie Geller
one important consideration—turkeys can’t ﬂ y. As ﬁ ctitious newsman Les 
Nessman reported live on the air, “Turkeys are hitting the ground like bags 
of wet cement!” Be certain your promotion will “ﬂ y” before you drop it on 
the public.
No Budget? No Problem
For some reason, many station managers do not believe in spending money 
on marketing. When faced with this challenge, Doug Harris says, “Use 
OPM.” What is “OPM”? It’s “other people’s money” or “other people’s 
media.” How does one get hold of other people’s money? Actually it is 
not very hard. As Doug Harris points out: “Clients of a radio station have 
cars, electronic products, restaurant gift certiﬁ cates, trips, tickets, spa days, 
and access to places and people all of which can be incorporated into sta-
tion giveaways.” All those clients ask in return is airtime and maybe an 
appearance by you or one of your presenters from your station van. Here 
is where the sales department can be your best ally. Of course, they will 
expect advertising revenue in return, but that is fair.
If the sales department is unable to help, or if you are promoting a 
noncommercial radio station, you still have options. As a member of the 
media, you have access to cultural and entertainment events and items that 
your listeners do not.
One example of creative problem solving to promote a show in America 
came from public radio. A quiz show,  just starting out, had no money for 
prizes, so the promoters talked one of their network’s news presenters into 
recording an outgoing message on the voice mail system of each week’s win-
ner. And they made fun of themselves for not having money for better prizes. 
The audience got the joke, and now, several years later, though the program is 
a success, listeners still demand a chance to win that news presenter’s voice on 
their phone answering machine. Now that bit is an integral part of the show.
Let’s say you work at a noncommercial jazz station with no funds to 
spare. Ask a band that gets a lot of airplay from your station to put on a 
concert just for your listeners, and borrow a local jazz club for the venue. 
Everybody wins—the club gets exposure, the band gets airplay, your audi-
ence feels special and appreciated. Cost to you: zero.
Although you may not be spending any money on your event, it is 
 advisable to detail in writing the value of the things your station is  providing, 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         263
and the value of the products or services you will receive in return. Make 
sure all the necessary people sign off on the event, and you can avoid some 
nasty surprises later.
Do not be afraid to use your contacts to arrange experiences for listeners 
that they would not otherwise have. Celebrities are often loyal to the stations 
that ﬁ rst recognized their talent and promoted them early in their careers.
“OPM” Programming
Make sure to use what Doug Harris calls “other people’s media” (OPM) 
every chance you get.
Listener polls, publicity stunts, and the traditionally wacky things that 
radio stations do are often attractive to television stations and print outlets, 
provided that they are sufﬁ ciently out of the ordinary to be of interest to 
the public. Of course, a good place to look is at your own company if it 
owns newspapers, magazines, TV, outdoor, or other media. But don’t stop 
there. Create relationships and educate yourself on the needs of other 
media outlets in your area. And be prepared to give them content in a 
form that they can most easily use.
Most cities have a media contact list published by the visitors’ bureau, 
or you can do a little homework and create one. Then ﬁ nd someone on 
your staff who can write good press releases on a regular basis. Use this list 
to promote station activities, events, and personalities. Remember, these 
outlets and electronic media like the Internet are always in need of fresh 
entertaining content. If you can provide something interesting or exciting 
for them to cover, they will.
Approaching Television
How do you get a TV station to promote your radio station? As a 
New York City television assignment editor, Howard Price is the gate-
keeper to getting stories on WABC TV. Here’s what he says you need to 
know about pitching a radio story to television:
■ Think about how you can break through the thousand or so faxes 
spewed daily onto the assignment editor’s desk, the nine phone 
lines that ring constantly, and the 330 channels of scanner chatter 
that must be monitored.

264         Valerie Geller
■ Don’t get frustrated if you call a TV news desk and they are 
brusque with you or if you hear “no.” It just means they are busy. 
Try again another time.
■ Get a feel for what plays on the station you are pitching. Like 
radio’s many formats, each TV station’s programming targets 
speciﬁ c audiences and demographics.
■ Call once. Fax once. E-mail once. And never call when the newscast 
is on the air. Make sure your faxes and e-mails contain the 
facts—that’s what the stations really need.
■ Pitch things that dovetail with the day’s news—especially if you 
are a news or talk station—and don’t pitch a goofball story on 
a serious news day. It may work better to promote your “light” story 
to a TV station on a slow news day.
■ Keep TV posted regularly, and with as much advance notice as 
possible, on your scheduled guests.
■ Know the TV station’s deadlines. Most coverage for morning news 
shows is locked in by 4 a.m.; for noon shows, by 10:30 a.m.; for the 
5:00 and 6:00 p.m. news, it’s about 3:30 p.m.; and for 10 or 11 p.m. 
newscasts, by about 9:30 p.m. The exception, of course, is for 
legitimate breaking news.
■ Start your events on time, but run them long enough for latecomers 
to have a chance at getting some pictures and sound. Deliver 
what you promise on your press release or pitch to the 
newsroom.
■ Plaster your call letters everywhere. To make sure your name, dial 
position, and images get the play you want, post them all over your 
studios and at your events. That way, even if they aren’t mentioned, 
the audience will see them.
■ No pictures—no story. TV is a visual medium. Compelling pictures 
are what drive it. A bunch of folks sitting around a radio studio 
don’t make for exciting TV, unless of course they are high-proﬁ le 
folks making news exclusively on your air.
■ Be “TV friendly.” Create broadcast spaces inside and outside your 
studios that TV crews can easily negotiate to get the shots you want 
them to get. TV crews need extra time to put their trucks in place, 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         265
string their cables, etc. Make sure there are electrical outlets in your 
studios that they can access. Giving them time to edit your story 
helps, but remember, “live” is TV’s magic word.
■ If your radio station is co-owned with a TV station, labor every day 
to strengthen that partnership. Share resources when it counts and 
each station will reap the rewards. If you are not co-owned but your 
station has a network afﬁ liation, partner with your network’s local 
TV outlet. Your network will love you, your TV partner will love 
you, and, most important, so will your audience.
Piggyback on Your Advertisers’ Advertising
Doug Harris suggests “doing a little homework to ﬁ nd out which advertis-
ers in your market spend the most money on television, print, and outdoor.” 
He continues:
Find a way to include one of the station personalities or a station logo in 
that client’s advertising. The client might like to use one of your station 
personalities as a spokesperson for his product or service instead of an 
anonymous actor.
This is a way to get exposure for your radio station’s call letters, logo, or 
personalities at little or no cost to you. Of course, co-promoting a major 
event is a great way for your station to look larger than it would if it were 
doing this project alone. And if two media entities are willing to share the 
limelight, you can put your station’s logo and personalities in front of a 
much bigger audience.
Other resources—a branded Web site, an online newsletter, or an inter-
active phone system (such as a movie theater’s recorded schedule on the 
phone message recorded by your afternoon host)—can all offer additional 
exposure for a particular personality, program, or promotion.
These cost-effective examples of “other people’s media” will enhance 
and amplify your marketing attack, especially if traditional, more expen-
sive avenues of external marketing are closed.
While on-air messages are usually short-form (10 to 60 seconds), more 
details and features of a promotion may be easily explained on the 
station’s Web site. The Web site is also a great place to post photos of 
contest prizes, previous winners, contest rules, and other key information, 
too cumbersome for air.

266         Valerie Geller
Doug Harris’ Action Plan for Success
Here is a seven-step process for planning in advance and putting things in 
writing to build an annual marketing plan for your station, personality, or 
program.
Step One: Each department at the radio station should prepare a list 
of goals, needs, and wants. The needs of the programming department are 
quite different from those of the sales department. Both are important. 
This list should include equipment upgrades, additional staff, and other 
expense-related requests. It should also include ratings and revenue goals 
and marketing targets and achievements. If your programming department 
wants to “own” the concertgoing public, then the marketing and promotion 
department needs to target concert venues and ticket outlets. Meanwhile, 
the sales department can target concert promoters and related activities 
and products such as soft drinks and guitar stores.
Step Two: Create an eighteen-month calendar beginning with the start 
of the next month. If that seems too big a job, try one year or even six months, 
but start planning now for the future. Keeping in mind the goals that have 
just been identiﬁ ed, here’s what a planner might put on a calendar:
● National, regional, or local events and holidays
● Religious observations
● First day of school, university classes begin
● Days when banks, schools, and public ofﬁ ces might be closed
● Major sporting events
● Celebrity birthdays of interest to the target listener
● Station events or anniversaries
● Special station programming
● Ratings periods
A marketing manager should be looking for anything that might inter-
est or distract the target audience. He or she should be looking for a “good 
parade” in order to “get in front of it.” Promotion is the exploitation of 
opportunity.
Step Three: Marketing, programming, and on-air staff should meet to 
decide which of these calendar dates are most important and how the sta-
tion will tie into them. If the team is not comfortable planning Christmas 
promotions in March, then at least acknowledge the need for a Christmas 
promotion and stockpile some airtime or station resources. For  promotions 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         267
during ratings periods, reserve funding and promotional airtime in an 
imaginary “war chest” for later use. You can decide later what your spe-
ciﬁ c strategy and tactics will be. In commercial stations, talk to your sales 
department about their potential needs for these calendar periods. Ideally, 
the needs of sales should be integrated with those of programming to share 
costs and maximize revenue.
Step Four: Calculate your budget for each promotion or promotional 
period. If you know you’ll be doing four concert remotes per weekend and 
giving away one hundred station T-shirts at $5 each, add that to the cost 
of having your staff at the event for two hours, special banners, etc., and 
budget the cost of running that promo each weekend. If you know that 
each weekend you send your staff out with prize packages costing $800, it’s 
simple to put your budget together. Identify other costs like morning show 
giveaways and special opportunities as speciﬁ cally as possible.
Be sure to leave some contingency dollars for “unscheduled” opportuni-
ties that may come up at the last minute. You don’t want to miss a  spontaneous 
moment to promote your station because you didn’t leave any budget for it. 
For ratings periods, planning for a billboard campaign at one price and a TV 
campaign at another price will prepare you for either scenario.
Step Five: Defend and explain your budget by writing a story, or 
narrative, to go with your proposal. It should show the department’s goals 
and how they work with the key periods you’ve identiﬁ ed. Your manager 
will review this budget, so requests need to appear reasonable, logical, and 
beneﬁ cial to the station. Financial managers are paid to keep costs down, 
but if you’ve done a good job with step four, your ﬁ gures will not look 
like guesswork. Budgets are NEVER approved on the ﬁ rst pass, and you 
will be asked to reduce your request. A good marketer knows this. Ask for 
everything you need, but prepare to settle for less.
Step Six: When asked to reduce the budget, a marketing manager may 
wish to show the narratives to other department heads. There may be ways 
to cut expenses by sharing costs with other departments. The narratives 
explain marketing goals to everyone. Perhaps individual requests can be 
scaled back in order to meet group goals.
Step Seven: Review your progress and your spending every month. 
“Mid-course corrections” may be necessary if your plan is not having its 
desired effect. If you have launched something that is not working, the 
marketing and programming teams should take steps to correct it. At the 
end of the year, your station should be able to look back on a series of 
successes and a minimum of disappointments.

268         Valerie Geller
Remember, the most common mistakes in marketing and promoting 
broadcast properties and personalities can be avoided by following two 
simple rules:
1. Plan in advance. Why wait until the last minute to plan promo-
tions? The dates for all national holidays, many sporting events, 
and the ratings periods that affect any market for the next year 
are all available today.
2. Put everything in writing. If a marketing manager must tell his tale 
over and over, it will slow things down and sap its strength. Have 
written rules about promotions and how they get on the air. 
Everyone involved in the process needs to know and follow 
these rules.
Use Your Own Airwaves and Web Site to Promote
Of course your station already has the two most powerful tools you need 
for keeping your listeners and attracting new ones. Since your Web site has 
the ability to be “searched” by anyone anywhere, it makes sense to add 
exciting content at every opportunity. Don’t miss a chance to put up some-
thing great. Have a digital camera with you everywhere you go, not just 
at station events. Is your station’s bumper sticker stuck on the back of the 
governor’s limo? Get it onto your site fast. The most powerful tool to keep 
people listening longer or to give them an idea of what they can expect 
from your station is the powerful promo.
Up Next—Powerful Anticipation
One of the most highly paid positions at a major market radio station is 
that of production director. Radio stations are not known for throwing 
money around needlessly, so there must be something rare and special 
about a nonmanagerial position that can command almost as much salary 
as is spent on a morning show.
Creativity is the “X factor” that makes the production director such 
a valuable member of your team. Radio imaging pro Mark Driscoll says, 
“Your product is the station’s package. Your promos are the wrapping 
paper and the bow on that package. Having great promos makes the 
listener want to open up the box and see what’s inside.”

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         269
Create Expectations
Innovatively produced promos for your station and your shows make the 
audience feel they will miss something if they tune away.
Maybe a listener is not interested in whatever is on the air at the 
moment. However, if you can create excitement and anticipation about an 
upcoming event, the listener may give you ﬁ ve or ten extra minutes of his 
or her time, or come back later.
Pick the Highlights
Promos can establish your station’s “personality,” or image. Some call it 
“stationality.” You know you have a great station when you have trouble 
deciding which moments to promote.
Station promos are a lot like ﬁ lm promos. They incorporate peak expe-
riences and show highlights to create excitement, energy, and, most of all, 
the desire to “be there.” Like many movie trailers, the promos may often 
be better than the shows themselves.
Seize Opportunities
Anything from an upcoming appearance to the top-of-the-hour ID can 
become an opportunity to creatively promote your station. There’s just 
one rule: If it is prerecorded, it has to be perfect. Make sure you have 
a good-quality, reliable audio recording system in place in order not to 
miss the chance to utilize a “magic moment” for a show promo. You may 
come across some of these moments during aircheck sessions, and it is 
very  frustrating when the quality of the sound is too poor to use for a pro-
duced promo.
You do not need to have a huge budget to run great promos on your 
radio station. If you have creative air talents, you can harness their abilities 
to promote not only their own shows but the station itself.
Listen to some of the hundreds of audio feeds from various stations’ 
Internet Web sites. There you will ﬁ nd a mix of hot promos, parody songs, 
and creative spots. In addition, many production directors maintain their 
own Web sites featuring examples of their best work.
Remember, when you make your promos, formatics count. Don’t 
miss an opportunity to give call letters, dial position, and the station’s 
name.

270         Valerie Geller
Promo Points: News/Talk Radio
Teases and Promos Are Best When Short
If you err, err on the side of brevity. It is better to leave the audience hun-
gry than to overfeed them.
Cross-Promote Like You Mean It
Having each air personality enthusiastically mention other shows and 
events on the station promotes and personalizes both the hosts and the sta-
tion. There is nothing like a word of endorsement from a listener’s favorite 
host to make that listener give another show a chance.
If you are not a particular fan of the show you are being asked to pro-
mote, ﬁ nd one or two genuinely good things you can say, and say them. For 
example, “Sam’s show got rated number one in the Reader’s Choice Poll of 
City Magazine!” You don’t have to lie; you just have to realize that when 
someone on your team succeeds, you win too.
If you are the number one show on the number seven station, it is not 
nearly as rewarding as being the number one host on the number one 
station.
Many of the biggest syndicated personalities in America take the time 
to cross-promote others on their local stations and their afﬁ liates as well. 
Cross-promotion gives your schedule a feeling of continuity.
Do It Yourself—Get Your Own Outside Press
Promotions consultant Pam Baker says that talent shouldn’t expect the 
station to do all the work:
If you are a morning show personality and your show’s events or antics 
are not receiving any press coverage, do it yourself. The sales team works 
hard to develop relationships with clients. You should do the same with 
the media. Be active on your own account. Positive public relations can not 
only boost your ratings, it helps establish you in the marketplace, making you 
more valuable. Consider the beneﬁ ts of hiring your own public relations 
representative.

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         271
Throw Out Stale Bread
It is tempting to use great promos over and over again. I’ve heard stations 
use the same old promos for days, weeks, even years. Do not give in to that 
temptation! Even if you have produced the most hilarious promo—distinctive, 
memorable, and featuring seven of the biggest stars in Hollywood—after a 
while, it gets boring. In fact, if a listener hears the same promo over and over 
again for weeks, it can make your whole show sound boring. If a promo is 
really that fantastic, run it for a little while, store it for several months, and 
then recycle it.
Keep a library of stand-out promos that are not date-speciﬁ c in the 
event you are unable to produce a fresh one for some reason.
Change your promos like you change your underwear. If someone 
complains and says, “But I did a great one last week,” remind him or her 
that creativity leads to more creativity.
Stay “Up” for It
If you cut your promos last thing before you leave the station, there is a 
danger of sounding tired and unenthusiastic. After all, you have just spent 
three hours on the air, you want to go home, and you are holding your car 
keys. Try running into the production room prior to today’s show and see 
what you can come up with to promote tomorrow’s show. The promos will 
have that sound you have when you ﬁ rst go on the air—spirited and full of 
energy.
Get It Right
When you work with prerecorded elements, make them perfect. Live on 
the air, you cannot possibly control everything that happens. But when you 
record, you can. Make it ﬂ awless. Here you can create radio art.
Creating Powerful Promos
You can creatively “promo” anything. There’s no excuse for a boring 
promo. TV “magazine” shows and tabloids make a business of promot-
ing the most mundane details of stars’ lives as if they were shocking new 
information. It’s not until you’ve waited through 59 minutes of other news 
that you ﬁ nd that the “newly discovered nude photographs of today’s big-

272         Valerie Geller
gest big screen star” are actually baby pictures. The purpose of the promo 
is to entice the listener to come back later or stay longer to hear what 
you’ve got.
Here is an example of a radio station bragging about increasing its 
transmitter power—something not usually considered exciting. Broadcaster 
Tom Bodett, a spokesperson for the Motel 6 chain, did the spot. Bodett 
made famous the Motel 6 tag line: “We’ll leave the light on for you.”
Promo: KGO Transmitter Upgrade
[Soft country-style music plays behind the spot]
When a radio station has been around as long as KGO, some of that elec-
tronic stuff’s bound to wear out. Well, since it did and not everyone can talk 
real loud like that Ronn Owens or Bernie Ward, KGO went and got one of 
those new jillion-watt transmitters to squirt those sound waves out there.
[Electrical-sizzling sound effects]
Well, sure, it’s a big deal to the baby harp seals up in Nova Scotia that are 
now getting a fuzzy earful of KGO at night, but what’s it mean to you?
Well, not much except you might not need to use that microwave to 
heat your Lean Cuisine anymore and you probably won’t have to actually 
switch on the lights either. Just turn on KGO and stand back . . . 
I’m Tom Bodett, and we’ve cranked up the power for you on KGO News/
Talk 810.
To write, produce, and create powerful promos, begin by thinking 
of how you could be enticed to tune in. A great promo will intrigue the 
audience with a promise of something interesting coming up. Although 
research shows they will be disappointed should the actual item not 
stand up to the promo, listeners tend to keep trying if the promo is really 
that good. There is a risk.
If you consistently fail to deliver what you promise, you can lose 
credibility and audience. Often, those tabloids really DO have amazing 
photos. Remember that promos are “the fancy bow you wrap around 
your stations’ package.” Your station needs to have something real to 
promote, or you’ll have only a wrapped box, with nothing inside.
There are various styles of promos. If you want to experiment with 
your station’s image and build continuity between shows, try to create the 

Creating Powerful Radio: Promotion         273
image that the radio station is like a family and all the hosts listen to and 
support one another. When done well, it really works. The “inside” promo 
is the method of one host promoting his or her show within another host’s 
show. Your talkable topic or engaging question can make a good promo, 
as well.
Listen to your station’s other programs. Then you’ll really know the 
product you are promoting. For example: “Hi, I’m Sam on WKXW, The 
Talk Station. You are listening to the Dr. Paula Show, but I’d like to invite 
you to join me later on this afternoon. We’ll be taking calls, the mayor will 
check in, and you’ll get a chance to meet the number one singer in America 
right now. That’s today at two p.m. here on the Talk Station.”
Direct Promos
Example: “Up next with Bill Jones on WWXX, you’ll meet the man who 
saved California’s gray whales, and later in the show, Joe Jones’s lawyer. 
He’s defending a notorious author and death row inmate. Coming up, on 
WWXX.”
That’s an effective promo, but it took only ﬁ fteen seconds. It includes 
the name of the host, the station’s name, the time coming up, and a teaser.
Parody Songs
Creating the Powerful Parody
Promos with parody songs can be a powerful way of getting a message 
across in a unique manner. If you’re musically creative and you like to sing, 
this may be a method that works for you. Parody songs* can also be used to 
get your point across in a fun way.
To create a powerful parody song, ﬁ nd a current event, news story, or a 
celebrity you ﬁ nd humorous—then do one of the following:
■ Pick a song that has a “hook” close to your topic.
■ Pick a very popular current tune that is easy to sing.
■ Use a nursery rhyme.
*The Green Book of Songs by Jeff Green has song titles listed by topics; it is great 
for parody songs. You can also try working with karaoke music.

This page intentionally left blank

275
Creating Powerful Radio 
Sales and Commercials
“Do anything you want on the air . . . but you still have to be able 
to sell it. If a sponsor is afraid to be associated with it, you lose.”
— The Greaseman (Doug Tracht, syndicated personality)
Why should someone on air, working in commercial radio, care about com-
mercials? Because they pay the bills. An understanding of the revenue side 
of the industry makes anyone a more valuable asset to the station.
It’s remarkable how little some air personalities know or bother about 
the importance of commercials. They see the spots as a “break” in the pro-
gramming instead of an integral part of the on-air package. A poorly done 
or boring commercial can be as much of a tune-out as any other bad pro-
gramming, yet, if a commercial is done right, and creates powerful radio, it 
will keep listeners engaged.
Turn It Up!
Salespeople listen to and view the station differently than the rest of the 
staff. That became very clear to me one night on the way to dinner with 
friends in sales. The car radio was on. Suddenly the conversation was loudly 
C H A P T E R  24

276         Valerie Geller
interrupted: “Quiet, turn it up!” A client’s spot was on. Sales people are just some 
of the people who turn the radio “up” during commercial breaks. That’s their 
work. It’s important to them. It’s the way they and their  stations make money.
Creative, effective, powerful commercials are important. And there’s 
big money in making good ones. Televised sporting events like the Super 
Bowl or the Olympics are now watched nearly as much for the creativity of 
the commercials they carry as for the efforts of the athletes involved. But, 
in sales and advertising, as in sports, before you get to the big leagues, you 
have to practice, train, and learn the ropes.
Sales Is from Mars, Programming Is from Venus
Salespeople are a different breed from the on-air talent. We need both types 
to make a commercial radio station a success. For years I’ve been doing a 
seminar as part of the Creating Powerful Radio workshop (with apologies 
to John Gray): “Sales is from Mars, programming is from Venus.”
For an on-air personality, the need to earn a living is there, but most 
chose their careers because of a need for creative expression, a love of 
performing, and a desire to be in the spotlight. It is essential to the hap-
piness of an on-air talent to have an audience. But the motivation for a 
sales person is ﬁ nancial reward. Experienced account executives may have 
a background in selling products or services other than radio. It may not 
matter much to them what product they are selling. Nevertheless, a good 
sales person, no matter what he or she is selling, cares about the quality of 
the product and wants to see it succeed. They can be every bit as passionate 
about selling as air talent are about their shows.
Break Down the Brick Walls
The way sales and programming view one another can affect the success 
of a radio station. It’s important that each side respects the work of the 
other. If key members of your sales department resent your morning host 
as the guy who leaves the building at 10:30 a.m., they probably don’t under-
stand his day began with show prep and a pot of black coffee at 2:00 a.m. 
Conversely, you have a problem if the morning personality sees the account 
executive as an unapproachable guy in Gucci loafers.
A lot of time is wasted in radio stations because there is distrust 
between sales and programming. Sales people often view talent, particularly 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         277
on personality radio stations, as a liability. A sales person lives in fear of 
the one careless remark that will blow up an account he or she has been 
working for months to acquire. The talent, meanwhile, believes the sales 
staff would be perfectly happy running commercials ﬁ fty-nine minutes out 
of every hour. Hosts feel that sales have no respect for the product they are 
selling and little idea of what it takes to build credibility with an audience. 
With some effort, both sides can reach an understanding.
An opportunity presented itself one April Fool’s Day. Station man-
agement agreed to an experiment: We made a switch. First thing in the 
morning the sales team were surprised to learn that instead of their regular 
duties, each was being given a shift on the News-Talk radio station. On-air 
personalities were handed a list of potential clients they would have to 
meet with and convince to buy advertising on the radio station.
The sales manager smiled. He thought it would be fun. “Going on the 
radio, how hard can it be? I talk all day long.” After about an hour, mid-
day host “Bob the Sales Manager” had sweat stains the size of soccer balls 
under each arm. His hands were shaking. Here is what listeners heard.
FIRST CALLER: “I want to talk about that ancient tree they are about 
to cut down on Main Street.”
Silence from the host.
NEXT CALLER: “I want to talk about the verdict in the Lawson murder 
trial.”
Silence from the host. Finally someone took pity on Bob and asked for 
some advice about getting a selling job.
At last, a subject Bob understood. He’d made it through the hour, but 
just barely. Here’s what he said afterward: “You never appreciate how hard 
it is until the pressure is on, and you have to hit the ball yourself.” Here are 
some excerpts from the talk show host’s appraisal of his day:
I can’t believe how hard it is. I hate wearing a suit. There’s a lot of math, 
percentages, and numbers. I couldn’t take it. I heard the word “no” more 
today than I have in my entire life. This is hard. If I had to do this every day 
for a living, I’d be miserable! I couldn’t take the rejection.
After the experiment, talent showed a new respect for the efforts of the 
sales team. Now they bring in sales leads. Today, when this station’s talk hosts 

278         Valerie Geller
meet someone with a business, product, or service or an executive who could 
be a potential advertiser, they collect business cards and hand them to the sales 
manager. This has led to new revenue for the station, based on relationships 
and connections with people who previously did not consider radio commer-
cials as an effective advertising tool. The air staff now happily goes on sales 
calls to meet clients and the sales team has a new regard for what it takes to do 
the work. They like each other better now. That new respect has also paid off 
when talent are asked to do live copy or produce creative commercials.
The Live Copy Advantage: Credibility Sells
Some of the most effective spots are ad-libbed or “live copy” because there’s 
room for fun, spontaneity, and personalization. Here’s how it works: The 
host may be given either a fact sheet or a script. He or she highlights what 
is best about the product or service being advertised. Storytelling skills and 
personal experience are worked into the sell. If the host is credible, the 
spots are entertaining, and the product is decent, listeners are likely to buy. 
That, above all else, makes advertisers happy.
Credibility is paramount. American personality Howard Stern’s spon-
sors pay enormous rates for his live spots, even though he sometimes seems 
not to be selling the product at all. Once in a live spot for a life insur-
ance company, Stern created a brilliant show “bit.” He advised male heads 
of households not to buy too much life insurance from his sponsor. As he 
explained it, after you die, your wife’s new boyfriend will convince her to 
give him the insurance money to start a mail order business, which will 
subsequently fail, and then, bankrupt, your children will starve or wind up 
on the streets as teenage hookers.
The moral of Stern’s commercial: You need this life insurance, but 
don’t buy too much of it. That was an original and powerful commercial, 
and it was funny, too.
Many products in America are on the map today because of the per-
sonal selling and live copy spots done for them by personalities.
Another Live Copy Advantage: Job Security
Air personality Mike Siegel is quick to point out that tying air talent to 
advertisers through live copy spots makes it easier to ride out a couple of 
bad books. The advertiser believes it’s the talent’s personality that is selling 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         279
the product. This creates ﬁ nancial security both for the station and the air 
talent. Even if numbers are down-trending, if you’re bringing in big dollars 
for live spots, management will be reluctant to get rid of you.
Siegel also advises that if the account executive or the client writes a 
script for the campaign, the talent should have an opportunity to read the 
copy, give feedback, and give suggestions for modiﬁ cations. Account execu-
tives: Make sure you record live copy spots and always follow up with the 
client to conﬁ rm not only that the script is satisfactory, but also that the 
spots are working.
Siegel believes that if you’re selling a product, you’d better know it 
and use it. Eat at the restaurant. Drink the Washington State–grown cherry 
juice. Drive the car. Get the skylight installers to put one in your house. 
Siegel warns, “Don’t endorse a product you don’t know, and don’t endorse 
a product you don’t like. The spots won’t ring true. The audience won’t 
believe you, and they won’t buy.”
I remember a TV segment about legendary veteran commentator Paul 
Harvey, who is known for his innovative live commercials. Most of Paul 
Harvey’s sponsors have been with him for decades, and listeners have come 
to associate these products with him. As a test of the listener’s devotion, the 
reporter traveled to a rural factory and asked a group of women working 
on the production line to hold up their thermal beverage containers. Each 
woman proudly displayed the container manufactured by the company 
recommended and endorsed by their hero, Paul Harvey. That’s the power 
of creative live copy selling.
Go Along on the Sales Call
Mike Siegel recommends going with the account executive to meet your 
sponsors, and getting to know them personally. Raise any questions you 
may have about any possible ﬂ aws or problems with the product or service 
at that time. Learn enough to be able to convey your personal enthusiasm. 
Consider including a brief interview with your client in the spot. Be sure 
you endorse only one product in each advertising category. (This is one of 
the reasons live spots demand premium pricing.) Follow up on any listener 
complaints. Again, Siegel warns, investigate thoroughly before endorsing.
If a spot doesn’t work one way, be ﬂ exible and willing to change the 
approach. Don’t treat commercials like a separate part of your show. The 

280         Valerie Geller
audience is sophisticated enough to know why the commercials are there. 
If the products and services are good, and properly targeted at your audi-
ence, you can make the commercials as informative and entertaining as the 
rest of your show.
All of this seems like a lot of work, but when handled properly, live 
spots can be a gold mine for everyone involved.
Produced Spots
Make the Commercials Powerful Radio
The Creating Powerful Radio principles apply to commercials: Does this 
product or service affect “health, heart, or saving money”? How does it 
beneﬁ t the listener? Remember to paint word pictures. Think and speak 
visually. Personalize, be a powerful storyteller. Keep the message on point. 
Be creative. You’ll always win over your listener if you make him laugh. 
Make it matter, be truthful, make sure to always emphasize what is “in it” 
for the listener.
The Radio Advertising Bureau suggests these guidelines:
 1. The most important rule in radio advertising: Mention the client 
often. Make sure the listeners know where to ﬁ nd the client.
 2. Play up the advantage to the listener. What’s the unique selling 
proposition of the product or service? What does it offer that is 
not available elsewhere?
 3. Grab attention. Use noise, music, unusual voices, whatever is 
appropriate.
 4. Zero in. Pitch directly to your target listener. “If you own an aging, 
overweight cat, listen to this!”
 5. Be easily understood. Copy writers who use big words  gratuitously 
(there’s one now!) often lose the audience.
 6. Get to the point! Don’t delay the unique selling proposition.
 7. Use action words—“Now” and “Today” when you’re announcing a 
sale. Radio’s greatest strength is its immediacy . . . use it!

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         281
 8. Make the listener part of a word picture. Don’t just talk about that 
new car. Using sound effects and music creates a mood and puts 
your listener behind the wheel.
 9. Avoid clichés such as: “We’re known for our excellent quality and 
great customer service.” Try, “Our quality sucks and we’ll ignore 
you from the moment you come in until you leave in a huff.” The 
audience will pay attention.
 10. Be accurate. Make sure the spot is checked by the client or other 
responsible party before it hits the air. Nothing says “We’re sloppy 
and don’t deserve your money” more than a spot with factual 
errors that’s rushed onto the air.
Selling the Talk
Broadcast executive David Baronfeld’s decades of experience in sales and 
management have made him a believer in the beneﬁ ts of selling News-
Talk. “Although we have seen huge growth in listening options over the 
last few years, some of the most consistent performers have been the News 
and Talk formats. And while syndicated talk has become hugely popular, it 
is the local sponsorships like trafﬁ c, news, business reports, weather, sports, 
etc., that create premium revenue opportunities.”
Baronfeld offers the following pointers, including techniques he has 
developed and learned through the years to sell radio, in particular talk 
radio, and live copy commercials.
 
1. Create promotional alliances. Identify twenty-ﬁ ve quality, high-
proﬁ le local businesses. Multiple locations are preferable; however, a 
strong single location store can act as a magnet. Target one company per 
category and create an annual or semi-annual promotional event that you 
can do together for years. Examples would include: banks; casinos; home 
improvement stores; car dealerships; electronic, furniture, and jewelry 
stores;  cosmetic surgeons; and sporting goods stores.
 
2. Create media partnerships. It is advantageous for radio to join 
forces not only with other TV and radio properties within your group or 
cluster, but also with competing media. Having a relationship with either 
the daily newspaper or leading TV station tells your advertisers that you 
are the “go to” dial position for breaking news, weather, sports, etc. Shared 

282         Valerie Geller
resources provide the opportunity to put your station’s name in print or on 
the screen at no charge. You add name recognition and raise the level of 
your station’s credibility with your listeners.
 
3. Think brand names. Brand selling is different than a co-op or non-
traditional revenue deal. By prospecting for business generically, millions 
in potential revenue are never realized. Prospecting should be focused. 
When asked, “What’s your favorite soft drink?” people don’t say, “I’m a 
cola drinker.” They say, “I like Coke.”
For potential advertisers, paint a picture of your listeners with real-life 
examples of the products they buy and own: “They are Lexus owners who 
use Dell computers and stay at the Westin.” Using brands as part of your 
presentation allows you to charge a premium for your brand.
 
4. Take a good look at your listener. Years ago, I worked with an AOR 
station to help improve their local sales effort. The sales people couldn’t 
get beyond their image of the audience’s ‘band T-shirts and bad teeth,’ but 
they had to make their budgets. So I brought a camera to the next station 
promotion and took pictures of their listeners. One visual emerged. No 
matter what they wore, their hair was fabulous.
Two days later, I walked into a sales meeting, showed the pictures, and 
suggested they call on the Conair blow dryers guy, the Aveda shampoo rep, 
and the distributor for Head and Shoulders. Less than 72 hours later, the 
station closed an annual contract, worth nearly six ﬁ gures, with the area’s 
largest beauty supply house.”
That’s just hair. Now think about how much money you could  generate 
if you saw your listeners in a different light, as brand buyers and brand 
users of everything from mortgages to cars, phones, home improvements, 
travel, and so on.
 
5. Understand your advertiser’s needs. The people I like to sell to are 
those accountable for hitting or overachieving their budgets. It makes most 
sense to talk about using radio directly with the people who are responsible 
for maximizing those sales. Shoot for the top. Call or write the company’s 
president or CEO. Tell him or her you have an idea that can maximize sales 
and save them money. Nine times out of ten, you’ll get the appointment.
 
6. Let your air talent sell for you—Part I. This is the sales perspective 
that Mike Siegel talks about. Everybody loves to meet the station’s prime 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         283
talent. Bring along a camera, and chances are good that a picture of them 
(ideally, wearing your station logo) and the client will occupy a prominent 
wall position. Do this in ﬁ fty companies with more than ﬁ fty employees. 
Soon you’ll have thousands of “impressions” per week in the workplace. 
Make the goal to be in 540 ofﬁ ces in the next three years. That is a lot of 
exposure, and all you’ll need is a digital camera.
 
7. Let your air talent sell for you—Part II. If you allow and encourage 
talent to earn income from revenue streams separate from salary (i.e. pro-
motion fees, endorsements, live copy), you’ll be viewed as talent-friendly, 
which is a good thing, especially at contract renewal time. Most on-air 
 personalities understand that the better their relationship is with sales, the 
more the account executives will pitch them to clients, and the more money 
they’ll make. Studies show that air talent who spend at least ﬁ ve hours 
a week with station salespeople can almost always equal and sometimes 
double their regular salaries.
 
8. Let your air talent sell for you—Part III. Perhaps you remember or 
have heard about the late talk personality Alan Berg. The movie Talkradio 
was loosely based on his life. We spent at least two to three hours per week 
making sales calls together. One day we had two calls to make. The ﬁ rst was 
with the owner of a Chinese restaurant. We walked in and made some small 
talk. In just minutes, Alan jumped in and said, “I can only endorse one Chinese 
restaurant. And if you’d like me to endorse yours, you’ll need to buy a twenty-
six week schedule.” In less than thirty seconds we had the order.
Twenty minutes later, we’re meeting with the owners of a  rattan furni-
ture store. As I begin my presentation, Alan says, “I can only endorse one 
furniture store. And if you’d like me to endorse yours, you’ll need to buy 
a twenty-six week schedule.” Again, within two minutes of the start of the 
meeting, we closed the deal. All I had said was, “Hello.”
Selling Alan, or rather letting Alan sell, was truly extraordinary. Look 
around you. Your best salesperson may be a member of your air staff.
 
9. Hire a sales staff that lives a News-Talk lifestyle. Hire salespeople who 
use news and talk radio. At some clusters salespeople can sell most, if not all, 
of the stations. At others, there are separate sales staffs. In my  opinion, that is 
the better way to go. As an example, Toyota has separate sales staffs and facili-
ties for Toyota and their premium brand, Lexus. Don’t hire a group of music 
radio listeners to convey what it’s like to be a sports talk fan to your client.

284         Valerie Geller
Instead, assemble a staff of sellers who love the format, can describe its 
attributes, understand the variety of people to whom they will be  selling, 
and share similar interests with the client. For example, hire a former 
 business owner or someone who has sold the types of products your sta-
tion will advertise. I’m not saying that non–News-Talk listeners can’t sell 
this format, just don’t have an entire sales staff of them.
 
10. Create as many premium avails as possible. Each week you have 
several hundred premium available spots for sale. Make sure your sales staff 
understands just how valuable these commercials are. Live reads, business 
and sports sponsorships, trafﬁ c and weather reports, news updates—don’t 
let these golden nuggets go to waste. And don’t give them away either. 
These are your “beachfront premium units.” They are worth more, and you 
are entitled to charge more for them.
 
11. Have fun. If you sell News-Talk, you are involved in a format that 
appeals to more potential advertisers than any other in town. Your air 
 talent is the best known. Your listeners are the most active. Welcome to 
radio utopia.
Making the Sale: Networking vs. Cold Calling
To excel at sales, just as on the programming side, it helps to be a good com-
municator. Your people skills and knowledge of how to make connections 
can lead to potential business and will serve you in all areas of life, not just 
broadcasting. Most people who gravitate toward sales are genuinely social 
individuals. Developing relationships is an important part of prospecting 
and growing sales contacts.
Business leads are all around you. The person exercising next to you, your 
uncle Dave, your kids’ nanny; everyone in your circle can potentially lead 
to business. With the help of the Internet, you can make your own “coinci-
dental meeting” occur by seeking out individuals who may already be inside 
companies you’re looking to contact using online Social Networking Services 
(SNSs) to ﬁ nd business connections you may not have realized you had. Most 
of them are free or cost next to nothing to use. It may not be too long before 
the “cold call” becomes a rare event. It seems you may already be just a couple 
of acquaintances away from the person you thought you could never reach.

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         285
Sales trainer and consultant Pam Lontos has twenty-ﬁ ve years of expe-
rience, from selling health club memberships to being vice president of 
Disney Broadcasting to running her own company. She suggests: 
It is much easier to approach prospects on the recommendation of their 
friends. But if everyone knows this, why aren’t more people doing it? It’s 
very hard to “cold call” a prospect, but if there is a prior relationship or 
connection in place, things become easier. Proper networking techniques 
are the secrets of the superstars in sales.
Tracking news sources and gathering clients are based on similar prin-
ciples. The more people you know, the more ways you can follow a story 
or a business lead. Although there are effective shy sales people, the job is 
a more natural ﬁ t for outgoing personalities. You will ﬁ nd more about this 
in Chapter 2 under “Right Casting.” I once watched “Michael,” a top sales 
manager, work a room. Michael seemed genuinely interested in what was 
happening in the lives of each person he talked to, and he remembered 
everyone’s name. All those people felt signiﬁ cant, special, and important.
If Michael had asked them for the entire contents of their wallets and 
purses at that moment, they would have cheerfully handed them over. He 
“works” his clients the same way. Michael understands that businesses are run 
by people. When you get the person on your side, you’ll get their business.
Meeting the Right People
Pam Lontos advises: “Go meet the people who can make the sale. Attend 
charity events, or business social functions where the decision makers are. 
One salesman went to a local pub every Friday after work. He didn’t go 
there to drink. He went there because all the advertising agency decision 
makers met there every Friday.”
Once you’ve connected with the decision maker, Lontos suggests, it 
does no good to go up and say: “I’m Joe Blow with WXYO. Do you want to 
buy some advertising?” Instead Lontos advises:
You must focus on and ask them about themselves to establish rapport. 
Find out how they got started in the business and what they enjoy most 
about their industry. Ask what they do in their spare time when not work-
ing. Put yourself in the prospects’ place. Ask: “How would I know if some-
one I’m talking to would be a good prospect?”

286         Valerie Geller
How Can I Help?
Be of genuine help. For example, if you realize that two people you have 
met at an event don’t know each other, introduce them. This is an easy way 
to be seen as a helpful person. Ask existing clients if they know anyone 
who would beneﬁ t from advertising on your station. Help them focus on a 
particular group. If they are golfers, ask about anyone in their foursome. If 
they belong to a civic group or organization, ask about the other members. 
It’s not that people don’t want to give you referrals; it’s just that they truly 
can’t think of anyone if you give them their whole world to choose from. 
You’ve got to help them narrow it down. After someone gives you a refer-
ral, ask what he or she thinks the referral will be looking to accomplish. 
This will give you a little preliminary information.
Also ask if you can use your contact’s name. When you do call, say, 
“Susan asked me to call you and I promised I would.”
Finally, Lontos reminds us, the secret weapon in sales is to be genuinely 
interested in other people:
When you ask people about what they do, they will eventually ask you 
about what you do. Have a great beneﬁ t statement ready: “I help business-
people with their advertising and marketing plans so they can increase 
their bottom line.” Most people will respond by asking how you do that. 
Now you can start talking about what you do and how you can help them. 
That’s a lot better than a cold call.
Pam Lontos’s Sales Tips
■ Understand your clients. Question and listen to the prospects and 
uncover and meet their true needs.
■ Qualify the buyer. Always get to the top decision maker. Don’t 
waste time with people who are not in a position to make a 
decision.
■ Listen with the intent to understand. Only when you understand 
can you respond. Listening is more important than talking. The 
 client will give you the information to sell him or her. The next 
thing you say should be based on what the client just said.
■ Understand the power of questioning. You can qualify the buyer, 
establish rapport, eliminate competition, build credibility,  identify 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         287
needs, ﬁ nd hot buttons, get personal information, and close a 
sale, all by asking questions. Have powerful questions at your ﬁ nger-
tips.
■ Sell beneﬁ ts, not features. Clients care only about what’s in it for 
them. Sell the end result of what they want. You can ﬁ nd this out 
only by asking questions and listening.
■ Use the power of testimonials. The best sales tool you have is 
a  reference from a satisﬁ ed client. Use testimonials to over-
come objections and build trust. Testimonials take the fear out of 
buying and make it easier to close.
■ Learn to recognize buying signals. Prospects will tell you when they’re 
ready to buy. You must pay attention.
■ Remember, the best buying signal is: “How much does it cost?”
■ Don’t offer the price until you’re asked. Also don’t give price until 
you’ve ﬁ rst shown value.
■ Know the difference between a stall and an objection. “I want to 
think it over” isn’t an objection—don’t waste time treating it like 
one. This prospect has an unanswered question. Find out what the 
prospect wants to think about, answer it, and continue selling more 
beneﬁ ts.
■ Uncover the real objection. Prospects usually won’t tell you their 
true objections at ﬁ rst. Due to the fear of making a decision, they 
often give false objections at ﬁ rst, to stop you from selling them. Ask 
questions to ﬁ nd the real problem.
■ Anticipate objections. If you’ve been selling for your station for two 
months, you already know the ten or so standard objections. Have 
answers to them written out and rehearsed. Create questions that 
eliminate objections before they are even mentioned.
■ If you don’t make a sale, make a ﬁ rm appointment to return. Make 
some form of “sale” each time you call.
■ Never argue with a prospect. If you win the argument, you still lose 
the sale.
■ Redeﬁ ne rejection. You’re not being rejected, your offer is.

288         Valerie Geller
■ Treat each client as though he/she is the most important.
■ Satisfy client complaints in less than twenty-four hours. This will lead 
to added sales and a great reputation.
■ Understand that hard work makes luck. Years of hard work went 
into making successful people “lucky.” You can get just as lucky 
by learning how to sell and seeing more prospects.
■ Use the power of persistence. Take “no” as a challenge. Learn 
from children how proﬁ table persistence is.
■ Have a sales call scheduled immediately after your sales meeting. Try 
out what you have just learned. Do it over and over, day after day, 
until that technique becomes automatic.
■ Learn the ABC’s of sales. Read, go to seminars, listen to CDs. 
Adapt the techniques you learn to your own personality. Use your car 
as a school. Play sales training or motivational CDs as you travel.
You’ve Made the Sale, Now What?
Your station may have the greatest production team in the world waiting 
to do your clients’ bidding, but there’s no rule that says a great car dealer 
is also a good copy writer, and you have certainly heard clients voice their 
own spots so poorly that their commercials sound like parodies.
Producing good commercials for your customers is where you’ll really 
have a chance to win their trust and help them build their businesses. But 
what, exactly, makes a “good” radio spot?
Have you ever turned the radio up to hear a commercial? Audience 
research has taught us that when a spot is well produced and ﬁ ts the station’s 
target audience, listeners perceive that spot as new or useful information 
about products or services they may want to try, or special pricing on an item 
they may already use or need. They may actually pay special attention to 
that spot. Conversely, a bad or boring spot about a product or service that’s 
not relevant or does not conform to the Powerful Radio principles involving 
health, heart, money, or transformation—that neither persuades, entertains, 
informs, nor inspires—will drive listeners away from your station.
For some people, creative ads that work seem to fall like rain from the 
sky. For the rest of us, there’s Maureen Bulley. Bulley is president of The 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         289
Radio Store. Her books include the popular Write Good Copy Fast, and 
she holds seminars and workshops for industry professionals. She’s man-
aged to take what is often perceived as a highly creative and quirky process 
and put it in a form that anyone can use. Here she shares the techniques she 
teaches to create powerful ad copy:
The correlation between audience tune-out and “commercial breaks” is 
no coincidence. But if we view breaks as an interruption of programming, 
so will our audience. Advertising jargon such as “stop set” or “commer-
cial break” implies that we are stopping or breaking away from entertain-
ment to broadcast commercials before we return to  regular programming. 
Not coincidentally, it is also the time we lose listeners to the competition 
when they scan the dial to see who is not playing commercials at that 
moment.
You can persuade your audience to stay with you for every minute of 
every hour. Commercials are a valuable part of your programming. You 
must treat them with the same respect as the rest of your show.
Give careful thought to the placement of commercials in the context of 
the programming hour. Know when your competition schedules commer-
cials and for how long. If they are about to lose their audience because of 
a commercial “break,” be ready to receive and capture that audience with 
compelling programming.
Be aware of how many spots in a row your station is airing. Not only 
will your audience wander, but long commercial clusters do a disservice 
to your advertisers. If no one stays to hear their commercials, no one can 
respond to them.
Check computer-generated logs, paying attention to the sequence 
of commercials. Has the computer scheduled a hard-sell ad in the ﬁ rst 
 position at 6:30 a.m. when the majority of your audience is waking up? Try 
a less jarring commercial in that important ﬁ rst position. Spots will often 
be an exit point for listeners, but don’t hold the door open for them as they 
leave. Treat them like an old friend who came over for coffee and encourage 
them to stay for “just one more cup.”
If you are the talent for the spot, read commercials with a new  attitude. 
Enter the studio in a positive state of mind. Prepare to focus, and con-
tribute in a creative and meaningful way. Improvise in scripts whenever 

290         Valerie Geller
 possible to add a personal touch or to make an awkward script easier on 
the ear.
A well-organized session makes the ﬁ nished commercials sound  better. 
If a talent needs to run down the hall for a pair of working headphones, 
a bottle of water, or a functioning timer, you may lose the mood of the 
 session or stop a creative process cold. If you’re in charge of the studio 
where the commercials are produced, it’s your job to make sure everything 
is in order ahead of time.
Scripts should be double-spaced and appear clean and uncluttered. 
NEVER include anything in the body of the script that is not meant for air. 
Copy writers should provide a pronunciation guide for words the talent 
may not know how to say, such as proper names and brand names. Show 
numbers as digits, not words. The eye recognizes “250” but stumbles over 
“two hundred and ﬁ fty.” Scripts should be proofread and timed by reading 
aloud. This allows the writer to identify and correct word combinations 
that are difﬁ cult to say, or sentences that are too long to read in one breath. 
Focus on the end user when preparing a script for production.
The order in which scripts are read in a production session is also 
important. If the talent has just completed an airshift, his or her voice is 
warmed up and ready to perform. If production is scheduled before an 
airshift, allow time for the voice to warm up. Read easier scripts ﬁ rst, and 
build up to ones that are more demanding on the voice. A talent’s voice is 
his livelihood. Treat it with respect.
Create Powerful Copy
The ﬁ rst step in creating powerful copy is gathering information and estab-
lishing clarity. What is this copy intended to do? What is its goal?
The advertising goal must be speciﬁ c and measurable. Indicate pre-
cisely what you want to happen when people hear the commercial, and 
how often you want it to happen. Clarity will help you create a script that 
gets the desired result.
If your clients want to increase trafﬁ c to a Web site through their radio 
advertising schedules, advertising goals would specify how much more traf-
ﬁ c they desire in measurable, quantiﬁ able statements. By design, the script 
must include a call to action that sends the listener to the Web site. The 
script does not include a telephone number or street address, because that 
information would only distract listeners and would not help advertisers 
achieve their goals.

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         291
When writing scripts using the Copy Navigator designed by Maureen 
Bulley, brainstorm based on what you know about the product or service 
and the problem it will solve for consumers if they purchase it. Gather 
any other data that the advertiser thinks may be useful. If your station has 
access to research that may help position your client in the market or bet-
ter target the client’s ad, be sure to have it ready.
Perhaps you know that your listeners, twenty- to forty-year-old moth-
ers, frequently use a certain city playground as a place to bring their kids 
and socialize. Perhaps you know that your client’s car dealership is just 
a few blocks from this popular spot. Your automobile-repair client might 
not have thought: “We’re just a two-minute walk to Playland” and that 
this could help sell auto tune-ups, but if you do, it can help that client get 
a result.
Broadcasters pay a lot of money for research about their listeners. 
Make sure your clients get to take advantage of that investment.
Maureen Bulley’s “Copy Navigator”
The Copy Navigator can be completed by the copywriter, Account 
Executive for advertising copy, or the Program Director or Promotions 
Director if the goal is to write effective promotional copy. You may ﬁ nd 
it useful to ask additional questions to get the answers you require. Ask 
questions like, “Why should I buy from you? The store down the street has 
similar products?” Or, “If I bought one of your products and I wasn’t satis-
ﬁ ed, what would you do?” (A sample Copy Navigator follows.)
Write Good Copy Fast—Maureen Bulley’s 
Copy Writing Techniques
All commercials require a beginning, a middle, and an end. In fact, some 
writers start by deciding how the commercial will end and work backwards. 
This is a style decision that you will make on your own.
One of the most common problems with scripts is that they introduce 
a theme or an idea at the beginning and fail to revisit that idea again at 
the end. If you state a problem at the beginning of a script, and then use 
the middle to state your client’s approach to that problem, be sure to refer 

292         Valerie Geller
Sample Copy Navigator
Date: _____________ 
Account: ___________________________
Marketing Goal: What does the Advertiser expect to achieve over 
a speciﬁ ed period of time? That is, increase awareness/increase 
sales 10 percent over last ﬁ scal year.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Advertising Goal: What does the Advertiser expect to achieve 
with this advertising campaign? That is, increase inbound calls by 
150 per week.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Best Potential Customer: Describe the best prospect for this 
 commercial. Include as much detail as possible.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
What’s in It for Me? (Beneﬁ t): What is the problem I am trying to 
solve with this advertising? That is, I’d love to take the whole  family 
out for dinner, but it’s too expensive. At Our Town Restaurant the 
whole family can enjoy a meal out, while saving money.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         293
your listeners back to the original problem and how your client will solve it 
for them at the end of the spot. For example:
If your car is acting a little sluggish lately, it may be time for a tune-
up. It is time to save on a tune-up at Ed’s Garage. Ed’s will have your 
car running smoothly in no time with a ﬁ fty-six-point check and tune-
up  special for just $49.99. Ed will tune up your engine, and check all 
the ﬂ uid levels too. If they need topping off, he’ll do it, all for under 
ﬁ fty bucks! Car a little  sluggish? Perk it up with a Tune Up special at 
Ed’s Garage. Call 566-CARS to book your appointment.
Why Should I Believe You? (Support): This will back up the 
“What’s in It for Me?” statement with reasons why the customer 
should believe what we say; that is, at Our Town Restaurant, children 
under 6 always eat free.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
How Should It Sound?: Describe the tone or manner of the copy, 
the same way you would describe the product’s personality; that is, a 
sense of humor, a serious money-saving message.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Things to Include in Each Spot: Elements that must be in every 
spot such as jingle, use of a speciﬁ c announcer, or a slogan.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________

294         Valerie Geller
Notice how we refer back to the opening “problem” of a sluggish car 
at the end of the commercial. This theme could be made even stronger by 
adding sound effects of a sluggish car at the beginning, and replacing them 
with sounds of a smooth-running car at the end.
Regardless of whether you are writing a narrative, dialogue, or any 
other style of commercial, review all of your scripts with the “beginning, 
middle, and end” concept in mind.
Writing Narratives
Maureen Bulley teaches thousands of people around the world how to 
write copy in a variety of styles. Here’s an excerpt from her Certiﬁ ed Radio 
Copywriter© program that will give you an idea of how to write ﬁ ve basic 
types of advertising copy.
Great narratives include all the necessary product information, but you 
hear it in a natural way, within the context of a story. That’s the secret.
 A narrative is also known as a single-voice commercial. This is one of the 
most frequently used techniques in broadcast writing.
 One of the most common mistakes made with narratives is writing them 
too long. They end up being read so fast they lose all meaning. They become 
an irritant, compromising your station’s programming and any results the 
advertiser had hoped to achieve.
 Write a narrative as though you were writing a letter to a friend, or 
speaking to someone on the telephone. Write the way people speak. People 
don’t talk in complete sentences, and they do use slang. This will help you 
ﬁ t the entire thought in to the allotted time. Pick one theme or storyline to 
concentrate on, and then weave in the details as required.
 Another key to a good narrative is to know the skills and personality 
of your voice talent. If you write with a particular voice talent in mind, it 
becomes easier to develop the script to make it sound like something he 
or she would actually say. When you write your next narrative commer-
cial, read it aloud the way you want your voice talent to read it. Then ask 
yourself if you can read it comfortably within the allotted time period, if 
it sounds natural, and if it convinces you that trying this product would be 
a good thing.
 Commercials that blend in to your programming and complement 
it, instead of intruding on it, are much more effective. If your station’s 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         295
 programming is high-energy, a narrative can mirror that programming 
without becoming a high-pitched scream-fest. Think about how one of 
your listeners might tell that story.
Writing Dialogue
They say that when two people really “click,” they can ﬁ nish each other’s 
sentences or read each other’s thoughts. That is how a great dialogue 
commercial sounds. In fact, allowing the talent to complete each other’s 
thoughts is a great technique for writing and producing effective dialogue. 
Above all, dialogue, like narrative, should sound natural.
Prove it to yourself by writing your next dialogue commercial “short,” 
giving the talent time to make it sound natural. Allow them time to pause 
and respond to what the other person is saying. If you don’t have particu-
larly strong acting talent, cast two people in the commercial who have com-
plementary personalities, or appear to get along well in the halls or at the 
coffee machine. Your chances of achieving your goal of better dialogue will 
be greatly improved.
Let them work with the script by giving them only basic copy points, 
then ask them to converse with one another about the advertiser and the 
products. Your client may hand you a veritable grocery list of products to pro-
mote. Remember, though, that your obligation to your client is to achieve 
his or her goal. A dialogue ad that sounds like a list won’t sound very natu-
ral, and is not likely to be effective.
Good dialogue makes the listeners feel like they’re eavesdropping on 
a private conversation. So, try recording two people having a conversation 
about your client’s product or service. You will probably get some great 
natural responses that make for a very realistic commercial. You can either 
excerpt portions of that session for your spot or use the actual dialogue as 
the “script” for your recording session with professional talent.
Finally, when you’re choosing the voice actors for your commercial, be 
sure their voices are not similar. Otherwise it can be difﬁ cult for the lis-
tener to identify who is talking, and who is saying what.
Testimonials
A testimonial commercial could be from a satisﬁ ed customer, a celebrity 
endorsing a product, or a commercial voiced by the client. Whoever is 
doing it, the most important feature of a testimonial ad is that it must be 

296         Valerie Geller
believable. The other challenge with testimonials is making sure that they 
sound good in the execution. This can be achieved with good recording 
techniques, whether in-studio or on the street, and with  people who simply 
sound good and give coherent, succinct  comments.
If you and your client have chosen a local celebrity to be your spokes-
person or to endorse your product, be sure you have explored all the 
positives and negatives of this type of approach. There’s always a risk that 
the person you’ve chosen may do something later to embarrass the client 
or risk the reputation of the product. If you do involve celebrities, be sure 
to involve them in the creation of the script. Ask them what they would 
actually say about the product, and try to  incorporate their honest feel-
ings and words into the copy. This will give credibility and integrity to your 
celebrity testimonial spot, and the  listeners do know the difference.
The ﬁ nal type of testimonial commercial is the client-voiced commer-
cial. Before you cast a client in a commercial, be sure there’s a perfectly 
legitimate reason for him or her to be there. If it’s simply ego, that’s not 
good business for either of you. If ego is at the root of your client’s desire 
to appear in his ad, an ad that talks about your client can sometimes do the 
job. For example, John Jones might feel just as good about hearing a profes-
sional voice promote his business this way: “John Jones has been greeting 
customers at the door of his restaurant with a cup of his wife Mary’s home-
made chili for twenty-ﬁ ve years.”
With endorsement commercials, it is always good to include the client 
in script development. If the client is in the spot, work to get the best pos-
sible voice delivery from him. Remember, your goal is to make him sound 
genuine, not like a professional announcer.
The Art of Storytelling
While all commercials require a beginning, middle, and end, it is sometimes 
difﬁ cult to express all of the important points within the prescribed time 
period. The key to successful storytelling is being able to complete it within 
the number of seconds provided. This is a challenging writing style, but 
with practice you can master it!
The best advice is to use fewer words. If you can say it in two words, 
don’t use four. If you can make a statement with music or sound effects, 

Creating Powerful Radio: Sales and Commercials         297
it will help you to move the storyline forward without spending valuable 
time.
Never overlook your most important job of selling product for the 
advertiser. Ask yourself why you are using the storytelling technique, and 
decide if it’s really appropriate. Do not tell a story for the sake of telling a 
story; make sure it introduces the product in a beneﬁ cial way, and “asks for 
the order.”
One of the unique beneﬁ ts of advertising with sound is that it gives us 
the opportunity to convey the story and have the listeners develop their 
own images about its details. Because they play an active role in complet-
ing the storyline, listeners tend to remember the message longer. They may 
also be able to relate personally to the story, or know someone who can.
When you work on your storytelling skills, begin by writing the story 
out, using as many words as it takes to tell it. Then go back and remove all 
unnecessary components that don’t contribute to the storyline or sell the 
product. Once you have that ﬁ rst edit, look for places to economize on 
words. Look for opportunities to convey your message with sound. Even 
the voice reading your commercial will add to the story’s overall texture. 
Keep paring down your script until it works within the prescribed time. Be 
sure to allow the announcer(s) time to tell the story at an appropriate pace. 
You’ll defeat your purpose if you ask them to rush through the commercial 
to include all your copy.
Humor
Perhaps one of the most difﬁ cult techniques to master, humor is powerful 
when done properly. Humor is also a high-maintenance style. Humorous 
commercials tend to become tiresome fairly quickly and can go from being 
entertaining to annoying if the listener is overexposed to them. Humor is 
also culturally speciﬁ c and differs from one target group to another. Use 
humor with caution, and be sure to have fun with the audience. Never make 
fun of your audience in an effort to sell a product or service.
The fundamental rule for writing a humorous commercial is to ensure 
that it stays true to the product. Many times people remember the joke 
in a commercial but are unable to identify the product or service adver-
tised. So when you’re deciding whether or not to use a humorous spot, ask 

298         Valerie Geller
 yourself, “Does the humor serve to promote the product and encourage 
trial?” Remember, the job of advertising is to promote the product.
Common themes of humor spots include the following:
■ The human condition—If the listener can say, “I have been there, 
I know about that,” the humor is based on the human condition. 
These situations are funny because we can relate to them.
■ Incongruity—This form of comedy consists simply of putting 
things together that don’t belong together. Incongruity can be 
achieved either in the script writing itself or in the production style. 
Perhaps the music is completely the opposite of what people are 
 expecting, or the voice talent is exactly the opposite of what 
the listener expects to hear.
■ Exaggeration—Exaggerating or minimizing a situation can make for 
memorable comedy. Exaggeration can be achieved through words, 
but it can also be conveyed through the characters in your com-
mercial, the selection of sound effects, or the choice of music. Think 
about what naturally belongs in the commercial for the product or 
service you’re writing for, and then try using the polar opposite.
■ Puns or double meanings—A pun or double meaning usually 
goes along with some type of misunderstanding. This launches 
the  comedy and helps establish the humor in the situation.
Powerful Radio, as you can see from Maureen Bulley’s tools for creating 
exciting and effective copy, can happen in, as well as around, the commer-
cials on your station.

299
Creating Powerful Radio
LifeStage Demographics
Are Traditional Demographics Still the Best 
Selling Strategy for the Future?
The pivotal moment came to me during a focus group. As the participants 
were leaving the room, I noticed a young woman in her early twenties say-
ing “hello” to a 51-year-old lady on her way out. As they began to chat, 
the years between them melted away. Both had young children, attended 
the same “Mommy and Me” classes, were both buying minivans, and had 
stayed at the same hotel in Disneyworld. Although they were generations 
apart, they shared the same LifeStage.
That was the moment the light bulb in my head went on and the concept 
for LifeStage Demographics was born. We began examining research and 
focus group results and developed a system that could effectively tap into 
the listener’s lifestyle and LifeStages. Armed with this information, stations 
could then make programming and marketing decisions based on what 
was important to their listeners. From a programming perspective, the rat-
ings were astonishing. The stations working with LifeStage Demographics 
had huge listener increases and much more time spent listening. We then 
invited sales people to attend the workshops and explained the LifeStage 
C H A P T E R  25

300         Valerie Geller
Demographics research. That helped the account executives better sell the 
station. It was a win-win for everyone.
I work with successful radio stations around the world, and one secret 
they all have in common is that they all they cross demographic lines. Key 
elements to their programming successes are that their on-air personalities 
speak the truth, have a good sense of humor, provide new and useful infor-
mation, and, most importantly, relate to the listeners. They cross demo-
graphic lines because good entertainment attracts listeners of all ages. But 
it is lifestyle and LifeStage that dictate what appeals to different groups of 
listeners. If radio managers and programmers begin to look at their audi-
ences by life stages instead of by demographics, you will be surprised at the 
positive result.
Cable television found its market and makes a great deal of money, 
superserving, or niche targeting, people who belong to special interest 
groups or those who share similar lifestyle or life stages. On cable TV, you’ll 
ﬁ nd special programming geared toward the health conscious or medically 
oriented, pet lovers, couples about to have a child, independent-ﬁ lm lovers, 
golf or home decorating enthusiasts, antique collectors, women, political 
junkies, gourmet food lovers, and more.
The magazine and publishing world learned about niche marketing 
over the past decades as it migrated from mass circulation “one size ﬁ ts 
all” editorial publications to today’s multiple smaller-niche special-interest 
markets. These focused publications set their foundations on the common 
interests of their readers. The Internet does a great job of superserving 
special interests and targeting those in various life stages.
Traditional demographic breakdowns we’ve worked with in the past 
are less and less relevant. Our society and culture are changing. The audi-
ence is changing along with it. If radio is going to continue to grow, develop 
and powerfully connect to the audience, it is time to rethink how we look 
at that audience. The old way of thinking about demographics just doesn’t 
work anymore.
If you were to talk with account executives or program directors, they 
might tell you that the most coveted target demo for stations is adults, 25 to 
54. In the radio industry, we’ve programmed and sold in terms of targeted 
demographics for so long that we have missed out on one thing: The way 
people live today is different from how people lived in the past, and tra-
ditional demographics of targeting 12+, 18 to 24, 25 to 54, 35 to 54, 55+ no 

Creating Powerful Radio: LifeStage Demographics         301
longer strictly apply. Perhaps you have heard someone joke, “twenty-ﬁ ve 
to ﬁ fty-four, that’s not a demographic, that’s a family reunion!” It’s true.
But what and who is the target audience? Does the 25 to 54 targeted 
goal reach out and appeal to the same audience? Of course not. Within 
each target and each format, there are very different audiences in differ-
ent life stages, living very different lifestyles. To determine and superserve 
selected LifeStages while still keeping an open door to a mass audience is 
one of the beneﬁ ts of using LifeStage Demographics.
Advertising has already noticed LifeStage Demographics. A recent 
evening in front of the television screen showed an arthritis medication 
ad featuring people in a variety of age and ethnic groups. The common 
thread was that all had been living with arthritis. This commercial showed 
the medication helping them resume their daily lives. Their LifeStage is 
ill health. Historically a drug company promoting a new medication for 
arthritis sufferers might have focused on the obvious market, elderly peo-
ple. The information that is new here isn’t only that there is a new drug 
discovery, it’s that all kinds of people, including some over sixty-ﬁ ve, live 
with arthritis—and the pharmaceutical company is marketing its product 
to all of them.
Our culture is changing in other ways too. The old assumption was that 
people made buying decisions based on a common set of needs deﬁ ned by 
age, income, sex, and ethnic group. To a certain extent, that is still true. But 
since people have more choices about the ways they live, they are making 
buying decisions based on a whole new set of additional criteria. That is 
what LifeStage Demographics is all about. If you look at a group of friends 
who are all in their thirties, you will probably ﬁ nd some contradictions in 
the conventional thinking about demographics.
Advertisers, programmers, and marketers tended to assume that a 
group of 33-year-old women shopped at the same stores, ate at the same 
restaurants, and saw the same movies as other women of their same race 
and income. But in reality, when a 33-year-old woman looks at her group of 
single friends, she sees that some of them are shopping, dining, and going 
out to movies together because they are enjoying the single life and each 
other’s company; others are weary of being on their own and are actively 
seeking partners. Some are meeting at the playground with their kids talk-
ing about preschool, and renting movies. Others are planning vacations to 
islands in the Paciﬁ c with their husbands or boyfriends. It isn’t so much 

302         Valerie Geller
their paychecks or their ages that are dictating their lifestyles as choices 
they have made.
Let’s follow that subgroup of thirty-something women to the play-
ground and see who else is there. There are some older women, some ethni-
cally diverse women, and some men. The age range is 16 to 65. The unifying 
LifeStage demographic here is that they are all taking care of children at 
around 2:00 in the afternoon. They are all making buying decisions and 
lifestyle choices based on the commonality of responsibility for children.
You might think that the 65-year-old grandmother at that playground, 
with her high disposable income and her status as a retired person, would 
buy a certain kind of car, perhaps a sporty, luxury convertible. Instead, she 
has a Volvo wagon with toys in the back and cereal embedded between 
the seats.
You might think the 40-year-old man pushing the 5-year old on the 
swing is completely out of place, but he is one of three men on that play-
ground today who works from home and cares for his children. His wife, a 
physician, is attending to her medical practice. Today he will also stop by 
the grocery store and take his child to a fast-food restaurant for a treat. 
Choices these men will make include: public school vs. private school, soc-
cer camp vs. camping vacation, bottled water vs. juice boxes, washing the 
kids’ hands with Purell vs. Handi-Wipes, computer class vs. music lessons, 
McDonalds Happy Meal vs. a granola bar, video vs. art project. And of 
course those same people are making decisions about which TV station is 
on in the family room and which radio station is on in their cars.
A 44-year-old single female professional might be living the same 
lifestyle as a 23-year-old single woman working in a big city. A recently 
divorced man of 51 might spend his cash on designer clothing, a sports car, 
meals at expensive restaurants, and premiere seats at sporting events. His 
lifestyle could mirror that of a 26-year-old single executive who spends his 
or her time and money the same way. The chronological age of the listener 
does not matter as much as the LifeStage.
Because people are living longer, enjoying active lives and good health, 
the stereotypes deﬁ ning people’s lifestyles have been pitched out the win-
dow. The stereotypes of roles of men and women have changed. Older 
women have young children. Healthy, ﬁ t women are watching and play-
ing sports. Men start new families at sixty. Since people are living longer 
because of advanced medical breakthroughs, with emphasis on leading 

Creating Powerful Radio: LifeStage Demographics         303
healthier lifestyles, those who are 55 and over may have more disposable 
income to spend on leisure activities, vitamins, exercise equipment, travel, 
clothing, cars, gadgets, and more. And here’s big news: The older audience 
doesn’t consider itself to be an “older” audience anymore.
Ironically the very people who ought to be aware of this, often the 
young people making key marketing decisions and agency advertising buys, 
are doing so without an awareness of how listeners/consumers in different 
life stages actually live. Traditional categories like 12+, 18 to 34, 25 to 54, 
55+ no longer give us the information we need to make accurate program-
ming and marketing decisions.
If broadcasting does not redeﬁ ne the way in which we view and 
 understand audiences, and plan our marketing strategies accordingly by 
acknowledging special interests and LifeStage Demographics, radio may 
miss the boat.
In reassessing what works for sales, advertising, marketing and program-
ming, it is time to look at using LifeStage Demographics as a strategy.
Using LifeStage Demographics
When I teach LifeStage Demographics to programming, marketing, or sales 
departments at radio and TV stations, what most people want to know is: 
“How can I use this? How does this help us get ratings, market our station, 
or sell more advertising?”
A thorough knowledge of LifeStage Demographics helps you draw a 
far more accurate picture of your target audience by giving you a practical 
understanding of the listener’s various life stages. Here’s how.
Sales
Having an understanding of LifeStage Demographics helps effectively tar-
get sales  presentations for clients, with proven results. Knowing your audi-
ence and speciﬁ cally targeting a life stage is invaluable when presenting 
your  station’s listener proﬁ le to prospective clients. If, for example, you 
understand through LifeStage Demographics that most listeners without 
 children do not buy life insurance but buy as much as they can afford as 
soon as they have their kids, that is useful information in pitching a pro-
spective  insurance agency and helping get the sale.

304         Valerie Geller
A sales force armed with the knowledge of LifeStage Demographics 
can better explain your station’s value to a potential advertiser: “Our clas-
sic rock station has an audience of dads packing lunches for their twelve-
year-old kids before those dads go to work. You’ll sell a lot of life insur-
ance to these fathers because every day they think, ‘What would happen 
if I didn’t get home from my job? How would my family cope?’ ” Those 
who are single don’t usually buy life insurance, nor do young couples 
without kids.
Most recent homebuyers, regardless of their ages, tend to defer luxury 
spending. They spend weekend time and spare money not on restaurants, 
but on the house. They might make several trips in a day to hardware or 
home repair shops. You’ll do a lot of business with the big home “do-it-yourself 
store” because you’ll know those listeners are spending ﬁ xing their own 
houses instead of hiring others to do it for them. Younger homebuyers may 
simply not have the extra money to hire help once they buy the house, 
more mature homebuyers may be worried about saving money to send 
their children to college.
Commercials
LifeStage also helps production directors at stations create better and more 
successful commercials that net results for the clients, particularly when 
you can deﬁ ne special interest groups. Common interests elevate aware-
ness for commercials. Advertising in special-interest media is as interesting 
to the audience as is editorial content. That support means less of the ad 
dollar is being spent on simply getting attention and more of it is going into 
deﬁ ning the message.
If radio ignores this new audience fragmentation, we may very well 
hand over receptive consumers to other media. It’s time to redeﬁ ne demo-
graphics as a sales and marketing strategy and to go with special interests 
and life stages instead.
LifeStage Demographics Help with 
Promotions and Marketing
Marketing campaigns speciﬁ cally designed to target the LifeStage of your 
desired audience will net better results along with increased word of mouth. 
You will achieve more effective planning of contests, product tie-ins, and 

Creating Powerful Radio: LifeStage Demographics         305
events. The result: Your listeners will feel more connected to “their” station 
and believe, “They are talking to ME.” Here is one example of a perfect 
LifeStage Demographic promotion: An adult contemporary station that 
had chosen to speciﬁ cally target young mothers, between twenty-ﬁ ve and 
thirty-ﬁ ve, held a circus with clowns and prizes for the children. During 
the event, the station also offered a ﬁ ve-dollar oil change and lube job for 
the busy moms. Members of the station’s target audience could attend the 
radio station function, get a bargain on necessary automobile maintenance, 
and save the time it would take to bring the car into the mechanics shop, all 
while having fun at the circus with their kids.
Programming and On-Air Talent
Hire staff in various stages of life. It helps if most are in the LifeStage of 
the target audience you wish to attract. Learning LifeStage Demographics 
not only helps your on-air talent, in selecting content and in show prep, 
but also helps managers in hiring decisions for new on-air or behind-the-
scenes producing talent. Through the use of LifeStage Demographics, you 
will create more powerful, relevant, and surgically targeted programming 
which will beneﬁ t the station by growing and developing the listener base 
and extending the audience’s time spent listening.
Music and Imaging
Using LifeStage Demographics aids your music and research departments 
in selecting songs, liners, and jingle packages.
Get the Audience You Serve
In other words, LifeStage Demographics helps to make sure you are speak-
ing to your audience at every opportunity in a language that they can fully 
understand, and that you fully understand their needs in order to serve 
them. There is no part of your station, from its logo to the coffee in your 
breakroom, that is not affected by LifeStage Demographics.
LifeStage Demographic research shows that race and age do not play 
as big a role in deﬁ ning audience interests as do education level and social 
class. According to this research, upper-middle-class educated Asians, 
African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics have more in com-
mon with upper-middle-class Anglo-Saxons than those with lower income 

306         Valerie Geller
levels or less education. Like it or not, deﬁ ning interests solely by race and 
age will soon be a thing of the past.
As LifeStage Demographics developed, we applied the concept to both 
sales and programming with very good results. Ratings increased at several 
stations, as did revenue.
Every successful radio station must appeal to a broad range of listeners 
who are experiencing various life stages. However, by gaining an under-
standing of the various LifeStage of your listeners, you will have an oppor-
tunity to eclipse your competition and win a larger share of the potential 
audience.
Life-stage categories can and frequently do overlap. For example, 
a person can be a homeowner without being married, a woman who is 
looking to ﬁ nd a partner, may also have children.
LifeStage Demographics Categories
“Kids”
There are as many kinds of kids, teenagers, and young people as there are 
people. Kids are divided into four subcategories:
■ Academic fast track: “I want to be a doctor, so I study all the 
time.”
■ Trendy: “I spend all my free time at the mall hanging out with my 
friends. I’ll worry about my future later on.”
■ Sports fanatic: “I play football, baseball, soccer, basketball—any 
sport whenever I can—and I go to the games.”
■ The “perennial kid”: These “kids” can be eighteen or thirty-ﬁ ve 
years old! They may still be attending college. They are making 
important independent spending decisions. Some are young 
 people who are done with school. They may have tried living on 
their own, gotten jobs, or attended college, but, whether due to 
practical economic or emotional reasons, these kids have returned 
to the “nest” and are living a LifeStage of prolonged adolescence, 
remaining at home with their families. Research is showing that the 
expected age of reaching adulthood has now moved to people’s 
late twenties.

Creating Powerful Radio: LifeStage Demographics         307
Young Men
Amazingly, we also found similar life stages in the category of “young 
men.” Again, here were different generations, but similar lives. We discov-
ered a 38-year-old man living an identical lifestyle to a 17-year-old. Here 
were men of signiﬁ cantly different ages, almost different generations, living 
similar lives. Both worked in music/video stores, both rented apartments, 
both drove sports cars. Both of these men were “not sure what they wanted 
to do with the rest of their lives.” Both were single; dated a lot; got regular, 
expensive haircuts; ate out frequently; attended concerts; and visited their 
families each week for a home-cooked meal. Both the 17-year-old and the 
38-year-old also brought sacks of dirty clothes home each week so their 
mothers could do their laundry!
Young Women
As we learned from our earlier virtual trip to the park, chronological age 
does not matter as much as life stage. A woman could be 17 or 46 and still 
want to shop at trendy stores, purchase lacy underwear, or have an interest 
in romantic gossip about the latest pop stars.
Working People
There are several types of LifeStage Demographic breakdowns in the 
working world. Among these, we found two main categories: (1) People 
who had made a career commitment lived a very different lifestyle than 
(2) those who still had major career decisions pending.
1. Just a Job: This group admitted that their “real” lives were outside 
of their jobs. Someday they hoped to ﬁ nd their true calling and on that day 
would step into the role they were meant to play. At present, they were not 
committed to or deeply involved in their work.
Whether in retail, the corporate world, the public sector or in fast-
food services, these people were still trying to “ﬁ nd themselves” and were 
 working at their jobs merely to make a paycheck.
2. Career Commitment: Those who had made a career commitment 
lived a very different lifestyle than people who were in the “Just a Job” 
LifeStage, who still had major career decisions pending. The committed 
career people were struggling to get ahead in their chosen ﬁ elds. They spent 
long or extra hours at work, and many went into the ofﬁ ce on weekends. 

308         Valerie Geller
Some traveled extensively for their jobs. The career commitments cut into 
their time with family, friends, and leisure activities. Many said they spent 
time thinking about their work, even when they were not on the job.
Renters
Renters lived a vastly different lifestyle than homeowners did. Because 
they were not under the ﬁ nancial responsibility of maintaining a home, 
often there was more disposable income available. They also tended to 
have more ﬂ exibility. A notable characteristic of this LifeStage is that if 
need be, renters could relocate more easily for work or personal reasons 
than those who owned their homes.
Homeowners
As noted, it was not uncommon to ﬁ nd new home buyers making several 
trips to a home repair shop in one weekend (and not always to buy items, 
but sometimes just to ask questions!). Extra money that was once used for 
vacations, luxury items, and evenings out often went into paying extra costs 
or expenses for the house.
Solo
If someone lived alone, his or her listening, viewing, travel, entertaining, 
and spending habits were different from those of couples.
Couples
Couples tended to make decisions together, and with more compromising. 
This included everything from which radio station was played in the car to 
the choice of vacation destinations.
Couples with Kids or without Kids
Those with children lived a different lifestyle than those who did not have 
them. Again, age was irrelevant.
Good Health/Ill Health
Age was not necessarily a factor here. We found that the lifestyle of an 
80-year-old man, spending most of his days in bed, watching TV or 
 listening to the radio, wearing a bathrobe and pajamas, wasn’t all that 

Creating Powerful Radio: LifeStage Demographics         309
different from that of a 38-year-old woman recovering from a difﬁ cult 
back surgery.
Special Interests
We found other categories of LifeStages, with people who had special 
interests in common, including pet lovers, sports fanatics, gourmet chefs, 
etc. Here, neither age nor sex mattered as much as the common interest. 
Although there were generational commonalties that could not be ignored, 
age was not necessarily a factor here either.
When you are formatting, programming, and marketing your radio 
 station, it is not enough to say, “We want an audience of 25- to 54-year-old 
men.” A programmer must also ask, “Which LifeStages of 25- to 54-year-
old men does our station want to serve?”
Life Stages Are Fluid
Life stages are more ﬂ uid than traditional age/sex/income-based demo-
graphics. After all, your own next age-deﬁ ned demographic group, if you 
are in your twenties, is your thirties, then your forties, and so on; however, 
if your LifeStage is “With Kids,” you may raise a family of young children, 
live in a child-free house for awhile, divorce, remarry, then start all over 
again with a new house full of small children.
It takes a little more effort on the part of researchers to get used to 
the idea that we cannot just park people into an age, sex, ethnic, or even 
income group and expect them to live a certain way. It takes research and 
effort to market yourself to the various people in different LifeStages, but 
the payoff is worth it.
A Station Should Hire People in the Life
Stages It Wishes to Attract
There is no substitute for life experience. Your imagination can take you only 
so far. Most of us base our understanding of the world on direct experience.
It’s no longer enough to say we want our audience to be men 25 to 
54. Whatever your LifeStage target, “With Kids” checking out schools, 

310         Valerie Geller
“Couples” planning vacations at an exotic resort, “Solo” singles looking 
for spouses, or active people training for a marathon, if you have not 
 experienced it, it makes sense to have people around you who have.
If you are running a station or hosting or producing a program whose 
target audience doesn’t look or live like you (and it is possible that you 
are), surround yourself with people who are like the audience you wish to 
target. Then you have to trust these people. Listen to them. They may have 
insights that do not show up in conventional research.

311
Creating Powerful Radio
 Research
“You know the station is a success when people 
who don’t listen lie and say they do.”
— Overheard at a National Association of 
Broadcasters Convention
People love to look at research. We open the newspaper or watch TV and 
gobble up those Gallup polls, pie charts, and percentages of who is doing 
what. We like statistics, ﬁ nished products, results. Most of us know it’s not 
the data, but how one interprets it that counts.
Applying research to radio is a challenge. It’s easiest with music radio. 
You ask a group of people what they think about a song, a performing 
artist, or a jingle. Interpreting “Personality” or News-Talk research is 
tougher. The reason? You can research only what has gone before. There 
is no way to predict in a research study what people are going to respond 
to tomorrow.
Working in talk radio is not for the faint-hearted. It elicits strong reac-
tions. Your listeners will love you or hate you. They’re active, and they’ll 
let you know how they feel with calls, faxes, ﬂ owers, e-mails, boycotts, and 
threats.
C H A P T E R  26

312         Valerie Geller
There is one clear difference between News-Talk programming research 
and music programming research. In news and talk radio, polarization can 
be a good thing. Strong listener reaction, to a news-talk personality—be it 
positive or negative—is good, provided there is a balance. Don’t be afraid 
of this intense reaction, it’s one of the strengths of talk radio.
In talk radio, negative reaction can be a good thing, if balanced by an 
equal and opposite positive reaction. There is cause for concern if 97  percent 
of the audience hates your host or show and only 3 percent love it.
If you have an equal number of positively and negatively polarized 
 opinions, that is a sign that whether they love it or hate it, they’re listening.
Take strong personalities Rush Limbaugh and Howard Stern, for 
example. People either love them or hate then, but each has millions of lis-
teners. The natural instinct of programmers is that they want their stations 
to be liked. They do not enjoy calming angry listeners or spending their 
work days answering e-mails from irate audience members. If a program-
mer can ﬁ ght his or her instinct and override the pressure, it bears keeping 
in mind that it takes a while to grow a show. Stick with programming you 
believe in. Even if it is controversial, it is worth it. You will have a valuable 
product in the end.
Listeners are creatures of habit. They do not like change. They like 
it the old way. While behavior can be immediately changed, according to 
Dr. Evian Gordon from Australia’s Brain Resource Company, it can take 
a thousand repetitions before a human brain is “rewired” to change, and 
this includes changing listener’s habits.
It’s only when the new way has a chance to “kick in” that it becomes a 
habit for them. So, (1) if they don’t like the host today, they might tomor-
row; and (2) if they hate him but they listen (and write it in their diary), 
that’s OK. Don’t be alarmed when your research shows that the audience 
has strong opinions about the hosts on your station. Controversy is not nec-
essarily a bad thing. At a station I once worked with printed on its T-shirts, 
“Listen to talk radio because all great minds don’t think alike.”
Just about every radio market can tell the story of a beloved host 
whose name is known to all in the community but who is listened to by 
very few. Conversely, the mention of certain hosts causes dramatic negative 
response among many who would never miss a show. Music radio is both 
morning-show and music driven. In America, news and talk are very differ-
ent formats. Obviously both beneﬁ t when there is a lot of news happening: 

Creating Powerful Radio: Research         313
a natural disaster, a political crisis, a war, a huge trial, or an election. But 
talk radio tends to be personality and opinion driven, while news radio is 
information based and current-events driven.
A hybrid of these two—News-Talk—has splintered into several  speciﬁ cally 
targeted formats. Under the News-Talk umbrella, you can hear hot talk, 
self-help talk, sports talk, right- or left-wing political talk, Christian talk, 
male- or female-oriented talk, and FM or youth-oriented talk, among oth-
ers. Clearly, talk radio programmers have taken a clue from their   music-
oriented counterparts and fragmented the format, targeting speciﬁ c 
 demographic groups for their stations.
What research can do is help you understand your audience and its 
lifestyles. It can answer questions like: How can my station better serve my 
audience? Or, What have they responded to in the past?
One of my favorite research projects came from Frank Magid and 
Associates in Marion, Iowa. They did a presentation years ago on the top-
ics people would always listen to on the air. Those main topics include:
■ Health (safety)
■ Heart (emotional stories that touch the “heart”)
■ Pocketbook (money)
When you look at the content of stories that people remember over a week, 
this list remains fairly accurate, though now there is a fourth category to 
add, which is transformation.
Transformative topics can include anything that gives a listener hope 
for the future, how his or her life can be better tomorrow than it is at the 
moment because of something they’ve heard on air. The current trend of 
self-help advice, or ﬁ x-it programming, proves this.
Research can also be an incredible tool for programmers and manag-
ers when working with on-air talent and sales people. One project I took 
on involved a Religious Talk station on which a minister, a priest, and an 
attorney all hosted shows. They were dull. Even people with a lot of faith 
were tuning out. I was called in to “ﬁ x” the shows.
Here’s what was going wrong: The hosts were talking at the listeners. 
They were lecturing, orating, and preaching, but not communicating. These 
men held themselves above their audience. Although each considered 

314         Valerie Geller
 himself to be a good listener, not one of them really cared what his audi-
ence was saying. As a result, it was not personal, intimate, interesting, or 
meaningful. It was very boring radio.
I met with these hosts as a group, then one on one and just could not 
seem to get them to understand that they were not communicating power-
fully. Well-educated, always treated with great respect, and with fairly high  
self-images, these men refused to believe that they were not getting through.
It was a focus group research project that saved these shows. We hid 
our hosts behind a two-way mirror and watched the proceedings. The focus 
group put on headphones and began listening to a recording of the ﬁ rst 
radio program. Within minutes, most had removed their headphones and 
were talking amongst themselves.
The priest was outraged. “But I’m just getting to the important part. 
They’re not paying attention!” He was shocked that people had tuned him 
out. I pointed out that in church no one would dare to get up and leave on 
a Sunday morning, even if the sermon was dull. Parishioners would all sit 
politely, quietly bored, though pretending to listen. But alone in their cars, 
at home, or in a listening focus group, listeners do what they please, which 
is to tune out if a show is boring or irrelevant to their lives.
It was only after all three of the hosts experienced the tune-outs that 
they were ready to learn the techniques of creating powerful radio: story-
telling, showing their hearts, being more personal, and listening. All three 
hosts have successful shows today because they were led to understand 
that they must become more powerful communicators.
Research is a necessary tool of modern business. Can you imagine a 
car manufacturer putting out a new car without test-marketing it ﬁ rst? Big 
money is at stake. People in business want data before they introduce a 
new product. They need a realistic sense of how the audience or consumer 
will react. Radio is no different.
Many products we don’t think twice about today are in our lives 
because of quantitative research: single-serving frozen dinners, zipper-lock 
plastic bags, automobile cup holders, a tire patch in a can.
In the United States, there are pages and pages of names of broadcast-
ing researchers in the radio directories. Anyone can hang out a shingle and 
call him or herself a researcher. Be careful which company you choose. It’s 
a combination of skills and personality that makes good research.

Creating Powerful Radio: Research         315
If done right, research can help you get ratings and learn the habits of 
your audience.
No Crystal Ball
Researcher Steve Apel emphasizes that market research can’t predict con-
sumer behavior. “If it could, no product backed by research would ever 
fail. What research can do, if used properly, is identify public trends and 
tendencies.” In radio, this means giving your listeners something they’ve 
been missing or more of what they say they like. There is no crystal ball.
Remember that while there are many research techniques, the basic 
process involves:
■ Asking the right questions
■ Compiling the data
■ Analyzing and interpreting the results
Don’t get intimidated by the language of research.
Apel advises that if you’ve hired research professionals using advanced 
analytical techniques to interpret a study, ask them to explain the tech-
niques they are using. Be sure you’re comfortable with the logic. After all, 
you need to understand and have conﬁ dence in this interpretation if you 
are using it to make changes to your station.
Researcher and consultant Matt Hudson warns that research alone is 
no way to make your programming decisions. He says: “[Research] does 
not prove or disprove anything. We still need creative minds to understand, 
interpret, and implement the ﬁ ndings.”
Here, Hudson deﬁ nes some research terms and talks generally about 
radio research. In some cases, I’ve provided examples to illustrate Matt’s 
deﬁ nitions.
Qualitative vs. Quantitative
“Qualitative studies, such as focus groups, involve ten to twelve people 
and are used to collect indicators that will be tested in a more statistically 
reliable research project, for example, a phone study. Quantitative studies, 

316         Valerie Geller
such as format searches or perceptual telephone studies, are large sample 
procedures which yield quantitative results. These can be generalized to 
the population from which the sample was selected.”
In other words, you’ve got only twenty-eight people at your station 
and you already know their opinions about everything anyway. So, you get 
twelve people, strangers who really like talk radio, gathered in a room, then 
you ask them in great depth and detail about whatever you need to dis-
cover. These twelve people are a ﬂ ashlight in the dark. They will illuminate 
new areas and point you in the direction you need to go for your larger or 
quantitative study.
This group is like gold. They can teach you things you never believed 
possible about your radio station; and the deeper you go, the better it gets. 
Just as in the focus group that taught the religious broadcasters how to 
communicate, when you really listen to these twelve people, powerful 
things can happen. However, you shouldn’t make big decisions like ﬁ ring 
someone because twelve people don’t like the person. That calls for a bigger, 
quantitative study.
The questions based on the insight gained in the qualitative study can 
lead you in a direction of seeking trends in the quantitative study.
Let’s say a station’s evening talk host is the subject of a small focus 
group study. Turns out, some of the listeners ﬁ nd him so irritating that they 
put up with static to hear another host on a station hundreds of miles away. 
Up until then, the station’s management had no idea the distant station 
could even be heard in the market. Thanks to the small focus group’s quali-
tative results, quantitative questions about the distant station can be asked 
in the larger perceptual study.
Some researchers say you should never base programming decisions 
on qualitative research, and all agree that unless designed to do so, results 
from qualitative research should not be the sole factor in decision-making. 
Let us say you wanted to build a new bakery in New York City. If you ask 
nine people which bakery has the best bread in New York, you’d get nine 
different answers. They could give you some great ideas on what they like 
to see in the bakery, or whether they prefer store-bought bread.
But you certainly wouldn’t want to use the results of your nine-person 
study to determine where you’d put your new store, what types of bread 
you would bake, or how much you should charge. To make these kinds of 
decisions, you’d have to ask many more people than that.

Creating Powerful Radio: Research         317
Phantom Cume
In the United States, radio measures listening using diaries. Listeners 
either write down what they hear on the radio in a diary or remember what 
they’ve heard and then relate this information by phone to a data collec-
tion company. Neither of these methods captures “real-time” listening, that 
is, listening as it is happening. So, every radio station has a number of listen-
ers for whom they’ll never get credit. This phenomenon is called phantom 
cume. It’s the percentage of your cume that does not mention your radio 
station when asked to recall which stations they have listened to in the past 
week.
A healthy phantom cume seems to be around 25 to 30 percent over 
your reported cume. However, we are seeing many stations with phantom 
cumes reaching 70 percent of reported cume! Radio stations are presently 
experimenting with some new techniques to lower their phantom cumes 
and get the ratings credit they deserve.
Phantom cume may soon be a thing of the past, as new audience mea-
surement technologies emerge, such as Arbitron’s People Meter, though 
these new methods may also bring on their own problems or challenges.
Often research conﬁ rms something you already suspect about your 
 station. I once used a research study to verify my instinct about a station I 
was consulting: that we had many more listeners to the station than we were 
getting credit for in the ratings diaries. Working with a research  company, 
we were able to objectively verify that we had huge unreported listening 
(phantom cume) and easily ﬁ xed the problem by having the on-air person-
alities identify the station’s name and call letters more frequently. That way 
the audience knew whom they were listening to and could later recall and 
identify the station when asked.
Validity
A test or study should measure what it is intended to measure. The ideal 
research situation is to have a valid test or study that is also reliable. It is 
actually possible to have a valid test that is unreliable or an invalid test that 
is reliable.
As an example, you can ask all the morning host’s friends if they like 
the show. You can do everything right. You can make sure the responses 
aren’t inﬂ uenced by one another and your demos are properly sampled, 

318         Valerie Geller
but your sample is still a group of your host’s friends. The study is perfectly 
valid, it’s just not reliable. If you really want to know what the community 
thinks of your morning host, don’t recruit a group of his biggest fans.
Because you know your market, work with your researcher to ensure 
validity. Ask about the criteria your research company uses to select the 
group. Do a mission statement for your study, then make sure you ask ques-
tions that will give you the answers you need. Even though they may not be 
the answers you want, ask yourself: Is it skewed or biased in any way? Does 
it really measure what we want?
Prestige Bias
Respondents tend to give answers that they think will make them seem 
more educated, successful, hip, ﬁ nancially stable, or otherwise prestigious. 
A good researcher can control this problem by asking and directing the 
questions correctly.
Researcher Bias
In this case, respondents provide speciﬁ c answers because they believe these 
are the ones the researcher wants to hear. They want to impress and please 
the researcher. Again, this is easily managed by a skilled professional.
Random Sample
Every person has an equal chance of being selected to participate in a focus 
group, music test, or telephone perceptual study. A station database is NOT 
a random sample. If someone has volunteered for your study, he or she 
could not really have been chosen at random.
Size Is Important
What is a “statistically reliable sample size?” It depends on the error rate 
you are willing to accept. Generally, between 75 and 100 people should par-
ticipate in your perceptual study for each demographic group, or “cell,” you 
want to measure. For instance, if you want to do a study measuring adults 
25 to 44, you’ll want approximately the following number of participants:
■ Women 25 to 34 (at least 75 respondents)
■ Men 25 to 34 (at least 75 respondents)

Creating Powerful Radio: Research         319
■ Women 35 to 44 (at least 75 respondents)
■ Men 35 to 44 (at least 75 respondents)
This yields a total of 300 participants, generally considered adequate for 
this type of study.
How to Use a Focus Group
These results should NOT be used to make major decisions. This small 
sample research technique gives you an indicator; it helps you to devise 
the next set of questions you will need in your larger group for a telephone 
perceptual study.
When Should We Do Research?
Hudson concludes that conducting research to coincide with the start of 
a ratings period is not logical. Listeners don’t try a new station when the 
ratings book begins. Broadcasters should think of research as a preventa-
tive strategic weapon. While the results of your research can be had almost 
immediately, it can take several months for the effects of the programming 
changes to show. It bears repeating that brain research demonstrates that it 
can take as many as a thousand repetitions to make a lasting impression.
Programming changes should be in place long before you enter a 
 ratings measurement period.
What to Find Out
Steve Apel suggests: “Through questions that probe listener knowledge and 
impressions, you can get a feel for whether people perceive your station’s 
programming the way you intend.” What he means by this is that by ask-
ing the same question in a number of different ways—using, for example, 
different descriptive terms—you can get a clearer picture of what listeners 
really think. The picture “enable[s] you to assess whether or not your sta-
tion is on target and provide[s] a basic guide for modifying the station to 
better suit [your] listeners’ needs, tastes, and expectations.”
For example, during a perceptual study, you might ask the following 
questions: Which station plays the best rock? Which station plays the wid-
est variety of rock? Which station plays the hottest rock? Which station 
plays your favorite rock? A skilled researcher will be able to interpret the 

320         Valerie Geller
differences in the responses to give you more than just a simple “call letter” 
answer to the question.
Finally, those who call radio stations or write to you are NOT necessar-
ily indicative of who is listening to your station. Research has shown that 
only between 1 and 3 percent of your audience will ever call the station. 
To best serve your audience, create programs for the 97 percent who are 
listening, not those who call.
Ask Your Own People
In the beginning of USA Today, Gannett’s publishing division did a smart 
thing. It developed a concept of a “fast food” newspaper targeted to, among 
others, travelers, business people, and TV viewers. This would be a paper 
for people without a lot of time to read who just wanted the news head-
lines, sports, and gossipy “water cooler” features. The publishers chose an 
easy-to-read style accompanied by photos and colorful graphics.
Gannett used demographic research of the U.S. population and hired 
well-qualiﬁ ed reporters in proportion to the ethnic makeup of the United 
States: 52 percent women, 48 percent men, 18 percent African American, 
and so on. They hoped and speculated that the staffers would bring their own 
background experiences and unique perspectives to the stories they covered, 
as well as to story selection and story ideas. The concept worked. USA Today 
is omnipresent in airports, hotels, ofﬁ ces, and newsstands around the world.
A lesson can be learned here for radio. It never hurts to have your target 
demographic represented in your workplace, and it can’t hurt to ask anyone with 
an opinion to spend a few minutes giving his or her thoughts to you. Be aware, 
however, of who’s speaking. If your chief engineer, a known classical music 
buff, can’t stand your afternoon sex therapy advice show, don’t be surprised or 
make any programming decisions as a result. If, however, your chief engineer 
is a twice-divorced woman known for her romantic prowess and she ﬁ nds that 
same afternoon show dry or pompous, you might want her to elaborate.
Remember: Research is just a tool. It is one of the many weapons in 
your arsenal for creating a powerful radio station. You can have all the 
research results in the world, but it always comes down to people. You have 
to use your judgment every step of the way—not just in hiring your airstaff 
but also in choosing your researchers and the participants in your research 
project. Apply all your creative skills. The rules for Creating Powerful 
Radio apply to research as well.

321
Creating Powerful Radio
 Final Notes
“Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in 
rising every time we fall.”
— Confucius
“If at ﬁ rst you don’t succeed, try, try again.”
— Proverb
Working in radio is a great job, with no heavy lifting. In what other profes-
sion do you get paid to tell the stories of life, chronicle the times we live in, 
ﬁ nd the most interesting people alive, meet them, and talk to them?
It is easy to get disillusioned and jaded when concern for proﬁ t seems 
to make creativity a luxury, if not a vice. But those who run the business 
side of radio need you. They are basing their station’s ﬁ nancial future on 
one idea: that people will listen to what they have put on their radio sta-
tions. Your thoughts, your ideas, your words, and your personality are the 
product they are selling. You matter. It is up to you to use your creativity to 
make what is on the radio powerful.
Don’t waste a minute of your time on the air. Say your station’s name 
or call letters with pride! Make it matter. Be glad to be there. Tell the truth 
C H A P T E R  27

322         Valerie Geller
as you know it to be. Do every show with the same enthusiasm as you did 
your ﬁ rst, knowing it could be your last. Do not get caught up in pettiness 
at work.
In the 1700s Denis Diderot made this plea to artists: “Move me, sur-
prise me, rend my heart, make me tremble, weep, shudder, outrage me, . . .  
then delight me if you can.”
In talk, as in all radio, do not forget the important things. Be yourself. 
Use your life experience. Even though you are talking about the personal 
events of your life, do not divulge what is private. The Powerful Radio you 
create should be as unique as your DNA, but always engage or involve the 
listener.
Prepare, do the formatics, state your opinions, be courageous, and use 
humor. Remember, it is never about you, it is always about the listeners. 
They are the people who are giving you the most precious thing they have 
on earth: their time.

R e s o u r c e s
Contributors
Jaye Albright
Consultant, Albright & O’Malley
Email: radioconsultj@aol.com
www.radioconsult.com
Steve Apel
Research Consultant
Email: steve@apels.net
Dave Baronfeld
MetroNetworks
Email: Dbaronfeld@aol.com
www.metronetworks.com
Andy Beaubien
General Manager/Consultant 
Broadcast  Programming & Research
Email: Andybpr@earthlink.net
www.bpr.com.au
Jerry Bell
Managing Editor/Reporter
KOA, Clear Channel–Denver
Email: jerrygbell@clearchannel.com
Mervin Block
“Writing Broadcast News”
Television Newswriting Workshop
Email: merblo@aol.com
www.mervinblock.com
Ross Brittain
The Ross Brittain Report
Email: ross_brittain@compuserve.com
www.rbreport.com
Maureen Bulley
The Radio Store, Inc.
“Write Good Copy Fast”
Email: doradio@total.net
www.theradiostore.com
John Catchings
TV Production and Consultation
Email: JC@johncatchings.com
www.catchingsandassociates.com
Jim Chenevey
CBS Radio News
Email: jch@cbsnews.com
www.cbsnews.com
323

324         Resources
Alan Eisenson
Operations Manager
KFBK/KSTE
Email: alaneisenson@clearchannel.com
www.kfbk.com
Caroline Feraday
Air Personality
Email: caroline@feraday.fsnet.co.uk
www.lbc.co.uk
Nic Gaunt
Photographer
Email: nic@nicgaunt.demon.co.uk
www.nicgaunt.com
Bernard Gershon
Vice President/General Manager
ABC News.com
Email: bernard.l.gershon@abc.com
www.abc.com
Dr. Evian Gordon
Chairman/CEO
The Brain Resource Company
Email: evian.gordon@brainresource.com
www.brainresource.com
Doug Harris
Creative Animal International
Email: dough@creativeanimal.com
www.creativeanimal.com
Lee Harris
News Anchor
1010 WINS New York
Email: lee@harrismedia.com
www.1010wins.com
Michael Hedges
“Follow the Media”
Email: newsletter@followthemedia.com
Mark Howell
News Director, Journalist
KUZZ Radio
Email: mhowell@buckowens.com
www.markhowellnews.com
Matt Hudson
Music Test America
Email: musictestamerica@comcast.net
www.musictestamerica.com
Lynn Jimenez-Catchings
News Journalist
KGO Radio
Email: lmcatch@hotmail.com
www.KGOam810.com; 
www.sehabladinero.info
Tommy Kramer
Talent coach
Email: tommy@tommykramer.net
www.audiencedevelopmentgroup.com

Christine Lavin
Artist/Singer-songwriter
www.christinelavin.com
Warren Levinson
Journalist, NY Bureau Chief
Associated Press
Email: wlevinson@ap.org
www.ap.org
Pam Lontos
Sales Training Consultant
www.pamlontos.com/ index.html
Melissa McConnell Wilson
General Manager
KVHS-FM Radio
Email: wilson143@aol.com
www.kvhs.com
Denise McIntee
President
Powerful Radio Productions, Inc.
Email: Denisemac1@aol.com
www.powerfulradio.com
Jeremy Millar
Group PD
Australian Radio Network
Email: jeremymillar@arn.com.au
www.arn.com.au
Mackie Morris
The Magid Institute
Email: Mackie.morris@magid.com
www.magid.com
Lorna Ozmon
Consultant
President, Ozmon Media, Inc.
Email: lozmon@aol.com
www.ozmonmedia.com
Deborah Potter
Broadcast Journalism Instructor
www.rtnda.org
Howard Price
Assignment Editor
WABC-TV News
Email: Howard.B.Price@abc.com
Sean Ross
VP/Music and Programming
Edison Media Research
Email: sross@edisonresearch.com
www.edisonresearch.com; 
www.theinﬁ nitedial.com
Turi Ryder
Air Personality
Email: turi@shebopsproductions.com
www.shebopsproductions.com
Resources         325

326         Resources
Scott Shannon
PD/Morning Personality
WPLJ Radio
www.trueoldieschannel.com; 
www.scottshannon.com
Dave Sholin
Astralwerks Records
Email: yourduke@aol.com
www.astralwerks.com
Mike Siegel
Major Attractions
Email: mikesiegel2000@yahoo.com
www.mikesiegel.com
Dan Vallie
Vallie/Richards Consulting, Inc.
Email: valliedan@aol.com
www.vallierichards.com
Guy Zapoleon
Zapoleon Media Strategies
Email: info@zapoleon.com
www.zapoleon.com
Tom Zarecki
Consultant, RCS
Email: tzarecki@rcsworks.com
www.rcsworks.com

I n d e x
A
ABC Radio, 235
Airchecks, 34. See also Demo tapes
Albright on, 224, 225, 233, 235–236
archives and, 210, 235
complaints against, 218, 220, 221
confidentiality of, 233
criticism and, 213, 218, 229
damage by, 217–218
Eisenson on, 229–230, 230–231
facts needed for, 212, 233
feedback and, 231, 234, 244
formatics and, 35, 43
Gershon on, 234, 235
goals and, 213, 234, 241
Hendrie on, 59
“hotline call” and, 223
individualized, 214, 222, 224, 233
Lane on, 219, 221
listening and, 235–237
managers and, 211
McIntee on, 65–66, 230, 233, 234
as mirror, 210
mistakes during, 216–217
news anchoring and, 172–173
note taking during, 241
Ozmon on, 216–218, 220, 221, 222, 
234, 244
PDs and, 63–64, 102, 215, 219–220, 
222–224, 230–231, 234, 235
phone calls and, 239
questions asked in, 237–238
radio personalities and, 213, 221
Ross on, 231
rules of, 212–213, 233–234
setting/scene for, 222
show choosing for, 235
show prep and, 102, 244
as solution, 211, 230
success stories of, 226–231
talent and, 209–210, 214–215, 219, 
233–234
talent search by, 61–63, 67–69
talk v. DJ, 67
for teams, 242
timing of, 221–222, 223–224
transcriptions and, 236
Vallie on, 214, 234
vent v., 212, 222–223
Whatley on, 225
by Zapoleon, 225
Zarecki on, 222, 234, 235, 236–237, 242
Albright, Jaye, 35, 97, 224, 233, 
235–236, 241
on auditions, 67
on broadcaster success, 23
on life experiences, 110, 225
on “off” switch, 34
on topic selection, 104
Animal Farm (Orwell), 13
Apels, Steve, 315, 319
Arbitron, 36, 37, 69, 74, 252
People Meter, 317
Archives
airchecks and, 210, 235
news-talk radio stations and, 85–86
of promotions, 271
show prep and, 104
327

328         Index
Associated Press Bureau, Levinson 
and, 143
Audience(s)
interviews and, 88
news influence on, 138
news, multi-version and, 179–180
PSAs and, 200
public service and, 198–200
radio programming and, 5
reaction to host, 226–227
show prep and, 100
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 
Athens Summer Olympics and, 
163
B
Baker, Pam, 270
Baronfeld, David, on selling radio 
techniques, 281–284
BBC Radio’s Five Live, Feraday 
and, 154
Beaubien, Andy, 102
on creative mistakes, 240
on feedback, unreliable, 243
on radio station/broadcaster goals, 22
on talent/manager relations, 221, 
231
Bell, Jerry, 169–173
on fears, 172
Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on 
Writing and Life (Lamott), 11
Block, Mervin, 160–161
Bonaduce, Danny, Brandmeier and, 10
Borden, Scott, 78
Brandmeier, Jonathon, 48
Bonaduce and, 10
Brittain, Ross, tips of, 53
Broadcaster
casting/roles of, 11–12, 14
details, use of, and, 4
flexibility of, 4, 228
goals of, 22–23
guidelines for, 4, 50, 53
hiring/firing of, 5
opinion of, 32, 52
personality of, 2–3, 4, 11–12
radio/TV, 191–193
right casting questions for, 18–22
self-promotion of, 4, 63–64
traits of, 7
Bulley, Maureen, 289, 290–298
Burnout
avoidance of, 203–204
of DJ, 16
Lavin on, 206
life/hobbies and, 204–205
of managers, 203, 205
of PDs, 220
of talent, 201, 203, 204–206
vacation and, 205
C
Cable News Network, King of, 88–89
Cable News Network (CNN), 162, 
178, 192
Call for Action, WABC/New York 
and, 198
Cameron, Julia, 18
Capital Radio, Feraday and, 154
Catchings, John, 194–195
CBS Radio Network, 82, 83
CBS-TV, 160, 162
Certified Radio Copywriter (Bulley)
commercial dialogue and, 295
commercial humor and, 297–298
commercial narrative and, 294
commercial storytelling and, 
296–297
commercial testimonials and, 
295–296
on copy writing, 294–298
Chapman, Ron, 261
Chenevey, Jim
news, multi-version and, 185–190
newscasts of, 186–190
Christopher, Bob, 86

Index         329
CNN. See Cable News Network
Coaching Handbook (Kramer), 39–42, 
101–102
Coleman, Jeremy, 239
Commercials
accuracy of, 281
attention/action words for, 280
boring, 288
celebrities and, 295–296
clichés and, 281
copy writing for, 291
creativity of, 276, 289
as dialogue, 295
endorsement of, 296
guidelines for, 280–281
Harvey and, 279
as humor, 297–298
LifeStage Demographics and, 304
listeners and, 280–281, 288, 
289–290, 291, 297–298
live copy/reads, 278–280, 284, 
289–290
multi-voiced, 295
as narrative, 294
powerful copy creation of, 290–296
as problem solution, 291, 293–294
radio, on TV, 195
radio personalities and, 275
radio programming and, 289–290
research for, 291
salespeople and, 275–276
scripts for, 290, 291
sequence of, 289
Siegel on, 278–279
single-voiced, 294
Stern, Howard, and, 278
as storytelling, 296–297
Super Bowl/Olympics and, 276
talent and, 290, 294–298
time limit of, 296–297
wording and, 296–297
Contests
designated caller, 254
email/fax/mail, 255
fantasy and, 254
geography joke and, 259–260
Harris, Doug, on, 254–256
listeners and, 257
performance-based, 255, 256
prizes and, 254, 256–257
pro/cons of, 254–256
promotions and, 254–256
radio ratings and, 256–257
recall, 255
trivia, 255
TV/print recognition of, 256
Copy Navigator (Bulley), 290
on copy writing, 291
sample of, 292–293
Copy writing
benefits of, 292–293
goals for, 290, 292
information gathering for, 290
styles of, 294–298
voice talent/programming and, 294, 
295
Creating Powerful Radio (seminar), 
77
on right casting, 17
on storytelling, 139–140
on talkable topics, 119
Crowley, Candy, 162
D
Demo tapes
Ryder on, 64
talent and, 63–64
Demographics
cable TV/magazines/Internet and, 300
examples of, 301–302
LifeStage Demographics v., 
300–301
radio stations and, 300
research and, 320
Dick Orkin’s Radio Ranch, PSAs and, 
200

330         Index
Disc jockey (DJ)
airchecks of, 67
burnout of, 16
Driscoll, Mark, 268
Dylan, Bob, 134, 163
E
Eisenson, Alan, 31, 229–230, 230–231
on broadcaster opinions, 32
on talk-radio formatics, 38
on topic selection, 106–107
F
Federal Communications Commission, 
178
Feraday, Caroline, 154, 155–156, 
157–158
Formatics, 56
airchecks and, 35, 43
Albright on, 35
dead air and, 42
Kramer on, 39–42
language and, 39
listeners and, 37–38, 39–41, 46
news and, 173
phantom cume and, 317
phone calls and, 41
producers and, 121
promotions and, 40, 269–270
radiospeak and, 37, 42
resistance to, 35–36
Shannon on, 36
talent and, 35–36, 324
talk-radio and, 37–38, 43
teasing/resetting of, 38–42, 43
topics and, 227
Frank Magid and Associates, 104–105, 
313
Freberg, Stan, PSAs and, 200
G
Geller Media International
on monologue/churn, 77
on phone call screening, 131–132
powerful radio seminars creation 
by, 77
producer commandments by, 122
on radio/TV transition, 193–195
Geller, Valerie, 148, 276–278
airchecking principles of, 233–234
first aircheck of, 231–232
Generators, 12, 25
managers and, 28
producer as, 117
reactors v., 27
right casting of, 26
talent as, 26
topics and, 26
Gershon, Bernard, 138–139, 234, 235
on talent search, 65, 66
“Good Writer’s Dazzlin’ Dozen” 
(Morris, Mackie), 165, 166–167
Gordon, Evian (Dr.), on habits, 5, 
312
Grant, Bob, dead air and, 42
Guest(s)
boring, 87, 122
boring, getting rid of, 31, 98, 116
Eisenson on, 31–32
interview tips for, 90–91
news-talk radio stations and, 84
performance and, 30–31
show prep and, 98–99, 103, 118
H
Haas, Michael, on brainstorming, 
109–110
Hall, David G., on angry listener 
mail, 243
Harris, Doug
on creative contesting, 254–256
on listener’s minds, 247
on promises, 248
on radio station logos, 250–251
on short-term ratings, 257
on target definition, 249
Harris, Lee, 180, 182–184
Harvey, Paul, 40, 57, 81, 279

Index         331
Hedges, Michael, 260–261
Hendrie, Paul, 59
Host, music
phone calls and, 127
talk show host and, 60
versatility of, 8
Host, talk show
attention span of, 228
audience reaction to, 226–227
audition of, 60, 61–62, 63–64
e-mail/text messaging and, 130
life experiences of, 75–76, 83–84
Limbaugh as, 57–58
listeners and, 56, 86, 237, 238, 
313–314
McIntee on, 65–66
misunderstanding of, 226–227
monologue/churn and, 74–75, 77
news and, 84
opinions of, 230–231, 238
phone calls and, 125, 127, 239–240
producer’s relationship with, 
113–114, 115–117, 122
success of, 73–74
Swanson on, 73
topics and, 230–231
traits of, 56
Howard Stern Show, Quivers and, 81
Howell, Mark, 150
Hudson, Matt, 315–319
Hulse, Russell, 187–189
I
Imus, Don, McCord and, 81
Inglis, Sheri, on radio career, 207–208
Interviews
approach to, 89
art of, 145–146
audiences/politicians and, 88
King and, 88–89
listening and, 89, 91, 145–146, 148, 
151
news and, 145–146
news, multi-version and, 181
Nordström on, 88
performance and, 32
purpose of, 87
questions, dumb and, 88, 91, 92, 146, 
151
talk radio and, 91–92
tips for guests, 90–91
topics of, 89
J
Jimenez-Catchings, Lynn, 152
Jimenez-Adams, Denise, 151–152
K
Karl, E., 49
Karmazin, Mel, Stern and, 33
Katchen, Sharon, 150
Katrina (hurricane), news coverage of, 
167–168
KCBS/San Francisco, 142
KCWR/KUZZ, 150
Kerr, Philip, on leadership, 7
KFBK/Sacramento, 258–259
KFI/Los Angeles, “overnight success” 
of, 3, 5
KFWB/Los Angeles, 150, 199
KGO-TV/San Francisco, 194
KGO-AM/San Francisco, 73
KGO/San Francisco, 198, 272
King, Larry, 88–89
KIOI-FM/San Francisco, 259
KIRO/Seattle, 82
KLOL-FM/Houston, 256
KOA/Denver, 56, 169
KOB/Albuquerque, 258
KPIX-TV/San Francisco, 194
KPNT-FM/St. Louis, 246
Kramer, Tommy, 39–42, 101–102
on communication, 104
team tips and, 241–242
KRBE-FM/Houston, 256
KTAR/Phoenix, 86
KTBZ-FM/Houston, 246
KTLK/Denver, 169

332         Index
L
Ladd, Jim, 56
Lamott, Anne, 11
Lane, Randy, 219, 221
on creative people, 100
on feedback, 231
on transcription, 236
Larry King Live, radio incarnation 
of, 72
Late Night with David Letterman, 
NBC and, 14
Lavin, Christine, 206
“Leukemia Cure-a-thon,” KGO/San 
Francisco and, 198
Levinson, Warren, 143
on background sounds, 144
LifeStage Demographics
advertising and, 301
chronological age and, 301–302
commercials and, 304
couples with/without kids and, 208
demographics v., 300–301
fluidity of, 309
good/ill health and, 308–309
kids and, 306
listeners and, 299–300
music and, 305
promotions and, 304–305
race and, 305–306
radio programming and, 305
radio stations and, 299–300, 303, 306, 
309–310
renters/homeowners and, 308
research/focus groups for, 299, 
305–306
sales and, 303–304
solo/couples and, 308
special interests and, 309
stereotypes and, 302–303
talent and, 305
target visualization and, 249
working people and, 307–308
young men/women and, 307
Limbaugh, Rush, 3, 57–58, 72, 96, 239, 
257, 312
Listeners. See also Audience
attitude of, 46
commercials and, 280–281, 288, 
289–290, 291, 297–298
contests and, 257
emotional needs of, 249–250
formatics and, 37–38, 39–41, 46
Frank Magid and Associates on, 
104–105, 313
hosts, talk show, and, 56, 86, 237, 238, 
313–314
humor and, 97–98, 247, 297–298
information wanted by, 48, 49–50
LifeStage Demographics and, 
299–300
money/rescue/scandal/sex 
and, 247
morning routine of, 47
news and, 142, 147, 163, 165, 
167–168, 170, 178, 195
opinions of, 56, 242–243, 248, 
311–312
promotions and, 245, 252, 272–273
reality of, 46
sales and, 282
talk radio and, 73–76
tip line and, 253–254
topics and, 105–106
traffic/weather and, 153, 154–155
Lontos, Pam
on meeting right people, 285
sales tips of, 286–288
M
Mainelli, John, on entertainment, 74
Manager(s). See also Program director
airchecks and, 211
burnout of, 203, 205
generator/reactor and, 28
job loss and, 19–20
Morris, Mackie, on, 165

Index         333
qualities/restrictions of, 21
responsibility of, 19, 206
risk taking and, 20, 33–34
talent, high-ego, and, 135–136
McConnell-Wilson, Melissa, 96
McCord, Charles, Imus and, 81
McGovern, Nuala, 114–115
McIntee, Denise, 9, 230, 233, 234
on airchecks, 65–66
Millar, Jeremy, 102
Morning shows
Brandmeier on, 48
Karl on, 49
radio hosts/personalities and, 45, 56
Siegel on, 50
Morris, Mackie, 165, 166–167
Morris, Virginia, 199
Mother Teresa, 226
Multi-version. See News, multi-version.
N
National Public Radio (NPR), 89
NBC-TV, 5, 14
Negroponte, Nicholas, on 
management, 232
News
accuracy of, 139, 143, 147, 149, 150, 
166, 180
audience influenced by, 138
background sounds and, 140–141, 
144, 148, 150, 171, 194
big v. everyday, 137
boring, 140, 142, 167, 174, 179, 194
breaking, 85, 148, 180–181, 313
credibility/seriousness of, 139, 166
details of, 142, 165, 170–171, 174–175
excitement v. boring, 141
follow-up of, 84, 143–144, 180
formatics and, 173
good v. bad, 160
interviews and, 145–146
listeners and, 142, 147, 163, 165, 
167–168, 170, 178, 195
opinions in, 82, 148, 150
promotion of, 174, 179, 252–253
radio/TV integration and, 191–196, 
281–282
reporter tips for, 146–147
sounds of, 140–145
talk integration with, 82, 83–85
talk radio and, 80–82
talk show hosts and, 84
tip line for, 253–254
News anchoring
accuracy/facts and, 170
airchecks and, 172–173
Bell on, 169–173
human err and, 170, 172
news, multi-version and, 181–182
pauses and, 171–172
storytelling and, 170, 194
tips for, 170–175
zen rules of, 169–173
News, multi-version
actualities and, 177, 180–182, 183
angles of, 180–182
audiences and, 179–180
background sound and, 177, 181
Chenevey and, 185–190
details of, 177, 180–181, 193–194
Harris, Lee, on, 180
interesting element of, 179, 181
interviews and, 181
local/national and, 179–180
method of, 180–182
of New York City blizzard, 183–184
news anchoring and, 181–182
radio stations and, 178
techniques of, 181–182
Newscasters
creativity of, 139, 166
credibility of, 143, 150
emotions of, 145, 152
equipment knowledge of, 151, 152
Feraday on, 157–158
Gershon on, 138–139

334         Index
Newscasters (Continued)
information sources and, 146, 147
story understanding of, 148, 150, 
152, 175
story versions and, 147, 175
as storyteller, 138–139, 148, 151, 
163
tips for, 149, 150–152, 175
training of, 174
wording tips for, 149
News-Talk radio stations
archives and, 85–86
communication of, 80–81, 151
daily system for, 82, 83–85
disasters and, 81, 85
format of, 72, 311, 313
guests and, 84
staff of, 79–80
teamwork in, 85
Newswriting
adjectives/active verbs and, 163, 
166, 174
Crowley on, 162
echo chamber effect and, 161
information organization in, 
162–163
lead-in, -outs for, 160–162, 180
for men/women, 164
Potter on, 162
reporter’s script and, 161, 173
visual descriptions and, 163–165, 
167, 171, 175, 193, 194
words count in, 161, 162–163
Nordström, Stig-Arne, 88
NPR. See National Public Radio
O
Off-air staff
PD management of, 13–14, 70, 133
radio stations and, 9, 34, 70, 86
On Listening (Faber), 92–93
Orwell, George, 13, 159–160
Other people’s money/media (OPM), 
265
promotions and, 262–263
Ozmon, Lorna, 216, 220, 221, 234, 244
on assertive/aggressive statements, 
222
Frankenstein syndrome and, 
217–218
on transcription, 236
P
PD. See Program director
Performance, 29
broadcaster’s opinion and, 32
guest and, 30–31
interviews and, 32
“off” switch and, 34
phone calls and, 31–32, 125, 239
points on, 30–34, 50
risk and, 32–34
show opening and, 30
staff respect and, 34
topics and, 30, 32
Phantom cume, 121
formatics/research and, 317
prevention of, 37
radio stations and, 317
Phone calls, 78
airchecks and, 239
boring, 239–240
Coleman on, 239
criteria for, 132
database of, 128–129, 131
Eisenson on, 31–32
formatics and, 41
good, 125–126
Hendrie on, 59
host, music, and, 127
host, talk radio, and, 125, 127, 
239–240
Limbaugh on, 58, 239
nervousness of, 129–130
performance and, 31–32, 125, 239
producers and, 123, 125–131
quality of, 239–240
regulars, 128–129

Index         335
rejections of, 127–128
rules for, 126, 128–129
Ryder on, 32, 61, 239–240
screening of, 123, 125–131
sequencing of, 129–130
talk radio and, 125, 129
tip line and, 253–254
tips for, 127, 129, 131
“Politics and the English Language” 
(Orwell), on newswriting, 159–160
Potter, Deborah, 162
Price, Howard, 263
topic selection criteria of, 105–106
Producers
commandments for, 122
demand of, 113
development of, 114–115
eavesdropping by, 119–120
flexibility of, 117
formatics and, 121
as generator/reactor, 117
hiring of, 116
host, talk show, relationship with, 
113–114, 115–117, 122
information sources for, 118–119
job security of, 115
life experiences of, 120–121, 122
phone calls and, 123, 125–131
show prep and, 122
websites and, 130
Production director
radio stations and, 268–269
web sites and, 269
Program director (PD)
airchecks and, 63–64, 102, 215, 
219–220, 222–224, 230–231, 
234–235
burnout of, 220
as call counter, 239
off-air staff management by, 13–14, 
70, 133
reputation of, 216
right casting by, 12–17
show prep and, 99, 100
staff modification by, 16–17
talent and, 214–218, 224, 230, 243
talent search by, 8–11, 23, 61–63, 
67–68
topic selection and, 106–107
Promotion
advertisers’ advertising and, 265
airwaves/web sites for, 268–269
anticipation for, 268–269
archives of, 271
Baker on, 270
calendar/future planning for, 266
Chapman on, 261
checklist for, 260–261
contacts and, 262–263
contests and, 254–256
disaster avoidance for, 261–262
Driscoll on, 268
examples of, 246
formatics and, 40, 269–270
funding for, 246, 262–263, 267, 269
goals for, 266
Harris, Doug, on, 245–246
Hedges on, 260–261
ideas for, 256–260
of KPNT-FM/St. Louis, 246
of KTBZ-FM/Houston, 246
less is more in, 260
LifeStage Demographics and, 
304–305
listeners and, 245, 252, 272–273
magic moments and, 252–253, 269
marketing plan for, 266–268
monthly review for, 267
of news, 174, 179, 252–253
OPM and, 262–263
parody songs and, 273
payoff of, 260–261
planning mistakes of, 268
proposal of, 267
of radio personalities, 250
radio programming and, 257–258
radio station logos and, 250–251
of radio/TV, 192, 193, 195, 263–265

336         Index
Promotion (Continued)
recording of, 271
research for, 249
of seasons/dates, 266–267
talent and, 270
PSAs. See Public service 
announcements
Public service
audiences and, 198–200
by KFWB/Los Angeles, 199
by KGO/San Francisco, 198
local v. national, 199–200
Morris, Virginia, on, 199
radio programming for, 198–199
radio stations and, 197–200
by WABC/New York, 198
by WBBM-AM/Chicago, 198
by WLS/Chicago, 198
Public service announcements (PSAs)
audiences and, 200
Dick Orkin’s Radio Ranch and, 200
examples/selectivity of, 200
Freberg and, 200
Q
Quivers, Robin, 81
R
Radio
career stability of, 207–208
Federal Communications 
Commission and, 178
imagination and, 138, 141
music v. talk, 56–57
research and, 311–312, 314–315, 320
TV publicity of, 195, 263–265
Radio Advertising Bureau, on 
commercial guidelines, 280–281
Radio Computing Services (RCS), 222
Radio personalities
airchecks and, 213, 221
commercials and, 275
development of, 211
life experiences of, 50
marketing plan for, 266–268
morning shows and, 45, 56
promotion of, 250
rock-to-talk, 55–59
sponsors and, 279–280
as traffic reporters, 157–158, 228
traits of, 56, 135–136
weather and, 153–154
Zapoleon on, 65
Radio programming
audiences and, 5
brainstorming for, 108–109
commercials and, 289–290
goals for, 266
growth of, 3, 5
LifeStage Demographics and, 305
news and, 80
promotions and, 257–258
for public service, 198–199
sales respect for, 276–278
syndicated, 8–10, 57, 72, 102, 211, 
281
targets for, 249
weather and, 228–229
Radio station
ascertainment and, 197, 199
branding of, 248
demographics and, 300
full-service, 55
hours/pay of, 14
humor and, 12, 46
job openings of, 69
LifeStage Demographics and, 
299–300, 303, 306, 309–310
logos and, 250–251, 265, 305
marketing plan for, 266–268
name/personality of, 250
news, multi-version and, 178
objective/goals of, 22–23
off-air staff and, 9, 34, 70, 86
passion of, 14–17
permanence of, 251–252

Index         337
phantom cume and, 317
production directors and, 268–269
promises and, 248
public service and, 197–200
right casting and, 17–23
web sites of, 130, 268, 290
The Radio Store, Bulley and, 289
Radio Waves (Ladd), 56
Radio-Television News Directors 
Association, 165
RCS. See Radio Computing Services
Reactors, 12, 25
generators versus, 27
managers and, 28
producers as, 117
right casting of, 26
talent as, 26
topics and, 26
Research
Apel on, 315, 319
demographics and, 320
focus groups and, 315–316, 319
by Frank Magid and Associates, 
104–105, 313
Hudson on, 315–319
for LifeStage Demographics, 299, 
305–306
phantom cume, 317
prestige/researcher bias, 318
for promotions, 249
qualitative v. quantitative, 315–316
questions in, 315, 316, 319–320
radio and, 311–312, 314–315, 320
random sample and, 318
sample size and, 318–319
Sklar on, 78
on talk radio, 315–316
USA Today and, 320
validity/reliability and, 317–318
Right casting
of generators/reactors, 26
by PDs, 12–17
questions for, 18–22
radio stations and, 17–23
Ritt on, 18
for sales, 285
“Rita from the Beauty Parlor,” 27
success of, 10
Ritt, Martin, 18
Robinson, Jill, 7
Ross, Dave, 82, 83, 231
Ross, Sean, 50, 51
Ryder, Turi, 32, 64, 239–240
on creativity, 61
S
SAFO SHRIMPS theory
of consumer interest, 247–248
Harris, Doug, on, 247–248
Sales
advertiser’s needs and, 282, 286
Baronfeld and, 281–284
business leads/communication and, 
284
buying signals of, 287
commercials and, 275–276
credibility of, 278–279
LifeStage Demographics and, 
303–304
listeners/brand names and, 282
Lontos on, 286–288
media partnerships and, 281–282
meeting right people and, 285–286
networking v. cold calling, 284–288
objections to, 287
persistence in, 288
promotional alliances and, 281
questioning power in, 286–287
radio programming respect for, 
276–278
referrals for, 286–287
rejection and, 277, 287
right casting for, 285
Siegel on, 282–283
staff of, 282–284
talent and, 277–278, 282–283

338         Index
“Sales Is from Mars, Programming 
Is from Venus” (Geller), 
276–278
Shannon, Scott, 36, 110, 111
Sholin, Dave, 51, 52
Show prep
airchecks and, 102, 244
Albright on, 97
archives and, 104
audience and, 100
Beaubien and, 102
for dull day, 107–110
guests and, 98–99, 103, 118
humor and, 97
ideas for, 110, 244
information sources for, 96, 103, 
105, 118–119
life experiences and, 108, 110
Limbaugh and, 96
McConnell-Wilson and, 96
Miller and, 102
moment seizure and, 98, 111
music/soundtrack for, 101
need for, 95–96, 101–102
note pad/recording device for, 
99–100, 111
PDs and, 99, 100
prerecorded material and, 103
producers and, 122
rules for, 98–99
schedule for, 103
Shannon on, 110–111
slot filling and, 98–99, 118
topics and, 100–101, 102–107, 119
Siegel, Matt, 50, 278–279, 282–283
Sklar, Rick, 78
Social Networking Services (SNSs), 
284
Stamberg, Susan, 74, 89
Star Country (Robinson), 7
State of the Art (Karl), 49
Stern, Howard, 278, 312
Karmazin and, 33
Sugerman, Mike
creativity of, 142–143
as storyteller, 143–144
Swanson, Jack, 73
T
Talent. See also Broadcaster; Host, 
music; Host, talk show; Radio 
personalities
airchecks and, 209–210, 214–215, 
219, 233–234
burnout of, 201, 203, 204–206
commercials and, 290, 294–298
creativity of, 107–108, 240, 276, 
323–324
criticism/praise for, 215–216, 218
demo tapes and, 63–64
diversification of, 207–208
finding/developing of, 7–23
formatics and, 35–36, 324
friends and, 100, 105–106
as generator/reactor, 26
high-ego, 133–136
human err and, 240
image of, 18–19, 50
improvement/growth of, 215–216, 
224–225
intelligence/desire/humor of, 66–67, 
237, 323–324
job loss and, 19–20, 133–135, 207, 
224
job search by, 67–69
life experiences and, 96–97, 102, 106, 
107–108, 204, 206, 324
LifeStage Demographics and, 305
management v., 136, 218
McIntee on, 9
passion and, 14–17, 323–324
PDs and, 214–218, 224, 230, 243
personality of, 11–12, 52
promotions and, 270
radio/TV transition of, 193–195
restrictions of, 20, 21

Index         339
risk taking of, 32–34, 52, 59, 101
Robinson on, 7
sales and, 277–278, 282–283
search for, 10–11, 61–63, 65–67
self-checking of, 225, 232
storytelling ability of, 62, 97, 108, 
238, 314
survival tips for, 207–208
teams of, 241–242
Vallie on, 25, 214, 215–216, 224
wrong show and, 14, 34
Talk (Stamberg), 74, 89
Talk radio
Borden on, 78
CNN and, 192
difficulty of, 56
Eisenson on, 38
evolution of, 71–72
feedback, unreliable for, 242–243
formatics and, 37–38, 43
interviews and, 91–92
life events and, 74–76
Limbaugh and, 72
listeners and, 72, 73–76, 312
monologue/churn of, 74–75
news and, 80–82
news integration with, 82, 83–85
phone calls and, 125, 129
promotion points for, 270–273
research on, 315–316
teams of, 241–242
TV and, 192–193
Taylor, Joseph, 187, 188, 189
Tele-Communications Incorporated, 
186–189
Topics
consistency of, 229–230
content of, 2, 4, 74–77, 81–82, 118, 
175, 237, 243, 313
formatics and, 227
generators/reactors and, 26
host, talk show, and, 230–231
of interviews, 89
listeners and, 105–106
offensive, 243–244
PDs and, 106–107
performance and, 30, 32
priority of, 102
resetting of, 226–227
selection of, 104–107
show prep and, 100–101, 102–107, 
119
uniqueness of, 238
universal angle of, 119, 120–121
wrong day for, 228–229
Traffic
accuracy of, 153, 154, 155–156
Feraday on, 155–156
follow-up for, 155, 157
format for, 156
information source of, 156–157
listeners and, 153, 154–155
radio personalities and, 157–158, 
228
reporting time of, 154
spotters, 157
U
USA Today, 320
V
Vallie, Dan, 25, 214, 215–216, 224, 
234
The Vein of Gold (Cameron), 18
W
WABC TV, 263
WABC/New York, 9, 57, 69–70, 96, 
198, 259
Walsh, Ed, news tips of, 149
The Way Things Ought to Be 
(Limbaugh), 57
WBBM-AM/Chicago, 151, 198
WCBS/New York, 151
Weather
listeners and, 153, 154–155

340         Index
Weather (Continued)
radio personalities/meteorologists 
and, 153–154
radio programming and, 228–229
reporting time of, 154
WEBN-FM/Cincinnati, 256
Whatley, Susanne, 225
WINS/New York, 180, 182, 183–184, 
184
WLS/Chicago, 198
WMIR/Lake Geneva, Washington, 
259–260
WNYC/New York, 78, 114
WPLJ/New York, 110
Write Good Copy Fast (Bulley), 289
Writing Broadcast News (Block), 
160–161
WWL/New Orleans, 86
WZZU-FM/Spokane, Washington, 256
Z
Zapoleon, Guy, 225
before-and-after trick and, 240–241
on talent search, 65
on talk radio teams, 242
Zarecki, Tom, 38, 222, 234, 235, 
236–237, 242
Z-100/New York, 53 

N o t e s

This page intentionally left blank

N o t e s

 
This page intentionally left blank

N o t e s

 
This page intentionally left blank

N o t e s

 
This page intentionally left blank

N o t e s

 
This page intentionally left blank

N o t e s

 
This page intentionally left blank

