
CREATE DYNAMIC EXCEL DASHBOARDS
A simplified step-by-step guide
William K. Wonder

Copyright
All Rights Reserved
©2017 William K. Wonder
 
This book is licensed strictly for personal or educational use.
Redistribution in any form is prohibited, and should only happen with
express written authorization from the publisher/author.
Every effort has been made to make this eBook as complete and
accurate as possible. However, the authors and copyright holders provide
absolutely no warranty for any information provided, and shall not be
liable to any person or entity for any claim, damages, or any other liability
arising from, out of, or in connection with the information in this book.
This document and sample workbook are provided “as-is” and expresses
the author’s views and opinions. Information and views expressed in this
document and sample workbook, including URL and other Internet Web
site references, may change without notice.

 
Content
About this book
Introduction
CHAPTER 1: PLANNING THE DASHBOARD
Case Study: Santa Inn Restaurant
Prepping data for analysis
CHAPTER 2: THE CALCULATIONS
YTD Revenue Analysis
Yearly Trend Analysis by Month
Product & Product Category Performance
Performance by Sales Agent
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING THE DASHBOARD
The Headline Section
Visualizing Contribution Using Ring Charts
Visualizing the Product Categories
Dynamic chart titles
Final touches on the dashboard
Sharing the Dashboard
Final Thoughts

About this book
This book aims at equipping you with advanced Pivot Table skills that can
help you analyze any set of data and present it in an intuitive and
interactive style as opposed to presenting static reports. I will focus on
the hidden power of Pivot Tables as I take you through a journey of
creating your interactive data visualizations.
The techniques covered here will apply for MS Excel 2010 and higher
versions.
As much as this dashboard uses sales transactions data, the techniques
discussed here-in will apply for any other data, so long as the data is
arranged and defined by the conventional rows and columns!
This book takes a very practical approach to data analysis in Excel and
my high anticipation is that you will find it easy to follow the useful
techniques that you need to provide insights backed by data. I look
forward to interacting with you at my blog datacycleanalytics.com/blog or
on Twitter @BillWilliamsK, LinkedIn and Facebook.
As a supplement to this manuscript, I recommend articles at Chandoo’s
website who in many ways has been a mentor in my learning journey of
advanced Excel concepts.
The content covered herein seeks to consolidate in a centralized place
my experience in training various working professionals in Kenya on how
to maximize advanced Excel features in the office.
Should you need to clarify something as you go through the content
herein, please write to me on datacycleanalytics@gmail.com
I encourage you to practice the concepts by using the accompanying
Excel workbook so that you can gain maximum benefits.
I will appreciate if you could also leave an honest review on
Amazon.

Complement your experience with this
FREE DOWNLOAD
Great dashboards are a product of well thought out charts. Grab your
free copy of the “Boardroom Ready Chart Book” and learn how to
communicate your message to inspire action!
Click here to get your copy
https://datacycleanalytics.com/boardroom-ready-excel-charts/

Introduction
Business Intelligence is one of the buzzwords in this age of big data, data
science, and analytics. To simplify the understanding of Business
Intelligence (BI) we shall limit ourselves to the ability to leverage on data
to inform business decisions. In order for management to have fruitful
discussions during their periodical meetings, the analysts need to learn
the invaluable skill of dashboard reporting.
A dashboard can be taken as a decision support tool that succinctly
displays the key metrics being tracked, mostly on a single screen. Most
BI solutions provide ability to develop dashboards. MS Excel provides a
very flexible platform to develop very interactive dashboards without
having to make extra investments.
A DASHBOARD is a decision support tool that succinctly displays
the key metrics, mostly on a single screen, for better management
decisions.
When creating dashboards in any platform, it is important to think through
the message one wants to convey. Each chart type and table that one
includes in the dashboard page need to complement and add a different
angle to the overriding theme of the dashboard.
The choice of colour is very important. I recommend using colours that
are easy on the eye. To be safe, stick to your corporate colours. After all,
the goal of the dashboard is insights and not pictures!
Another consideration for creating a dashboard is the need to clearly
communicate information at a level that is actionable. For instance, a
CFO and a product manager may require to track information at different
levels of details. As an analyst, you need to listen to the needs of various
users of the dashboards and distill it to the right level. This calls for
discussions with the consumer of your dashboard to understand how the
information displayed impacts their day-to-day decisions.
This book doesn’t go into details in regard to the above paragraphs but
assumes the reader has taken care of these considerations.


CHAPTER 1: PLANNING THE DASHBOARD
Case Study: Santa Inn Restaurant
The rest of this book shall focus on a fictitious restaurant, Santa Inn,
which operates in 4 locations. The structure of the business is such that
each of the locations has several sales agents.
CLICK HERE TO DOWNLOAD THE COMPANION
WORKBOOK
Santa Inn has employed Jean as a Data Insights Analyst and its
management, in particular the hotel manager, needs a way to have a
better grip on the core business numbers for him to better react to market
trends.
After interviewing the hotel manager, Jean came up with the following as
the most important metrics that will show the health of the business.
· Total revenue (YTD) generated in a given year, and the growth rates
there of
· Monthly trend analysis of revenue for the past 3 years
· Contribution of each location to the overall revenue
· Best-selling (top 5) and poorly performing (bottom 5) products in
each location for a given year
· Performance of the various product categories to see the category
driving sales, again sliced per location and year
· Performance by sales agents
Having worked with Santa Inn since its inception, Jean knows her way
into the business and goes ahead to import the data that would help her
address the needs raised by the hotel manager.
Figure 1: Sample data set
On quick scan of the data she got from the system, Jean identifies that
the business deals with 77 unique products that are segmented into 8

categories. The data represents 3 years of sales. She is happy and gets
down to business.
Before she goes further, Jean takes a pen and a paper and mocks up
how her final dashboard would look like. Figure 2 below shows the sketch
that will act as the road map for the rest of this book.
Figure 2: Dashboard Sketch / Mockup
Dashboard Tip:
It is good practice to always draft a mockup of the final output. The mock
up follows the user requirements gathered during the interviews with the
hotel manager above. Sketching allows you to think what is the best
visualization to use to convey each of the metrics identified, and the
relative positioning of the visuals on the one pager dashboard. This also
saves you a lot of time when it comes to doing the analysis. Note
however, that the sketch/design acts as a guideline and you can review it
until you achieve one that will use the one-worksheet optimally.

Prepping data for analysis
As is the case with most of the data you and I extract from various
organization systems, Jean realizes she requires extra columns to be
added to aid in further calculations. In this case, she needs to have
columns for Year, Month, Weekday, among others. She goes ahead and
creates the extra columns as seen in figure 3 below.
Figure 3: Sample data with helper columns
I normally refer to these extra columns as helper or auxiliary columns.
In figure 3 above, all the helper/additional columns apart from Sales
column leverage on the Date column (column E) in the data extract.
Excel offers a wide range of Date functions to help the analyst
manipulate date data types to extract various date attributes. Jean
employs the following formulae:
Year: =YEAR(E4)
Month: =MONTH(E4)
MonthName: =TEXT(E4,"mmm")
Weekday: =TEXT(E4,"ddd")
Sales: = F4*G4 à quantity multiplied by unit price.
As their names imply, the YEAR and the MONTH functions are used to
extract the year and the month component respectively, from a given
date.
The TEXT function in the above formulae, that is the MonthName and
Weekday, is used here to change the display of the transaction date to
the first three letters of a month and day respectively.

Bonus Tip
The TEXT function helps to change the way a date is displayed, e.g.,
given cell E4 has the date 1-01-2014, then
 TEXT (E4,"mm") will give ‘01’ for January
 TEXT (E4,"mmmm") will give the full month name, ‘January’ in
this case
 TEXT (E4,"dddd, dd/mmm/yyyy") will result in ‘Wednesday,
01/Jan/2014’
Year-to-Date (YTD) column
YTDDates: =IF (I4<MONTH (TODAY ( )), "YTD", "Not YTD")
We generate a YTDDates column in order to be able to report on sales
that comprise the Year-to-Date (YTD) transactions. By definition, this
would be the dates between January and the current month.
For the sake of this dashboard, this refers to January up to the end of the
month prior to the current one. That is to say, if today’s date is
17/09/2016, then the dates to be considered as YTD dates fall between
1/01/2016 to 31/08/2016.
This is done conveniently to avoid incomplete months. Thus, the formula
for the YTDDates column uses an IF function to check if the month
number in the Month column is less than the month of today’s date.
Past 12 months
P12Months: =IF(AND(E4>=EarliestDate,
E4<=MostRecentDate),"Past12Months","NotPTM")
Understanding this formula:
This formula helps us classify the sales dates into the ones that represent
sales that occurred in the past 12 months.
That is dates that fall between the 1st of the month 12 months
before the last date for which we have data (in this example, this is
the end of previous month, from today’s date), and the end of
previous month, calculated with reference to today’s date.
The IF function is combined with the AND function to concurrently check

if the transaction date falls between EarliestDate and MostRecentDate,
where EarliestDate and MostRecentDate are named ranges defined in a
separate worksheet as follows:
Figure 4: Defining and naming the dates that gives us the limits for the
past 12 months; sales
The TODAY() function doesn’t take any arguments and always returns
the current date. The EOMONTH on the other hand returns a date that is
“X” number of months before or after the specified start date. So,
assuming the TODAY() function returns 17/07/2016, then the EOMONTH
will result into the end of the previous month, specified by the -1 in the
formula.

CHAPTER 2: THE CALCULATIONS
Having created the helper columns, Jean is now ready to deep dive into
analytics that would be required for the dashboard. She decides to
capitalize on the power of Excel’s Pivot Tables for this exercise. At this
point she creates a new worksheet that will contain all her analysis and
calls it Calculations.

Global dashboard slicers
She recognizes that she will require the Year, Location and the product
Category Name as filters/slicers for majority of the metrics.
In the Calculations worksheet, she:
· inserts a Pivot Table from the Insert menu on the Ribbon and puts
these 3 columns in the Filter box.
· then goes to the Analyze menu, selects Insert Slicer and ticks the
same 3 columns to appear as slicers (Analyze menu: is one of the
contextual menus that appear when a cell in the Pivot Report is
selected. For Excel 2010, this menu is called the Options menu).
· Further, from the Analyze menu, she is able to give this report a
meaningful name such as ReportSlicers as shown below.
Figure 5: A report that will be used to control the report slicers in the
dashboard
Jean selects all the 3 slicers, then cuts and pastes them in a new
worksheet named Dashboard and makes a random selection on the 3
slicers.
On the Calculations worksheet, Jean names the cells B1, B2 and B3
as selYR, selLocation and selCateg respectively. Naming of ranges
makes it easy to follow formulas that make use of these cells as we shall
see later in this book.

“
Named ranges in Excel helps improve the readability and
meaning of formulas. Use the (1) Name box on the top left of the
Excel ribbon or (2) right click the cell you want to name and
choose Define Name…from the shortcut menu. You can also
define a named range from the (3) Formulas tab on the ribbon.”

YTD Revenue Analysis
This section analyses the overall revenue generated in the year up to the
end of last month, referenced from today’s date as defined in an earlier
section above.
Jean then inserts a pivot table shown below, by dragging the Sales
column into the Values box, the Year column in the Rows box of the
pivot report. She then puts YTDDates column as a filter and filters for the
dates that are within the YTD definition as earlier discussed.
Figure 6: YTD Revenue pivot report
Pivot Table Tip
One of the annoying behaviour of Pivot tables, especially where you have
multiple pivot reports on the same worksheet, is the way columns keep
resizing every time you refresh a given pivot report. It is good practice
to uncheck the option for “Autofit on update”.
Jean right clicks one cell in the Pivot report she just created and selects
PivotTable Options… from the short-cut menu. This gives her the
PivotTable Options dialog box where she unticks “Autofit column width
on update” as shown below. This process is repeated for each pivot
table created.
Figure 7: How to disable the auto-resize in pivot tables


Using Pivot’s % Difference from option to show YoY%
Year-on-Year revenue growth (YoY%)
Jean needs to provide context for her dashboard with respect to whether
the sales are growing or declining compared to prior year. From the pivot
table in figure 7 above, she can go to the column adjacent to the “Sum of
Sales” and use a formula to compute the YoY growth rates BUT Jean
decides to take advantage of the options available in Excel for Pivot
tables.
She drags the Sales column from the field list and drops it in the Values
box, the second time. She right clicks the values generated for this
column (which at this point has similar values to the previous summary)
in the pivot report and selects “Show Values As…” From the short-cut
menu that pops up, she can choose “% Difference From…” to compute
the YoY%. She sets the Base field to Year and chooses previous for the
Base Item (see figure 8 below).
Figure 8: Changing the display to show year-on-year growth rates
By following Jean’s example, you should have the following as the final
result (notice the headings for the pivot report have been renamed to
Revenue and YoY%).
Figure 9: Pivot report showing the YoY percentage growth rates

Finally, Jean names this report as YTD Report, on the Analyze menu.
This will make it easier for her to remember what the report is all about,
but more importantly, this makes it easier to know what report to connect
to the slicers in the dashboard.
At this point Jean needs to make sure this report is manipulated by the
user who only sees the dashboard page. That is, this report need to be
connected to the product Category Name slicer.

Connecting a report to a slicer
If you recall, at the onset of this chapter, Jean created 3 slicers and
pasted them on the dashboard page. At this stage, we’ll select the
particular slicers, one at a time and connect it to the YTD Report created
in the immediate section above.
When we select the Category Name slicer we get access to a contextual
Options menu from which we select Report Connections (alternatively,
you can right click the slicer and choose Report Connections). This gives
us a dialog box displaying all the pivot reports in the current file.
Figure 10: Connecting a slicer to multiple reports.

Change calculation display to % in Pivots
Revenue share per location:
The hotel manager would want a sneak preview of revenue split by
location. This report will then be sliced per year and for a user-selected
product category.
In a separate location in the calculations worksheet (named Calculations
in the instructor’s file downloaded), Jean inserts another pivot report and
even before she drags the fields to slice and dice the report, she
remembers to untick the auto-resize property, and further renames the
report as Performance by Location.
Jean would want to show the actual value and the share/contribution per
location for a given year. She therefore drags and drops the Sales
column twice in her pivot report, but changes the display of the second to
“% of Grand Total…”
To change the display, right click on one of the cells in the second
column, select “Show Values As…” from which you can choose “% of
Grand Total…”. This is more/less similar to the way you displayed the
YoY% in the previous section.
Remember to put the YTD column as a filter for this report.
Figure 11: Regional share of revenue pivot table
The revenue share report by location (named as Performance by

Location) is now ready. Jean goes to the dashboard page and selects the
Year and Category Name slicers and connects each slicer to this report
using the steps earlier discussed. In case you forgot the process, figure
12 shows a snap shot.
Figure 12: Connecting the performance by location report to the year
slicer

Yearly Trend Analysis by Month
The next thing that Jean wants to analyze is how the 3 years of data
compare in terms of performance per month. The hotel manager need
this information to pick out any seasonality in the data.
Jean goes ahead and inserts a pivot report as shown below. The hotel
manager would want to be able to slice this data by location.
Jean inserts a pivot report as shown below with the month names in the
Row labels and years on the Column labels. She places the Location
column on the Report filter box. When the active cell is in the pivot
report, Jean goes to
· the Design menu and puts off the totals for this report (see figure 13
below),
· the Analyze menu, selects Pivot chart and inserts a line chart for
this report.
When the chart is selected, she goes to the PivotChart Tools, Analyze
menu and Hides All field buttons to make the chart tidy.
This book doesn’t focus on a lot of details on how to customize chart
elements. The reader is advised to acquaint himself to advanced charting
techniques (e.g. adding a chart title that responds to a slicer, changing
the vertical axis values to display as thousands or millions, etc.).
Figure 13: Yearly Trend Analysis
As usual, Jean goes to Analyze menu and renames this pivot to Yearly
Trends Analysis. She is also keen to connect this report to the Location

slicer using the procedure discussed earlier on.
Jean then cuts and pastes the final chart on the dashboard page. At this
point Jean is not worried of how the dashboard looks like.

Product & Product Category Performance
Santa Inn restaurant is very keen on the sales turnover of each of the
product categories. As a manager, you would want to track the share of
each category as well as top performing and worst performing products.
To give context, the hotel manager would also like to see the YoY% and
the 12 months’ trend to date.

Performance by Product Category
Figure 14: Final Report -Performance by Category
To be able to show the above, Jean realizes a Pivot table would not fully
serve the purpose but she decides to use it to generate the performance
for the 8 categories for each of the years. She filters this report for a
given location by connecting it to the Location slicer (by now, this should
be easy to do. Refer to previous analysis for guidance). Further, Jean
filters the report to take care of YTD performance.
This report is named Analysis by Category. Remember to untick the
“auto-size property” of the pivot report.
Figure 15: Snapshot of the analysis by category report
The challenge at hand is to display the above report showing 2 years at a
go to help the manager compare the performance.
Jean needs to use a formula to pick the values to be displayed on the
dashboard page.
She finds a blank area next to this report and types the list of the 8
product categories. On the adjacent column, Jean could type 2016 and
2015 BUT she remembers that this would make the dashboard static.
Luckily, she had built a slicer by year and named the cell that returns the
selected year as selYR. Thus, instead of typing, say 2016, she types

=selYR and on the next column she types =selYR-1.
Dashboard Tip
Many people have wondered how to make their dashboard interactive
and often do a direct link to a given cell in the pivot report. The trick is to
use a formula that is controlled by the slicers (or form controls, pick lists
or a macro).
By using the formulas below, Jean is able to return dynamic values!
Figure 16: Use formulas to pick values for any two given years
The formulas used in figure 16 above are as follows. The VLOOKUP is
used here to retrieve the info to display in the dashboard, from the pivot
report created above. The MATCH function helps you to dynamically
return the position or the column index number for the VLOOKUP, based
on the year. The IFERROR function is normally used to arrest errors that
may arise from the formulae to avoid having to display them on the
dashboard.
In cell:
U18 è =selYR
T18 è =selYR – 1
T19 è = IFERROR (VLOOKUP ($S19, $S$7:$V$15, MATCH(T$18,
$S$7:$V$7, 0), FALSE),"")
V19 è = IFERROR(U19/T19-1,"")

This report is now ready to be moved to the dashboard page. We shall
reserve that for the next chapter.
The manager also wants to see a trend line against each of the
categories.
The trendline should depict the recent 12 months’ performance for each
category. In the section “Prepping data for analysis” Jean had created a
column for this purpose and she is now able to insert a new pivot report
(see figure 17 below for set up) that filters out the recent 12 months. Jean
gives this report a name -P12M by Category.
Figure 17: Recent 12 months’ performance by category
Jean is happy with the progress she has made this far. She has the data
that she needs to display the trendline and this again is reserved for the
next chapter when we build the dashboard.

Product Performance
Analyzing the product performance will entail:
· Revenue (amount sold in dollars) and volume (in units sold) for each
product
· Contribution of each product to overall revenue
The above shall be sliced by the Location and the Year slicers.
Revenue and Units Sold
Jean has now mastered the usefulness of the pivot table and she goes
ahead to use this feature to generate this output. She drags the Product
Name in the Row labels; Year and Location to the Filters and the Sales
and Quantity columns to the Values section of the pivot table report grid
as shown in figure 18 below.
To show the revenue contribution of each product, she drags the Sales
field the second time but changes the display, “Show Values As…” to “%
of Grand Total” as she has done on previous reports. (Note: Remember
to disable -untick- the pivot table options for auto-fitting the columns on
update).
Figure 18: Revenue and units sold sliced by year and location
Jean goes to the Analyze menu and gives this report a meaningful name
-Product Performance. She also renames the headings on the report to
Revenue, Contribution and Units Sold (see figure 18 above). She then
goes to the dashboard page and connects this summary to the year and
location slicers as she has done with other reports.
Jean notices that as an analyst, this report (containing 77 unique
products) may not offer insights to the hotel manager. After careful
thought on what to display on the dashboard view, she settles on the
following:

· Pareto analysis of the products performance sliced for each product
category
· Top/Bottom 5 performing products -across all product categories
Pareto analysis chart & “% Running Total in feature for Pivots
Pareto analysis follows the Pareto Principle (or 20/80 Rule) that was
introduced by the Italian Economist Vilfredo Pareto in his research
regarding the distribution of the country’s wealth. This model states that
when several factors affect a situation, a few factors will account for most
of the impact.
As such, Jean creates a Pareto Chart that presents the hotel manager
with a useful tool to visualize the what products account for most of the
revenue in the business.
Jean copies and pastes the report in figure 18 above in an adjacent
location in the calculation worksheet and does the following:
(i) Place the product Category Name column to the Filter section of the
pivot table and connect the product category slicer on the
dashboard page to this report. Name this report as Pareto Report
(Analyze menu).
(ii) Sort the report by revenue amount in descending order. That is,
right click the revenue column àSort àSort largest to smallest.
(iii) Right click the contribution column and change the display to “%
Running Total in…”as illustrated below. Further, change the
column heading to Cumulative %.

Figure 19: Pareto Analysis by product within a selected product category
(iv) With the report in figure 19 in place, turn off the grand totals from
Design menu.
(v) On the Analyze menu, select Pivot Chart.
On the Insert Chart dialog box that pops up, (1) choose Combo
from the list of chart types available, (2) set the chart type for
Revenue and Cumulative % fields to clustered column and
clustered line chart respectively, and, (3) tick Secondary Axis
against the line chart. (Note: This step applies to MS Excel 2013
and 2016. With lower versions, check out this post for the steps
involved).
Figure 20: Dual axis chart to display related chart items that use different
scales
(vi) Format the chart to suit your analysis. This could entail changing
the fill colour for both series, adding chart titles, positioning the
legends, etc.

Figure 21: Chart showing the products that contribute most for the
Seafood category
(vii) Once you are happy with the chart, cut and paste it in the
dashboard page.
Top / Bottom 5 Selling Products
For this report, Jean reverts to the report created in figure 18 above. To
display the top 5 products, Jean knows she can achieve this in a pivot
report as illustrated below.
Figure 22: How to set top / bottom views in pivot report
Jean knows that if she uses the pivot report methodology of top / bottom
views, she will have two separate reports, one set for top 5 and the
other for bottom 5 items. This creates a challenge when it comes to
displaying the two reports on the dashboard page. This is because she
wants to give the hotel manager the ability to choose either of the reports,

and as well optimize the usage of the dashboard worksheet.
She therefore settles to use formulas to extract (in another location in the
calculation worksheet) a sub-report from this main report. The values of
this sub-report will be driven by the user selection on the dashboard as
shown below.
Steps for top/bottom views
There are various approaches to achieve this but we shall limit ourselves
to a simple approach.
1. On the Drivers worksheet, create a table (J3:J5) as shown below (use
CTRL + T to format it as an Excel Table).
Figure 23: Steps to create the table and subsequent slicer
2. In the Drivers worksheet, insert a pivot table based on this table.
Drag the Top Views column on the Filter section of the pivot report
grid. Put nothing on the Row, Column, or Values sections.
3. Insert a slicer and select the Top Views column. Select one of the
options on the slicer, then cut and paste the slicer on the dashboard
page.
4. Select cell M2 shown in figure 23 above and on the Name box, name
this cell as selView.
5. On the main report (refer to figure 18 above), create a column to rank
the products by revenue.
Note: This is a critical step since the user (the Hotel Manager)
will control how the ranking is done as s/he selects top or
bottom from the slicer Jean has just created.
Jean enters the following rank formula in the Calculations worksheet,
cell W51.

=RANK ($T51, $T$51:$T$119, 0)
This formula will rank the revenues in descending order (defined by the
0 -zero- as the last parameter of this formula). Jean realizes that this
part of the formula needs to be dynamic so that it can toggle between
descending and ascending as the order of the ranking. To make this
dynamic, she makes the adjustment as follows:
=RANK ($T51, $T$51:$T$119, IF(selView="Top 5 Products", 0, 1))
The formula uses an IF function to check what the user has selected on
the dashboard, that is whether top or bottom, and uses this to return a 0
or a 1 for top and bottom views respectively.
Figure 24:Dynamic ranking the products by revenue
6. In a blank area on the Calculations worksheet, prepare the place for
the top/bottom items as shown below. The numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
represent the ranking and we shall use these as the basis to return the
product name, revenue amount, contribution and units sold.
Figure 25: Top / bottom data area
7. In cell Z51 in the Calculations worksheet, shown in figure 25, we type
the following formula and autofill / copy it in the range Z51:AC55 to
return the desired values. Be keen to properly lock the cell references.
=INDEX ($S$51:$W$119, MATCH($Y51,$W$51:$W$119,0),
MATCH(Z$50,$S$50:$W$50,0))

Figure 26: Top bottom products ranked by revenue
Jean is now happy that she can use this final result in her dashboard
page (see chapter 3).
As a bonus to purchasing this book, I availed a free eBook
to show you the various ways to show top “X” items in a
dashboard. CLICK HERE if you haven’t downloaded yet.

Performance by Sales Agent
The hotel manager has also requested to see how the various sales
agents are performing in terms of revenue share for a given location in a
given year.
This is pretty simple for Jean. She inserts a pivot table showing the Sales
Agents on the Rows, and Sales in the Values section. She then
connects the Location and Year slicers to this report which she names
Sales Agents performance.
With respect to the chart type to use for this purpose, Jean knows she
has a variety to choose from: Doughnut chart, Pie Chart, Clustered bar
chart, or a Treemap chart. The Treemap chart, however, is only available
in MS Excel 2016 and later versions. Jean knows that it will be easier to
maintain a clustered bar chart, and therefore goes with this.
On the Analyze menu, she inserts a Pivot Chart and selects the
Clustered Bar chart for this purpose. She then formats it to have a better
feel of the contribution of each sales agent:
· Change the fill colour of the bars to match/complement the
dashboard colour choices,
· When the chart is selected, go to Design menu and select Data
Labels in the Add Chart Elements option. Choose the position of
these data labels to be Outside End.
· Since we have the data labels indicating the value of each of the
bars, select the Horizontal Values axis and tap delete on the
keyboard. Maintaining this axis would be redundant.
· Reduce the Gap Width of the bars.
Once through with the formatting, cut and paste this chart in the
dashboard page.

Figure 27: Chart showing share of revenue per sales agent

CHAPTER 3: BUILDING THE DASHBOARD
Creating a dashboard in Excel can be a daunting task especially as a
beginner. In fact, it is advisable to invest time learning less-advanced
Excel concepts before attempting to create Dashboards. This will give
you a grounding on the fundamental formulas and features in Excel that
are the building blocks of dynamic dashboards.
For seasoned users though, the challenge is normally to use methods
that achieve the goal but are easily understood by other users. If you are
one of the power users of Excel, we will be glad to hear what techniques
you employ to make dashboards dynamic and therefore win the
manager’s interest to rely on it for decision making.
Jean has done all the analyses that will answer the questions that the
Hotel Manager asked at the beginning.
Jean goes to the Dashboard worksheet and starts creating the
dashboard. In doing this, she relies on the dashboard plan (see figure 2)
that gives a mock-up of where each of the analyses done will be
displayed on the dashboard page.
She starts by doing the following:
1. Remove gridlines from the Dashboard worksheet-from the View
menu on the Excel Ribbon
2. Minimize the Ribbon to increase the size of the screen
3. Resize columns A and B by reducing their sizes; Reduce the size of
row 1 but increase the height of row 2. Row 2 normally will host the
title of the dashboard; You may also zoom out the Excel worksheet
to say 85%.
4. Select the area of the screen that is visible (starting from cell B2)
and fill it with a background colour of your choice. You can choose
to retain the default fill colour, though. In this example I’ve set it to a
light gray fill.
5. Select the entire dashboard worksheet and set a uniform font type
and size.
Note that number 2, 3 & 4 above aren’t mandatory to do but help in
managing the worksheet.
Jean selects cell C2 and types the title: Santa Inn Restaurant Sales

Analysis. She increases the font size to 18 and makes it bold. She also
sets a font colour that matches the corporate colours of Santa Inn.

The Headline Section
Every dashboard contains a headline section with the key metrics. This
can be created to occupy the top of the page horizontally or kept at the
far-left margin. In our case, we would want to display the YTD revenue
for the selected year as well as the contribution of each location to this
revenue.
We shall employ shapes and linked pictures to create this section. We
shall also use custom ring charts for the share (%). I’ve written a very
helpful blog post that explains how to create stylish dashboards using
shapes.
a) From the Insert menu on the Ribbon, Jean selects Shapes and
inserts a Rectangle with rounded corners. On the top-left corner of
the worksheet, she draws a reasonable size to include the following
metrics: YTD revenue for selected year, YTD revenue for the prior
year, YoY percentage growth.
b) When this shape is selected, Jean goes to the contextual Format
menu and sets the Shape outline to No Outline, and the Shape fill
to a gray shade that complements the background of the worksheet.
c) This shape will further have the title “YTD Revenue: Beverages
-2015” where the word ‘Beverages’ and ‘2015’ are driven by the
user selection on the slicer. Therefore, the title needs to be
dynamic! These two items, luckily, are available on the
Calculations worksheet and are referred to as by named ranges -
selCateg and selYR respectively.
With the help of CONCATENATE function in Excel or use of the
ampersand sign -&, we can create a dynamic title as shown below.
The title is created in the Drivers worksheet and then linked to the
shape.
Figure 28: Dynamic titles for use in the dashboard
To link the shape to the value of cell J11 in figure 28 above, we
select the shape on the dashboard (ensure the cursor is not blinking

inside the shape), click inside the formula bar, press = then select
cell J11 in the Drivers worksheet.
NOTE that you have to click inside the formula bar before
typing =.
When the shape is selected from the edges, increase the font size
and change the font colour to a suitable colour, if need be. You may
also change alignment to centre.
Figure 29: Linking a shape to a cell
Note: This is a very intuitive way to make the dashboard dynamic
by ensuring the titles used in the dashboard on top of charts or
other items describe the visual or table displayed.
d) On top of this shape, insert 3 text boxes and set the Shape outline
to No Outline, and the Shape fill to No Fill. The first text box will be
used to display the value of YTD revenue, the second will have the
title “Prior Year” and the third will be linked to the value of YTD
revenue for prior year.
 
Jean knows she cannot link the values directly to the YTD
Report she created in chapter 2.
This is because she has data for 3 years and the dashboard user
controls which year s/he wants to view. Further, this data will keep
growing and she wants to build a dashboard that is responsive at
little or no changes at all. She therefore goes to the Calculations
worksheet and below the YTD Report creates a section where she
can extract the information to display.

Figure 30: Extracting the information to display
Cell A21 and A22 have the formulae =selYR and =selYR-1 respectively.
To return the revenue and the YoY%, we write the following formula in
cell B21, then autofill/copy to the range B21:C22. Be keen with the
locking.
=VLOOKUP ($A21, $A$11:$C$14,
MATCH(B$20,$A$11:$C$11,0))
Figure 31: Information extracted using formulas
The formula above has chances to return error where the prior year is not
part of the data. For instance, if the user selects 2014 as the year on the
dashboard, we do not have 2013 and thus you will have errors. We
therefore trap the errors using IFERROR as follows:
=IFERROR (VLOOKUP ($A21, $A$11:$C$14, MATCH(B$20,
$A$11:$C$11, 0)),"")
The YoY% values need to be formatted, either using Conditional
Formatting or Custom Number Formats. This is a principle of
dashboard reporting where important numbers ought to be highlighted.

Conditional formatting
Using Highlight Cells Rules
Select the two cells, C21:C22 and on the Home tab on the Excel Ribbon
àConditional Formatting àHighlights Cells Rules àGreater Than…
Repeat this for Less Than. Set the format cells value to zero (0) in both
scenarios BUT set the Custom Format font colour to Bold, Green and
Bold Italic, Red for growth rates greater than and less than 0
respectively.
Figure 32: Conditional Formatting settings

Figure 33: Settings for Greater Than...
Conditional Formatting Using Icon Sets
For this exercise, we duplicate the YoY% values on the adjacent column
on the right by just equating to the values on cells C21:C22. We then
select the two cells and on the Home tab, choose Conditional Formatting
àIcon Sets à3 Coloured Arrows.
Figure 34: Icon sets to display trends
MS Excel has default settings that defines the thresholds for the 3
arrows. These default settings may not be what we want. We therefore
select the cells upon which we did the conditional formatting, in this
case cells D21:D22, and on the Conditional Formatting command we
select àManage Rules… àEdit Rule and make the following changes.

Figure 35: Adjusting the icon sets settings
Using Custom Number Formats
We use the same YoY% rates but on a different adjacent column E.
We then select the two cells, E21:E22 that we want to format àright click
and choose Format Cells… àNumber àCustom number formats and
type the following:
[Green] [>0] +0.0%; [Red] [<0] -0.0%; 0.0%
Notice the semicolons that separate one section of the format from
another.

Figure 36: Custom number formats
Figure 37: Final output with column E using custom number formats
Tip: The green colour is too shouting, isn’t it? Would it not be also cool to
have a triangle appended to the rule? To do this, you may need to edit
the rule/format above to this one:
[Color10] [>0] ▲* +0.0% ; [Red] [<0]▼* -0.0%; 0.0%
Having done this, Jean is now ready with the properly formatted and
interactive information to display in the dashboard. She reverts to the
dashboard page where she had created a text box for the YTD Revenue
and links this text box to the cell B21. She repeats the same for prior year
values.
Remember to select the text box and click inside the formula bar
before pressing =

Using Linked Pictures
For the YoY%, you can follow a similar methodology as the one
discussed above using shapes. We however, want to explore the option
of Linked Pictures (Picture Link in some versions).
Select cells C20:C21 and press CTRL + C to copy. Once copied, we
move to the Dashboard worksheet and Paste Special as Linked Picture
as illustrated here.
This will create an image that mirrors the Calculations worksheet, with all
its formats.
Finally, Jean selects all the shapes (hold down the CTRL key on the
keyboard then select each shape) and on the contextual Format menu,
selects Group.
Figure 38: Paste a mirrored image
Figure 39: Grouping shapes to be able to move them at a go

Visualizing Contribution Using Ring Charts
The overall YTD revenue visualized in the previous section needs to be
broken down by location, i.e. how much each location is contributing to
the overall revenue. Jean had done this calculation using pivot tables and
thus it is just a matter of finding the best way to visualize the same.
Jean thinks that for each region she would want to use a doughnut / ring
chart to display the percentage contribution. A ring chart, however, would
require at least 2 data series to make sense. She goes ahead and in
another location in the Calculations worksheet, she extracts the
information to be displayed (see figure 40 below).
Figure 40: Location data to be visualized
Formulas used in the above illustration include:
Cell F16: =$F7
Cell G16: =VLOOKUP ($F16, $F$7:$H$10, 3, FALSE)
Cell H16: =1-$G16
We create a dummy series to make the doughnut chart a complete
(100%) ring by subtracting the revenue share from 100%.
Jean selects the range F15:H16 and plots a Doughnut chart from the
Insert menu on the ribbon. She then formats the chart to fit her needs as
illustrated below.

Figure 41: Chart formatting, series options
What to format:
· Adjust the hole size to, say 85%
· Delete the chart title and the legend.
· On the Format Data Series dialog box, select the Fill & Line option
and do the following:
o Click twice on the red series and set the series fill to Solid Fill
àlight gray. I choose gray shade since I want to complement
the background of the dashboard page. Note that you have to
click 2 times before you fill colour, otherwise it will apply the fill
colour on both series.
o Change the fill colour of the blue series to one of your choice.
o Using the Border settings, apply border properties of your
choice.
Figure 42: Fill colour settings

The final chart Jean comes up with looks like the one shown in figure 43
below.
Jean ensures she has selected the chart and inserts a text box that will
host the percentage contribution. She selects the text box and clicks
inside the formula bar then types = and links the text box to the revenue
share for that particular region in the Calculations worksheet.
Jean needs a descriptive text below the percentage indicated. She goes
to the Calculations worksheet and creates a dynamic text for this
purpose as follows (for cell references, refer to figure 39 above):
Formula: =$F16 & " (" & TEXT($G7,"$#,###") & ")"
Result: West Coast ($424,827)
Having the text in place, Jean selects the chart from the edges
(important!) and inserts a text box that she uses to link to this text.
The reason to select the chart before inserting the text box is to
ensure as you move/drag the chart to a different location in your
worksheet, the text boxes move along.
Figure 43: The before and after the formatting of the chart
Finally, Jean copies and pastes the finished chart, 3 times, for the other
three locations.
She then changes the link cells for the two text boxes in each chart and
then aligns these charts at the top of her dashboard worksheet to have
the following output.

Figure 44: The headline section of the dashboard
Arranging and Aligning the Charts
Most of the other charts that need to be included on the dashboard were
already discussed in chapter 2. These charts include the Trendline chart
showing monthly performance by year, the Pareto chart showing product
contribution and the Sales Agent clustered bar chart.
At this juncture, Jean rearranges these charts according to the original
dashboard mock-up she had come up with in chapter 1.
She skips two (2) rows after the headline section and places the yearly
trend chart on the left, below the YTD revenue, and likewise, arranges
the other charts.
Key points to consider:
1. Proximity principle: place related items close to each other. For
instance, the product category and the products performance
should be closely positioned.
2. Slicer properties: When you select a given slicer, a contextual
Options menu appears on the ribbon. Use this menu to adjust the
slicer behaviour. For example, select the Year slicer and increase
the number of columns to 3, and adjust the height and width of both
the buttons and the slicer itself, accordingly.
Figure 45: Adjust the slicer width and height accordingly

Further, you can right click the slicer, choose Slicer settings from
the shortcut menu and remove the “Year” label that appears on the
slicer as follows:
Figure 46: Adjusting slicer settings
Jean adjusts the properties for all her slicers and positions them
horizontally at the top of her dashboard page.

Visualizing the Product Categories
The product categories will be visualized as a table.
Jean knows she can use a linked picture for this purpose, the same way
she did with the YoY% for revenues. However, she chooses to do a direct
link (using =) for this. She copies the column headings from the
Calculations worksheet and pastes these at an appropriate location on
the dashboard. With an exception of the P12M Trend column (see fig. 47
below), she equates the other columns to the Calculations worksheet.
Having gotten the values from the calculations worksheet, select the
Trend column values (G16:G23) and do the following:
· Format as percent
· Right click àselect Format cells àNumber tab àCustom à type the
following custom format code. The code helps format negative
growths as red and positive trends as green with a + sign.
[>0] [Color10] +0%; [<0] [Red] -0%
 
Figure 47: Link to the calculations worksheet

Sparklines for past 12 months’ trend line
The P12M Trend column uses Sparklines to show the past 12 months of
data for the given category.
Inserting the Sparkline
1. Select cells C16:C23 on the dashboard page.
2. On the Insert tab >>>select the Line Sparkline.
Figure 48: Sparkline on Insert menu
3. Specify the data range, that is, the source data showing the recent
12 months of data per category. Click inside the Data Range box
and select Calculations!T34:AE41. When you press OK, you will
get the following:
Figure 49:Trend-lines for Categories
Selecting one of the cells with the Sparkline gives you a contextual menu
called Sparkline Tools àDesign which helps you customize the look of
the trend. Some of the properties you can adjust are indicated below. For
instance, you can adjust the high point theme colour to green while low
point is shown in red.

Figure 50: Adjusting the Sparkline properties

Top / Bottom 5 Products
We shall use the picture link for this. Remember in chapter 2 we had
generated the following summary:
Figure 51: Top Views by Product
Also, recall that a Linked Picture mirrors the source worksheet
formatting. As such, if need be, ensure that you format the location in
Calculations worksheet that has the above analysis to match the feel of
your dashboard
Once you are satisfied with the format, select the range Z50:AC55 on the
Calculations worksheet, copy and paste as a linked picture in the
dashboard page. Then align the top / bottom slicer above this summary.
Refer to the beginning of this chapter, i.e. the headline section, on how to
paste as a linked picture.

Dynamic chart titles
Most of the items on the dashboard page are controlled by what the user
has selected on the slicers. As such, it will be helpful for Jean to have
dynamic chart titles that describe what the user, in this case the Hotel
Manager, has selected. For this, we leverage on the CONCATENATE
function (or &) as well as the named ranges.
For this dashboard, the charts and the formulas used include:
· the Trendline chart showing monthly performance by year
="YTD Monthly Revenue for " & selLocation
· the Pareto chart showing product contribution
="Product Revenue Share (in $ '000)" & " :- " &
selLocation & ", " & selCateg & " for " & selYR
· the Sales Agent clustered bar chart
="Sales Agents Performance in " & selLocation & "
location in " & selYR
NOTE -The formulas are created in the Drivers worksheet and then
linked to a cell above the chart or to a chart title in a similar manner as
the headline section discussed earlier on.
Format these titles to be consistent with other headings on the dashboard
w.r.t. the colour and size.

Final touches on the dashboard
After all the aesthetics and alignments as well as the formatting has been
done, do the following:
1. If you need more space, do not display the Formula bar and the
Headings. Untick these from the View menu.
Figure 52: Untick formula bar and headings
2. When the formula bar and the headings are not visible and the
Ribbon has been minimized, select the bottom right cell of your
dashboard worksheet to identify the position at which the freezing
will be done. Ensure all the dashboard elements are contained in
the visible area above this cell. When the bottom right cell is
selected, click on Freeze Panes from the View menu as shown
below.
Figure 53: Freezing the dashboard worksheet to ensure no scrolling

Fix the slicer at a static position
3. One of the least used properties of the Slicers is the ability to fix the
slicer at the position where it is set in the finished version of the
dashboard. To do this, right click the slicer and choose Size and
Properties… from the short-cut menu that pops up. As indicated on
the figure that follows, tick the “Disable resizing and moving”
option in the Position and Layout properties of the slicer. Repeat
this for each of the slicers.
Figure 54: How to retain the slicer in a fixed position
Having followed through this tutorial you should end up with more/less
the same dashboard as shown in figure 55 below.
Figure 55: Complete interactive dashboard

Sharing the Dashboard
Jean now considers how to share the dashboard with the hotel manager
as well as other managers in the business who may be interested to see
various sections of the dashboard. Jean starts by protecting the
dashboard worksheet to ensure it cannot be manipulated but the users
can manipulate slicers.

Protect Worksheet
Go to Review menu àProtect Sheet. This will give the following dialog
box. Ensure you tick the two options highlighted below and any other
action that you want the user to be able to manipulate when the
worksheet is protected.
Figure 56: Protecting the dashboard worksheet
Type a password of your choice BUT remember to store this may be in
another worksheet lest you forget. Using of a password is however,
optional.

Protect the workbook
You may also want to hide all the other worksheets apart from the
dashboard view while sharing. Hiding the worksheet doesn’t guarantee
the users will not unhide. To ensure they cannot unhide or delete/insert
extra columns/rows, use the Protect Workbook feature on the Review
menu. Again, the password is optional here.
Figure 57: Protect workbook

Set the print area
Instead of sharing the file itself, you may want to share an instance of the
dashboard as a PDF. To do this we shall select the visible area of the
dashboard and on the Name Box, give this range a name. in this
example, we give it the name DBPrint. When this range is still selected,
click on Set Print Area on the Page Layout tab on the ribbon.
Figure 58: Set print area
Remember to adjust the page breaks to ensure the dashboard fits on one
worksheet. To see the page breaks, you need to be on the page break
(pre)view, and then adjust where the page break, by dragging the dotted
blue lines to the right or left, or top/bottom as the case may be.
Figure 59: Adjusting page breaks
Once you have adjusted the page breaks and ensured the entire
dashboard fits as a one pager, you can print the same on paper or on
PDF.
The section below shows you a macro that leverages on the named
range of the print area set above to make the printing to PDF easier.

Macro to Print on PDF
Press ALT + F11 to open the code editor (or Visual Basic (VB) Editor) of
Excel and insert the following code on the VB Editor. Notice the use of
the named range DBPrint.
Sub PDFExport()
Range("DBPrint").ExportAsFixedFormat xlTypePDF,
ThisWorkbook.Path & "\Santa Inn Restaurant Sales
Viewer-" & Format(Now, "ddmmyyyy-hhmm") & ".pdf"
End Sub
The next thing you will need to do is to insert a shape to which you
assign the above macro, such that once the user clicks on this
button/shape, the macro creates a PDF file in the same folder where the
file is stored.
Once the shape is inserted, you only need to right click and choose
Assign macro from the short cut menu that appears. The dialog box that
pops up will have a list of available macros in your file from which you
choose the PDFReport macro above, and press OK.

Final Thoughts
The techniques covered in this eBook apply for most of the dashboard
projects that you will encounter. You may however need to learn how to
leverage on formulas such as SUMIFS, INDEX, OFFSET, MATCH,
among others, to achieve the same.
I believe you are able to replicate the steps discussed here in your own
scenarios.
I invite you to be kind to help me change lives across the globe in the
following ways. It may seem a small thing to ask, but it will go a long way
to changing others’ lives, mine included
v Please leave an honest review as well as recommend this eBook
to your colleagues.
v Let us connect at my blog datacycleanalytics.com/blog or on Twitter
@BillWilliamsK, LinkedIn and Facebook.
Click here to…
Grab your free copy of
“Boardroom Ready Chart Book”
…and receive regular Excel tips and techniques to make you work faster
in Excel and create executive and professionally polished reports…

