Carl Anderson
Creating a
 Data-Driven 
Organization
PRACTICAL ADVICE FROM THE TRENCHES

DATA / DATA SCIENCE
Creating a Data-Driven Organization
ISBN: 978-1-491-91691-9
US $36.99	
 CAN $42.99
“ An impressive overview 
of the many things 
that need to happen, 
and best practices for 
making them happen. 
Runs the gamut from 
getting and analyzing 
the data, to creating 
the right culture, to the 
psychology of decision-
making.”
—Tracy Allison Altman
Founder at Ugly Research, 
Decision scientist and creator 
of PepperSlice
Twitter: @oreillymedia
facebook.com/oreilly
What do you need to become a data-driven 
organization? Far more than having big data or a crack 
team of unicorn data scientists, it requires establishing 
an effective, deeply-ingrained data culture. This 
practical book shows you how true data-drivenness 
involves processes that require genuine buy-in across 
your company, from analysts and management to the 
C-Suite and the board.  
Through interviews and examples from data scientists 
and analytics leaders in a variety of industries, author 
Carl Anderson explains the analytics value chain you 
need to adopt when building predictive business 
models—from data collection and analysis to the insights 
and leadership that drive concrete actions. You’ll learn 
what works and what doesn’t, and why creating a data-
driven culture throughout your organization is essential.
■
■Start from the bottom up: learn how to 
collect the right data the right way
■
■Hire analysts with the right skills, and 
organize them into teams
■
■Examine statistical and visualization tools, 
and fact-based storytelling methods
■
■Collect and analyze data while respecting 
privacy and ethics
■
■Understand how analysts and their managers 
can help spur a data-driven culture 
■
■Learn the importance of data leadership 
and C-level positions such as chief data 
officer and chief analytics officer
Carl Anderson is the Director 
of Data Science at Warby Parker 
in New York, where he oversees 
data engineering and data science, 
supports the broader analytics 
organization, and works to create 
a data-driven organization. 

Carl Anderson
Creating a Data-
Driven Organization
Practical Advice from the Trenches

978-1-491-91691-9
LSI
Creating a Data-Driven Organization
by Carl Anderson
Copyright © 2015 Carl Anderson. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Tim McGovern
Production Editor: Colleen Lobner
Copyeditor: Kim Cofer
Proofreader: Amanda Kersey
Indexer: Lucie Haskins
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
August 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-07-20: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491916919 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Creating a Data-
Driven Organization, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  vii
1. What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Data Collection                                                                                    1
Data Access                                                                                           2
Reporting                                                                                              4
Alerting                                                                                                  5
From Reporting and Alerting to Analysis                                        6
Hallmarks of Data-Drivenness                                                          9
Analytics Maturity                                                                             11
Overview                                                                                             17
2. Data Quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Facets of Data Quality                                                                       20
Dirty Data                                                                                           22
Data Provenance                                                                                36
Data Quality Is a Shared Responsibility                                         38
3. Data Collection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
Collect All the Things                                                                       41
Prioritizing Data Sources                                                                  44
Connecting the Dots                                                                         46
Data Collection                                                                                  48
Purchasing Data                                                                                 50
Data Retention                                                                                   56
iii

4. The Analyst Organization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
Types of Analysts                                                                               59
Analytics Is a Team Sport                                                                 65
Skills and Qualities                                                                            69
Just One More Tool                                                                           71
5. Data Analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  83
What Is Analysis?                                                                               84
Types of Analysis                                                                               86
6. Metric Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
Metric Design                                                                                   112
Key Performance Indicators                                                           119
7. Storytelling with Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  127
Storytelling                                                                                       128
First Steps                                                                                          131
Sell, Sell, Sell!                                                                                    133
Data Visualization                                                                           134
Delivery                                                                                             145
Summary                                                                                           151
8. A/B Testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
Why A/B Test?                                                                                  159
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing                                         160
Other Approaches                                                                           171
Cultural Implications                                                                      174
9. Decision Making. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
How Are Decisions Made?                                                             179
What Makes Decision Making Hard?                                           183
Solutions                                                                                           193
Conclusion                                                                                        200
10. Data-Driven Culture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  203
Open, Trusting Culture                                                                   204
Broad Data Literacy                                                                         207
Goals-First Culture                                                                          209
Inquisitive, Questioning Culture                                                   211
Iterative, Learning Culture                                                             212
Anti-HiPPO Culture                                                                       214
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

Data Leadership                                                                               215
11. The Data-Driven C-Suite. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  217
Chief Data Officer                                                                           218
Chief Analytics Officer                                                                   228
Conclusion                                                                                        233
12. Privacy, Ethics, and Risk. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  237
Respect Privacy                                                                                239
Practice Empathy                                                                             243
Data Quality                                                                                     248
Security                                                                                              249
Enforcement                                                                                     251
Conclusions                                                                                      252
13. Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  255
Further Reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  261
Analytics Organizations                                                                       261
Data Analysis & Data Science                                                              261
Decision Making                                                                                    261
Data Visualization                                                                                 262
A/B Testing                                                                                             262
A. On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data 
Better?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  263
B. Vision Statement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  271
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  275
Table of Contents 
| 
v


Preface
Summary
In this book, I address two core questions:
• What does it mean for an organization to be data-driven?
• How does an organization get there?
Many organizations think that simply because they generate a lot of
reports or have many dashboards, they are data-driven. Although
those activities are part of what an organization does, they are typi‐
cally backward-looking. That is, they are often a declaration of past
or present facts without a great deal of context, without causal
explanation of why something has or has not happened, and without
recommendations of what to do next. In short, they state what hap‐
pened but they are not prescriptive. As such, they have limited
upside.
In contrast, consider more forward-looking analyses, such as pre‐
dictive models that optimize ad spend, supply chain replenishment,
or minimize customer churn. They involve answering the “why”
questions—or more generally, “w-questions”: who, what, when, why,
and where—making recommendations and predictions, and telling
a story around the findings. They are frequently a key driver in a
data-driven organization. Those insights and recommendations, if
acted upon, have a huge potential impact upon the organization.
However, such insights require collecting the right data, that the data
is trustworthy, the analysis is good, that the insights are considered
in the decision, and that they drive concrete actions so the potential
vii

can be realized. Phew! I call this sequence—the flow from collection
to final impact—the analytics value chain.
This last step in the chain is critical. Analytics is not data-driven if
its findings are never seriously considered or acted upon. If they are
unread, ignored, and the boss is going to do whatever he or she
wants to do, regardless of what the data says, then they are ineffec‐
tual. To be data-driven, an organization must have the right pro‐
cesses and the right culture in place to augment or drive critical
business decisions with these analyses and therefore have a direct
impact on the business.
Culture, then, is the key. This is a multifaceted problem that involves
data quality and sharing, analyst hiring and training, communica‐
tion, analytical organizational structure, metric design, A/B testing,
decision-making processes, and more. This book will elucidate these
ideas by providing insights and illustrative examples from a variety
of industries. I also bring in the voices of experience in interviews
that provide advice and insights of what worked and what didn’t
from a variety of data science and analytics leaders. I hope to inspire
all our readers to become more data-driven.
Moreover, throughout the book I emphasize the role that data engi‐
neers, analysts, and managers of analysts can play. I suggest that a
data-driven organization and requisite culture can and should be
built not only from top-down leadership but also from the bottom
up. As Todd Holloway, head of data science at Trulia, remarked at
the 2014 Chief Data Officer Executive Forum, “The best ideas come
from the guys closest to the data.” Not only are they the ones who
work directly with the data sources and who recognize and can rem‐
edy the data-quality issues and understand how best to augment the
data, but “they often come up with the good product ideas.” In addi‐
tion, they can help educate the rest of the organization to be more
data literate. Part of that comes from developing their skill set and
using it to do good work. Another part, however, comes from being
more business savvy—learning the right questions to ask and busi‐
ness problems to tackle—and then “selling” their insights and rec‐
ommendations to the decision-makers and making a compelling
case of what the finding or recommendation means to business and
why it makes an impact.
viii 
| 
Preface

1 Brynjolfsson, E., L. M. Hitt, and H. H. Kim. “Strength in Numbers: How Does Data-
Driven Decisionmaking Affect Firm Performance?” Social Science Research Network
(2011).
2 Nucleus Research, “Analytics pays back $13.01 for every dollar spent,” O204 (Boston,
MA: Nucleus Research, 2014), 5.
And there are great impacts and gains to be had. One report,1 con‐
trolling for other factors, found that data-driven organizations have
a 5%–6% greater output and productivity that their less data-driven
counterparts. They also had higher asset utilization, return on
equity, and market value. Another report2 claims that analytics pays
back $13.01 for every dollar spent. Being data-driven pays!
Data-drivenness is not a binary but rather a continuum: you can
always be more data-driven, collect more high-quality relevant data,
have a more skilled analytics organization, and do more testing.
Moreover, you can always have a better decision-making process. In
this book, I’ll discuss the hallmarks of great data-driven organiza‐
tions. I’ll cover the infrastructure, skills, and culture needed to cre‐
ate organizations that take data, treat it as a core asset, and use it to
drive and inform critical business decisions and ultimately make an
impact. I will also cover some common anti-patterns, behavior that
inhibits a business from making the most from its data.
The goals of the book, then, are to inspire the analyst organization
to play its part, to provide pause for thought—to ask “are we making
the most of our data?” and “can we be more data-driven?”—and to
stimulate discussion about what more can be done to make use of
this key resource. It is never too early to be thinking about this.
Senior management and founders should be working to bake this
into the very fabric of their company at an early stage. So, let’s find
out more about what is entailed.
Who Should Read This Book?
The information here will help you build and run an internal analyt‐
ics program, deciding what data to gather and store, how to access it
and make sense of it, and, most crucially, how to act on it.
Whether you’re the only data scientist at a startup (and wearing a
half-dozen other hats, to boot!), or the manager at an established
organization with a room—or a department—full of people report‐
Preface 
| 
ix

ing to you, if you have data and the desire to act more quickly, effi‐
ciently, and wisely, this book will help you develop not just a data
program but a data-driven culture.
Chapter Organization
Roughly speaking, this book is organized by thinking about that
flow along that value chain. The first chapters cover data itself, in
particular choosing the right data sources and ensuring that they are
high quality and trustworthy. The next step in that chain is analysis.
You need the right people with the right skills and tools to do good
work, to generate impactful insights. I call this group the “analysts,”
deliberately using the term in its broadest sense to cover data ana‐
lysts, data scientists, and other members of the analytics organiza‐
tion. I do that to be inclusive because I believe that everyone, from a
junior data analyst fresh out of school to a rockstar data scientist,
has a role to play.I cover what makes a good analyst, how they can
sharpen their skills, and also cover organizational aspects: how those
analysts should be formed into teams and business units. The next
few chapters cover the actual analytical work itself, such as perform‐
ing analyses, designing metrics, A/B testing, and storytelling. I then
proceed to the next step in the chain: making decisions with those
analyses and insights. Here I address what makes decision-making
hard and how it can be improved.
Throughout all these chapters, there is a very strong message and
theme: being data-driven is not just about data or the latest big data
toolset, but it is culture. Culture is the dominant aspect that sets
expectations of how far data is democratized, how it is used and
viewed across the organization, and the resources and training
invested in using data as a strategic asset. Thus, I draw all the lessons
from the various steps in the value chain into a single culture chap‐
ter. One of the later chapters then discusses top-down data leader‐
ship and in particular, the roles of two relatively new C-suite
positions: the chief data officer and the chief analytics officer. How‐
ever, culture can be shaped and influenced from the bottom up, too.
Thus, throughout the book I directly address analysts and managers
of analysts, highlighting what they can do to influence that culture
and maximize their impact upon the organization. A true data-
driven organization is a data democracy and has a large number of
stakeholders who are vested in data, data quality, and the best use of
x 
| 
Preface

data to make fact-based decisions and to leverage data for competi‐
tive advantage.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file
extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer
to program elements such as variable or function names, data‐
bases, data types, environment variables, statements, and key‐
words.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by
the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or
by values determined by context.
This element signifies a tip or suggestion.
This element signifies a general note.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital
library that delivers expert content in both
book and video form from the world’s lead‐
ing authors in technology and business.
Preface 
| 
xi

Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and
business and creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their
primary resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certif‐
ication training.
Safari Books Online offers a range of plans and pricing for enter‐
prise, government, education, and individuals.
Members have access to thousands of books, training videos, and
prepublication manuscripts in one fully searchable database from
publishers like O’Reilly Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-
Wesley Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press,
Focal Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan
Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress,
Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course Tech‐
nology, and hundreds more. For more information about Safari
Books Online, please visit us online.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples,
and any additional information. You can access this page at http://
bit.ly/data-driven-org.
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email
to bookquestions@oreilly.com.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and
news, see our website at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
xii 
| 
Preface

Acknowledgments
Despite having a single authorship, this book is really the sum of
contributions, ideas, and help from a lot of great experts and collea‐
gues in the field. I would like to thank the following people for their
extremely helpful advice, suggestions, insights, and support:
Andrew Abela, Peter Aiken, Tracy Allison Altman, Samarth Baskar,
Lon Binder, Neil Blumenthal, Yosef Borenstein, Lewis Broome, Trey
Causey, Brian Dalessandro, Greg Elin, Samantha Everitt, Mario
Faria, Stephen Few, Tom Fishburne, Andrew Francis Freeman, Dave
Gilboa, Christina Kim, Nick Kim, Anjali Kumar, Greg Linden, Ste‐
phen Few, Jason Gowans, Sebastian Gutierrez, Doug Laney, Shaun
Lysen, Doug Mack, Patrick Mahoney, Chris Maliwat, Mikayla Mark‐
rich, Lynn Massimo, Sanjay Mathur, Miriah Meyer, Julie-Jennifer
Nguyen, Scott Pauly, Jeff Potter, Matt Rizzo, Max Schron, Anna
Smith, Nellwyn Thomas, Daniel Tunkelang, James Vallandingham,
Satish Vedantam, Daniel White, and Dan Woods. Thanks too, in
general, to my colleagues at Warby Parker, who were all very sup‐
portive. Sincerest apologies to anyone whom I may have inadver‐
tently missed from this list.
I would especially like to thank Daniel Mintz, Julie Steele, Dan
Woods, Lon Binder, and June Andrews, who acted as a technical
reviewers and who all provided very thorough, sage, and concrete
suggestions that greatly helped improve the book.
Thanks also to the organizers from Data Driven Business, especially
Antanina Kapchonava, and the participants of the Chief Data Offi‐
cer Executive Forum held in New York City on November 12, 2014.
James 
Vallandingham 
generously 
re-created 
and 
modified
Figure 4-1 especially for this book. Thanks, Jim!
I would like to thank Sebastian Gutierrez for some interesting con‐
versation and for letting me steal some examples from his excellent
data-visualization course.
I would also like to recognize the support of my friends and family,
especially my long-suffering wife, Alexia, who described herself as a
“book widow” at month two; and my mother, who has been incredi‐
bly supportive throughout my life.
Finally, I would like to extend my gratitude to all the great staff of
O’Reilly, especially Tim McGovern, who edited the work and who
Preface 
| 
xiii

pushed and shaped it in all the right places. Thanks, too, to Mike
Loukides, Ben Lorica, Marie Beaugureau, and especially the produc‐
tion team: Colleen Lobner, Lucie Haskins, David Futato, Kim Cofer,
Ellie Volckhausen, Amanda Kersey, and Rebecca Demarest.
xiv 
| 
Preface

CHAPTER 1
What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?
Without data you’re just another person with an opinion.
—William Edwards Deming
Data-drivenness is about building tools, abilities, and, most cru‐
cially, a culture that acts on data. This chapter will outline what sets
data-driven organizations apart. I start with some initial prerequi‐
sites about data collection and access. I then contrast reporting and
alerting versus analyses in some detail because it is such an impor‐
tant distinction. There are many different types of forward-looking
analysis, varying in degrees of sophistication. Thus, I spend some
time going over those types, describing them in terms of “levels of
analytics” and “analytics maturity,” in particular, discussing the hall‐
marks of an analytically mature organization. What does that look
like?
Let us start us on the way to answering our first question: what does
it mean for an organization to be data-driven?
Data Collection
Let’s get a couple of obvious prerequisites out of the way.
Prerequisite #1: An organization must be collecting data.
Data undoubtedly is a key ingredient. Of course, it can’t just be any
data; it has to be the right data. The dataset has to be relevant to the
question at hand. It also has to be timely, accurate, clean, unbiased;
and perhaps most importantly, it has to be trustworthy.
1

This is a tall order. Data is always dirtier than you imagine. There
can be subtle hidden biases that can sway your conclusions, and
cleaning and massaging data can be a tough, time-consuming, and
expensive operation. I often hear that data scientists spend 80% of
their time obtaining, cleaning, and preparing data, and only 20% of
their time building models, analyzing, visualizing, and drawing con‐
clusions from that data (for example, http://bit.ly/nyt-janitor and
http://bit.ly/im-data-sci). In my experience, this is entirely plausible.
In the next chapter, I’ll cover aspects of data quality in much more
detail.
Even if you do have quality data, and even if you have a lot of quality
data, you will only get so far and; despite the hype that you might
hear, it does not make you data-driven. Some people, especially cer‐
tain big data vendors and service providers, pimp big data as a pana‐
cea: if you collect everything, somewhere in there are diamonds (or
golden nuggets or needles or one of many other metaphors) that will
make any company successful. The hard truth is that data alone is
not enough. A small amount of clean, trustworthy data can be far
more valuable than petabytes of junk.
Data Access
Prerequisite #2: Data must be accessible and queryable.
Having accurate, timely, and relevant data, though, is not sufficient
to count as data-driven. It must also be:
Joinable
The data must be in a form that can be joined to other enter‐
prise data when necessary. There are many options, such as
relational databases, NoSQL stores, or Hadoop. Use the right
tool for the job. For instance, for a long while, the financial ana‐
lysts at Warby Parker were using Excel to compute the key met‐
rics reported to senior management. They sucked down huge
amounts of raw data from different sources and ran VLOOK‐
UPS (an Excel function to find cross-references in the data) to
join all that data to get a top-level look at the numbers. This
worked well initially, but as the company’s sales and customer
base were scaling rapidly, the data got larger and larger, the
Excel file approached 300 MB, their computers maxed out their
RAM, and the VLOOKUPS would take 10 hours or more, fre‐
quently crash, and had to be restarted. They had stretched the
2 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

tool and approach as far as they could go. Excel had been an
appropriate tool, but company hypergrowth changed that. The
mechanics of getting those numbers became a huge time-sink
for the analysts and a source of stress as to whether they would
get their numbers or have to wait another 10 hours to rerun
those VLOOKUPS. It turned them from analysts into Microsoft
data engineers. My team helped to bring that whole dataset into
a MySQL relational database. We wrote queries to crunch the
numbers for them, allowing them to focus on analysis, trends,
and presentation of that data—a far better use of their
time. Now that they have better tools and more time, they are
producing deeper, richer analyses.
Shareable
There must be a data-sharing culture within the organization so
that data can be joined, such as combining customers’ click‐
stream with their transactional history. Imagine a patient admit‐
ted to a hospital ER, receiving treatment and then being
released with a requirement to attend an outpatient clinic for
additional treatment and checkups. The patient is going to
receive worse customer service and more importantly worse
care if the hospital and clinic don’t share data—when, where,
and why was he admitted, what issues did he present, what
treatment did he receive, etc. From the healthcare providers’
perspective, their analysts are going to find it hard or impossible
to analyze and improve the process and care if they don’t have a
coherent, accurate picture of patient flow, diagnostic processes,
and complete longitudinal data of those patients. So, siloed data
is always going to inhibit the scope of what can be achieved.
When more data is available to more parts of a system, the
whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
Queryable
There must be appropriate tools to query and slice and dice the
data. All reporting and analysis requires filtering, grouping, and
aggregating data to reduce the large amounts of raw data into a
smaller set of higher-level numbers that help our brains com‐
prehend what is happening in a business. I need to be able to see
trends or understand differences among customer segments.
Analysts have to have tools that allow them to compute those
metrics relatively easily.
(All of these topics will be covered in greater detail in later chapters.)
Data Access 
| 
3

OK, so now we have data and it is accessible. Is this sufficient? No,
not yet. You need people with the right skills to use that data. That
can mean the mechanics of filtering and aggregating data, such as
through a query language or Excel macros, but it also means people
who design and choose the appropriate metrics to extract and track
(this topic is covered in Chapter 6). Those metrics might be resub‐
scription rates (for subscription services such as Netflix or the Wall
Street Journal), lifetime values, or growth metrics, but someone
needs to decide upon them and someone (else) needs to create some
process to provide those values.
So, for an organization to be data-driven, there have to be humans
in the loop, humans who ask the right questions of the data, humans
who have the skills to extract the right data and metrics, and
humans who use that data to inform next steps. In short, data alone
is not going to save your organization.
Reporting
Let’s suppose you have an analytical group with access to accurate
data. The group extracts sales data and generates a report proudly
claiming that the company’s bookings grew 5.2% from April to May
(Figure 1-1).
Figure 1-1. 5.2% month-over-month sales growth!
This is certainly now sounding more like a data-driven company.
However, this is still deeply insufficient. Certainly it is good that
they are tracking these metrics. The CFO and CEO will definitely be
interested in those numbers. What, however, does this value of 5.2%
4 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

really tell you? Very little, in fact. There are many possible reasons
why the company sales grew by this amount:
• Suppose that you sell a highly seasonal product, such as beach‐
wear. Maybe 5.2% is much lower than normal. Maybe most
years, May’s growth is more than 7% over the prior month and
this year’s growth is well below average.
• Maybe your chief marketing officer spent a lot of money on a
national campaign to drive brand awareness. How much of that
5.2% growth was generated from that campaign, and was that
campaign a good value for the money?
• Maybe your CEO appeared on Good Morning America, or your
product was featured in Techcrunch, or a video went viral, and
that was the driver. That is, growth can be traced back to a spe‐
cific unusual driving event (which might drive transient or sus‐
tained growth).
• Maybe monthly sales are low in volume and highly variable.
Maybe that growth was just luck and maybe the overall trend
is downward. (If you have ever traded stocks, you will surely
understand.)
• Maybe the data is just wrong. If your sales are relatively stable,
and you see a spike, and you are not aware of any unusual
events, perhaps there is a data quality problem.
All of these are possibilities. The reported number is just that, a
numerical value with little to no context.
“As orgs grow larger and complex, people at the top depend less on
firsthand experience, and more on heavily processed data.” — John
Gardner
—John Maeda (@johnmaeda)
August 16, 2014
Alerting
Ding, ding, ding! Web-app server #14 has just averaged more than
98% CPU utilization for the last five minutes.
Alerts are essentially reports about what is happening right now.
They typically provide very specific data with well-designed metrics.
But like reports, they don’t tell you why you are seeing a spike in
CPU utilization, and they don’t tell you what to do, right now, to rec‐
tify the problem. As such, like reports, they lack this crucial context.
Alerting 
| 
5

There is no causal explanation. This is the point at which perfor‐
mance engineers or system administrators dive into the production
logs to ascertain what is going on, why it is happening, and what the
options are to fixing it: rollback some code, spin up some more
servers, reconfigure the load balancer, etc. 
Figure 1-2 shows an example of server load over time. There is some
variability, but most of the day is spent with a run queue of about 0.5
or fewer. At 1 a.m., load starts to spike, shooting up to more than 5,
a tenfold increase over “normal," in the space of 30 minutes. It seems
highly unusual. What’s going on? Maybe someone should fix that,
but how?
In this case, it is just the weekly backups running. This happens
every Thursday at 1 a.m.—perfectly normal, nothing to see here.
This makes the point that there is great data here and a good metric
that’s presented clearly. But the context—that it is caused by back‐
ups, that it happens on a particular schedule and this 1 a.m. time slot
is expected, and that the server can handle this load without prob‐
lems—is all lacking. 
Figure 1-2. Example of server load over time (from http://bit.ly/bwf-
back).
From Reporting and Alerting to Analysis
Reporting and alerting are necessary but not sufficient characteris‐
tics of being data-driven. We should, however, not understate the
importance of both these activities. Reporting especially is a highly
valuable component of a data-driven organization. You can’t have an
effective one without it. However, the reverse is not true: there are
many organizations that focus on reporting and may have little to
6 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

1 Dykes, B., “Reporting vs. Analysis: What’s the Difference?” Digital Marketing Blog,
October 19, 2010.
2 Faria, M., “Acting on Analytics: How to Build a Data-Driven Enterprise.” BrightTALK,
September 11, 2013.
no real (objective) analysis. For one thing, reporting may be driven
by legal requirement and responsibilities, such as Sarbanes-Oxley
compliance and generating earnings reports to shareholders, and
not from an internal cultural drive to improve the business.
Reporting tells you what happened in the past. It also provides a
baseline from which to observe changes and trends. It can be inter‐
esting and can keep some investors and shareholders happy, but it is
a fundamentally backward view of the world. To be data-driven, you
have to go beyond that. To be forward-looking and engage in analy‐
sis, dig in, and find out why the numbers are changing and, where
appropriate, make testable predictions or run experiments to gather
more data that will shed light on why.
Let’s be more explicit and compare and contrast the two. Here is one
set of definitions:
Reporting
“The process of organizing data into informational summaries
in order to monitor how different areas of a business are per‐
forming”1
Analysis
“Transforming data assets into competitive insights that will
drive business decisions and actions using people, processes and
technologies”2
Reporting says what happened—we hit a peak of 63,000 simultane‐
ous visitors on the website on Thursday at 10:03 a.m. It tends to pro‐
vide a very specific scope.
Analysis says why it happened—the company was mentioned in a
piece on the TV newsmagazine show 60 Minutes at 10:01 a.m.—and
should recommend what the organization can or should do to gen‐
erate more or less of the same.
Reporting is matter of fact, descriptive. Analysis, on the other hand,
is prescriptive.
From Reporting and Alerting to Analysis 
| 
7

3 Davenport, T.H., J. G. Harris, and R. Morison. Competing on Analytics. Boston: Har‐
vard Business Press, 2010.
In Table 1-1, we summarize the differences between the two. Hope‐
fully it is now clear why analysis and being data-driven is such a
powerful facet or cultural component of a business. This is what can
drive a business in new directions or to greater levels of efficiency.
Table 1-1. Key attributes of reporting versus analysis (mostly gleaned from
Dykes, 2010).
Reporting
Analysis
Descriptive
Prescriptive
What?
Why?
Backward-looking
Forward-looking
Raise questions
Answer questions
Data → information
Data + information → insights 
Reports, dashboards, alerts
Findings, recommendations, predictions
No context
Context + storytelling
A useful framework for understanding analytics is Davenport et al.3
(see Table 1-2).
Table 1-2. Davenport’s hypothesized key questions addressed by analytics
(modified from Davenport et al., 2010). D) is valuable analytics but only
E) and F) are data-driven and then if and only if information is acted
upon (more explanation in text).
 
Past
Present
Future
Information
A) What happened?
Reporting
B) What is happening
now?
Alerts
C) What will happen?
Extrapolation
Insight
D) How and why did it
happen?
Modeling, experimental
design
E) What’s the next best
action?
Recommendation
F) What’s the best/
worst that can
happen?
Prediction, optimization,
simulation
8 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

Here we can see insight-driving activities in the bottom row. As I
noted earlier, reporting (A) and alerting (B) are simply not data-
driven: they state what happened in the past or that something
unusual or undesirable is happening now; there is no explanation of
why it is happening or why it did happen, and no recommendations
as how to resolve or reproduce the situation. Digging down to
understand causal factors through models or experiments (D) is a
precursor to data-drivenness. Only by understanding why some‐
thing happened can you formulate a plan or set of recommendations
(E). E) and F) are truly data-driven but if and only if the information
is acted upon—explained in detail below.
(C is a danger zone: it can be easy enough to extend a perceived
trend out to the future—in Excel, click “Chart" and then “Add trend‐
line”—that is, extrapolate outside the current’s data range and make
a naïve prediction. Even making a sensible choice about a functional
form for the model, there are many reasons why that prediction may
be misleading or plain wrong. To have confidence in those predic‐
tions, you should strive to have a causal model. Types of analysis is
covered in Chapter 5.)
In summary, the bottom row highlights forward-looking activities
that include elements of causal explanation. Now we are starting to
touch upon what it means to be data-driven.
Hallmarks of Data-Drivenness
There are several types of activities that truly data-driven organiza‐
tions engage in:
• A data-driven organization may be continuously testing. It
might be A/B testing checkout flow on a website or testing
email subject lines in a marketing campaign. LinkedIn, for
instance, runs 200 experiments per day, whereas Etsy runs doz‐
ens of experiments simultaneously. Tests may also include user
testing—working directly with actual customers or users to
obtain direct feedback on possible new features or products.
• A data-driven organization may have a continuous improve‐
ment mindset. It may be involved in repeated optimization of
core processes, such as shaving minutes off manufacturing
times or decreasing cost per acquisition. This comes about
Hallmarks of Data-Drivenness 
| 
9

4 Bosker, B., “Google Exec Marissa Mayer Explains Why There Aren’t More Girl Geeks.”
The Huffington Post, July 6, 2011.
through careful analysis, crafting mathematical  or statistical
models, and simulation.
• A data-driven organization may be involved in predictive mod‐
eling, forecasting sales, stock prices, or company revenue, but
importantly feeding the prediction errors and other learning
back into the models to help improve them (we cover this fur‐
ther in Chapter 10).
• A data-driven organization will almost certainly be choosing
among future options or actions using a suite of weighted vari‐
ables. Resources are always finite, and there are always pros and
cons for different reasonable courses of action. One should
gather data for each of the set of variables that are of concern or
interest and determine weights among those to generate a final
leading decision. For instance, when Warby Parker selected its
first office location outside New York, it considered a large set of
variables—Gallup’s Well-being index, talent pool, cost of living,
number and cost of flights to New York, etc.—and ranked and
weighted them as part of the final decision. Marissa Mayer
(CEO of Yahoo!) tells a similar story when choosing among
competing job offers and making her decision to work for
Google.4
A true data-driven organization will be doing at least one of these
things, something forward-looking where data is a first-class citizen.
OK, now we have an organization that has high-quality data and
skilled analysts who are engaged in these forward-looking activities.
Surely, that makes it data-driven!
Unfortunately, not necessarily. Like a tree falling in a forest with no
one to hear it, if analysts are putting out analyses but no one takes
notice, if they don’t influence decision makers’ decisions, which are
still based on gut and opinion, it is not data-driven. Analytics has to
inform and influence the influencers.
Dykes talks about this in terms of an “analytics value chain” (see
Figure 1-3). Data has to drive reports, which should lead to deeper
dives and analysis. Those analyses have to get to the decision maker
who incorporates those into her decision-making process. This step
is key to being data-driven. An organization needs that data and that
10 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

5 SAS, “Eight Levels of Analytics,” (Cary, NC: SAS Institute, Inc., 2008), 4.
analysis to drive a decision that changes strategy or tactics and
makes an ultimate impact to the organization in some manner.
Technology and training can do the first part: enable analysts to run
analyses and write up their findings. However, it is the culture that 
sets up the mindset and process to take notice of those findings,
trust them, and act upon them.
Finally, we get to the crux of what being data-driven means. A data-
driven organization will use the data as critical evidence to help
inform and influence strategy. There will be an evidence-based cul‐
ture in which data can be trusted and the analysis is highly relevant,
informative, and used to determine next steps.
Therein lies the challenge. If your organization is making gut deci‐
sions, how do you make a case for more data-driven decision mak‐
ing? It is not easy and it is not quick, so don’t expect radical changes
overnight, but everyone in an organization can contribute signifi‐
cantly to such an improvement. In this book, we will examine a
number of ways an organization’s culture should be driving to be
more data-driven.
Figure 1-3. The analytics value chain (from Dykes, 2010). In a data-
driven organization, the data feed reports, which stimulate deeper
analysis. These are fed up to the decision makers who incorporate
them into their decision-making process, influencing the direction that
the company takes and providing value and impact. Figure from
http://bit.ly/dykes-reporting.
Analytics Maturity
In 2009, Jim Davis, the senior vice president and chief marketing
officer of SAS Institute, declared that there are eight levels of analyt‐
ics:5
Analytics Maturity 
| 
11

6 Despite appearing two years earlier, Davenport and Harris’ source is cited as “adapted
from a graphic produced by SAS.”
Standard reports
What happened? When did it happen? Example: monthly finan‐
cial reports.
Ad hoc reports
How many? How often? Where? Example: custom reports.
Query drill down (or online analytical processing, OLAP)
Where exactly is the problem? How do I find the answers?
Example: data discovery about types of cell phone users and
their calling behavior.
Alerts
When should I react? What actions are needed now? Example:
CPU utilization mentioned earlier.
Statistical analysis
Why is this happening? What opportunities am I missing?
Example: why are more bank customers refinancing their
homes?
Forecasting
What if these trends continue? How much is needed? When will
it be needed? Example: retailers can predict demand for prod‐
ucts from store to store.
Predictive modeling
What will happen next? How will it affect my business? Exam‐
ple: casinos predict which VIP customers will be more interes‐
ted in particular vacation packages.
Optimization
How do we do things better? What is the best decision for a
complex problem? Example: what is best way to optimize IT
infrastructure given multiple, conflicting business and resource
constraints?
The ideas appear to form the basis of a figure in Davenport and Har‐
ris’s 2007 influential book Competing on Analytics,6 shown here
as Figure 1-4.
12 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

Figure 1-4. “Business Intelligence and Analytics” of Davenport and
Harris’ Competing on Analytics. HBR Press, previously derived from
Jim Davis’ levels of analytics.
(You can see that this is also where Davenport’s framework
and Table 1-2 is based. You can easily map the first four levels to the
upper information row and the second set of four to the lower
insight row of Table 1-2.)
I like the general concept and the labels. However, in the way that
both Davis (2009) and Davenport and Harris (2007) present their
ideas, especially with the big sweeping upward arrow, it is too easy
to interpret this as a progression or some sort of hierarchy, kind of
like a video game where you progress to each next level only after
having conquered the previous level.
This pseudo-progression is often labeled as analytics maturity. If you
do a Google image search for “analytics maturity,” you will see what I
mean; that many BI vendors and practitioners present this as set of
stepping stones with unidirectional arrows pointing from one level
to the next. Analytics is not like that: it cuts across levels within an
analysis, and different parts of the organization can be engaged in
Analytics Maturity 
| 
13

7 Shevlin, R., “The Eight Levels Of Analytics?” The Financial Brand, October 27, 2009.
8 LaValle, S., M. S. Hopkins, E. Lesser, R. Shockley, N. Kruschwitz, “Analytics: The New
Path to Value.” MIT Sloan Management Review, October 24, 2010.
analyses of differing degrees of sophistication at any one time. Ron
Shevlin7 makes some great points:
From a capabilities perspective, there’s no reason why a firm
couldn’t forecast something likes sales (“level” 6) without knowing
where exactly the “problem” with sales is (“level” 3)...How could I,
as a manager, address the question of “what actions are needed
now?” without some understanding of “what if these trends con‐
tinue?” and “what will happen next?” (“levels” 6 and 7)?
The correct way, I think, to interpret this is to think of the maximum
level that the organization is engaged in is positively correlated with
the level of commitment, investment, and utility of analytics and, as
Davenport and Harris argue, the analytical competitiveness. For
instance, if you have an operations research team of Ph.D.s dedica‐
ted to optimizing your global supply chain, you are clearly heavily
invested in data and analytics. If your organization only gets to
alerts and query drilldowns, you have a lower investment and are
less data-driven.
The underlying implication is that more sophisticated analytics are
better; they make and organization more competitive. Is that
true? In a fascinating study,8 MIT Sloan Management Review colla‐
borated with IBM Institute for Business Value to survey 3,000 man‐
agers and analysts across 30 industries about their use of and beliefs
about the value of analytics.
One survey question asked about the organization’s competitive
position where the possible responses were:
1. Substantially outperform industry peers
2. Somewhat outperforming industry peers
3. On par with industry peers
4. Somewhat or substantially underperforming industry peers
Those organizations that chose answers 1 or 4 were deemed top and
lower performers, respectively. Interestingly, compared to lower per‐
formers, top performers were:
• Five times more likely to use analytics
14 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

• Three times more likely to be sophisticated analytics users
• Two times more likely to use analytics to guide day-to-day oper‐
ations
• Two times more likely to use analytics to guide future strategies
There are certainly complicating factors in the methodology. There
may be significant survivor bias, and there will likely be correlation
of top performers with organization size (we know that revenue of
these organizations ranged from less than $500 million to more than
$10 billion). For instance, perhaps only larger, more successful
organizations have the bandwidth and resources to develop sophis‐
ticated operations research departments that can develop and run
supply chain simulation models. However, there was broad agree‐
ment that better and more sophisticated analytics drove business
value.
The authors identified three levels of analytics capability: aspira‐
tional, experienced, and transformed. These are summarized in
Table 1-3.
Table 1-3. Levels of analytics capability: aspirational, experienced, and
transformed. Modified from http://bit.ly/sloan-big-data.
 
Aspirational
Experienced
Transformed
Use analytics to...
Justify actions
Guide actions
Prescribe actions
Use rigorous
approaches to make
decisions
Rarely
Sometimes
Mostly
Ability to capture,
aggregate, and
analyze or share
information and
insights
Limited
Moderate
High
Functional proficiency
• Finance and
budgeting
• Operations and
production
• Sales and
marketing
• All aspirational
functions
• Strategy / biz-dev
• Customer service
• Product R&D
• All aspirational and
experienced functions
• Risk management
• Customer experience
• Workforce planning
• General management
• Brand and marketing
management
Analytics Maturity 
| 
15

Compared to aspirational organizations, transformed organizations
were: 
• Four times more likely to capture information very well
• Nine times more likely to aggregate information very well
• Eight times more likely to analyze information very well
• Ten times more likely to disseminate information and insights
very well
• 63% more likely to use a centralized analytics unit as the pri‐
mary source of analytics (analytics organizational structures are
covered in Chapter 4)
Again, there is a complicated tangle of cause and effect and biases
here, but there is an association between competitive advantage, rel‐
ative to industry peers, and analytics sophistication.
So, what is stopping organizations from adopting analytics widely?
Two of the top three answers were lack of understanding of how to
use analytics and lack of skills internally in the line of business (see
Figure 1-5).
Figure 1-5. Response to the question, “What are the primary obstacles
to widespread adoption and use of information and analytics in your
organization?”
Those are something that everyone, including every analyst, can
help drive. For instance, analysts can help “level up” their skill set
and can be more proactive about doing good work and communi‐
16 
| 
Chapter 1: What Do We Mean by Data-Driven?

cating its value to their managers and to the business. They can do
more research to dig up case studies of how other organizations
tackled similar business problems through analytics. Managers of
the data engineers can assign resource to data integration and qual‐
ity so that data is trusted. Senior managers can promote or demand
greater sharing of data and designate clearer ownership and stew‐
ardship of data, such as appointing a chief analytics officer or chief
data officer (covered in Chapter 11). Everyone has a role.
Overview
We’ll dive into these issues in more detail in the following chapters.
More concretely, I’ll examine the needs in terms the foundation: the
raw and aggregated data itself and its quality (Chapters 2 and 3).
Next, I’ll examine the analyst organization itself: the types of ana‐
lysts, the skills they should possess, and how they should be struc‐
tured (Chapter 4). I’ll cover aspects of data analysis (Chapter 5),
metric design (Chapter 6), and storytelling with data (Chapter 7).
Chapter 8 covers A/B testing. Crucially, we’ll cover the culture and
decision-making process that are the hallmarks of a great data-
driven organization (Chapters 9 and 10). I’ll discuss what’s needed
to manage the culture and change management, especially in larger
organizations: a data-driven C-suite. In particular, I’ll cover three
new executive positions: chief data officer, chief digital officer, and
chief analytics officer (Chapter 11). Chapter 12 covers ethics and
privacy issues of data and how an organization that respects its
users’ data may in fact limit what its analysts may do with the data.
I’ll end with some general conclusions (Chapter 13).
Overview 
| 
17


CHAPTER 2
Data Quality
80% of my time was spent cleaning the data.
Better data will always beat better models.
—Thomson Nguyen
Data is the foundation of a data-driven organization.
If you don’t have timely, relevant, and trustworthy data, decision-
makers have no alternative other than to make decisions by gut.
Data quality is key.
In this chapter, I’m using “quality” in a very
broad sense, considering it primarily from an
analyst’s perspective.
Analysts need the right data, collected in the right manner, in the
right form, in the right place, and at the right time. (They are not
asking for much.) If any of those aspects are missing or lacking, ana‐
lysts are limited in the questions that they can answer and the type
or quality of insights that they can derive from the data.
In this chapter and the next, I will cover this broad topic of data
quality. First, I’ll discuss how to ensure that the data collection pro‐
cess is right. This is quality in the sense that it is accurate, timely,
coherent, etc. Then, in the next chapter, I’ll cover how to make sure
that we are collecting the right data. This is quality in the sense of
choosing and supplying the best data sources to augment existing
19

data and so enable better insights. In short, I’ll cover collecting the
data right followed by collecting the right data.
This chapter focuses on the ways that we know that data is reliable,
and all the ways that it can be unreliable. I’ll first cover the facets of
data quality—all the attributes that clean data has. After, I will delve
into the myriad ways that data can go bad. That latter section is rela‐
tively detailed for a couple of reasons. First, because there are
numerous ways data quality can be impaired. These different ways
are not theoretical. If you’ve worked with data for a while, you will
have encountered many, if not most, of them. They are a reality and
happen more often than we would like. There is a reason that most
data scientists spend the vast majority of their time cleaning data.
Moreover, the likelihood of encountering these issues increases with
scale. A former colleague, Samer Masry, says, “When working at
scale, always remember issues that are one in a million can happen
every second!” Second, and perhaps more importantly, as I suggest,
proactively checking and maintaining data quality is a shared
responsibility. Everyone in the analytics value chain should be an
active participant in data quality. Thus, having a deeper understand‐
ing of data quality issues and sources, some of which are subtle and
can introduce profound biases into data sources, is to everyone’s
benefit.
With that, let us examine what data quality means.
Facets of Data Quality
Data quality is not something that can be reduced down to a single
number. Quality isn’t a 5 or a 32. The reason is that the term covers a
suite of facets or dimensions. Consequently, there are degrees of
quality, with some issues more serious than others. The severity of
those issues, however, can depend on the context of the analysis to
be performed with the data. Thus, if you have a customer address
table where the state code is present but the ZIP code is mostly
absent, then missing ZIP codes would be a major blocker or impedi‐
ment if you intended to analyze by ZIP but not if you intended to
analyze at the state level.
More concretely, data quality has a number of facets. The data
should be:
20 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

Accessible
An analyst has access to the data. This not only covers permis‐
sions but also the appropriate tooling that makes the data usable
and analyzable. For instance, while a SQL (Structured Query
Language: how people query databases) dump file may contain
the data that the analyst may need, it is not in a useful form. It
has to be exposed in a running database or in a business intelli‐
gence tool (on top of the database) for analysts to be able to
analyze the data.
Accurate
Values represent the true value or state of the entity. For
instance, a miscalibrated thermometer, a mistyped date of birth,
and an out-of-date customer address all represent inaccurate
data.
Coherent
Data can be combined with other relevant data in an accurate
manner. For instance, a sales order should be able to be tied to a
customer, one or more products in the order, a billing and/or
shipping address, and possibly payment information. That suite
of information provides a coherent picture of the sales order.
Coherence is driven by the set of IDs or keys that bind the data
in different parts of the database together.
Complete
There is no missing data. This can mean a single piece of data
within a single record, such as a missing first name in a cus‐
tomer record, or complete records that are missing, such as a
whole customer record that failed to get saved to a database.
Consistent
Data is in agreement. For example, an email address for a par‐
ticular customer in one data source matches the email address
for the same customer in another data source. When there are
conflicts, one source should be considered the master source or
they are both unused until the source of disagreement is under‐
stood and fixed.
Defined
Individuals data fields each have a well-defined, unambiguous
meaning. Well-named fields accompanied by a data dictionary
(discussed later) aid quality.
Facets of Data Quality 
| 
21

1 Eckerson, W., “Data Warehousing Special Report: Data Quality and the Bottom Line.”
(Chatsworth, CA: 101communications LLC, 2002), 34.
Relevant
Data has bearing on the data analysis being conducted. For
instance, the historical stock trading prices of AAPL, while
interesting, may have little bearing on an analysis of pork belly
futures.
Reliable
Data is both complete (you have all the data that you should
expect) and it is accurate (the data provides the correct informa‐
tion).
Timely
There is a short or reasonable duration between the collection
of the data and the availability or release to analysts. In practice,
this means that the data arrives in time for analysts to complete
analysis before it is due. I recently heard of a major corporation
whose data warehouse had a latency of one month. With those
delays, the data is next to useless (yet still represents a mainte‐
nance and storage cost) and can only reasonably be used for
long-term strategic planning and forecasting.
A slip in just one of these facets can render the data useless, partially
usable, or the worst of all: seemingly usable but misleading.
In the rest of this chapter, I cover some of the processes and prob‐
lems that drive down data quality, some approaches to detect and
mitigate the issues, and who is responsible for data quality.
Dirty Data
Data can go bad in lots of ways and at every step of the data collec‐
tion process. I’ll trace the data all the way through its life cycle, from
its generation to its analysis, covering the ways that bad data can be
introduced at each point.
Data is always dirtier than we imagine. According to one study,1
dirty or poor data quality costs US businesses $600 billion annually
(that’s 3.5% of GDP!).
22 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

In many situations, analysts have little control in the collection and
primary processing of data. Typically, they receive a dataset far
downstream in a long chain of steps covering data generation,
recording, transfer, processing, and blending. However, it is impor‐
tant to be aware of and appreciate the types of data quality issues
that can arise and their potential remedies.
The goal of this section is to highlight the common data quality
problems and pitfalls, to show how some of these issues can be avoi‐
ded in the first place, and to briefly cover how they can be identified
in datasets. Moreover, as will become clearer later, it is a call to
action for members of the analytics teams to be full stakeholders in
data quality wherever possible.
So, starting off at the source, what makes data dirty, and what can be
done about it?
Data Generation
Data generation is the most upstream source of issues and can arise
from errors in hardware (sensors), software (bugs), and wetware
(humans).
In hardware, sensors may be miscalibrated or uncalibrated, which
can result in inaccurate readings. For instance, a temperature sensor
might be reading high: it says 95°F when in reality it is only 93°F.
That may be easy to fix: where possible, calibrate it against some
source of truth, such as another trusted sensor or meter, during
setup.
Sensors may also be plain unreliable. I once worked on a DARPA
(Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) grant involving
swarm robotics. We had a collection of simple robots whose task
was to map the environment collaboratively. The problem was that
the infrared sensors on these robots were shockingly bad. Instead of
focusing on developing a decentralized algorithm to map a building,
I spent most of my time working on algorithmic filters to deal with
the quality of the sensors that measured distance to the nearest wall
or other robots. Values would be dropped or the distance estimates
to the nearest wall would suddenly jump around one meter or more
(>50% error) from a stationary robot—you just couldn’t trust the
information coming out of those sensors.
Dirty Data 
| 
23

2 Seely, C. E., D. Nicewander, R. Page, and P.A. Dysert, “A baseline study of medication
error rates at Baylor University Medical Center in preparation for implementation of a
computerized physician order entry system.” Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2004 Jul 17(3):
357–361.
3 Goldberg, S. I., A. Niemerko, and A. Turchin, “Analysis of Data Errors in Clinical
Research Databases.” AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2008: 242–246.
When humans are involved, there are countless way to introduce
 errors into the collection process. They may not know how to use
equipment properly, they may rush, or otherwise be sloppy. They
may misinterpret instructions. They may not follow protocols set
out: imagine nurses in two different clinics measuring patients’
weights. In one, they weigh the patients with their shoes on, in the
other with shoes off. Clear protocols and training are needed to fix
these types of issues. Just like any experiment, you need to try to
control and standardize as much of the process as possible so that
the data stands the best chance of being usable, reliable, and compa‐
rable.
Data Entry
When data is generated manually—such as the nurses measuring
patients’ weights—it has to be recorded, ultimately in some sort of
computer. Despite the promise of paperless offices, data is still far
too often recorded on paper forms as an intermediate step before it
is entered into a computer. These hardcopy stages can introduce a
lot of errors.
When handwritten forms are transcribed, mistakes will happen. (If
you see my handwriting, you will understand.) Healthcare providers
have done the most research in this area, in part because the conse‐
quences of inaccurate information can be so serious in terms of
patients’ health but also because the cost, such as giving a patient an
unnecessary test, is so high. In one study, 46% of medication errors
(which had a base rate of 11% of all orders) were attributed to tran‐
scription mistakes.2 Disturbingly, some fields in clinical research
databases were found to have error rates of 27%.3 Such errors can
arise from people misreading or misinterpreting writing, not hear‐
ing or not understanding bad audio quality or unusual words when
transcribing aurally, or miskeying the information into a computer.
24 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

For instance, I used to work in a healthcare modeling company. A
key government dataset we frequently used was called NHANES
(National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey). This is essen‐
tially a US census for health. Mobile clinics tour the country and
sample people: they take blood pressure readings, measure weight,
ask about family history of diabetes and cancer, and so on. When we
looked at the distribution of heights of people in one of their data‐
sets we found a whole bunch of adults listed at five inches tall! These
are trained staff that survey people day in and day out. Because
measuring height is a relatively simple procedure, the most likely
explanation is a data entry problem. Maybe they were five feet tall,
but it’s just as possible that they were five feet, five inches, or six feet
five, but because we couldn’t tell for sure, we had to set those values
as unknown.
Fortunately, five-inch-tall people is such an obvious error that we
could detect it with a simple histogram and be confident that there
was a problem. That, however, is not always the case. There are
degrees of detectability. Imagine transcribing a paragraph and
instead of copying “allergies: cats and dogs,” the data entry clerk
transposed two characters and typed “allergies: ctas and dogs.” Ctas
is just nonsense. It is not a dictionary word. This is easy to catch and
you can use the context to work out what it should be. A more sub‐
tle error is cases where transposition of characters can lead to other
valid words: think “form” transposed to “from.” That is harder to
detect. In this case, the context will hopefully allow you to work out
what it should be, but it is not guaranteed. Finally, now imagine a
value of 56.789 has two digits transposed to 56.798. That is going to
be very difficult, if not impossible, to detect.
More generally, data entry issues manifest themselves as four types
of issues:
Transcription
Words or values entered are not those that were in original data.
Insertion
Additional characters were introduced. 56.789 → 564.789.
Deletion
One or more characters were omitted. 56.789 → 56.89.
Transposition
Two or more characters were swapped. 56.789 → 56.798.
Dirty Data 
| 
25

Special subcategories of insertion and deletion
are dittography, where a string or value is copied
twice (56.789 → 56.7789) and haplography,
where a double string or value is only copied
once (56.779 → 56.79). The terms come from
text criticism, where scholars reconstruct dam‐
aged and hand-copied ancient texts, a special
kind of bad-data problem.
Dates are especially subject to transposition errors involving days
and months. I am British and my native format for dates is day/
month/year. However, I live in the US, where the format is typically
month/day/year. This was certainly confusing to me for the first few
years that I lived here, and it can be confusing for others, too. Imag‐
ine a website with users across the globe enter a free-form text field
for a date. Users may have different expectations of date format, and
without sufficient messaging or validation, data can be incorrectly
entered. Some dates might easily be caught: 25 March (3/25 in the
US) cannot be month=25/day=3. What about something like 4/5
though? Can you be sure that all users mean that to be April 5?
So, what can be done about these types of errors?
Data entry error mitigation
The first thing to do, if possible, is reduce the number of steps from
data generation to input. To state the obvious, if you can avoid an
intermediate paper form, you should do so and enter data directly
into the computer.
Where possible, add field validation to your electronic forms
(Figure 2-1). That is, if the data is well-structured and has an
expected format—a US ZIP code must be five or nine digits digits or
a Social Security number must be nine digits—check that the data
meets that format, and if it doesn’t, reject the data and guide the user
to correcting any mistakes. Validation is not limited to single values.
For instance, you should check that a return flight time is after the
outbound flight. In short, validate as much as possible and pre‐
vent “garbage in, garbage out” at source.
26 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

Figure 2-1. Example of field validation in an online registration form,
from http://www.jqwidgets.com/.
Where there is a set of valid values, such as state abbreviations, you
can use a dropdown menu for the user to choose from. Autocom‐
plete is another alternative. In general, you want users to type as lit‐
tle input as possible: get them to choose from a set of options that
you provide—unless, of course, it is an open-ended question with a
free-form text field.
Ideally, try to remove the human element as much as possible from
the data collection process and have as much as possible collected
and stored automatically.
If you have the time and resources, you can have two people inde‐
pendently transcribe the data, or the same person transcribe the data
twice, and then compare results and then recheck where the data
doesn’t match. This is known as double entry. I once had an intern
transcribe measurements from a set of technical drawings and then
he, on his own volition, redid the task and checked for differences.
As the consumer of the data, that gave me a lot of confidence that
the data was as accurate as we could reasonably expect.
An interesting approach used when transmitting important num‐
bers such as bank account numbers, Social Security numbers, and
even the ISBN number of this book is to use a check digit. This is an
extra digit tacked onto the end of a number that is some function of
Dirty Data 
| 
27

the other digits and is used to check that the rest of the number was
transmitted correctly from one system to another. Let’s imagine that
you need to transmit a ZIP code: 94121. Let’s detail a very simple
scheme. You sum the digits to get 17. Now you sum those digits to
get 8. You transmit 941218. The receiving system at the other end
would do the same operation: chop off the last digit, 94121 → 17 →
8. This matches that check digit of 8 and so 94121 is correct. If there
was a transcription error and you transmitted 841218 instead, you
could detect 84121 → 16 → 7 ≠ 8. 
This scheme isn’t very robust: 93221 (double transcription error) or
94211 (transposition error) would provide the same check digit
value. Real check digit functions are more mathematically complex
and robust than this and they are designed to deal with a number of
transcription and transposition errors. Routing numbers of US
banks (the nine-digit number in the bottom left of your checks) are
one such example and have a trailing check digit. Those routing
numbers must satisfy
3 × d1 + d4 + d7 + 7 × d2 + d5 + d8 + d3 + d6 + d9 mod 10
= 0
(mod means the remainder if we take out multiples of 10, so
32 mod 10 = 2 as 32 = 3 × 10 + 2) and can be checked with simple
Python code, such as:
routing_number = "122187238"
d = [int(c) for c in routing_number]
checksum = ( # do the math!
             7 * (d[0] + d[3] + d[6]) +
             3 * (d[1] + d[4] + d[7]) +
             9 * (d[2] + d[5])
           ) % 10
print(d[8] == checksum)
As can be seen, there are a number of things that you can do to try
to maintain high-quality code at the data entry stage, but they are
not infallible. So, you have some data in the system and it flows
down to an analyst. Now what?
Exploratory data analysis
When analysts receive some data, they should generally do some
exploratory data analysis (Chapter 5) to assess data quality. One
28 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

simple way to check for glaring errors, such as the five-inch-tall peo‐
ple, is to summarize the data. For each variable, one can compute a
five-number summary: minimum, the lower quartile (25th percen‐
tile), the mean and/or median, the upper quartile (75th percentile),
and the maximum. Take a look at the minimum and maximum. Do
they make sense? Are they higher or lower than you would expect?
Five inches is clearly way too low.
Here is an example of R’s summary() function on the Iris dataset—R
is a free open source software environment for statistical computing
and graphics popular with statisticians and data scientists. Iris, a
type of flower, is the source of a well-known dataset collected by 
Edgar Anderson but made famous by the statistician R. A. Fisher,
consisting of measurements of 50 samples of three iris species:
> summary(iris) 
 Sepal.Length   Sepal.Width  Petal.Length   Petal.Width     Species 
  Min. :4.300   Min. :2.000   Min. :1.000   Min. :0.100    setosa :50 
1st Qu.:5.100 1st Qu.:2.800 1st Qu.:1.600 1st Qu.:0.300 versicolor:50 
Median :5.800 Median :3.000 Median :4.350 Median :1.300 virginica :5
  Mean :5.843   Mean :3.057   Mean :3.758   Mean :1.199
3rd Qu.:6.400 3rd Qu.:3.300 3rd Qu.:5.100 3rd Qu.:1.800 
  Max. :7.900   Max. :4.400   Max. :6.900   Max. :2.500 
You can easily scan the rows and columns to get a sense of the data
(1st Qu. = 1st quartile or 25th percentile; 3rd = 75th percentile). You
can also obtain the same information (plus outliers) visually by gen‐
erating boxplots (Figure 2-2).
Figure 2-2. Boxplots of the iris dataset by calling R’s boxplot() function.
Figure 2-3 illustrates some of the issues that you might be able to
detect with a simple histogram of your data. In the NHANES data‐
set, I also looked at the blood pressure measurements. Running sum
mary(), I saw maximum blood pressure values that seemed
Dirty Data 
| 
29

4 Guesstimation is an underrated analyst skill. I would recommend Chapter 7 of P.K.
Janert’s (2011) Data Analysis with Open Source Tools (O’Reilly).
extremely high, far higher than seems normal. I thought that those
were erroneous, too. However, when viewed as a distribution, they
were at the tail of the distribution but at a reasonable frequency.
Checking the medical literature, I was able to confirm that blood
pressures could be as high as those observed. However, these were
people who likely had an untreated medical condition. Remember
that this was a general sample of the US population and not patients
from a medical facility where presumably they would be treated—
context is everything.
Figure 2-3. Example of the sorts of errors and features that can be
detected with a simple histogram: A) default values, such as –1, 0, or
1/1/1900; B) incorrectly entered or duplicate data; C) missing data;
and D) default values, such as 999.
Developing expectations of the data and the related ability to esti‐
mate4 are two skills that analysts should develop. I was wrong about
the blood pressure values because I was used to thinking about nor‐
mal healthy individuals. However, I found out more, increased my
domain knowledge, adjusted my expectations of the range of values
that I should expect to see, and was comforted that the data was
likely correct.
It goes to show that initially you can’t necessarily trust any data
source. I always assume that there is something wrong with the data,
and it is my job to find out where the problems lie. I don’t get obses‐
sive, but I will do some work (such as R’s summary(), pairs(), and
boxplot()) to assure myself that there are not any obvious issues. In
the case of the NHANES data, my colleagues and I plotted histo‐
30 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

grams of all the variables to look for odd patterns, bimodal distribu‐
tions, and other outliers. Counting number of records by date is
another simple test. Exploratory data analysis such as this can be
simple, quick, and highly valuable.
Missing Data
One of the most significant issues with data is incomplete or missing
data (Figure 2-3C). That can manifest itself in two ways: missing
data within a record, or wholly missing records.
Filling in the Blanks: Imputation
There are statistical approaches than can be used to “impute” or fill
in the missing data with the most likely values (I happen to like R’s
Amelia package and Google’s imputation service for its spread‐
sheets). Their success depends upon a number of factors, including
sample sizes, the number and pattern of missing data, the types of
variables (whether they are categorical, continuous, discrete, etc.),
and the noisiness of the data. One of the simplest approaches is to
fill in the missing values with the mean of that variable. More
sophisticated approaches, however, often use iteration of a techni‐
que called expectation-maximization with maximum-likelihood.
See Missing Data by P.D Allison (Sage) and Statistical Analysis with
Missing Data, Second Edition by R.J. A. Little and D.B. Rubin
(Wiley). It is a powerful technique but, depending upon the charac‐
teristics of the data, is going to produce at least some incorrect pre‐
dictions.
Why then, might you use such an approach? Why risk it? In many
cases, especially in medical and social sciences, data is very expen‐
sive to collect, and you might only have one chance to collect it.
Imagine collecting blood pressure from a patient on the third day of
a clinical trial; you can’t go back and repeat that. A core problem, a
catch-22 situation in fact, is that the smaller the sample size, the
more precious each record is. However, the less data an imputation
algorithm has to work with, the worse its predictions will be.
A single missing value within a record can render the whole record
useless. This would typically be true if it represented the primary
key—i.e., the value that uniquely identified the subject of the record
—such as a customer ID or order ID (and which would be needed to
Dirty Data 
| 
31

join to other data). It would also be true of other fields if those were
the focus of the analysis. For instance, if you intended to analyze
sales by ZIP code, and ZIP code was missing from a particular
record, then clearly you could not use that record. If you are lucky,
you may not need the field with the missing value and so you do not
suffer reduced sample size.
As mentioned earlier, data can be missing for a variety of reasons. In
surveys, for instance, people may not understand or skip a question,
their handwriting might be illegible to the transcribers, or they
might give up on the survey halfway through. In hardware, a server
might die or a sensor might fail. Because biases can kill the quality of
your data, what is really important to figure out is how the data is
missing.
Imagine that a web server disk dies, taking with it the locally stored
data you need. This would be an example of wholly missing records.
If you have a load balancer that distributes the load randomly to
each of 20 web servers, one of which failed, it is inconvenient for
sure—you’ve lost 5% of your data—but so long as the missing data is
a random sample of all data, all is not lost. However, if there is some
pattern or bias, you can be in trouble. If that web server typically
serves a particular geographic region, you may be missing a dispro‐
portionate amount of data from a given set of ZIP codes, and that
could significantly impact the analysis.
A more biased scenario is the following: imagine that you send out a
customer survey and give recipients two weeks to respond. Any
responses that arrive after the cutoff are excluded from the analysis.
Now imagine a set of customers who are suffering from shipping
issues and receive their orders late. They might be more likely to be
both unhappy and to send off their responses later. As such, you
might exclude a higher proportion of unhappy customers. You have
a biased sample. In his statistics teaching material, Daniel Mintz
provides an especially clear example of bias: “Question. Do you like
to answer surveys: yes or no?” Who will and will not complete that?
The type of missingness is critical. (I blame statisticians for the fol‐
lowing terminology, which I think is terrible.) You need to investi‐
gate whether the data is:
MCAR
Missing completely at random, such as the randomly allocated
web server traffic.
32 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

MAR
Missing at random, meaning that the data is missing as a func‐
tion of the observed or nonmissing data, such as the geo-serving
web server that resulted in a lower sample size for a subset of
ZIP codes.
MNAR
Missing not at random, where data is missing as a function of
the missing data, such as the unhappy customers and their sur‐
vey responses. This is the most pernicious case where there is a
significant bias.
The lower down this list, the more trouble you are in and the fewer
options you have to resolve the situation.
They key is that you recognize and understand any biases that you
are facing. Sometimes you can at least say directionally the impact in
the metrics or place some bounds. Counterintuitively, there are even
some unusual situations where biased missing data can have no
impact on your metric.
When I used to teach statistics, I would use the following example to
teach the properties of the median: there is an unusual sport of
pigeon racing where “pigeon fanciers” drive their pigeons, say, a
hundred miles from home, release them, then frantically drive back
home and wait for the birds to arrive. It’s a race, and as each bird
arrived, they note the time—pigeon number six arrived after 2 hours
and 3 minutes, pigeon number 11 arrived at 2 hours and 13 minutes,
etc. Inevitably, some pigeons don’t make it. They might get blown
off course or fall prey to a raptor. We can’t know the average flying
time of all the birds because some birds have missing data. However,
so long as fewer than half the birds are missing, we can compute the
median flying duration. We know the original sample size, we know
the durations of more than half the sample, and significantly we
know that all missing data is slower than the last bird to arrive, so
we can compute the true median value: it is robust to this set of
missingness criteria. Thus, sometimes the right metric choice can
salvage a situation. (The choice of metrics is covered further in
Chapter 6.)
Duplicates
Duplicate data is another common problem. Duplicates can mean
the same exact record appearing multiple times. This can happen for
Dirty Data 
| 
33

different reasons; for instance, suppose that you have 10 datafiles
and you accidentally load the 6th file twice, or you are loading a file,
and halfway through, you encounter a corrupted record that breaks
the load. If you edit the file to fix or delete that record and reload the
file, then the first half of the file is duplicated in your database.
Duplicates can arise from multiple sign-ups. For instance, a cus‐
tomer might sign up for an account multiple times with the same or
different email, resulting in different customer IDs but with the
same other personal information. (While it sounds simple, entity
disambiguation such as this can be very tricky.) Duplicates could
also arise from overlapping sensors in which two sensors record the
same event. In that medication error study mentioned earlier, 35%
of errors were due to data not being transferred correctly from one
system to another; sometimes the data didn’t make it, and some‐
times the orders were duplicated. According to Johns Hopkins Hos‐
pital, 92% of the duplicates in its data occur during inpatient
registration.
In terms of databases, there are several ways to prevent this type of
duplication. The safest is to add a constraint to your database table.
Let it be the gatekeeper. A combination key defines the set of one or
more fields that makes a record unique. By adding this key con‐
straint to your database table, it will complain about and reject any
records where that same combination of data already exists in the
table. In addition, you can wrap the load in a transaction, which
provides all-or-nothing load behavior. That is, the database notes
the current status (think of it taking a snapshot), starts to load a new
set of data, and if there are any problems, it rolls back to the begin‐
ning, to that snapshot point, with no new data saved. This gives you
a chance to work out why the file is corrupted and means that you
don’t have to clean up any mess in the database. A third, less effi‐
cient, approach is to run two queries per record: first a SELECT query
that asks if this record is already present. If not, then an INSERT
query adds the new record.
Duplicates like these are more common than you think. If you are
not aware that there are duplicates, this may influence your metrics,
but probably more serious is that at some point one of the analysts
will notice. Once the quality of the data is brought into question, the
data team has lost credibility, and there is a reduced chance that the
data will be used or trusted and be incorporated in a decision-
making process.
34 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

Truncated Data
When data is loaded into a database, it can get truncated (anderson
→ anders or 5456757865 → 54567578). In the best case, you may
lose a few characters of a free-form response field; and in the worst
case, two different IDs may be truncated so that they look like the
same shorter, incorrect ID value; i.e., you inadvertently combine
data from different orders or customers.
Why can this happen? In typical relational databases when creating
a table, you have to specify each field’s name and type: for example,
there will be a column called last_name, and it will be a string with
at most 32 characters; or there will be a customer_id column, and it
will be an integer ranging from 0 to 65535. The problem is that you
don’t always know in advance the maximum string or integer length
of the values that you will encounter. You might obtain a data sam‐
ple, estimate the field lengths, and add a buffer such as doubling
those estimates, but you don’t really know for sure until you process
the data in production. Moreover, databases typically default to
truncation errors as warnings; they output a message, but they keep
chugging away consuming the data. As such, these problems can be
easy to miss. One way to fix this is to set your database to strict
mode so that warnings become full-blown errors that you can more
easily catch.
Units
Another source of data quality is inconsistent units, especially in
international teams and datasets. CNN reports:
NASA lost a $125 million Mars orbiter because a Lockheed Martin
engineering team used English units of measurement [pounds-
seconds] while the agency’s team used the more conventional met‐
ric system [Newton-seconds] for a key spacecraft operation.
Yeah, it’s really that important. The only way to avoid this is to have
very clear, explicit communication. Have a requirements document
that sets out unambiguously how items are measured and recorded
and their units. The resulting dataset should also be accompanied by
a detailed data dictionary.
Currencies are another area where units are critical. Imagine an
international e-commerce website where an order of value 23.12 was
placed. In the US, we would expect that to be $23.12; but in France,
we would expect that to be 23.12€. If orders from different countries
Dirty Data 
| 
35

are combined without a currency metadata field into one data‐
set, the resulting analysis will be biased toward the weaker currency
(because they have larger numerical values for the same item) and
will be useless.
Datasets have to provide as much metadata and context as necessary
to avoid ambiguities such as these.
You can also just adopt and stick to the metric system (wake up,
America!).
Default Values
Another issue with data, sometimes something that can be hard to
track down and disambiguate, is default values (Figure 2-3A and D).
Missing data might appear as a NULL in a database, but it could also
appear as some default value that you specify. For instance, Jan 1,
1900 is a common date default. There are a couple of issues. First, if
you forget that there is such a default, you may be left puzzling
about the results. Suppose that you made a date of birth field have a
default of 1/1/1900. Analysts may wonder why so many people in
your database appear to be more than 100 years old. Second, and
more serious, if you make a bad choice, you may not be able to dis‐
tinguish missing data from actual data. For instance, if a default
value is set as 0, but nonmissing data for that field may also take a
value 0, then you can’t determine which really had a measured value
of 0 and which were unknown. Choose default values wisely.
Data Provenance
When data quality issues are found, it is crucial to trace them back
to their origin. That way, the whole subset of data can be removed
from analysis or better processes or protocols can be devised and
put in place to remedy the problem. Metadata that stores the origin
and change history of data is known as lineage, pedigree, or as I use
here, data provenance.
There are two primary classes of provenance: source provenance,
which tracks where data comes from, and transformation prove‐
nance, which tracks changes made to data. 
In my team, for instance, we collect datafiles daily from a variety of
vendors and load them into our database for reporting and analysis.
Typically, those raw data receiving tables, which are called landing
36 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

or staging tables, have two extra fields: loadtime (the time at which
we start the load for that file or batch) and filename. That way, if we
discover quality issues, it makes it very easy to identify which file the
data came from, for us to inspect the exact line in the raw datafile,
and for us to ask the vendor to investigate. This is an example of
source provenance.
In transactional databases (databases used to support live applica‐
tions and uses such as processing orders as opposed to reporting),
it’s fairly common to see a pair of fields in a table: created_at and
last_modified. As the names suggest, these fields specify when the
record was first created (you write that metadata once on creation
and never update) and when the most recent change was made
(update with current time any time any part of the record is
changed). Sometimes you may also encounter an additional field,
such as modified_by, which lists the user who made the most recent
change. This can be helpful to identify whether a change to, say, an
order or email preference was made by users themselves or by a cus‐
tomer service representative working on their behalf. Here, cre
ated_at is an element of source provenance while last_modified
and modified_by are elements of transformation provenance. The
most fine-grained provenance is a separate logging table or logging
statements that lists precisely what was changed, by whom, and
when.
Provenance metadata should be an element of a proactive strategy of
checking, maintaining, and improving data quality. 
There is a good chance that data provenance is going to grow in
importance. It is increasingly easy to instrument systems to collect
and store more of one’s own data and to purchase relevant supple‐
mental data from third parties (such as demographics from ZIP
code or shopping history from email). These organizations should
be creating richer contexts around their customers and both their
explicit and implicit event and transaction data. That requires creat‐
ing objects from multiple sources of data, modifying existing data,
such as imputing missing values, or annotating data with other
attributes, such as inferred gender, intent, and so on. All of these
should be traceable back to the original data value, its source, and
any reason or metadata for any modification or transformation.   
Data Provenance 
| 
37

Data Quality Is a Shared Responsibility
The ways in which data can be inaccurate or of poor quality are end‐
less. In addition to those mentioned previously, there are line-
ending issues, encoding issues where unicode values are squished
into ASCII (this happens all the time), corrupted data, truncated
files, late data, and names and addresses that don’t match up (sum‐
marized in Table 2-1). Data quality shouldn’t be left just to the data
engineers; it should be an enterprise-wide responsibility.
Table 2-1. Summary of just some of the types of data quality issues and
potential remedies. For a more detailed list, see Singh and Singh, “A
descriptive classification of causes of data quality problems in data
warehousing,” IJCSI Intl. J. Comp. Sci 7, no. 3 (2010): 41–50.
Facet
Issue
Solutions
Accuracy
Data entry: character insertion
Web: drop-down
menu, autocomplete. Analog: double entry. 
Accuracy
Data entry: character deletion
Web: drop-down
menu, autocomplete. Analog: double entry.
Accuracy
Data entry: character mutation
Web: drop-down
menu, autocomplete. Analog: double entry.
Accuracy
Data entry: transposition
Web: drop-down
menu, autocomplete. Analog: double entry.
Accuracy
Data entry: out-of-range values
Web: form validation. Database: field
constraints.
Accuracy
Data entry: ambiguous date
formats
Web: datepicker or explicit form. Database:
create data dictionary, standardize (e.g., to
YYYY-MM-DD).
Accuracy
Duplicates records
Database: combination key constraints,
dedupe data.
Accuracy
Data corruption
Check digits or check sums.
Accuracy
Differing encoding (e.g., one table
is UTF-8 while another is ASCII) or
encoding conversion loss (e.g.,
José stored as ASCII might end up
as Jos?)
Database: try to standardize on a single,
broad character set, such as Latin1 or
UTF-16.
Accuracy /
coherence
Value truncation
Database: larger field type; elevate database
warnings to errors.
38 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

Facet
Issue
Solutions
Coherence
Combined fields (e.g., “Doe, Joe”
makes it very hard to join to other
tables where same person might be
“Joe Doe”)
Application or database: use separate fields.
Coherence
Differing primary keys for same
entity in different system making it
hard to associate data correctly
Application or database: unified ID system.
Consistence
Conflicting data (e.g., differing
address for same person in different
systems)
Database: central user system or rule-based
resolution to decide which is more reliable.
Confusion
Confusing or ambiguous time zones
Web: datepicker. Database: create data
dictionary, standardize (e.g., to UTC).
Confusion
Field abuse: stuff a field with other
data (e.g., use an unused mid
dle_name field to store order
status)
Application or Database: best practices, strict
clearly documented schema.
Confusion
Confusing codes (e.g.,
HiLowRangeTZ3)
Database: create data dictionary.
Confusion
Ambiguous missing data: does
value of 0 mean missing or actual
value of 0?
Application or database: choose sensible
default values outside value range.
Completeness
Partial loading errors
Database: alerts, transactions, (e.g., rollback
to prior snapshot on error)
Completeness
Data missing completely at random
(MCAR)
Analysis: oversample, use category weights.
Completeness
Data missing at random (MAR):
data is missing as function of the
observed or nonmissing values.
Analysis: restrict analysis to where data can
be used safely.
Completeness
Data missing not at random
(MNAR): data is missing as function
of the missing data
Analysis: redesign or restart collection
process. 
Completeness
Incorrect number of delimiters in
flat causing fewer or extra columns
Quote fields, source quality checks.
Timeliness
Stale data from slow updates (e.g.,
backlog of change of address
forms)
Better, faster automation.
Provenance
Unclear when or why a data field
was changed
Application or database: better logging, add
provenance database fields.
A frontend developer can add ZIP code validation into a website
form, a data engineer can add in a check digit during transmission
Data Quality Is a Shared Responsibility 
| 
39

to another data repository, and a database administrator can check
for and prevent duplicates or monitor for loading errors. However,
you can’t expect them to know what are out-of-range systolic blood
pressure values. When input data forms are part of your organiza‐
tion’s operations, business owners (meaning managers in the busi‐
ness units), domain experts, and analysts should be working with
the frontend developers to provide range check bounds. They
should also be part of the requirements and project management
process to make sure that data quality elements are incorporated
into the data flow process where appropriate. As mentioned earlier,
the analytics organization should be a stakeholder in the data collec‐
tion machinery.
Downstream, business owners and domain experts should proac‐
tively check data quality. Analysts should be doing exploratory data
analysis or developing their own repeatable processes to check that
data is within ranges, that certain expected relationships hold true
(such as the ratio of systolic to diastolic blood pressures), to ascer‐
tain the level of missingness, and so on. At the farmer’s market, a
chef will pick up produce, squeeze the avocados, sniff the basil.
Those, after all, are literally his raw ingredients. Likewise, analysts
should have the same attitude to data. It is their raw ingredients and
must pass their sniff test, too. 
Business owners are likely responsible for the decision to purchase
datasets from a third-party vendor or for designing the experiments
to sample people in customer surveys or in online A/B tests. They,
too, should be thinking about and seeking out biases in the data.
They should be running or delegating exploratory data analysis,
plotting distributions, and finding those five-inch-tall people. 
40 
| 
Chapter 2: Data Quality

CHAPTER 3
Data Collection
Errors using inadequate data are much
less than those using no data at all.
—Charles Babbage
It’s difficult to imagine the power that you’re going to have
when so many different sorts of data are available.
—Tim Berners-Lee
In the previous chapter, I covered data quality and collecting data
right. In this chapter, we switch focus to choosing the right data
sources to consume and provision to the analysts. That is, collecting
the right data. I’ll cover such topics as prioritizing which data sour‐
ces to consume, how to collect the data, and how to assess the value
that the data provides to the organization.
Collect All the Things
Imagine that you are rolling out a new checkout process on your
website. You will want to know exactly how it is performing against
your metrics—you will want to track conversion, basket size, and so
on—but it will also be instructive and insightful to understand how
it is being used. For instance, on some sites, “add to cart” is a painless
single click, so a pattern of customer behavior might be to add a
bunch of items to the cart as a holding area and then prune that
down to their final choices before clicking the checkout submit but‐
ton. On other sites, however, “add to cart” might involve multiple
clicks, and removing items might be harder or ambiguous—in short,
41

1 Anderson, C. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More. New
York: Hachette Books, 2005.
there is more friction—so that customers essentially need to make
their final decision before adding items to the cart. You can see why
instrumenting the checkout process as much as possible can lead to
deeper insights about the feature and can drive ideas for feature
additions or refinements and further tests.
In his book, Building Data Science Teams (O’Reilly), DJ Patil 
remarks:
It’s easy to pretend that you’re data driven. But if you get into the
mindset to collect and measure everything you can, and think
about what the data you’ve collected means, you’ll be ahead of most
of the organizations that claim to be data driven.
Collect and measure everything that you can. You never know what
you might need, you often only have one chance to collect the data,
and you’ll kick yourself later when you need it and it is no longer
accessible. The more data that you collect, the greater the chance
that you have to model and understand the users’ behavior (as in the
checkout example) and, importantly, their context—context is king.
That is, the more that an organization understands about the indi‐
vidual users, their tastes, intentions, and desires, the more it can
improve the user experience through personalization, recommenda‐
tion, or more fine-grained services that reach down the “long tail.”1
When developing online products, collecting everything is a no-
brainer. It is a data source that you control, and a click on one fea‐
ture can use the same or similar collection mechanism as a click on
another feature. That is, you can make use of common patterns, data
flows, and storage mechanisms. A strongly data-driven organiza‐
tion, however, will likely be thinking much broader than this: data-
driven marketing, data-driven sales, data-driven customer service,
data-driven supply chain, data-driven HR. If each of those has a
suite of internal and external data sources with different formats,
latency, data quality issues, security and compliance requirements,
etc., then this starts to become daunting for the data team. That’s
when “collect everything” sounds great in practice but is a major
headache when the rubber meets the road. 
42 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

2 Fortuny, E. J. de, D. Martens, and F. Provost, Predictive Modeling with Big Data: Is Big‐
ger Really Better?” Big Data 1, no. 4 (2013): 215–226.
3 First coined by Laney, D., “3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity,
and Variety,” Application Delivery Strategies by META Group Inc., February 6, 2001.
Moreover, it is not free. While more data is better2 (see Appendix A
for some examples and reasoning why), it can come at a hefty price.
It costs money to build pipelines to suck down, cleanse, transform,
and store those data. There is a cost to maintain those systems, to
back up the data, and to integrate those data sources to provide a
holistic view of the business. There can also be a significant down‐
stream cost to provide quality tools for analysts to make good use of
disparate data sources. You need all of that to get the right data into
the hands of the analysts.
The Three Vs of Big Data
Big data practitioners and vendors tend to think about data collec‐
tion and processing at scale in terms of three Vs: volume, variety,
and velocity.3
Volume
Refers to the amount of data. This incurs direct costs in terms
of storage and data transfer. Although it is true that storage
costs are decreasing exponentially—they are now about $0.03
per GB compared to about $10 per GB in the year 2000—the
number of sources of data available, and the rate at which those
sources can be sampled, have increased so significantly that
they counter those storage cost decreases.
Variety
Another important dimension of data. On the one hand, a var‐
ied set of sources provide a richer context and more holistic
view. Thus, pulling down weather information, inflation data,
as well as chatter on social media, may provide fruitful insights
into sales of your products. However, the more varied your
data sources and data types (CSV from one source, JSON
objects from another source, hourly weather here but rapid
stock ticks here), the greater will be your integration costs. It is
hard to bring these data together to paint a coherent picture.
Collect All the Things 
| 
43

Velocity
How much data you need to process per unit time. Imagine
sampling Twitter data during a presidential debate to provide
current sentiment. You have to not only process a huge amount
of information, but do so at a rapid clip to be able to provide
some real-time sense of how the nation is feeling about the
remarks during the debate. Large-scale, real-time processing is
complex and costly.
(Occasionally, you will see some vendors slip in another V, veracity,
that reflects data quality.)
Even organizations that collect a huge amount—Facebook, Google,
and yes, the NSA, too—didn’t make it happen overnight. You build
the data sources, connections among them, and processing capabili‐
ties over time. You have to have a rational, well-thought-out data
acquisition or provisioning strategy. Further, data teams in most
organizations are resource-constrained; they can’t do everything at
once, and so they have to prioritize which data sources to tackle very
carefully. The reality is that when collecting data, things happen
sequentially and slowly—there are always unforeseen delays and
problems, and so you have to focus on value, return on investment,
and the impact that a new data source will make upon the organiza‐
tion. That’s a primary focus of this chapter.
Prioritizing Data Sources
How does a typical, smaller, resource-constrained organization,
where data engineers have competing calls on their time, choose
which data source to consume next? In prioritizing those data
sources for consumption and provisioning, a data-driven organiza‐
tion should focus on a fourth and more important V: value to the
business.
The primary motivation of the data team should be to meet the
business units’ and their analysts’ needs and help provide an impact
to the organization. Each team or unit is likely to have a set of “core”
data. For a customer service team, that might mean the various
forms of interaction data, such as emails, phone calls, social media,
perhaps instant message data, case data, and the sales order data.
With that, they can perform their primary function—to deliver
amazing customer service—but they can combine these sources to
44 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

produce a holistic view of the set of interactions per case; they can
view the high-level metrics about team productivity, such as average
time to resolve a case; and they can analyze the type of interactions
per source. Teams have to have their core data. However, in addi‐
tion, they might have another set of data that would augment their
core data. For instance, this might be defect rate data from manufac‐
turing or A/B test data that might highlight where customers are
getting confused by a new feature. Those might help the team pre‐
dict the rate and topics of cases that are expected to come in. Those
other data sources are likely valuable and impactful but not crucial.
The problem in a resource-constrained organization is that the cus‐
tomer service team is only one of many teams. Other teams have
their set of core and nice-to-have data needs, too. Imagine a data
engineer or data team project manager trying to balance all these
requests from different teams. Table 3-1 sets out a number of
dimensions that may help them determine priority. The key facet is
return on investment (ROI), but ease, complexity, data quality, and
other issues are a consideration.
Table 3-1. Points to consider when prioritizing which new data sources to
bring into the organization in a resource-constrained data engineering
team
Priority
Reason
Explanation
High
Data is truly and
urgently needed.
If there is a genuine need from the business unit and a hard
deadline, you need to serve those internal customers ASAP.
High
Data will deliver
high value.
If there is a high return on investment (ROI), for instance, they can
help generate significantly higher revenue or reduce costs, this
source should be a high priority.
High
Multiple teams
need the same
data.
There is a higher ROI if you can satisfy multiple business owners
simultaneously.
High
Data is ephemeral
or streaming.
Some streaming social media APIs or hardware devices only allow
you to query a certain short time window after which the data is
lost forever. It is a case of use it or lose it.
Medium
Augment existing
data in value-
driving way.
New data will augment existing data and provide a significantly
richer context. (This is discussed in detail in the next section.)
Medium
Data engineers can
reuse existing data
processing code.
If the team has some familiarity with the data source or its API
and can make use of existing code, there are likely to be fewer
unknowns or surprises.
Prioritizing Data Sources 
| 
45

Priority
Reason
Explanation
Medium
Easy to pull down.
Sometimes a request might jump the queue because there exists a
nice Python client or API that makes it very easy to pull data down
or the data has a clean and simple schema. If this is a data source
you can knock out in an afternoon or a day or two, and it will
provide some demonstrable value, it might be worth just getting
it done quickly.
Medium
Good API that
allows you to bring
down historical
data.
If you don’t urgently need the data right now, and you know that
you can always go back and retrieve historical data, then there are
probably other higher-priority data sources to go after. For
instance, if you wanted to pull down raw Google Analytics data for
archiving purposes, you can always get it when you really need it.
Low
Analysts have some
data access and a
workaround.
If the analyst has some access to the data source, even if not ideal,
such as through a vendor dashboard, but there is a workaround
(such as exporting data to CSV that meets their immediate needs),
then this is low priority. There are likely other data sources that
organization does not currently have access to that might deliver
more immediate value.
Low
Low-quality data.
If there is little confidence in the quality of the data, then it may,
at best, provide little value and, at worst, be counterproductive.
Low
Data has to be
screen-scraped.
Screen-scraping is where one extracts data from web pages.
Because website owners frequently change the underlying HTML
and CSS of pages, and they are not always well structured, such
data processes tend to be complex, very brittle, and require a lot of
maintenance.
Low
Low likelihood of
the data being
used.
If it is only a “nice to have” and is without a clear use case, this is a
low ROI choice.
As you can see, there are a lot of competing considerations that
determine what new data source it makes sense to bring into the
organization next. There is a delicate balance of the cost and com‐
plexity to deliver that new data versus the value that data provides to
the analysts and the organization as a whole.
Connecting the Dots
While there is clear value to consuming data across your organiza‐
tion—you obtain some data from digital marketing, some from
sales, some from supply chain, etc.—for deeper analytics, there is
even greater value when you start to link up “adjacent” data items.
What do I mean by that?
46 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

Imagine that you are given a thousand-piece jigsaw puzzle, but there
is no picture on the box. As you sort the pieces, you identify a group
of blue pieces. Those are probably the sky. A group of individual
green pieces look like grass. Here is an eye. Is that human or animal?
You can get a vague sense of the overall image, but it lacks any detail.
The detail comes when you start to click adjacent pieces together.
You click that piece with the eye to the piece with an ear. Now you
have greater clarity. Let’s translate this more explicitly to analytics.
Suppose that you use Google Analytics to analyze how people come
to your website. This gives you a breakdown of referring pages and
search terms, locations in the world, and so on, which gives you a
sense or picture at the sample or population level (those are the
pieces of the sky). You analyze the suite of customer survey respon‐
ses over the last three months: 75% love the price, 20% were amazed
by the customer service, and so on (those are like the pieces of
grass). You get a sense of the state of the business, but only a 50,000-
foot view because these are independent data points.
Now, in contrast, imagine a single sales order (Figure 3-1). Belinda
Smith orders an outdoor patio set. If you can join the sales order to
the transacting session from her clickstream, you can gain greater
insight: she spent 30 minutes clicking around 15 different patio sets
before she decided on one. Clearly, she did not arrive with a particu‐
lar patio set in mind. How did she get to the page? If you join in
referrer data, she did a Google search for “patio tables” and that led
her to your site. That confirms your intuition about her browsing
behavior. Now, if you add in her complete sales history, you realize
that Belinda is a frequent shopper, often for home goods, and inter‐
estingly has a spike in the last month. Together, the information that
she used a Google search and is a frequent shopper implies that she
may not be brand loyal and that you need to work hard to reacquire
her. Each time you add in another dataset at this individual-level,
you get a much deeper, richer sense of this person. Let’s keep going.
Let’s pull in US census data that maps gender probability given a
first name: Belinda is almost certainly female. OK. When she paid,
she added in a shipping address. Let’s pull in demographic data from
that ZIP code. This is an affluent suburban neighborhood with large
lot sizes. What else can we do with that address? Let’s look up that
address on the multiple listing service (MLS), which is a central
repository of house sales. Interestingly, the listing shows that the
house has a pool. That could be useful for recommendations. What
Connecting the Dots 
| 
47

else? The house was sold just six weeks ago. Aha, she likely recently
moved to that address. From other analysis we have done, we know
that new homeowners tend to buy occasional rugs, beds, and lamps
(yes, it is true, I did this analysis). Finally, she clicked on a refer-a-
friend widget to get a coupon during checkout. Because she
accepted Facebook’s terms of service in the process, this opens up
her social network. (We’ll cover privacy and ethics in detail in Chap‐
ter 12.)
For a data analyst or data scientist, this deep profile and context
offers a huge amount of raw material to work with. You can get a
clear sense of her history, demographic, and even, in this case, cur‐
rent motivation. Do this for some of your other customers, and
automate even just some of this analysis, and you have a powerful
strategic advantage.
Connecting the dots at this individual level, in contrast to the seg‐
ment level, has huge value and should drive the decisions about
which datasets to bring into the organization next (without violating
ethical or privacy concerns) and how to connect them at the indi‐
vidual level.
Data Collection
Now that we have considered the question of what data to collect, let
us briefly consider the question of how it should be collected.
For many data sources, you simply take a systematic approach and
suck down all the available data for that source (or subset of the
fields). There are many ways to consume data feeds. You can use an
API, or collect files from an FTP site, or you can even screen-scrape
and collect what you can. If this is a one-time dump, you are done. If
the data, however, is updated or added to frequently, and this is an
ongoing data stream, you have to decide how to consume that data.
For small files or tables, it can be easier simply to blow away existing
tables and replace them with the current, larger dataset. In my team,
we consider “small” to be tables with 100,000 rows or fewer. For
larger data sources, you have to set up some more complex delta
process. The simplest case is where new data is always entirely new
rows (an example is transaction logs where updates or deletes to
existing rows should not happen). In that case, you can just append
(INSERT) the new data to the existing data table. In more complex
48 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

cases, you have to work out several cases: a new data row is an
INSERT, or it is a DELETE, or it is an UPDATE. 
Figure 3-1. Adding a rich context to Belinda’s order using a suite of
data sources. From http://bit.ly/anderson-ddo-sea.
For other data sources, you may have to sample data. It may be very
expensive to send out and process surveys, run clinical tests, or even
dip into Twitter’s firehose. How you sample has very important
implications to data quality. We will cover experimental design in
Chapter 8, but a poor design can introduce severe bias and reduce
data quality and utility dramatically. The simplest approach is a
“simple random sample” where one essentially flips a coin to choose
randomly those that are in the sample and those that are not. The
goal is that the sample is truly representative from the larger popula‐
tion or sample from which it is drawn.
Data Collection 
| 
49

One thing to consider is sampling for longitudinal datasets. Imagine
that you wish to sample website sessions per day. You sample 10% of
sessions and load those into a database for further analysis. If you do
this each day, you will have a set of independently and randomly
chosen sessions, but you may miss out on data from visitors that
visit the website on consecutive days. That is, your dataset may not
contain any individuals with multisession data—they might be in
sample on Monday but out of sample on their return on Wednesday.
So, if you are more interested in following multiple sessions, and
your site tends to have visitors that return frequently, you may fare
better, and have higher-quality data to work with, by randomly sam‐
pling individuals and following their sessions over time, than by
sample sessions. (You will, however, likely suffer attrition as individ‐
uals drop out and fail to return.) How you sample should be driven
by the business question that you are trying to answer.
One final point: should you consume raw or aggregated data? Some
vendors provide dashboards where data has been aggregated up to
the key metrics that the analysts need. Those can provide significant
value to the analysts. However, if the data is valuable, what I tend to
see is that analysts want more; they want to drill down further and
slice and dice the data in ways that the vendor dashboard does not
support. While those reports and dashboards can be consumed as-is
for archiving purposes, my take is that it is usually better to suck
down the raw data where possible because you can always aggregate
up to those metrics but not vice versa. With the raw data, you can, in
principle, support slicing and dicing the data in all the ways that the
analyst can imagine. There are cases where consuming raw data is
not feasible, such as where the raw data is huge and costly to store,
or the vendor provides a valuable service to compute those metrics
(a process that you could not perform yourself), but raw is typically
the better option.
Purchasing Data
While there is typically a wealth of information from an organiza‐
tion’s internal data systems alone, and it can be supplemented with
publicly available data, sometimes you just need to shell out for
additional data from third parties.
There are many reasons why you might purchase external datasets.
Earlier, we used the example of Belinda Smith’s patio set purchase to
50 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

make the case about the value of context. First, other partners, ven‐
dors, or even government agencies may simply have the data that
can provide that context and add the “adjacent pieces” in your puz‐
zle. Second, you may have internal data but a third party can pro‐
vide higher-volume or higher-quality data. 
Sometimes, you may have little choice as to where to purchase data.
For instance, MLS has a practical monopoly on housing sales data.
In other cases, however, there is direct competition. For instance,
you can purchase customer profile data, based on credit card pur‐
chases, from a suite of providers, such as Datalogix, Axciom, Epsi‐
lon, or Experian. There is a market.
When there is a choice of sources—for instance, a dataset that maps
ZIP code to metropolitan area—one has to weigh a number of
dimensions, including:
Price
Analysts and their bosses love free, but sometimes it is better to
pay for higher-quality data. You have to consider whether it is a
fair price and consider the value that it will provide to your
organization. This is considered in detail in the next subsection.
Quality
How clean and reliable is the data?
Exclusivity
Is this a proprietary, exclusive dataset that will provide an
advantage over your competitors if used well?
Sample
Can you obtain a sample that will allow you to judge the content
and quality and review the format sufficiently without having to
make a firm commitment?
Updates
How frequently does the data change, become stale, or irrele‐
vant? How frequently is the data updated?
Reliability
If calling a web service API, what’s its up time? What are the
limits on API calls or other service-level agreements?
Security
If the data is sensitive, is it encrypted and transmitted securely?
Purchasing Data 
| 
51

Terms of use
Are there any licensing terms or restrictions that will limit the
value that you can derive from the data?
Format
We all have our favored formats, but generally human-readable
formats, such as CSV, JSON, or XML (and which would exclude
binary formats, excepting standard compression) are preferred
because they are more easily parsed and provide more options
to do so. At the end of the day, is this a format that you can
easily support, or do you need to chalk up additional develop‐
ment costs and time to consume and support it?
Documentation
Well-documented sources should be favored. Typically, you
want to know how data is collected (to know whether it can be
trusted and if it provides value) and have a data dictionary (that
lists the fields, their data types, example values, and any impor‐
tant business logic incorporated into that field’s value;
see Table 3-2). Randall Grossman, the chief data officer of Ful‐
ton Financial, has said that “A trusted data dictionary is the
most important thing that a CDO can provide to business
users.”
Volume
Can you support the volume and storage needs? Valuable data‐
sets need not be large, however. For instance, a ZIP code to
DMA (designated market area, i.e., TV viewing region defined
by the Nielsen Company) may only have 41,000 rows but can be
immensely valuable to a marketing team evaluating TV ad
spend.
Granularity
Does it go down to the level of resolution you need?
52 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

Table 3-2. Example of a data dictionary, this one from a public health
project in California
SAS variable
name (eHARS)
Label
Description
Values
SAS
format 
HARS
variable
name
aids_age_mos
Age at
AIDS
diagnosis
(months)
The calculated age at
AIDS (HIV, stage 3)
diagnosis, in months.
 
 
age_mos
aids_age_yrs
Age at
AIDS
diagnosis
(years)
The calculated age at
AIDS (HIV, stage 3)
diagnosis, in years.
 
 
age_yrs
aids_categ
AIDS case
definition
category
The CDC case definition
for AIDS (HIV, stage 3)
met by the patient;
calculated based on
lab information and
opportunistic diseases
entered for a person. 
For a description of the
algorithm used to
calculate
aids_categ, refer
to section 8 of the
eHARS Technical
Reference Guide.
7 - AIDS (HIV,
stage 3) case
defined by
immunologic
(CD4 count or
percent) criteria
A -  AIDS (HIV,
stage 3) case
defined by
clinical disease
(OI) criteria
9 - Not an AIDS
(HIV, stage 3)
case
$A_CAT
categ
aids_cdc
CDC case
definition
for AIDS
Has this person met
the CDC AIDS (HIV,
stage 3) case
definition? 
To meet the CDC AIDS
(HIV, stage 3) case
definition, the case
must be defined by
immunologic criteria
or clinical disease
criteria
(aids_categ = A
or 7).
Y - Yes
N – No 
$YN
N/A
It is clear from a good data dictionary how the data is defined, what
the formats and allowable values are, and, in this case, how the data
is used by a software package. These are a few rows from eHARS
Purchasing Data 
| 
53

4 d’Alessandro, B., C. Perlich, and T. Raeder, “Bigger is Better, But At What Cost?” Big
Data 2, no. 2 (2014): 87–96.
(Enhanced HIV/AIDS Reporting System) in California. (SAS is stat‐
istical application suite popular in medicine.)
How Much Is a Dataset Worth?
It is relatively easy to work out how much your data costs you. You
can examine the direct storage cost bill (such as from Amazon Web
Services), the cost of backup services, the paycheck and overheads to
the data team staff who manage and maintain the data, and of
course the purchase price of the data (if any). However, a data-
driven organization needs to identify the value to the business.
What is the ROI? That is more tricky to ascertain.
d’Alessandro et al.4 provide a principled framework that can estimate 
direct ROI values, in dollars, at least in certain situations. They work
in the world of advertising, developing predictive models to com‐
pute the best ads to show to each user. They get paid if a user clicks
an ad. Thus, in this scenario, the outcome and return is clear: they
get paid, say $1, if the user clicks, and $0 if the user does not. They
also have their own data that drives their models. Some of that is
derived from historical bidding activity, and some that was pur‐
chased in the past (which they regard as sunk cost). The question
they ask is, “what is my ROI for models built on our own data versus
models built with additional third-party data?” This requires deter‐
mining three components:
1. What is the value of an action? In this example, the action is a
click, and it is worth $1.
2. What is the expected value of a model with our own data?
3. What is the expected value of a model with our own data plus
additional third-party data?
Combining those:
Value of data = expected value(model with third-party data) –
 expected value(model without third-party data)
54 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

and
incremental return = value(click) × value of data.
Thus, suppose that a model with their own data only has a 1%
chance of being clicked upon but a model with additional third-
party data has a 5% chance of being clicked upon. The value of the
data is a 4% lift, and the incremental value of that data is $1 × (5% –
 1%) = $0.04.
Armed with a concrete value such as this, you can then objectively
determine the value of purchasing that data. If it would cost $0.04 to
purchase those incremental data points, then it is not worth it. If the
cost is only $0.01, then it is a no-brainer.
You are not restricted to evaluating the incremental value of third-
party data in addition to your own data. As is so often the case in
data, context is everything. Interestingly, d’Alessandro et al. ran an
experiment where they compared incremental value of third-party
data against randomly targeting users, that is, no data versus third-
party data only. They showed positive incremental value across a
range of segments with segment value / 1000 users as high as
$1.80. They then ran an experiment with their own data plus third-
party data. What would you expect to happen? The incremental
value tanked! Segment value per 1,000 users was now around $0.02
or less. In the context of data they already possessed, the extra data
provided positive but negligible value (Figure 3-2), most likely
because of redundancies in the data.
This general approach works well because it is possible, at least from
their data providers, to obtain a sample of data that they can test. If
the economics works out, they can purchase a full dataset. That is,
they are not committed to making the data purchase until they have
run some experiments to estimate the value. That is not always the
case with vendors. However, you may be in a situation where you
pay a monthly fee for a data feed. If so, you can run experiments
such as these to determine the value of the data and make a decision
as to whether it provides a positive ROI or not. If not, cancel the 
service.
Purchasing Data 
| 
55

Figure 3-2. Adding additional data likely adds value, but there are
diminishing returns. From http://bit.ly/dalessandro-predictive).
As the authors conclude:
As “big data” becomes the panacea for many business optimization
decisions, it is increasingly important for managers to be able to
evaluate their data-driven decisions and justify the investments
made in acquiring and using data. Without the tools to make such
evaluations, big data is more of a faith-based initiative than a scien‐
tific practice.
Amen!
Data Retention
In this chapter, we have focused on obtaining and integrating addi‐
tional data, increasing the data that analysts have to work with.
However, data can become stale or irrelevant. We touched on some
of the costs in the previous section: storage costs, maintenance costs,
and acquisition costs. There are also costs and risks that are less easy
to estimate: if there is a data breach, what will be the damage and
cost to your business? So, one thing to consider is when to delete
data (reduce risk and cost) and when to move data to an appropriate
storage medium.
Data has a habit of replicating. You may load a dataset into a rela‐
tional database, but that isn’t the end of it. A given data point might
flow down to one or more slave databases, just in case the master
56 
| 
Chapter 3: Data Collection

database server dies. Now you have two copies. Then you may do
backups onto a server. Typically, you have several days or maybe a
week’s worth of backups available in case things go wrong. Now we
are up to nine copies of that data point. All those copies cost money.
One thing that you can do is match the datasets to the relevant
latency required in order to use or restore them.  
An example is the following: Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) is
a cheap and easy-to-use location with which to store data. For
instance, it is almost certainly cheaper to store those backups on a
service such as this than maintain an additional server to house
those backups. When you need the data, you can pull them down
instantly. Amazon, however, also provides a similar service called
glacier. This is essentially the same as S3 but is meant as an archiv‐
ing service; however, it can take four to five hours to restore the
data. At current prices, this is about one third the cost of S3. If some‐
thing went wrong, would you need that data instantly, or could you
live for half a day or a day without it?
A data-driven organization should think carefully about the value of
its data. Primary focus should be on its core data, where any down‐
time may have a real impact. It should consider deleting old, irrele‐
vant data (this is easier said than done); but if nothing else, it should
consider moving it to the cheapest suitable medium, such as offsite
tape archives.
A more data-driven organization, for instance, one that has reached
the “level” of predictive modeling, can create “rich” data models that
capture the key features of the data and discard the rest. For
instance, according to Michael Howard, CEO of C9, “Salesforce, for
example, doesn’t keep a history of a deal for more than 90 days.” If
that is the case, then it is imperative that you select details carefully.
As we have shown, a data-driven organization has to think very
strategically about its data sources and the organization’s resources
to garner and maintain them. Analysts have an important role here
by researching possible sources and vendors, obtaining samples
and, where possible, determining quality and putting the samples to
work to ascertain their value. 
In the next chapter, we consider who those analysts are, what their
role is, and how they should be organized.
Data Retention 
| 
57


CHAPTER 4
The Analyst Organization
A really great data analyst should get people excited...
I knew I was the first to get the data, so I was the
first to know the story. It’s fun discovering stuff.
—Dan Murray
The human component of a great data-driven organization is a great
analytics organization. Who are those people, and how should they
be organized?
In this chapter, I will cover the analytics organization itself: the types
of staff that comprise it and the skills that they should possess. I’ll
examine the breadth of analytics positions, and we’ll meet some of
the people in those varied roles. In addition, there are a number of
ways in which analysts can be organized, each with a different set of
pros and cons, and so I’ll step through various organizational
structures.
Types of Analysts
A data-driven organization is likely to have a variety of analyst roles,
typically organized into multiple teams. Different people describe
different analyst roles differently, and many of the skills are overlap‐
ping among them, but I’ll outline a general description of my ver‐
sion of data analysts, data and analytics engineers, business analysts,
data scientists, statisticians, quants, accountants and financial ana‐
lysts, and data-visualization specialists. For each, I’ll describe the
types of skills they tend to possess, the tools they use, and provide an
59

example of someone in that role. Your organization may have a dif‐
ferent set of titles, but the skills described here are generally neces‐
sary in order to make the most of your data. 
Data Analyst
This is the broadest, most common term, at least compared to the
more specialized roles discussed next. In many cases, they are T-
shaped: they have shallower experience across a broad spectrum of
skills but deep skills and domain knowledge in a dominant
area. Data analysts range from entry-level positions, which are often
more focused on data gathering and preparation, to highly skilled
and very specialized analysts. Such analysts are often domain
experts, focusing on a wealth of different areas, such as voice of the
customer, loyalty programs, email marketing, geo-specialized mili‐
tary intelligence, or certain segments of the stock market. The par‐
ticular roles in an organization depend on the organization’s size,
maturity, domain, and market. In all these roles, their output is
likely to be a mix of both reporting and analysis. As well as breadth
of domain, analysts vary widely in their level of technical skills.
At one end are analysts who work solely in the world of Excel and
vendor dashboards. At the other end are people, such as Samarth,
who write Scala code against raw, large-scale data stores at Etsy.
Samarth’s background is in political science, but he got his analytics
training while working on Barack Obama’s 2012 re-election cam‐
paign. There he picked up R, SQL, and Python—the typical data sci‐
entist’s trifecta—to run web and email experiments. He is now data
analyst at Etsy in New York, where he still works on web and email
experiments but also clickstream analysis, analyzing trends, and
writing reports and white papers. He works with a variety of product
managers, engineers, and designers across the company to help
design experiments, analyze them with Scala/Scalding, R, and SQL,
and interpret those results. He also writes general company-wide
white papers as well as more specific memos for executives to
understand trends, user behavior, or specific features.
An analyst with a very different profile is Samantha. She has a bach‐
elor’s degree in accountancy and works as a data analyst for Progres‐
sive Insurance in Cleveland, Ohio at in their claims control finance
team. She manages an escheatment (the transfer of unclaimed or
abandoned property to the state) process for claims through audit,
analysis, and compliance with state escheatment laws. That involves
60 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

creating reports to track abandoned property, analyzing outstanding
drafts, and summarizing the financial risk associated with those. She
uses a mix of SAS, Excel, and Oracle, as well as domain-specific
tools, such as ClaimStation. She has a broad set of internal “custom‐
ers” who rely on her work including Corporate Tax, Financial Oper‐
ations, IT, Claims Business Leaders, as well as individual claims
representatives in the field and is driven, she says, by “seeing my
analysis pay off to the financial benefit of both Progressive and our
insured customers.” Being in a more heavily regulated industry and
with particular responsibilities for ensuring that Progressive comply
with state laws, attention to detail is an especially important trait in
her role.
Data Engineers and Analytics Engineers
Primarily responsible for obtaining, cleaning, and munging data and
getting it into a form that analysts can access and analyze. They are
responsible for operational concerns, such as throughput, scaling,
peak loads, and logging, and may also be responsible for building
business intelligence tools that analysts use.
Meet Anna. While working toward a Ph.D. in physics, she realized
her true passion lay in data science and joined Bitly as a data scien‐
tist, leaving her graduate program with a master’s degree. At Bitly
she created visualizations from large datasets, crunched data with
Hadoop, and implemented machine learning algorithms. She then
joined Rent The Runway and is now a data engineer. Using tools
such as SQL, Python, Vertica, and bash, she now maintains the data
infrastructure that supports the analysts, develops new tools to make
data more reliable, timely, and scalable, and she acts as the touch‐
point with the rest of the organization’s engineers to understand any
changes that they are making that will impact data.
Business Analysts
Analysts who typically serve as the interface between business stake‐
holders (such as department heads) and the technology department
(such as software developers). Their role is to improve business pro‐
cesses or help design and develop new or enhanced features in back‐
end systems or frontend systems, such as an enhanced checkout
flow on a customer-facing website.
Types of Analysts 
| 
61

1 Conway, D., “The Data Science Venn Diagram,” September 30, 2010.
Anderson, C., “What is a data scientist?” December 3, 2012.
Lynn is senior business analyst for Macys.com. With a bachelor’s
degree in fine arts, experience as an application developer, and
Project Management Professional certification, Lynn has a decade of
experience of project management and business analysis, mostly in
bookselling ecommerce. Her role involves analysis of project
requirements, understanding clients’ needs, process improvement,
and project management, often using an agile approach. “There isn’t
a typical day,” she said. “Some days I talk with the users” (i.e., mer‐
chants who use Macy’s product information management sys‐
tem) “about their needs, some days I review user stories with the
developers, or answer questions from QA or developers about the
user stories.”
Data Scientists
A broad term that tends to include more mathematically or statisti‐
cally inclined staff, typically with both advanced degrees (often in
quantitative subjects, such as math, sciences, and computer science)
and developed coding skills. I like Josh Wills’ pithy definition: “Data
Scientist (n.): Person who is better at statistics than any software
engineer and better at software engineering than any statisti‐
cian." However, it doesn’t fully capture their role, which might be to
build “data products,” such as recommendation engines using
machine learning, or to do predictive modeling and natural lan‐
guage processing.1
Trey, a senior data scientist at Zulily, a daily-deals site based in Seat‐
tle, is one such data scientist. With a master’s degree in sociology,
Trey splits his time working on a variety of projects ranging from
building statistical models and recommendation algorithms that
improve customer experience to helping product managers inter‐
pret the results of an A/B test. He mostly uses Python (using libra‐
ries such as pandas, scikit-learn, and statsmodels) and will pull
down data to analyze using SQL and Hive. While he has the techni‐
cal skills to build statistical models, he considers the the ability to
explain those models to nonexperts a crucial data science skill. This
love of teaching is reflected in his hobby, the spread, a blog that
62 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

teaches data science concepts using American football data as well
as how to become more informed consumers of sports statistics.
Statisticians
Skilled personnel who focus on statistical modeling across the orga‐
nization. They typically have at least a master’s degree in statistics
and are especially prevalent in insurance, healthcare, research and
development, and government. One quarter of statisticians in the
US work for federal, state, and local government. They are often
involved in not just analysis but the design of surveys, experiments,
and collection protocols to obtain the raw data.
Meet Shaun, a statistician supporting quantitative marketing at Goo‐
gle’s Boulder office. With a bachelor’s degree in mathematics and
computational science and a Ph.D. in statistics, Shaun now has a
varied role supporting employees on other teams, often moving
from project to project as needs arise. One on hand, his work can
involve pulling, cleaning, visualizing, and verifying the quality of a
new data source. One the other, he taps into his statistical skills to
develop clustering algorithms to improve online search geo-
experiments, develop Bayesian structural time series models, or to
estimate individual-level viewership from household-level data
using Random Forests. He spends most of his time in R, especially
to analyze and visualize data (notably packages like ggplot2, plyr/
dplyr, and data.table). However, he also extracts data with SQL-like
languages and uses some Python and Go.
Quants
Mathematically skilled quantitative analysts who typically work in
the financial services sector modeling securities, risk management,
and stock movements on both the buy and sell side of the market.
For example, a pension fund may employ a quant to put together an
optimal portfolio of bonds to meet the fund’s future liabilities. They
often come from mathematics, physics, or engineering backgrounds,
and some—especially algorithmic trading analysts (the highest paid
of all analyst positions)—are especially strong programmers in lan‐
guages, such as C++, that can process data and generate actions with
very low latency.
Satish is a quant at Bloomberg in New York, coming to the role with
a strong background in both applied math and electrical engineer‐
Types of Analysts 
| 
63

ing, including a Ph.D. He uses R (ggplot2, dplyr, reshape2), Python
(scikit-learn, pandas), and Excel (for pivot tables) to build a range of
statistical models and then C/C++ to roll some of those into produc‐
tion. Those models often cover relative value for various fixed-
income asset classes. However, he also serves as an internal
consultant and thus gets to work on a diverse set of problems rang‐
ing from credit models for mortgage-backed securities to predicting
wind power supply in the UK. “The vast amounts of financial data
and analytics that are available at Bloomberg are unmatched in the
industry,” he says. “As such, it is extremely rewarding to know that
most of the models we build are things that provide value to all our
customers.” One of the challenges of working with financial data is
that it is very long-tailed and thus the models must handle those
rare, extreme events gracefully. 
Accountants and Financial Analysts
Staff that focus on internal financial statements, auditing, forecast‐
ing, analysis of business performance, etc. Meet Patrick. With a
Bachelor of Arts in philosophy, politics, and economics and a back‐
ground as a debt capital markets analyst at RBS Securities, Patrick is
now a retail finance and strategy manager for Warby Parker in New
York City. He is responsible for retail financial planning and analysis
and supporting the development of the company’s store roll-out
strategy. He spends his days deep in Excel managing the stores’
profit and losses and KPIs, developing models of future perfor‐
mance, digging into model variance, and analyzing market develop‐
ment. Currently he spends about 60% of his time on reporting and
the remainder on analysis, but this is shifting toward analysis as his
access, comfort, and skills with the company’s business intelligence
tools improve.
Data Visualization Specialists
People with a strong design aesthetic who create infographics, dash‐
boards, and other design assets. They may also code in technologies
such as JavaScript, CoffeeScript, CSS, and HTML working with
data-visualization libraries, such as D3 (a very powerful and beauti‐
ful visualization library covered in Scott Murray’s Interactive Data
Visualization for the Web (O’Reilly) and HTML5.
Meet Jim (Jim V in Figure 4-1). After obtaining a master’s degree in
computer science, specializing in bioinformatics and machine learn‐
64 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

ing, Jim worked for Garmin developing GUIs for its GPS devices
and thereafter at a biological research facility analyzing large-scale
sequence data. It was there that he discovered D3 and began to blog
about it, developing clear, instructive tutorials. He is now a data-
visualization engineer and data scientist at Nordstrom’s data lab in
Seattle. Using a mix of Ruby, some Python, and R (especially the
packages ggplot2 and dplyr), he splits his time between supporting
personalization and recommendation systems and visualizing data,
with the primary audience being employees in other teams.
In larger organizations, you may find additional specialized roles
such as those who solely generate reports, or who specialize in using
a particular business intelligence tool. Others may focus only on big
data technologies, such as Hadoop or Spark.
As you can see, there is a huge amount of overlap of these roles and
terms. Most are munging data with some sort of SQL-like language.
Some code more than others. Many roles involve building statistical
models, often with SAS or R. Most involve a mix of both reporting
and analysis.
Analytics Is a Team Sport
Analytics is a team sport. A well-oiled, data-driven organization is
going to have both a range of analytical personnel with different
roles and also personnel with complementary skills. It needs to con‐
sider the “portfolio” of skills in the team and the profile of new hires
that would work best to flesh out and strengthen missing or weak
areas in that team. 
For instance, Figure 4-1 shows the team profile of Nordstrom’s data
lab in 2013. You can easily spot the strongest mathematicians and
statisticians in the team (Elissa, Mark, and Erin), the strongest
developers (David and Jason W), and their data-visualization expert,
Jim V, profiled earlier. I asked Jason Gowans, the director of the lab,
what he thinks about when hiring a new addition. “The first is that
we’re proponents of the Jeff Bezos two-pizza rule,” he said. “There‐
fore, it’s unlikely we’ll be much bigger than we currently are. We
think that helps us stay focused on what we think are the big oppor‐
tunities. The second is that each member brings something unique
to the team and can help everyone else ‘level up’.”
Analytics Is a Team Sport 
| 
65

They made a smart move early in the team’s history to hire a strong
data-visualization guy, something that many teams leave until later.
Having beautiful, polished proof-of-concept data products helped
the team gain traction and acceptance within the broader organiza‐
tion. “Jim has been a key ingredient in our ability to generate enthu‐
siasm for our work and really bring it to life with his
datavisualization skills,” Jason said.
Data scientists, often coming from an academic background, are
especially T-shaped. When they have two dominant areas, they are
termed Pi-shaped. You can think of hiring and team formation as
analytics Tetris.
Figure 4-1. Team profile of the Nordstrom data lab (as of Strata 2013).
ML = machine learning. Devops is a relatively new term arising from
agile software development and represents a mix of IT, system admin‐
istration, and software engineering.
A 2012 survey of hundreds of self-reporting data personnel by Har‐
ris et al. covered five skill groups:
• Business
• Math/operations research
• Machine learning/big data
• Programming
• Statistics
66 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

They identified four clusters of roles:
Data business people
“Quite T-shaped with top skills in Business, and moderate skills
elsewhere.”
Data researchers
Deep in statistics and less broad with low rankings in machine
learning/big data, business, and programming.
Data developers
Pi-shaped with strong programming skills and relatively strong
machine learning/big data skills and moderate skills in the other
three groups.
Data creatives
The least T-shaped group “who were, on average neither ranked
the strongest nor the weakest in any skill group.”
Their average profiles are shown in Figure 4-2. It is easy to spot the
wide variation among the four types.
These four roles map imprecisely onto the analyst job titles
(Table 4-1); organizations with more personnel and complexity may
have a greater number of defined roles; smaller operations will likely
have fewer people wearing more hats. It’s also worth noting that
while Harris et al. found data creatives “neither strongest nor weak‐
est in any skill group,” they didn’t categorize visualization and com‐
munication as a skill group, and it is a vital one for a working team.
One might also note that as a data-science problem, this is a weak‐
ness of surveys: they are limited to the categories that the survey
designers envision. In this case, there was domain knowledge to
realize that data creatives were part of successful teams, but not
exactly clarity about what they added.
Table 4-1. Mapping of the analyst roles listed earlier in this chapter with
those of Harris et al. 2013
Data businessperson
Data creative
Data developer Data researcher
Business analysts
Data-visualization
specialists
Data scientists
Statisticians
Data analysts
 
Data engineers
Quants
Accountants and Financial Analysts  
 
 
Analytics Is a Team Sport 
| 
67

Figure 4-2. The skill profile of the four clusters of respondents (Figure
3-3 from Harris et al., 2013).
Ideally, when hiring, managers have to think at three levels:
Individual level
Is this person a good fit? Do they possess the skills, potential,
and drive that we seek?
Team level
Does this person complement the rest of the team and fill in
missing holes or shore up a weak spot?
Work level
How does the team profile match the work that is required?
That is, what is the team profile that best fits what we are trying
to achieve? For instance, work that focuses primarily on finan‐
cial predictive models may have a different optimal staffing skill
set than work focused on optimizing customer service.
68 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

2 Stephen Few’s Now You See It (Analytics Press) has a good discussion of this topic, pp.
19–24.
Skills and Qualities
What are the traits that make for a great analyst?2
Numerate
They don’t have to have a Ph.D. in math or stats, but they
should at least be comfortable with descriptive statistics
(median, mode, quartiles, etc.; see Chapter 5) and be willing to
learn more.
Detail-oriented and methodical
If these numbers, reports, and analyses are flowing up to senior
management to make a major business decision, they had better
be correct. The analysts must be of a “measure twice, cut once”
ilk.
Appropriately skeptical
Great analysts cultivate a good “spidey sense” of when some‐
thing seems wrong in the raw or aggregated data or the analysis
itself. First, they will proactively think through the range of val‐
ues that would make sense. Second, they will proactively ques‐
tion the validity of the data and double-check the source data
and the calculations when a metric is higher or lower than
expected.
Confident
Analysts not only need confidence to present their findings to
groups of (senior) colleagues, but if the findings are surprising
or expose gross inefficiencies, their data and analysis may be
brought into question. They have to have confidence in their
work to stand by it.
Curious
Part of an analyst’s role is seek actionable insights and so they
need to be curious to always be developing hypotheses or ques‐
tioning potentially interesting aspects of the data.
Good communicators and storytellers
An analyst’s work is worthless if it is not conveyed well to deci‐
sion makers and business owners who can act upon the recom‐
Skills and Qualities 
| 
69

mendations. They have to tell a compelling, coherent story
around the data and the findings. Thus, they must have sharp
written, verbal, and data-visualization skills. (More on this in
Chapter 7.)
Patient
There is a lot that is outside an analyst’s direct control. That
includes the accuracy or availability of the raw data source,
missing data, changing requirements, or hidden biases in the
data revealed only late in an analysis that may mean they have
to scrap or redo their analyses. Analysts need patience.
Data lovers
In the same way that many computer programmers just love to
code and the domain is almost irrelevant, some people just love
data as a resource, a way to make sense of their world and make
an impact. They just love to dig in. Hire those people.
Life-learners
This isn’t specific to analysts, but those who love to learn, the
ones who are always reading the latest articles and textbooks
and taking classes to develop their knowledge and skills, will do
well.
Pragmatic and business-savvy
You have to focus on the right questions. It can be all to easy to
get sucked down a rabbit hole and spend too much time digging
into a sub-1% edge case that has no real impact to the business.
Like good editors, they have to keep the bigger picture in mind
and know when to kill a story and move onto something else
that is a better use of time.
I asked Daniel Tunkelang, head of search quality at LinkedIn, what
he seeks when hiring analysts:
I look for three things in data analysts/scientists. First, they need to
be smart, creative problem solvers who not only have analytical
skills but also know how and when to apply them. Second, they
have to be implementers and show that they have both the ability
and passion to build solutions using the appropriate tools. Third,
they have to have enough product sense, whether it comes from
instinct or experience, to navigate in the problem space they’ll be
working in and ask the right questions.
70 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

Ken Rudin, head of analytics at Facebook, says:
You can use science and technology and statistics to figure out what
the answers are but it is still an art to figure out what the right ques‐
tions are...It is no longer sufficient to hire people who have a Ph.D.
in statistics. You also need to make sure that the people that you
have have “business savvy.” Business savvy, I believe is becoming
one of the most critical assets, one of the most critical skills, for any
analyst to have.
How do you figure out if a potential analyst that you are looking at
has business savvy? When you interview them, don’t focus just on
how do we calculate this metric. Give them a case study, a business
case study from your own business, and ask them, “in this scenario,
what are the metrics you think would be important to look at?”
That’s how you can get at that.
Just One More Tool
In terms of practical skills, it goes without saying that the majority
of analysts around the world use Microsoft’s Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint as their major workhorses. They are very powerful
tools. It is surprising, however, how a few additional tools can make
a big difference in terms of productivity.
This section is meant as a challenge to two pri‐
mary audiences. If you are an analyst, challenge
yourself to learn just one more tool or utility in
the next month or quarter. If you are a manager
of analysts, get them to challenge themselves in
this manner. Check in and find out how much
of an impact that has had. You will be surprised.
Here are a few areas to consider.
Exploratory Data Analysis and Statistical Modeling
R is an increasingly popular environment for statistical computing
and it has exceptional data-visualization libraries (such as ggplot2).
For instance, you can read in a CSV and visualize the relationship
among all possible pairs of variables in just two commands:
data<-read.csv(filename.csv);
pairs(data)
Just One More Tool 
| 
71

3 Great open source tools for analytics can be found in Data Analysis with Open Source
Tools by P. K. Janert (O’Reilly).
Figure 4-3 shows the output of those commands. In the second
panel of the top row, we can see the relationship between sepal
width (x-axis) versus sepal length (y-axis) of iris flowers.
Figure 4-3. This is the output of the command pairs(iris) in R. Iris is a
well-known dataset, collected by Edgar Anderson but made famous by
the statistician R. A. Fisher, consisting of measurements of 50 samples
of three iris flower species. The correlations among the variables and
the differences among the three species is obvious when you are able to
view the relationships holistically like this.
As such, it can be invaluable for rapid exploratory data analysis.
(The nonopen SAS and SPSS are popular and powerful, too.) There
are about 6,700 packages for all sorts of data types, models,
domains, and visualizations, and it is free and open source.3 If you
72 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

4 One introductory book is Using SQLite by J. A. Kreibich (O’Reilly).
already know R, then learn a new R package and broaden your skill
set.
Database Queries
While Excel can be incredibly powerful, it does have scaling issues:
at a certain size of data and number of VLOOKUPS, it can bring
your computer to its knees. It is for this reason that SQL is a valua‐
ble tool in any analyst’s toolkit. SQL is a transferable skill; and while
there are some small differences in the language among databases
(such as MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Access), it is pretty much stand‐
ardized, so once you know SQL you can switch among different
relational databases easily. You can then query data in a scalable
manner (crunch millions of rows), can share queries with colleagues
(sharing small text queries and not huge chunks of raw data), and
you have a process that is repeatable (you can rerun analyses easily).
There are many books and offline and online courses to help you get
started in SQL. One free online course that I would recommend
is W3Schools’ SQL Tutorial because you can run queries in the
browser itself. Another approach to getting started is to install a
database on your local machine. Installing and configuring main‐
stream databases, such as MySQL and PostgreSQL, can be tricky to
install. Thus, I would highly recommend starting out with SQLite4—
a lot of applications on your smartphone are using SQLite to store
application data. This is free, almost trivial to install, saves your data
to a single transportable file, and will get you up and running writ‐
ing SQL queries in minutes. 
In case you are worried that this is an old technology that will soon
be superseded by a shiny new approach, in the O’Reilly 2014 Data
Science Salary Survey, King and Magoulas remark “SQL was the
most commonly used tool...Even with the rapid influx of new data
technology, there is no sign that SQL is going away.”
File Inspection and Manipulation
If the analytics team must work with large or many raw datafiles,
then someone—it doesn’t have to be everyone because analytics is a
team sport—should pick up some simple Unix command-line skills
Just One More Tool 
| 
73

for file filtering and manipulation. Alternatively, a scripting lan‐
guage, such as Python, will provide those tools and much more.
See Chapter 5 for a fuller discussion.
Example of One More Tool: Counting Lines with the
*nix ‘wc’ Utility
If you know the *nix (i.e., Unix and Linux) command line, you can
move on. For everyone else...
Suppose that you receive a 10 MB CSV datafile and need to count
the number of records. How would you do that? Open up Excel,
scroll down or use CTRL+↓ and see the row number of the last
row? Sure, that works. How about if it was a 100 MB file? Excel can
just about handle that, but it might take you 10 minutes to achieve.
OK, how about 1 GB? That approach is not going to work.
New angle on the problem: what if it were three 10 MB CSV files?
Open up Excel three times, once per file. Sure, that works. What if
it were 300 files? Hmm, we need another approach. 
What if I told you that you could complete all of these problems in
a few seconds? The *nix command line is packed full of small,
focused utilities that do one particular job and do them very well.
wc is a utility that does a word count, as well as lines, character, and
bytes.
Q: But I don’t have access to *nix! I run Windows.
A: No problem, just install the free cygwin. That gives you the Unix
command line in Windows.
Q: But I don’t have access to *nix! I run OS X. 
A: Macs are Unix under the hood. Go to Applications, open up
Utilities, and then click Terminal. Boom! There is your Unix com‐
mand line.
The format for the command is trivial: wc -l filename
wc is the word count utility, -l (the letter) tells it to count lines
rather than words, and filename is the filename of your file. Exam‐
ple:
$ wc -l weblog_20150302.log
 1704190 weblog_20150302.log
74 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

($ is the prompt; yours may look different.) This shows you that the
weblog file had 1.7 million rows. To count lines of each file in a
directory, just provide a folder name instead of a filename:
wc -l mydatafiles/
   123 file1.csv
   456 file2.csv
   579 total
Wasn’t that easy? It even totals them for you. I use this command all
the time as part of my data quality checks to help me estimate how
long it will take to load a dataset into a database and to verify that
all the data got loaded.
Hopefully, you understand the broader point here: simple utilities
that take minutes to learn can dramatically boost an analyst’s skill
set and productivity.
Which tool or utility to learn depends on your current skill set and
its weak spot(s). However, everyone has a weak spot. Take up the
challenge.
If you need further incentive, O’Reilly’s 2013 Data Science Salary
Survey from attendees from two large Strata conferences in 2012
and 2013 found the following:
Salaries positively correlated with the number of tools used by
respondents. The average respondent selected 10 tools and had a
median income of $100k; those using 15 or more tools had a
median salary of $130k.
This was more clearly and starkly presented in their 2014 survey
(Figure 4-4).
Just One More Tool 
| 
75

Figure 4-4. The relationship between number of different tools versus
data science salary. This is Figure 1-13 of the 2014 O’Reilly Data Sci‐
ence Salary Survey.
In 2013, they further concluded:
It seems very likely that knowing how to use tools such as R,
Python, Hadoop frameworks, D3, and scalable machine learning
tools qualifies an analyst for more highly paid positions—more so
than knowing SQL, Excel, and RDB [relational database] platforms.
We can also deduce that the more tools an analyst knows, the bet‐
ter: if you are thinking of learning a tool from the Hadoop cluster,
it’s better to learn several.
Finally, the 2014 survey shows about a $15,000 bump for coding
versus noncoding analysts. If you are a noncoding analyst, do your‐
self a favor and learn to code!
Analytics-org Structure
Having considered the types of analyst roles and skills, I now con‐
sider how they are organized in the context of the larger organiza‐
tion. 
First, let’s consider the two common extremes.
76 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

5 “Ken Rudin ‘Big Impact from Big Data',” October 29, 2013, video clip, YouTube.
6 Davenport, T. H., and J. G. Harris. Analytics at Work. Boston: Harvard Business Press,
2007.
7 Jain, P., “To Centralize Analytics or Not, That is the Question,” Forbes, February 15,
2013.
Centralized
There is a central analytics team to which all analysts report. There
are many advantages. First, the team can standardize skills, training,
and tooling, and they can share resources and reduce software
license costs. Second, they can more easily promote the use of ana‐
lytics and advanced analytics within the organization. Third, ana‐
lysts can communicate easily, learn from or mentor each other, and
feel that they are part of a like-minded team. Fourth, there is, or can
be, the perception of greater objectivity as their success or rewards
are unlikely to be aligned with the success of the projects that they
are analyzing. Finally, they can help promote master data sources as
single sources of truth. On the downside, they can be somewhat
removed from the business owners and their goals, they tend to be
very reactive to requests for work5,6  they can be more bureaucratic.
As Piyanka Jain notes, “everything needs to get into the pipeline,
and get prioritized, and get resources allocated against it.”7
Decentralized
A decentralized analytical organization embeds the analysts in indi‐
vidual teams. Those analysts report to those teams and share their
goals. In other words, they live the goals, reports, and metrics of
those teams. The downside is that they can be somewhat removed
from other analysts. There is the potential for redundancy of effort,
divergence of tools, skills, metric definitions, and implementation.
There can also be a lack of communication and sharing among ana‐
lysts from different teams. The decentralized model is the most
common, accounting for 42% of respondents in one survey, a factor
that Davenport et al. (p. 108) consider reflects “analytics immatur‐
ity.” They do not explicitly clarify or defend that position, but my
interpretation is that it is difficult to excel at some of the higher lev‐
els analytics, such as an operations research department working on
hard optimization or predictive problems, without some more cen‐
tralized coordination, expertise, and oversight.  
Just One More Tool 
| 
77

8 LaValle, S., M. S. Hopkins, E. Lesser, R. Shockley, and N. Kruschwitz, “Analytics: the
New Path to Value,” MIT Sloan Management Review 52, no. 2 (2010): Figure 9.
There are many pros and cons of these two structures (summarized
in Table 4-2). Being part of a larger, centralized analyst organization,
analysts have more local support, mentorship, and a clearer career
path. However, in a decentralized structure, the line of business
manager has dedicated resources and presumably a faster turn‐
around time.
Table 4-2. The pros of centralized versus decentralized analytics structure.
(Cons are implicit as the opposite of the pros in the other column.) Greater
domain knowledge could go either way (see text for explanation).
Pro
Centralized
Decentralized
Clear career path
✓
 
Direct, full-time access
 
✓
Faster turnaround time
 
✓
Greater redundancy of domain knowledge
✓
 
Standardized toolset and training
✓
 
Standardized metrics: numbers that agree
✓
 
Less bureaucracy
 
✓
(Perceived) objectivity
✓
 
Greater domain knowledge
?
?
Sixty-three percent more transformed organizations than aspira‐
tional organizations (think back to Chapter 1) “use a centralized
enterprise unit as the primary source of analytics.” As before, there
are confounding variables at play—in particular, company size and
total number of analysts—because transformed organizations are
also more likely to be using analytics in the business units, too.8
One should expect that analysts in the decentralized organization
would build up greater domain knowledge, such as deeply under‐
standing the voice of the customer data, analytical processes, and
metrics. Such concentration of knowledge may represent a risk,
however, to the enterprise as a whole if those few individuals leave.
(In a centralized organization, there will more likely be redundancy
of domain knowledge as analysts switch among different lines of
business.) This may mean that domain knowledge is actually less, on
78 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

9 Stone, J., “Centralized vs Decentralized Analytics: All You Need To Know,” April 22,
2012.
average, in a decentralized structure if those analysts are frequently
leaving to be replaced by novices that require multiyear training
from scratch.
Interestingly, Jeb Stone9 argues that in a centralized organization
with a few standard technologies,
to increase value to the organization, an analyst should master
these additional technologies, cross-train on these specific lines of
business, and approach the level and quality of work already bench‐
marked by senior analysts. Without a career path, your analysts are
highly incented to learn in-demand technology on your dime—
whether or not your organization has a need for it—and then jump
ship to an employer who will compensate them for that skill. Per‐
haps even more to the point: rock-star analysts will avoid employ‐
ers with a decentralized Analytics function, because they know it’ll
take them longer to come up to speed and that there is likely no
performance incentive program specific to their accomplishments.
In an attempt to find a structure that draws as many pros and mini‐
mizes the cons, an intermediate form exists, called the hybrid model.
This model, such as employed at Facebook, has a centralized analyt‐
ics team, and thus you have the benefits of standardized training,
tooling, and the like, but the analysts physically sit with the different
business teams and moreover share those teams’ goals. Thus, you
have the benefit of close alignment and analytical standards. The
downside is that you introduce a situation in which analysts may be
reporting to more than one manager, one from the business side
and one from the analytics side. This introduces the very real poten‐
tial of conflicting or confusing messages.
When you have a decentralized model, you need some way to bring
the analysts together to develop common skills, to attend training
on tooling, discuss data sources, metrics, analyses being worked
upon, and so on. One approach, and one that we employ at Warby
Parker, is to form an analysts’ guild, “an organized group of people
who have joined together because they share the same job or inter‐
est.” It gets analysts from different teams, and in our case from dif‐
ferent buildings, talking to each other, discussing issues, and doing
show and tells. It also allows my data team to provide training on
business intelligence tools and statistics.
Just One More Tool 
| 
79

10 Davenport, T. H., and J. G. Harris. Analytics at Work. Boston: Harvard Business Press,
2007.
11 Khalil, E., and K. Wood, “Aligning Data Science – Making Organizational Structures
Work,” (Tysons Corner, VA: Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc., 2014).
A guild such as this makes it more matrix-like but does require buy-
in from the managers or department heads to which those analysts
report and/or from more senior management. Analysts need to be
encouraged by their managers to break away from their work to
attend and participate in the guild.
Other organizational structures10,11 more common in larger organi‐
zations, include:
Consulting
In some organizations, the centralized model is modified such
that analysts are hired out to departments with appropriate
chargebacks, in a consultative structure. With poor executive
leadership, there is the potential downside that the analysts fol‐
low the money or the most vocal executives and that they are
not necessarily working on projects that would deliver the most
value to the organization.
Functional
A form of serial centralization in which a central group sits
within one functional business unit, primarily serving that unit,
but may provide some services to other parts of the organiza‐
tion. They may then migrate en masse to another business unit
as the need arises.
Center of excellence
This is similar to the hybrid structure but on a larger scale and
houses a set of analytical experts, such as statisticians, in the
central hub. Thus, you have analytics being performed both in
the individual units and from central staff.
Table 4-3 summarizes the different organizational structures and
lists some example organizations of each type. However, it should be
stressed that these labels identify idealized structures, and in reality,
there are very blurry lines among them, and many intermediate
forms exist. For instance, Warby Parker is primarily a decentralized
form with analysts reporting to line-of-business managers only, but
there are some elements of a center of excellence model with a cen‐
80 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

12 Harris, J. G., E. Craig, and H. Egan, “How to Organize Your Analytical Talent,” (Dublin:
Accenture Institute for High Performance, 2009).
13 Davenport, T. H., Harris, J. G., and Morison, R. Competing on Analytics. Boston: Har‐
vard Business Press, 2010.
tral data team hosting data scientists and providing some support in
terms of advanced analytics (as well as business intelligence tooling,
analyst training, and driving standards). That structure, however, is
expected to change as the analytics organization matures.
Table 4-3. Summary and examples of the different analytical organization
structures
Organizational
structure
Analysts report to or share goals with
Examples
 
Central analyst org Business owners  
Centralized
✓
 
Mars, Expedia, One Kings Lane
Decentralized
 
✓
PBS, Dallas Mavericks
Hybrid/embedded
✓
✓
Facebook, Ford, Booz Allen
Hamilton
Functional
✓
 
Fidelity
Consulting
✓
 
eBay, United Airlines
Center of excellence
✓
✓
Capital One, Bank of America
There is no answer as to “What is the best structure?” It depends. It
depends upon the organization size and industry. For instance, an
analytical center of excellence form makes little sense when there
are, say, five analysts. They are more prevalent in organizations with
more than 25,000 staff. One form may make the most sense at one
point, but as the company scales, it outgrows it and may need a re-
org to a more appropriate form.
However, based on an Accenture survey and analysis of more than
700 analysts,12 Davenport et al. (p. 106) do claim:
We think the centralized and center of excellence models (or a fed‐
erated model combining elements of both) offer the greatest poten‐
tial benefit for organizations ready to take an enterprise approach
to analytics. Analysts in a centralized or center of excellence model
have significantly higher levels of engagement, job satisfaction, per‐
ceived organizational support and resources, and intention to stay
than decentralized analysts or those who work in consulting units.13
Just One More Tool 
| 
81

In Chapter 11, we’ll discuss where these teams sit in the larger
organizational structure and the C-suite executives that they roll up
to. Before, that, however, let’s consider more closely what analysts
do: analyze.
82 
| 
Chapter 4: The Analyst Organization

CHAPTER 5
Data Analysis
If you torture the data long enough, it will confess [to anything].
—Ronald Coase
In the next block of three chapters, I focus on the core activity of
data analysts: analysis, focusing on the goals of analysis within the
organization and how to do impactful analysis.
I’ll examine activities such as analyzing data, designing metrics,
gaining insights, and presenting or selling those insights, ideas, and
recommendations to the decision-makers. Chapter 6 covers the
design of metrics and key performance indicators (KPIs), and Chap‐
ter 7 focuses on data visualization and storytelling. This first chapter
of the trio, however, focuses on analysis itself.
Importantly, it does not cover how to perform analysis or statistical
inference because there are many better texts available that do that
(see Further Reading). Instead, it considers the goal of the ana‐
lyst: what does it mean for an analyst to analyze? What are they try‐
ing to achieve? What tools do they have in their toolkit? I’ll bring
back the idea of levels of analytics from Chapter 1 and introduce
some other perspectives on types of analysis.
The goal here is to highlight the range of statistical and visualization
tools that are available to analysts to glean insights from data. A sec‐
ondary goal is to urge analysts to use the appropriate tools and,
where necessary, to learn more sophisticated tools that can provide a
deeper level of understanding of the problem at hand.
83

A fine woodworker making a wooden table needs quality raw mate‐
rials, such as mahogany hardwood; a range of tools, such as chisels
and set-squares, and the skills to know when and how to use and
apply those tools. If one of those three is missing, the quality of the
end product is greatly diminished. And, so it is with analysis. To
obtain the greatest value-producing analytical product, you need the
raw materials—high-quality data—and a range of tools, such as dif‐
ferent analysis techniques, and the skills to know when and how to
apply those analytical tools to bear upon the problem.
What Is Analysis?
It is worth spending a few moments considering the term “analysis.”
It derives from Greek, meaning to loosen up or unravel (from ἀνά
[aná, “on, up"] + λύω [lúō, “I loosen"]). That makes sense, but it is
too high-level to help us grasp what it really entails. For a more
business-oriented perspective, recall the definition from Chapter 1:
Transforming data assets into competitive insights, that will drive
business decisions and actions using people, processes and
technologies.
—Mario Faria
Let’s dig a little deeper and dissect that. Hopefully from Chapters 2
and 3, we have some sense of “data assets,” but what’s an insight?
According to Wikipedia:
Insight is the understanding of a specific cause and effect in a
specific context. The term can have several related meanings:
• A piece of information
• The act or result of understanding the inner nature of things
or of seeing intuitively (called noesis in Greek)
• An introspection
• The power of acute observation and deduction, penetration,
discernment, perception, called intellection or noesis
• An understanding of cause and effect based on identification
of relationships and behaviors within a model, context, or
scenario
OK, understanding cause and effect, understanding the inner nature
of things, models, etc. That helps.
84 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

Information, “the result of applying data processing to data, giving it
context and meaning,” is often used synonymously for data,
although technically they are not the same (see box and also “The
Differences Between Data, Information, and Knowledge”). 
Data Versus Information Versus Knowledge
Data is the raw, unprocessed facts about the world. Information is
captured, processed data, while knowledge is a set of mental models
and beliefs about the world built from information over time.
The current temperature is 44°F. That is a numerical fact. It exists
and is true whether or not someone records it or observes it. It just
is. However, it is not useful (to anyone other than me) because it is
ambiguous. It lacks context. Where? When?
It is 44°F in New York City at 10 a.m. on November 2, 2014. That is
more contextualized data. However, it is still a statement of facts
with no interpretation.
44°F is much colder than normal. That is information. We have pro‐
cessed the data point, and combined it with other data points to
ascertain what is “normal” and where this value stands in relation
to that reference point.
44°F is chilly. I’ll need my coat. You combine information over time
and build up a mental model of what that means. This is knowl‐
edge. Of course, those models are all relative; someone in Alaska
might consider 44°F in November to be unseasonably warm.
From the depths of information, we can roll back up to the top-level
definition of analysis (Figure 5-1). Although the remaining terms,
such as “understanding” and “context” are still loaded, hopefully
we now have a clearer sense of what analysis entails, at least concep‐
tually.
Given that new level of understanding, let’s examine the set of tools
that analysts have access to. I’m not referring to software tools, such
as Excel or R, but instead in terms of the statistical tools available
and the types of analysis that one can perform.
What Is Analysis? 
| 
85

1 Or at least he considers these six types only in his data analysis course.
Figure 5-1. Result of a two-level drill down from definition of analysis.
Types of Analysis
Jeffrey Leek, an assistant professor of Biostatistics at Johns Hopkins
and co-editor of the simply statistics blog, considers that there are
six types of analysis,1 here ordered from simplest to most complex
and demanding:
• Descriptive
• Exploratory
• Inferential
• Predictive
• Causal
• Mechanistic
I am going to cover the first five only. The last, mechanistic, I asso‐
ciate more with basic science, research and development, and the
term “modeling” more than “analysis.” Mechanistic modeling and
analysis represents a very deep understanding of a system, which
comes from studying a stable system in a very controlled manner
with many experiments over many years—hence my association
with basic science. This situation doesn’t tend to occur within most
businesses, with some exceptions, such as R&D departments in
pharma and engineering. To be more pithy, if you are involved at the
level of mechanistic analysis, the pinnacle of analysis, you probably
don’t need this book to tell you how to do that kind of work.
If you think back to Chapter 1, your “spidey sense” might now be
tingling. There we discussed eight levels of analytics. Here we are
86 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

presented with six types of analysis, and, there is only one term in
common: predictive. What the heck does this mean?
The preceding list comprises types of statistical analysis. Impor‐
tantly, they can drive multiple levels of analytics. For instance,
exploratory data analysis (which we touched upon in Chapter 2) can
be used to prepare an ad hoc report  (analytics level 2). It could also
be used to derive the business logic for an alert (analytics level 4):
for example, find the 98th percentile of a distribution and sound an
alert if the relevant metric exceeds that level. You can think of levels
of analytics as activities using one or more types of statistical analy‐
sis with some business rules, constraints, and output format require‐
ments on top of that.
Figure 5-2 attempts to show the mapping between the two lists. The
heatmap shows level of analytics on the left and five types of analysis
below. The level in each cell is a crude estimate of the amount of
effort or time, centered on that type of analysis. For instance, stan‐
dard reports tend to use descriptive and exploratory analysis but are
extremely unlikely to use causal models. At the other end, optimiza‐
tion analytics will certainly build upon descriptive analysis and
exploratory data analysis, but their primary focus is on predictive
analysis, possibly reaching across to causal analysis.
Figure 5-2. Crude mapping between level of analytics (left) and types
of analysis (bottom). See detailed explanation in text.
Types of Analysis 
| 
87

I should clarify one point. There are many other types of quantita‐
tive analysis, such as survival analysis, social-network analysis, and
time-series analysis. However, each of those is tied to a specific
domain or data type, and the analytical tools and approaches within
those are comprised of these six more fundamental analytical activi‐
ties and approaches. For instance, in time-series analysis, you might
compute the period of a phenomenon (that’s descriptive analysis),
and then you might plot a variable over time (that’s EDA), and
finally you might model and predict future values (the predictive
analysis). You get the picture. In other words, these six classes are
archetypes of analysis. There are also types of analysis that are more
logical and qualitative. For instance, root-cause analysis, the “5 whys
method” from Toyota and Six Sigma, is a good example.
With that, let’s go through each of the five types of analysis.
Glossary
Confused by measure versus dimension versus metric? Don’t feel
bad. There is a lot of overlap and inconsistencies in their use and
little consensus. Here’s my take:
Variable
Something that is prone to change over space, time, or sample
units, for example, “Let variable v = velocity of the car” or
“Gender is a categorical variable.”
Dimension
A variable. While “variable” is more frequently used by scien‐
tists and programmers, dimension is more common in busi‐
ness intelligence. A dimension is a variable to categorize facts
and measures and typically is categorical or temporal, but
could be rankings, ratings, or integers. For instance, you may
wish to plot total sales (measure) versus state (dimension) or
year (dimension) or calculate website bounce rate (measure)
versus gender (dimension). I like to think of dimensions as the
things that are often on the x-axes and measures the things that
are on the y-axes in bar and line charts.
Measure
A measurement of the raw value of an object, such as length, or
it can mean a standard unit of scale. However, in business
intelligence, it typically refers to a function (e.g., BMI) or
88 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

aggregate, such as min, sum, count, or average of measured
data. Think of it as pure or derived measurement of something.
Metric
Function of two or more measures (in the measurement sense
of measure), or is simply a measure (in the function sense of
measure). Derived measure.
Statistic
A single measure of some attribute of a sample of values, for
example, arithmetic mean = 6.3. It is a function applied to a set
of data values that returns a single value. Confusingly, both the
function and the final value are the statistic.
Key performance indicator
This is a measure in a business context where it is associated
with a performance goal or target and/or some baseline value
(KPIs are covered in the next chapter). That is, it shows perfor‐
mance relative to some business objective or starting point.
Descriptive Analysis
Descriptive analysis is the simplest type of analysis. It describes and
summarizes a dataset quantitatively. Importantly, it characterizes the
sample of data at hand and does not attempt to describe anything
about the population from which it comes. It can often form the
data that is displayed in dashboards, such as number of new mem‐
bers this week or booking year to date (see “Dashboards” on page
147).
The natural place to start is a univariate analysis, meaning describ‐
ing a single variable (column or field) of the data. We discussed the
five-number summary in Chapter 2. However, there are many other
possible statistics covering areas such as location (“middle” of the
data), dispersion (range or spread of data), and shape of the distri‐
bution.
The simplest but one of the most important measures is:
Sample size
The number of data points or records in the sample.
 
Types of Analysis 
| 
89

Location metrics include:
Mean (average)
The arithmetic mean of the data: sum of values divided by num‐
ber of values.
Geometric mean
The geomean, for short, is used to capture the average when
there are multiplicative effects at play, such as compound inter‐
est over time when rates vary year to year. It is the nth root of the
product of the n values. If you receive 8% interest in year 1 and
then 6% for three subsequent years, the average interest rate is
6.5%.
Harmonic mean
Arithmetic mean of the reciprocals of the value, typically used
for averaging rates. For instance, if you drive to the store at 50
mph but hit traffic on the return and drive at 20 mph, the aver‐
age speed is not 35 mph but 29 mph.
Median
The 50th percentile.
Mode
The most frequently occurring value.
 
Dispersion or central tendency measures include:
Minimum
The smallest value in the sample (0th percentile).
Q1
The 25th percentile. The value such that one quarter of the sam‐
ple has values below this value. Also known as the lower hinge.
Q3
The 75th percentile. Also known as the upper hinge.
Maximum
The largest value in the sample (100th percentile).
Interquartile range
The central 50% of data; that is, Q3 – Q1.
90 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

Range
Maximum minus minimum.
Standard deviation
Measure of the dispersion from the arithmetic mean of a sam‐
ple. It is the square root of variance, and its units are the same as
the sample data.
Variance
Another measure of dispersion and is the average squared dif‐
ference from the arithmetic mean and is the square of standard
deviation. Its units are the square of those of the data.
Standard error
Standard deviation divided by the square root of sample size.
Measures the expected standard deviation of the sample mean if
we were to repeatedly obtain samples of same sample size from
same source population.
Gini coefficient
A measure of dispersion originally developed to quantify the
degree of inequality in incomes in a population, but which can
be used more broadly. Conceptually, it is easiest to view this as
the half the average absolute difference between two individuals
sampled at random from the population, divided by the average
income in the population.
 
Shape measures include:
Skew
A measure that captures the asymmetry of a distribution. If the
distribution has a larger tail on the right compared to the left, it
has a positive skew. Conversely for right skew. The number of
followers across Twitter users is highly positive skewed (e.g.,
“An In-Depth Look at the 5% of Most Active Users” (syso‐
mos) and “Tweets loud and quiet” (Radar).
Kurtosis
Measure of the sharpness of the peak of a distribution. Highly
kurtotic distributions have sharp peaks with fat tails. This can
be an important consideration in investing because it means
Types of Analysis 
| 
91

that extreme swings are more common than if the variable was
normally distributed.
I would also include the type of distribution as a useful descriptive
statistic. For instance, normal (Gaussian), log normal, exponential,
and uniform are all common. Knowing the type and thus shape of a
distribution can inform you of the characteristics it might have (e.g.,
that it may generate rare but extreme outlier values), can sometimes
provide clues to the generating processes, and typically indicates
what other metrics you should gather. For instance, if the distribu‐
tion is some form of power law, such as the distribution of the num‐
ber of Twitter followers, you know that you should compute the
decay constant as an important characteristic metric.
Not all variables are continuous, of course. Gender and product
group, for instance, are both categorical. Thus, descriptive analysis
might involve tables of relative frequencies for different categories or
contingency tables, such as the following:
Sales by sales region
Gender
Western
Southern
Central Eastern
Total
Male
3485
1393
6371
11435
22684
Female
6745
1546
8625
15721
32637
Total
10230
2939
14996
27156
55321
The key at this level of analysis is for the analyst to know what to
slice and group the data by, and to recognize when something stands
out as interesting. For example, in the preceding table, why do
women comprise such as larger proportion of sales in the western
region? 
Moving up to two variables, descriptive analysis can involve meas‐
ures of association, such as computing a correlation coefficient or
covariance.
The goal of descriptive analysis is to describe the key features of the
sample numerically. It should shed light on the key numbers that
summarize distributions within the data, and it may describe or
show the relationships among variables with metrics that describe
association, or by tables that cross-tabulate counts.
Some of these simple metrics may prove highly valuable in them‐
selves. You may want to know and track the median order amount
92 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

or longest duration to resolve a customer case. That is, they may be
sufficiently interesting to drive a standard report, ad hoc
report, query drill down, or alert (analytics levels 1 to 4) and that
alone can provide value to the organization. They may also provide
insight, or comfort, regarding data quality. For instance, if the maxi‐
mum age of a player on a first-person shooter gaming site is 115,
either the player entered bad data or the date of birth field was set to
a default date of 1900 (or you have a very cool great grandma)—sim‐
ple min, max, ranges, and histograms can help with that.
Finally, descriptive analysis is typically the first step on the ladder—a
chance to get a sense of the data—to more deeper analysis.
Exploratory Analysis
Descriptive analysis is a very important first step. However, numeri‐
cal summaries can only get you so far. One problem is that you are
condensing a large number of values down to a few summary num‐
bers. Unsurprisingly, different samples with different distributions,
shapes, and properties can result in the same summary statistics.
In Figure 5-3, the two samples have the same mean value of 100 but
have very different distributions.
Figure 5-3. A) a bimodal distribution and b) a unimodal distribution,
both of which have the same mean value of ~100.
Now that seems kind of unsurprising. We have a simple single sum‐
mary statistic: mean of a single variable. There are lots of possible
“solutions” or samples that could result in that summary statistic
value.
Types of Analysis 
| 
93

What is far more surprising, however, is the following. Suppose that
you were told that you had four bivariate (2D) samples with vari‐
ables x and y with the following statistics:
Property
Value
Sample size in each case
11
Mean of x in each case
9
Sample variance of x in each case
11
Mean of y in each case
7.5
Sample variance of y in each case
4.122 or 4.127
Correlation between x and y in each case
0.816
Linear regression in each case
y = 3.00 + 0.500x
That’s a highly constrained system. Those four samples have got to
look fairly similar, don’t they? As you can see from Figure 5-4, far
from it.
Figure 5-4. Anscombe’s quartet. Each of these four samples has the
same mean x, mean y, variance of x, variance of y, correlation, and
regression line (at least to two decimal places). Figure from http://
bit.ly/anscombes-quartet.
94 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

2 Anscombe, F. J., “Graphs in statistical analysis,” American Statistician 27 (1973): 17–21.
This is known as Anscombe’s quartet2 after statistician Francis
Anscombe, who devised this in 1973. In those early days of statisti‐
cal computing, his motivation for the quartet was against the exist‐
ing doctrine of the day in which textbooks on statistical method and
statistical software applications claimed that (page 17): 
1. numerical calculations are exact, but graphs are rough,
2. for any particular kind of statistical data, there is just one set of
calculations constituting a correct statistical analysis,
3. performing intricate calculations is virtuous whereas looking
at the data is cheating.
Anscombe went on to say:
Most kinds of statistical calculations rest on assumptions about the
behavior of the data. Those assumptions may be false, and then the
calculations may be misleading. We ought always to try and check
whether the assumptions are reasonably correct; and if they are
wrong we ought to be able to perceive in what ways they are wrong.
Graphs are very valuable for these purposes.
Using graphics to examine and visualize data is called exploratory
data analysis (hereafter, EDA), and was championed and promoted
by John Tukey and his heavily influential 1977 book, Exploratory
Data Analysis (Pearson). If done well, graphs help us see the bigger
picture of a data set, and help us spot obvious or unusual patterns—
something that our brains are innately good at. Those are often
where insights start to come from. Why is there a kink in that curve?
At what point are we seeing diminishing returns from marketing
spend?
EDA allows us to challenge or confirm our assumptions about the
data. This is why I mentioned R’s pairs() command in Chapter 2
about data quality. We often have pretty good expectations of what
unclean data might look like, such as outliers, missing data, and
other anomalies, perhaps more so than our expectations of what
clean data might look like.
As we study and gain greater experience with a domain, we develop
our intuition of what factors and possible relations at are play. EDA,
with its broad suite of ways to view the data points and relation‐
Types of Analysis 
| 
95

ships, provides us a range of lenses with which to study a system.
That, in turn, helps an analyst to come up with new hypotheses of
what might be happening and, if you understand which variables
you can control, which levers you have to work with in the system to
drive the metrics, such as revenue or conversion, in the desired
direction. EDA can also highlight gaps in our knowledge and help
determine which experiments might make sense to run to fill in
those gaps.
For univariate data, where the data is continuous (real numbers) or 
discrete (integers), common graphical types include stem-and-leaf
plots (Figure 5-5), histograms (Figure 5-6), and box plots
(Figure 5-7).
Figure 5-5. A stem-and-leaf plot.
Figure 5-6. A histogram.
96 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

3 Donuts: tasty to eat. Donut charts: just don’t do it. Use a pie or bar chart instead.
Figure 5-7. A box plot.
If a histogram is scaled so that its area equals 1, this is a probability
density function (PDF). Another useful way to view the same data is
to plot the cumulative probability, called the cumulative density
function (CDF). That can highlight interesting points of the distri‐
bution, including central data points.
Figures 5-8, 5-9, and 5-10 show the common graphical types for
univariate categorical variables.
Figure 5-8. A pie or donut chart.3
Types of Analysis 
| 
97

Figure 5-9. A bar chart.
Figure 5-10. A pareto chart.
98 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

For two variables, there is a larger array of common types:
 
Continuous or discrete
Categorical
Categorical
• Box plot
• Area chart
• Range chart
• Table chart
• Spider/radar chart
• Stacked bar chart
• Funnel chart
Continuous or discrete
• Scatter plot
• Line graph
• Polar plot
• Maps & Voronoi diagram
• Density plot
• Contour plot
• Same as top left
(See also Figure 7-5.)
For examining three variables at once, there is a whole slew of
graphic types. Some are more traditional, generic, and common
(surface, bubble plots, 3D scatter) while other have specialized pur‐
poses (see the D3 gallery). 
Where one variable is time (such as years) or categorical, another
approach can be to use “small multiples” where you create a lattice
of one- or two-dimensional plots (Figure 5-11).
Don’t restrict yourself to one or two types. All of
these chart types exist for a reason. Study their
strengths and weaknesses, and use whatever
type will show any interesting signals, trends, or
patterns to best effect. (We’ll return to some
aspects of this in Chapter 7.)
Where possible and appropriate, use a command, such as a pairs(),
to autogenerate plots of different combinations of variables that
your eye can rapidly scan to look for interesting features or oddities
that deserve greater investigation.
Types of Analysis 
| 
99

Figure 5-11. Example of small multiples. From http://bit.ly/small-mult.
Inferential Analysis
Descriptive analysis and EDA come under the broad umbrella of
descriptive statistics—they describe properties of the data sample at
hand. We now switch to the other main branch: statistical inference.
As the name implies, the goal is to infer some information—which
might be parameters, distributions, or relationships—about the
broader population from which the sample came. It also sets the
stage for hypothesis testing in which we design and run experiments
to test and analyze our understanding of the underlying mecha‐
nisms.
Because this is not a statistics textbook, this section will only give a
cursory overview of the sorts of questions one can ask, the classes of
insights that might be generated, and the added value that can be
obtained by using inferential analysis. If you need an introductory
text, I would highly recommend the free OpenIntro Statistics.
Why do we need inference? We typically infer metrics about the
population from a sample because data collection is too expen‐
sive, impractical, or even impossible to obtain all data. Consider an
exit poll for a presidential election. It is unrealistic to poll 125 mil‐
lion voters. Instead, we want to get a good representative sample and
make an accurate inference about what the results would have been
had we polled everyone. Also, if you are running quality checks on
100 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

your manufacturing process and it involves destructive testing, then
clearly it is impossible to test everything because you would have
nothing left to sell.
Another reason for inference is to provide an objective framework
for evaluating differences and results. Suppose that you ran a sur‐
prise and delight campaign. You select 1,000 customers with some
common criteria, such as that they must have made two purchases
in the last year and are members of your loyalty program. You send
half of them (the test group) a surprise gift with a note saying “Just
because we love our customers, here is a little thank you,” and the
other half (the control group) get nothing. You evaluate the number
of purchases over the next three months, and your descriptive anal‐
ysis shows that the test group spent $3.36 more per month on aver‐
age than the control group. What does that mean? It sounds good,
but how reliable is that value? Would we likely see a similar value if
we ran the experiment again, or is this difference just by chance?
Maybe it is swayed by a single customer who purchased one large
order? Statistical inference allows us to provide an estimate of likeli‐
hood that we saw that difference by chance alone if there were no
real difference in the underlying purchasing behavior.
Imagine handing that result to a decision maker. With descriptive
analysis alone, you can only state the result: “We found this differ‐
ence of $3.36/month, it’s in the right direction, and it seems what we
might expect."” However, with inferential analysis, you would be
able to make a far stronger case: “We found this difference of $3.36/
month, and there is only a 2.3% chance that that we would have seen
such as result if there were no real underlying difference. The data
strongly suggest this is a real effect of the campaign."” Or, con‐
versely, “We saw this difference, but there is a 27% chance that it was
a chance effect. In all likelihood there is no real impact from that
campaign, at least on that metric.” From both an analyst’s and deci‐
sion maker’s perspective, inferential analysis provides greater value
and impact to the organization.
The types of questions that one can answer with statistical inference
include (but are not limited to):
Standard error, confidence intervals, and margin of error
How much confidence can I have in this particular sample
mean or sample proportion? How much might it vary due to
chance if I were to repeat the experiment?
Types of Analysis 
| 
101

Expected mean of single sample
Is this sample mean significantly different from my expected
value?
Difference of means from two samples
Are the means from these two samples significantly different
from each other? (More technically: what is the likelihood that
we would observe this difference of means, or greater, if the null
hypothesis were true that there is no difference in the popula‐
tion means for the two samples?)
Sample size calculations and power analysis
What is the minimum sample size I will need, given what I cur‐
rently know about the process, to achieve a certain level of con‐
fidence in the data? These types of statistical tools are important
for planning A/B testing, covered in Chapter 8.
Distributions
Is the distribution of values in this sample consistent with a nor‐
mal (bell-shaped) distribution? Do these two samples likely
have the same underlying distribution?
Regression
Suppose that I conducted a well-designed experiment in which I
systematically varied one (independent) variable while control‐
ling as much as possible for all others factors, and then I fitted a
regression (trend) line. How much confidence can I have in that
trend line? How much is it likely to vary (in both gradient and
intercept) if I were to repeat the experiment many times?
Goodness of fit and association
Given a categorical variable (say, product category), do the fre‐
quencies or counts (say, purchases) match a set of expected rela‐
tive frequencies? Is there a relationship among two variables,
one of which is categorical?
Even though this is a very brief overview, hopefully you can see the
potential value in the set of tools that statistical inference provides. It
allows one to design experiments and analyze data more objec‐
tively, hopefully reducing false positives from chance effects.
Predictive Analysis
Prediction is very difficult, especially about the future.
—attributed to Niels Bohr
102 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

4 Taleb, N. N., The Black Swan. The Impact of the Improbable (New York: Penguin Press,
2007).
Predictive analysis builds upon inferential analysis. The goal is to
learn about relationships among variables from an existing training
dataset and develop a statistical model that can predict values of
attributes for new, incomplete, or future data points.
At first blush, this sounds like voodoo magic. After all, we have no
idea when the next big earthquake will destroy San Francisco (the
“big one” is overdue), precisely when and where hurricanes will
form next season, or the price of Apple’s stock on Monday morning
(if I could do that, I wouldn’t be writing this book). It is true that we
are indeed unable to predict features about these extreme, complex,
or chaotic phenomena—“black swans”4—well. However, many
aspects of business and other domains have sufficient signal that
predictive analysis can work well. For instance, Nate Silver was able
to predict all 2008 US Senate races and winners in 49 out of 50 states
in that year’s presidential elections. 
In retail, there can be strong sales patterns. Figure 5-12 (upper blue
curve) shows a very clear and predictable pattern of annual sales of
sunglasses, peaking in June–July with troughs in November and Jan‐
uary (presumably, the little subpeaks each December are holiday
sales). A similar pattern, but translated six months, are sales of
gloves with peaks each December. Predictive analysis can then be
used to generate forecasts, that is, future predictions in a time ser‐
ies, which in turn can be used to generate plans of when to manufac‐
ture or buy goods, how many to make or buy, when to have them
shipped to stores, and so on.
As well as time series, predictive analysis can also make predictions
about which class an object might fall into. For instance, given a per‐
son’s salary information, credit card purchase history, and history
of paying (or not paying) bills, we can predict their credit risk. Or,
given a set of tweets that contain a short movie review, each of
which has been labeled by a human as being positive (“I loved this
movie.”) or negative (“This movie sucked.”), we can develop a model
that will predict the sentiment—positive or negative—for new
tweets, such as “The movie’s special effects were awesome,” that the
model was not trained upon.
Types of Analysis 
| 
103

Figure 5-12. Google Trends showing predictable, seasonal patterns of
interest in sunglasses (upper, blue) and gloves (lower, red) from 2004–
2014 and forecasting out one year to 2015.
The applications of predictive analysis are enormous with huge
impacts. Following are a few examples.
Predictions that form the basis of a service per se:
Dating apps
Good recommendations of who to date can lead to greater cus‐
tomer satisfaction.
Stock prediction software (caveat emptor!)
By tracking movements in stock prices and identifying patterns,
algorithms can attempt to buy low, sell high, and maximize
returns.
Predictions that provide enhanced service to the customer:
Spam filters
Recognizing and filtering out spam (“Buy ViaGRa onLine”) ver‐
sus nonspam (“Your meeting with the CEO”) messages leads to
clean inboxes and happier users.
Content apps
Good recommendations of what to watch (Netflix) leads to
higher retention and lower churn.
Social networking
LinkedIn’s “People You May Know” increases the user’s network
effect and provides both the user greater value and the service
more valuable data.
Predictions that can drive higher conversion and basket sizes:
104 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

Cross sell and upsell
Even simple association-based recommendations, such as “Cus‐
tomers Who Bought the Frozen DVD Also Bought The Little
Mermaid" (Amazon) leads to higher sales and, for some, makes
holiday shopping quicker and easier.
Ads and coupons
Learning and individual’s history and predicting an individual’s
state, interest, or intent can drive more relevant display ads or
effective supermarket coupons (such as from Tesco, which we
will discuss in more detail later).
Predictions that drive a better strategy:
Bank approval
Predicting who will default on mortgages and baking those
insights into the approval processes can decrease risk.
Predictive policing
Predicting crime hotspots and so when and where to send
police patrols.
Demand forecasting
Predicting future website or service traffic, such as tweets sent
during the Super Bowl, can lead to a proactive, preemptive
ramping up of servers to meet demand and keep the service
running (fewer “fail whales”).
Political campaigning
Predicting individual voter’s intention (vote/not vote, Demo‐
crat/Republican/Undecided) well and rescoring nightly based
on new data, led to finer and better targeted efforts (media, calls
for campaign contributions, and door knocking) and contrib‐
uted greatly to success in the Obama presidential campaigns.
This is just a small sample. For an excellent overview of predictive
analytics and a more comprehensive list, see John Siegel’s book, Pre‐
dictive Analytics (John Wiley & Sons), especially Tables 1–9.
So how do we perform such analysis? There is a whole slew of
approaches and tools. The simplest possible model is to predict that
tomorrow will be the same as today. That can work well for some
slowly changing phenomena, such as weather in Southern Califor‐
nia, but not for volatile systems, such as stock prices. Regression is
the broadest family of tools. Within that, however, are a number of
Types of Analysis 
| 
105

5 Fortuny, E. J. de, D. Martens, and F. Provost, Predictive Modeling with Big Data: Is Big‐
ger Really Better?” Big Data 1, no. 4 (2013): 215–226.
variants (lasso, ridge, robust, etc.) to deal with different characteris‐
tics of the data. Of particular interest and power is logistic regres‐
sion that can be used to predict classes. For instance, spam/not spam
used to be mostly predicted with a Naive Bayes predictor, but nowa‐
days, logistic regression is more common. Other techniques and
what come under the term “machine learning” include neural net‐
works; tree-based approaches, such as classification and regression
trees; random forests; support vector machines; and k-nearest
neighbors.
While powerful, predictive analysis is not necessarily difficult. One
of the hardest steps is to obtain a good, clean dataset. When devel‐
oping a classifier, that often means manually curating a corpus of
data; for instance, labeling a set of tweets as positive or negative,
which can be especially laborious. Once you have that in place,
though, with a good library, such as scikit-learn, implementing a
basic model can involve literally a few lines of code. To obtain a good
model, however, often requires more effort and iteration and a pro‐
cess called feature engineering. Features are the model’s inputs. They
can involve basic raw data that you have collected, such as order
amount, simple derived variables, such as “Is order date on a week‐
end? Yes/No,” as well as more complex abstract features, such as the
“similarity score" between two movies. Thinking up features is as
much an art as a science and can rely on domain knowledge.
Finally, predictive analysis doesn’t necessarily require large amounts
of data. Nate Silver’s 2008 presidential predictions input data was
only 188,000 (see Oliver Grisel’s presentation for evidence of that
and a good short overview of predictive analysis). What was key was
that it involved a large number of different sources and polls, each
wrong and biased in some way, but collectively they averaged out to
be close to reality. There is evidence, at least for certain classes of
problems, that having large(r) amounts of data lets you get away
with simple models5 (see  Appendix A).
All in all, predictive analysis is a powerful weapon in a data-driven
organization’s arsenal.
106 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

6 If you are not convinced, check out the spurious correlations, such as US cheese con‐
sumption correlates with number of people who died by becoming tangled in their
bedsheets.
Causal Analysis
We have probably all heard the maxim: correlation does not imply
causation.6 If you collect some data and then do some EDA to look
for interesting relationships among variables, you’ll probably find
something. Even if there is a very strong correlation between two
variables, it does not mean that one causes the other. (For instance,
HDL cholesterol inversely correlates with rates of heart disease: the
more of this “good” cholesterol, the better. However, HDL-
increasing drugs don’t lower heart disease. Why? HDL is a byprod‐
uct of healthy heart, not a cause.) Thus, such post hoc analyses have
strong limitations. If you really want to understand a system and
know for sure what levers you have available to influence focal vari‐
ables and metrics, then you need to develop a causal model.
As in the surprise-and-delight example earlier, the idea is to run one
or a series of experiments in which you control as much as possible
and ideally change just one small thing. Thus, you might run an
experiment in an email campaign to your customers in which you
test the email subject line. If everything is the same (same email
content, sent at same time, etc.) and the only thing different between
the control and the treatment is the subject line, and you see a sig‐
nificantly higher open rate, then you have strong evidence and can
conclude that the higher open rate is due to the effect of that subject
line, that the subject line is the causal factor.
This experiment is somewhat limited because while it provides good
evidence of the influence of the subject line, it is not clear which
word of phrase resonates with the customers. For that, you would
need to run more experiments. Let’s take a more quantitative exam‐
ple: the time at which you send an email can make a big difference
to open rates. For that you can do a controlled experiment with mul‐
tiple treatments (send batch at 8:00 a.m., send batch at 9:00 a.m.,
send batch at 10:00 a.m., etc.) and examine how email send time
Types of Analysis 
| 
107

causes a change in open rates. You will be able to predict (interpo‐
late) what open rates would be if you were to send email at 8:30 a.m.
What Can You Do?
Analysts: You should be striving to both “sharpen your saw” as well
as obtain more tools for your toolkit. You will become a more effec‐
tive and valued analyst, and it is an investment in yourself and your
career. Evaluate the statistical and visualization skills that you cur‐
rently use. How can they be improved? For instance, would learn‐
ing R enable you to do EDA more quickly and in a more
reproducible manner? Would an additional, higher-level type of
analytical approach provide greater insights and impact to your
project? What would it take to learn that skill?
Management: Keep an eye out for situations where additional ana‐
lytical types might provide better insights and impact to the organi‐
zation. If stock outs are a problem in your supply chain, would
predictive models help? Can you do more experiments that will
deepen the institutional knowledge of causal factors? Push analysts
to develop their skills and openly support them with training, men‐
torship, and time to hone their skills and enhance the analytics
org. Let them experiment with other software tools that might pro‐
vide new types of insights or let them do their work more quickly
and easily. 
Such experiments provide a causal, deeper understanding of the sys‐
tem that be used for predictions and can help plan campaigns and
other changes to enhance the metrics that one is trying to drive.
They can also form the basis of the simulation models that can be
used to optimize the system. For instance, one can simulate a supply
chain and study the effects of how differing replenishment triggers
and rules can affect the chance of stock outs or the total shipping
and warehousing costs. These types of activities are in the bottom-
right of Davenport’s matrix in Table 1-2 and are the highest levels of
analytics. Given the controlled scientific manner in which the
knowledge is assembled over time and the power that such models
hold, such causal models are what Jeffrey Leek calls the “gold stan‐
dard” for data analysis.
In a business, all of this analysis and modeling activity is not for the
general interest for the analysts or more senior managers; it is with
108 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Analysis

the goal of driving the core metrics, such as email open rates, con‐
version metrics, and ultimately revenue. Thus, it is crucial that those
metrics are the correct ones to be aiming for and that they are
designed well. If not, then you could be optimizing for the wrong
thing. Given the importance of good metric design, I will now cover
that topic in the next chapter.
Types of Analysis 
| 
109


CHAPTER 6
Metric Design
If you don’t know where you’re going,
you’ll probably end up somewhere else.
—Yogi Berra
Count what is countable, measure what is measurable,
and what is not measurable, make measurable.
—Galileo Galilei
A data-driven organization needs to set out a clear strategy, that is, a
direction that the business is heading, and then determine a set of
top-level metrics—key performance indictors (KPIs)—to track
whether the business is indeed heading in the right direction and to
monitor progress and success. Responsibility for driving those top-
level KPIs flows down to divisions or business units where they may
define additional KPIs specific for that business unit. Ultimately, this
ends up a set of operational and diagnostic metrics that monitor
tasks, programs, tests, and projects that drives the KPIs.
Given this, it is imperative that metrics are designed well. They
should act as true, accurate compasses. You don’t want to be follow‐
ing a strategic metric that indicates you are heading in the desired
southeast direction, when your true heading is actually northeast, or
an operational metric that indicates mobile conversion is increasing
at 5% per annum when it is, in fact, flat. You don’t want to be watch‐
ing a faulty diagnostic metric that fails to inform you as early as it
could that your website is on the verge of crashing. Metrics are also
the outputs from experiments and A/B tests which, if instrumented
well, will inform causal analysis and that, as we discussed in the pre‐
111

vious chapter, provide the greatest raw material for data-driven
insights and strategies. David Skok sums this up well:
One way to look at how companies work is to imagine them as a
machine that has Outputs, and Levers that you, the management
team, can pull to affect its behavior. Weak management teams have
only a limited understanding of how their machines work, and
what levers are available to affect performance. The better the man‐
agement team, the better they will understand how that machine
works, and how they can optimize its performance (what levers
they can pull). When we look to design metrics, we are looking to
deepen our understanding of the machinery, and how it works.
Well designed metrics will automatically drive behavior to optimize
output from the machine.
In this chapter, I will cover the design of metrics. I start out with
general considerations and then focus on KPIs more specifically. I
will, however, only lightly touch on how you choose metrics because
a full discussion is beyond the scope of this book, and a number of
robust frameworks cover this important stage, such as balanced
scorecard, TQM, performance prism, and tableau du bord.
Metric Design
There are several considerations when choosing or designing a met‐
ric. In an ideal world, metrics should exhibit a number of traits.
Simple
Design a metric to be “as simple as it can be, but not simpler” (Ein‐
stein).
Which of these would be easier to explain to a colleague?
Customer: A person with whom there has been an exchange of
monies from the sale of one of our products.
Customer: A person who has purchased a product from us,
• Excluding gift card purchases
• Excluding those who returned their item for a full refund within
45 days
• Including anyone who redeemed a gift card
You get the point.
112 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

Simple metrics are, by definition, simple to define, which in turn
means they are:
• Simpler to convey to others: there is less chance of confusion
• Simpler to implement: they are more likely to be calculated cor‐
rectly
• More likely to be comparable to other teams or organizations
Of course, there are many reasons why one might legitimately want
to add on additional business logic and edge cases to create a more
complex metric. You may need to filter out sources of bias or
extremal edge cases. Or, you may need a metric that explicitly tracks
a particular biased subsample, such as the subset of customer cases
that cost you the most to resolve.
You have to take each case on its merits, but try to avoid adding
additional complexity for rare edge cases that add little to the overall
business value and insight of that metric.
Bottom line: don’t make metrics unnecessarily complex.
Standardized
Match standard metric definitions wherever possible. For instance,
if there is a standard, well-defined metric for website bounce rate,
then use it unless there is a very good reason to define and imple‐
ment a home-grown variant. If the retail industry uses exits to meas‐
ure foot traffic at stores, use that metric and not enters, even if they
might be highly numerically or conceptually comparable. For
instance, to track monthly active users, Facebook only includes peo‐
ple logged in, whereas Yelp considers both those logged in as well as
guests.
Being standardized will generate less confusion, especially for col‐
leagues joining your teams from other organizations. It will also
make it easier to compare your metrics with others in the same sec‐
tor, that is, to make use of competitor knowledge and to benchmark
your organization’s performance.
More important is to make sure that the metric is standardized
within your organization. I have seen confusion when different
teams think that they are using the same definition and may talk
about it in the same terms, but in reality, the implementation in
Metric Design 
| 
113

their team’s spreadsheets or systems have in fact diverged from one
another. Their numbers don’t match, and arguments ensue.
Best practice is to have a centralized, automated, documented, ver‐
sioned single source of truth that different teams draw from. You’ll
be able to incorporate analyses and insights from others, comforta‐
ble that you are comparing like for like. As such, this makes it easier
to build up a repository of analyses and an institutional knowledge
of the causal factors about the business (or market) that the organi‐
zation can trust, use, and build upon.
Bottom line: use standard metrics unless you have very good reasons
to deviate from them. If they are unconventional, document how
and why they are nonstandard.
Accurate
Metrics should be accurate. That is, their mean numerical value
should be close to the true underlying mean value (or population
mean; see Figure 6-1). If you compare this to archery, it is the equiv‐
alent of an arrow being on target.
Consider the checkout amount from Amazon purchases. The mean
checkout amount excluding book purchases is an inaccurate measure
of the average checkout amounts for all purchases. It is biased.
In Chapter 2, we mentioned some examples of missing data bias.
For instance, the average customer happiness doesn’t capture the
true happiness if those unsatisfied customers subject to slow ship‐
ping are more likely to submit their surveys late and miss the cutoff
date, or not submit it at all. We have a sample that biases the happi‐
ness metric up, away from the true, lower value.
When designing metrics, try to think about possible sources of bias
in both the data itself and in the metric. In Chapter 2, we discussed
some sources of bias in the raw data collection. From the metric’s
perspective, think carefully about any conditions that filter subsets
of the data in or out or any hidden or stale “fudge factors.”
Imagine a sharpshooter at a shooting range, firing a rifle at a distant
target and using a scope to help him see. There is a constant breeze
blowing the bullet off target; thus, he turns a knob on the side of the
scope to adjust the (mis)alignment of the scope and the barrel—the
“fudge factor”—to account for the wind. If the wind drops or picks
up, however, that scope alignment is stale and will no longer help get
114 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

the bullet on the target. Conditions change, and you have to keep
your models and any fudge factors up to date.
The same is true in business. At Warby Parker, we use electronic
devices to count the foot traffic in and out of our retail stores. One
use of such data is to compute our retail conversion metric, the pro‐
portion of people who enter the store that purchase something. At
one location, staff can only access the stock and break rooms by
going through the main entrance, and this extra staff traffic inflated
the traffic count, decreasing the conversion metric. It was a biased
metric. We remedied this with a statistical model that estimated, for
a given day of week and given level of busyness, the proportion of
traffic that was staff versus customers as a correction factor. This
resulted in a much more realistic conversion metric. The concern is
that such models can become stale as business conditions change;
for instance, customers may be more motivated to purchase during
the holidays. Either the model has to be recalibrated periodically, or,
as we are now trialing, use superior technology that can identify
staff explicitly and exclude them from the traffic counts.
Figure 6-1. Precision (being stable or clustered) and accuracy (being on
target) with illustrative example in two-dimensional data. Inaccurate
metrics have a bias such that their mean differs from the true mean in
a systemic way. Precision captures the variability: how much the mean
value would differ if you were to repeat the experiment multiple times
and collect new samples of the same size.
Metric Design 
| 
115

Precise
Metrics should  be precise. That is, they should return similar values
if repeated with the same conditions—if you compare this to arch‐
ery, it is the equivalent of a set of arrows being close to each other.
One tool or lever you have to control precision is sample size. The
larger the sample size, the smaller is the standard error. The rela‐
tionship is not linear, however. Because standard error of the mean
equals the standard deviation divided by the square root of the sam‐
ple size, to halve the standard error, we need to quadruple the sam‐
ple size.
We can visualize the combination of accuracy and precision in
Figure 6-1. Unless you have some validated reference data, you are
not always going to know whether your metrics are inaccurate.
However, you will likely soon discover if your metrics are imprecise
(unstable).
Bottom line: strive for accurate and precise metrics, and consider the
costs and benefits of larger samples.
Relative Versus Absolute
An important consideration is deciding whether to  use absolute or
relative metrics. That choice can generate metrics that paint a very
different picture of the same scenario.
Imagine an organization that has a membership structure, and 25%
are considered VIPs (say, they have purchased more than $1,000 of
product.) Six months later, only 17% are VIPs. Yikes, what hap‐
pened? Did they abandon? How can we turn the business around?
However, if, during that period, the company had a laser focus on
driving new customers, then the total number of members may have
increased (orange block in Figure 6-2), and the number of VIPs may
have stayed the same, but the proportion of VIPs will be lower. In
fact, it is possible that there could have been gains in the number of
VIPs while still showing a decrease in proportion.
Conversely, suppose after six months we see a significant increase in
number and proportion of VIPs. That might indicate a healthy
increasing customer base, but it could actually be static if the com‐
pany focused only on driving returning customers and increasing
repeat purchase rate (Figure 6-2 lower). (In many companies, this
second scenario of increasing repeat purchases is highly preferable
116 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

to new customer growth because the cost of acquisition of new cus‐
tomers is so high.)
As can be seen, the choice of absolute (number of VIPs) or relative
(proportion of VIPs) metrics can lead to very different interpreta‐
tions. 
Bottom line: Think through what you want to have happen in the
underlying data, and choose the metric to be absolute or relative so
that it will appropriately track that change.
Figure 6-2. A company has 25% VIPs. In the top scenario, the com‐
pany focuses on driving new customers (orange block). This leads to
more members, same number of VIPs, and lower proportion of VIPs.
In the lower scenario, the company focuses on driving returning cus‐
tomers. The proportion and number of VIPs are both higher but
without any change in total number of members.
Robust
Define  metrics that are statistically “robust,” that is, they are rela‐
tively insensitive to individual extremal values. 
Metric Design 
| 
117

Consider this example from the San Francisco Chronicle:
The average tech wage on the mid-Peninsula (San Mateo County)
last year was $291,497… A likely explanation for the distortion:
Facebook chief executive Mark Zuckerberg took only a dollar in
salary but reaped $3.3 billion exercising Facebook stock options in
2013… if you remove $3.3 billion from the total, you end up with
an average tech wage of roughly $210,000.
Using average here is inappropriate given the high degree of positive
skew of the salary data. The average is increased significantly (more
than 35%) by a single outlier value. In this case, a median is a far
better choice because it is robust to high-valued outliers and better
captures the location or middle of the data.
It should be noted that there are times when you want to design a
metric that is specifically sensitive to boundary values. Peak load on
a website is meant to capture the rare maximal values encountered.
You can estimate or visualize robustness by resampling. Take a sub‐
set of the data and compute your metric. Repeat many times (with
replacement) to get a set of metric values and plot their distribution.
Is it more variable than you might expect or desire?
Bottom line: use exploratory data analysis (such as histograms and
bivariate scatter plots) to get a feel for the data, and use those to
guide the choice of appropriate robust metrics and measures.
Direct
Try to choose  metrics that directly measure the underlying process
that you are trying to drive. That is, it is not always possible to meas‐
ure or quantify everything, and you may have to choose a proxy, or
an indirect measure, in its place.
Cathy O’Neil provides a nice example of how student test scores are
a proxy for teaching quality. The further the distance between the
underlying process and the proxy (or layers of proxies), the less use‐
ful and the more misleading the measure can be. You can end up
optimizing the proxy, which might be somewhat orthogonal to what
you really want to drive and optimize.
Another example comes from Susan Webber, who discusses Coca
Cola’s testing and introduction of New Coke in the 1980s. They ran
user tests that showed very positive results, even compared to regu‐
lar Coke. When it launched, however, the product tanked. Why?
118 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

Users found it too sweet. The problem is that testing involved “sip
tests,” and we tolerate greater sweetness in sips than in gulps. Had
they tested a “normal” user experience (chugging down a mouthful
on a hot day), they would have been able to optimize for the real-
world taste, experience, and preference.
Bottom line: where possible, instrument your systems and processes
as much as possible and at the lowest level possible to try to avoid
proxies. Don’t always take the easy way out, and use the data that
you happen to have. Focus on the data you should be collecting and
using that if it would better serve your needs.
Key Performance Indicators
Key performance indicators (KPIs), also known as key success indi‐
cators (KSIs), are the suite of highest-level measures linked to the
company’s strategic objectives. They help define and track the direc‐
tion that the business is going and help it meets its goals. As men‐
tioned earlier, these are the metrics that help keep the ship going in
the right direction.
Avinash Kaushik, a well-known commentator and teacher of web
analytics, defines them as
Measures that help you understand how you are doing against your
objectives.
He stresses the “bookends” of the definition: measures and objec‐
tives, as KPIs bind these two key pieces together. Examples of KPIs
include “increase brand awareness by 10%” or “double the number
of active users by year end” or “increase online conversion by 5% in
Q2.”
It is critical that KPIs:
Are clearly defined
You don’t want any confusion or ambiguity about a core metric
that the organization as a whole is trying to drive. You need a
clear metric definition, a clear target value, and a clear or stan‐
dard timeframe (typically, year end).
Are measurable
KPIs have to be quantifiable. You must be able to measure pro‐
gress numerically over time. In other words, there should be a
needle that can be moved and not a binary metric. As DJ Patil,
Key Performance Indicators 
| 
119

1 Feinberg, R. A., I-S. Kim, L. Hokama, K. de Ruyter, and C. Keen, “Operational detemi‐
nants of caller satisfaction in the call center,” Int. J. Service Industry Management 11, no.
2 (2000): 131–141.
US Chief Data Scientist, says in his book, Building Data Science
Teams (O’Reilly), “I’ve found that the strongest data-driven
organizations all live by the motto, ‘If you can’t measure it, you
can’t fix it.’”
Have targets
“Increase revenue” is a poorly defined KPI because it has no
numerical target. If the organization increases revenue by just
$5, staff can claim that the target is met and stop trying. Con‐
versely, if the target is too much of a stretch or impossible to
achieve, such as “increase revenue 5,000%,” it will not be taken
seriously, or people will soon give up, resigned to suffer what‐
ever consequences may ensue. KPIs should be achievable but at
a stretch with hard work.
Are visible
KPIs need to be visible to at least those responsible for driving
them but, ideally, broader than that. Staff need to have feedback
and have a clear sense of whether their efforts are paying off, or
they need to change tack and try something different. For
instance, Warby Parker’s strategic metrics and KPIs are visible
to all staff and are reviewed regularly (at least quarterly) with all
staff during all-hands meetings.
Reflect what the organization is trying to achieve
It is too easy to fall into the trap of tracking what can be easily
measured, such as reponse time to answer calls in a customer
center, when the true objective might be to increase customer
satisfaction. As the saying goes, “we make important what we
can measure.”1 That might require new processes to collect data
and measure progress and success. Do the extra work, and
influence what you truly want to impact.
Like goals, KPIs should be SMART:
• Specific
• Measurable
• Achievable
• Result-oriented
120 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

2 Marr, B. Key Performance Indicators (KPI): The 75 measures every manager needs to
know. London: Financial Times Press, 2012.
• Time-bound
Or, perhaps, more pertinently, SMARTER, by the addition of Evalu‐
ated and Reviewed (or Rewarded).
KPI Examples
Bernard Marr has identified 75 common KPIs.2. They include areas
such as financial performance and understanding customers
(Table 6-1).
Table 6-1. A subset of common KPIs found in businesses from
Bernard Marr
Financial performance
Understanding customers
• Net profit
• Net profit margin
• Gross profit margin
• Operating profit margin
• EBITDA
• Revenue growth rate
• Total shareholder return (TSR)
• Economic value added (EVA)
• Return on investment (ROI)
• Return on capital employed (ROCE)
• Return on assets (ROA)
• Return on equity (ROE)
• Debt-to-equity (D/E) ratio
• Cash conversion cycle (CCC)
• Working capital ratio
• Operating expense ratio (OER)
• CAPEX to sales ratio
• Price earnings ratio (P/E ratio)
• Net Promoter Score (NPS)
• Customer retention rate
• Customer satisfaction index
• Customer profitability score
• Customer lifetime value (CLV)
• Customer turnover rate
• Customer engagement
• Customer complaints
However, every business needs to choose and tailor its set of KPIs
for its sector, its particular business model, its lifecycle stage, and its
particular objectives. For instance, Warby Parker’s strategic objec‐
tives and KPIs show almost no overlap with Marr’s list. There is
nothing wrong with the list—it covers most typical businesses and
their needs—it just doesn’t capture that each business is unique.
Key Performance Indicators 
| 
121

3 Kaplan, R. S., and D. P. Norton. The Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy into
Action. Harvard Business Review Press, Boston: Harvard Business Preview Press, 1996.
4 Kaplan, R. S., and D. P. Norton, “Linking the Balanced Scorecard to Strategy,” California
Management Review 39, no. 1 (1996): 53–79.
Warby Parker has a strong social mission—we distribute a pair of
glasses to someone in need for every pair that we sell. Thus, unsur‐
prisingly, we have strategic objectives and KPIs associated with our
Do Good program because that is what we want to focus on driving
further. We design and manufacture our own glasses, and so we
have KPIs focused on improving that aspect of the business, too.
What I am driving at is that there is no cookie-cutter set of KPIs that
a business should use. They require very careful, deliberate thought
from senior management and other stakeholders about where to
direct the business and the attention and effort of all staff over the
course of the next year.
Kaplan and Norton’s balanced scorecard approach3 tries to ensure
that the suite of KPIs provide a coherent view of the organization
across four areas: financial, customer, internal business process, and
learning and growth. They liken it to flying an airplane.4 To be able
to fly a plane and get to your destination, a pilot needs to keep stock
of fuel, airspeed, altitude, compass, external conditions, and so on
simultaneously. You can’t make one flight focusing solely on optimiz‐
ing fuel consumption and then plan to focus only on altitude on a
later flight. One should view that complete instrumentation as a sin‐
gle strategy.
If you’ve peeked into the cockpit of a commercial airplane, you will
see dozens, if not hundreds, of dials, meters, and levers. The reality,
however, is that the pilot and co-pilot are only regularly monitoring
a tiny core subset. (If you’ve ever flown a glider or sailplane, as I
used to do, you’ll soon realize the essence of what is needed: altime‐
ter, compass, air speed indicator, and variometer. That’s it.) Com‐
pass: important. Light on in the galley: not so much. What you will
find are many warning lights; a pilot will, of course, respond imme‐
diately if they go off, but in “normal” mode, he or she can pretty
much forget about them. In other words, a organization will indeed
need dashboards and alerts to monitor the hundreds or thousands
of operational and diagnostic metrics, but tracking those can be
delegated down. Those dashboards and metrics may be highly local‐
122 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

ized to individual units or teams, but the KPIs are special: a small set
of metrics that should be highly visible to all.
So, how many KPIs do you need?
How Many KPIs?
KPIs will tend to cover all majors areas of the business and any parts
of the business that are the particular strategic focus for that
period, typically a year. A business might have a handful (4–5) of
“perspectives” or stakeholder groups. These might, but don’t have to
be aligned with C-suite members. Thus, a “perspective” might be
finance oveseen by the CFO, technology strategic objectives man‐
aged by the CTO/CIO team, marketing objectives owned by the
CMO, and so on. Bob Champagne suggests that within each of those
might be 2–5 strategic objectives, and each objective might be asso‐
ciated with 1–3 KPIs. However, the total number of KPIs should be
at the lower end of the 5 × (2–5) × (1–3) product. He suggests 20–30
maximum, and one of the commenters to his post remarks “twenty
is plenty.” Kaplan and Norton cite 16–25.
If you do have too many KPIs, staff are going to have divided focus,
will try to multitask, and will become less effective. For instance, a
small company can’t expand its product line and increase customer
satisfaction and increase revenue and expand internationally all at
the same time. It’s too much. Staff will become exhausted and are
being set up to fail. Instead, focus should be directed to a smaller,
more coherent set of goals, objectives, and KPIs that everyone can
understand and get behind.
KPI Definitions and Targets
If KPIs are to be SMART, they must be both specific and measura‐
ble. This means that one should avoid generic, ambiguous, and ill-
defined verbs such as “improve” and “enhance” or nouns or
adjectives such as “the best,” “leading,” or “quality.” Stacey Barr, a
performance measurement specialist, calls these “weasel words.”
Instead, she recommends taking a vague goal, such as “to transform
the performance of our customers,” having a conversation to dig
into those weasel words, and understanding and replacing them
with more sensory-specific language, such as “when our customers
work with us, they can achieve their business targets much sooner.”
With that, it then becomes easier to define more tangible, concrete
Key Performance Indicators 
| 
123

5 Micallef, M., “Key Performance Indicators for Business Excellence.”
metrics to achieve that goal, such as “reduce average time to reach
their targets” or “increase percentage of targets reached within target
date.”
Earlier I mentioned “double the number of active users by year end”
as an example KPI. This is a case where it is very important to have
clear definitions. “Active” is especially open to interpretation. In an
online gaming company, that could mean users who have simply
logged in within the last 30 days, or who have played a certain mini‐
mum number of games or spent a minimum number of hours gam‐
ing. Those need to be set out unambiguously at the time that these
KPIs and their targets are set.
So what are some good and bad KPI targets? Maria Micallef5 pro‐
vides some excellent examples.
Good targets:
• “We will reduce the number of missed household bin [trash]
collections by 5% by next year.”
• “We will increase the number of customers from Italy by 20 per
cent before the end of 2011.”
Each of these has a clear, specific metric (assuming that the concepts
of “missed” and “customers” are unambiguous or well set out), and
they are clearly measurable and time bound. How about bad targets?
Bad targets:
• “We aim to have the best transport service in the region.”
• “We will improve the way that we handle complaints.”
• “We will answer 75 per cent of all complaints within 5 days.”
Let’s dissect these.
The issue with the first is obvious: what does “best” mean?
The second is clear, too: improve how?
The third, however, is especially interesting: “Answer 75 per cent of
all complaints.” That seems specific. “Within 5 days” is clear and
time-bounded. In fact, assuming that this is achievable, it appears to
124 
| 
Chapter 6: Metric Design

1 See Kerr (1975) for examples of “fouled up” incentive programs, one cause of which is
“fascination with an ‘objective’ criterion: managers seek to establish simple quantifiable
standard against which to measure and reward performance. Such efforts may be suc‐
cessful in highly predictable within an organization, but are likely to cause goal dis‐
placement when applied anywhere else.”
meet all the criteria of SMART or SMARTER KPIs. What’s the issue
with it?
The problem lies with the other 25% of complaints. What of them?
As Micallef states, this is a “poor target if the remaining 25 per cent
take 3 months to answer.” One thing that you have to design against
in your metrics is to avoid staff gaming the system or knowingly or
unknowingly taking advantage of “loopholes” such as these and
meeting targets, while at the same time the organization is not
actually reaching the intended strategic objective.1 In this case, bad
word of mouth from those 25% could be enough to tear a company’s
reputation to shreds.
In these last two chapters, I’ve covered KPIs that define what the
organization is trying to achieve, what to consider when designing
good diagnostic and operational metrics (which are the things that
the organization is going to track and try to optimize), and I’ve cov‐
ered the types of analysis that can’t be brought to bear upon those
data. The next step in the analytics value chain is to package up
those insights, findings, and recommendations and present them to
peers, management, and decision makers. That is, you need to tell a
story with that data, which is the subject of the next chapter.
Key Performance Indicators 
| 
125


1 Cited in Data Visualization: A New Language for Storytelling by Mike Barlow (O’Reilly).
CHAPTER 7
Storytelling with Data
When you’ve got a good visualization, people get it right away and you
get a conversation going. You get feedback. It accelerates productivity. It’s
far better than talking on the phone or sending email. You instantly
convey the same idea to many minds.
—Ofer Mendelevitch1
In the previous two chapters, I covered types of analysis, ranging
from descriptive to causal, and the design of metrics including the
especially important subset, KPIs. In this chapter, we move further
along the analytics value chain: packaging up the findings, insights,
and recommendations to present to the decision makers and other
stakeholders, to increase the quality of discussion and decision mak‐
ing at every level. 
This chapter is a relatively high-level overview of the process and
objective of communicating analytics output in a data-driven orga‐
nization—the why and the what of communicating data rather than
the how. I’ll cover the prerequisites; that is, what you need to think
about before you even start preparing a presentation or visualiza‐
tion. To be more concrete, I will also cover a chart chooser and data-
visualization checklist, letting those two, and the source references
more or less speak for themselves. That will leave space to cover
presentation-level remarks, such as overall structure and focusing
the message.
127

Storytelling
“Every dataset, every database, every spreadsheet has a story to tell,”
says Stuart Frankel, CEO of Narrative Science. An analyst’s job is to
find that story, or at least find the story that matters to the organiza‐
tion, interpret it, and communicate it. Moreover, they have to tell an
accurate, empirically supported story. If they don’t, people will con‐
struct one themselves from their own, weak data. In Analytics at
Work, Davenport et al. (p. 138–139) tell of an executive at a hospital
system who claimed that a major influencer of patient satisfaction
and perception of quality was the taste of food. When the analysts
went to work to verify this claim, they found that food was the worst
factor in a suite of more than 30 predictors. The executive’s claim
couldn’t be further from the truth. The reason for this mismatch?
The executive had talked to two patients who had complained about
the food. That executive’s story was purely anecdotal, whereas the
analysts’ work was based on representative data and objective statis‐
tical analysis.
Given that, colloquially, “story” can be can be meant as an anecdote,
what do I mean by the term in this context, that is, presentation in a 
data-driven organization? 
Take a look at Figure 7-1. Anything strike you as unusual or interest‐
ing?
Obviously, 2009 was a rollercoaster year for Twitter with a huge
jump in account signup rate and a significant dropoff throughout
the year. (However, this is still a positive rate, and the user base con‐
tinued to grow.) There is actually a rich story in this one curve. The
first jump we notice (around March 2007) was buzz around the
South by Southwest Interactive conference, in which the service first
got noticed by early adopters and usage tripled. The flattening after
the second jump (around May 2008) is where Twitter actively
started blacklisting spammers. 2009 was a key year in which the ser‐
vice tipped into the mainstream; for instance, in April, at the start of
the downward slope of the main peak, Ashton Kutcher challenged 
CNN to see who would become the first to reach 1 million followers
(Ashton won, just, by half an hour), and Oprah Winfrey tweeted for
the first time and did so on air. This curve, for Australian accounts,
show similarities but also differences with that for the US. For
instance, the last jump, in 2013, corresponds to the run-up to an
128 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

Australian federal election. Thus, there is a national story in here,
too.
Figure 7-1. New account creation of Australian twitter accounts versus
time. From http://bit.ly/aus-twitter. 
Thus, “story” is meant to capture the key findings, features, or pat‐
terns in data, to convey what caused them where possible, and, look‐
ing forward, to spell out the implications and recommendations to
the organization. To Stephen Few, “Data visualization is the use of
visual representations to explore, analyze, and present quantitative
data.” I view storytelling here as an additional interpretative layer, a
narrative structure, on top of the data visualization. Figure 7-1 plus
the narrative is more insightful and revealing than Figure 7-1 alone.
The two have to be closely matched. You need the optimal visualiza‐
tion to reveal the pattern during analysis and then also to show the
evidence or pattern to the final audience, and you also need the cor‐
rect, accurate, and valid narrative to interpret those findings and
implications. 
Ideally, in this case, you would put the salient points into the plot
itself and so enhance the narrative directly and make it more self-
contained (Figure 7-2).
Storytelling 
| 
129

Finding a story and interpreting it involves a range of analytical
techniques that typically will include exploratory data analysis, that
is to say, data visualization with charts and tables (Chapter 5). While
this chapter focuses on data visualization, it is not an introduction to
the subject. I certainly could not do it justice, and there are many
great books that do. I would recommend starting with the gold
standards: the works of Edward Tufte (Envisioning Information, Vis‐
ual Explanations, and The Visual Display of Quantitative Information
[Graphics Press]). The Visual Display especially will get you in the
mindset of a visual designer and critic. This is the book in which
Tufte introduced the valuable concepts of chartjunk and data-to-ink
ratios, both of which are explained later.
For more practical, introductory texts, I really like Stephen Few’s
Now You See It (Analytics Press), which focuses more on data visual‐
ization for quantitative data exploration and analysis; and Show Me
The Numbers (Analytics Press), which focuses more on presentation.
For web-based visualizations, try Scott Murray’s Interactive Data
Visualization (O’Reilly). This chapter is also not a style guide; for
that, I would heartily recommend Dona Wong’s The Wall Street Jour‐
nal Guide to Information Graphics (W. W. Norton & Company).
Figure 7-2. Annotated version of Figure 7-1.
130 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

First Steps
When starting to think about the best way to present some data,
information, and analysis, there are three questions to consider:
• What are you trying to achieve?
• Who is your audience?
• What’s your medium?
These are essential for narrowing down the type of presentation,
style, and level of technical material that will get your message
across and have the greatest impact. Only after these three have been
nailed down can you reasonably think about the more practical
aspects of how you are going to structure the content and format it
visually.
What Are You Trying to Achieve?
What is your objective? Why are you putting this presentation or
report together? What do you hope to achieve? Presumably, this will
have been set out before you do your analysis, but you must have a
clear understanding of why you are presenting these data or find‐
ings, what you have concluded, and what you want to happen.
For instance, if this is a descriptive analysis only, the objective may
be for the reader to gain a greater understanding of the system, to
grasp the behaviors, magnitudes, and variabilities of key compo‐
nents; that is, it is just a knowledge share. Alternatively, if this is an
analysis of an A/B test, the objective may be to summarize how well
the different treatments fared against the control, the confidence in
the results, and the potential increased revenue assuming that the
lift is real. In this case, the ultimate objective is likely to get a deci‐
sion, a green light to roll this treatment feature out to 100% of users
in production. Those two are very different analyses with different
objectives and will require a different presentation style.
Let’s take the latter example, A/B test results, and examine it more
closely. In this case, the analyst should have done the analysis, come
to a conclusion about the meaning and confidence of the results,
and made a recommendation: we should roll this feature out. The
presentation should make the recommendation and also provide the
supporting evidence: this is how we set up the experiment, these
are the metrics of interest, this is what we found, here is some ambi‐
First Steps 
| 
131

guity that we encountered, and this is why we came to the final con‐
clusion.
Who Is Your Audience?
The next question to consider is the audience. How data literate are
they? How technical are they? What expectations do they have?
What’s their level of interest and motivation? How busy are they?
In a sense, an analyst needs to meet his or her objective despite the
audience. For the analyst, this may have been his or her primary
focus for days or weeks. To the audience, however, this may be just
one of 10 decisions that they make today, especially if they are in the
C-suite. The analyst should have a sound understanding of the stat‐
istical techniques employed, whereas the audience more than likely
will not. The analyst will have been immersed in data, code, and sta‐
tistics, whereas the receiver only cares about the business decision
and impact. The analyst or presenter has to take all of this into con‐
sideration and structure the material to maximize the impact.
For instance, if you realistically only have two minutes of your C-
suite’s time, you need to be short, crisp, and precise: “I recommend
taking this course of action because it will drive $1 million incre‐
mental revenue over the next year.” For others, such as presenting to
fellow data scientists and statisticians in an hour-long deep dive,
they may want as much technical detail as possible; they may want
to pore over the test statistics, degrees of freedom, confidence inter‐
vals, density plots, and the like.
CFOs are very comfortable poring over dense matrices of financial
metrics. (Whether that’s actually their preferred mode to consume
data is another matter.) A broader audience, however, such at an all-
hands meeting, may need only the very highest level and most non‐
technical key takeaways. You have to decide what is appropriate and
tailor your material accordingly.
What’s Your Medium?
The last question is to determine the medium that you will use. That
is, should you use a written report; a visual presentation, such as
PowerPoint; a dashboard; or an infographic.
This is partially tied to the previous question. That is, if you are pre‐
senting at an all-hands meeting, you essentially have a choice of a
132 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

visual presentation or a verbal presentation. For the CFO, you may
need to provide a written report to incorporate a suite of tables to
cover the breadth of views he or she needs and expects, or you may
need to present a PowerPoint deck to a set of managers.
That decision, in combination with your determination of their level
of interest and the amount of time they are likely to invest to con‐
sume your analysis, will determine the depth and level of detail con‐
tained with the presentation as well as the size. If you’ve got just
three minutes to present to the C-suite, you don’t want a 37-slide
PowerPoint presentation with lots of technical detail. PowerPoint
might be appropriate, but it likely can only be two or three slides.
Importantly, you can’t copy visuals from one medium to another as
is and expect them to be optimal. For instance, copying a dense table
from that written report and pasting it into a PowerPoint slide for
the all-hands meeting is just not going to work well. You have to tai‐
lor each slide, chart, and table for the medium at hand.
Sell, Sell, Sell!
A well-designed experiment, well-chosen metrics, and above all, a
carefully and clearly defined question provide the greatest chance of
seeing the dominant patterns in the data and answering those ques‐
tions. The analyst’s job is to find and illustrate the clearest, cleanest,
and most relevant patterns, and to interpret them and translate
them back to the impact upon the business. However, it is still
potentially only one interpretation of the data out of many. Others
may see the same data but come at it with different biases, objec‐
tives, or domain experience. Thus, to Sebastian Guttierez, a data-
visualization expert, the role of an analyst presenting data through
visualization is as a salesman. He told me, “You are trying to sell
something: we should increase our budget, we should change our
database, we should get more logs... At the end of the day, you have a
message...I view sharing data or data visualization with non-data sci‐
entists or non-data analysts much more like a marketing exercise.”
What are they selling? At least two things. First, if there are multiple
interpretations, analysts must select and promote the most objective,
logical, and parsimonious interpretation and demonstrate why they
take this particular view. Second, if they’ve gone through all the
effort to gather data, clean it, load it, understand and analyze it, per‐
haps build a model, and they’ve found something significant, some‐
Sell, Sell, Sell! 
| 
133

thing that can be used to impact the business, they want the
potential impact that they have found to be realized. They should
want to sell the action—what we should do—and the outcome—what
will result if we do. (We will return to this theme in Chapter 9.) In
other words, analysts should not be passive presenters of data, infor‐
mation, and findings but instead active salesmen of those ideas.
Moreover, as Sebastian remarked, when you take a marketing per‐
spective, and you have a message that you need to communicate,
that should prompt you as an analyst to get more data if that is
needed to provide a richer, more compelling fact-based story.
Importantly, the culture should be structured so that analysts are
incentivized to have maximum impact. Ken Rudin, head of analytics
at Facebook and previously at Zynga, exemplifies this:
“Analytics is about impact…In our company [Zynga], if you
have brilliant insight and you did great research and no one
changes, you get zero credit.”
Data Visualization
Now that we have a better understanding of what storytelling means
and an analyst’s role and motivations, let’s switch gears and touch
upon a few of the mechanics of data visualization. As mentioned at
the beginning, this chapter is not meant to be a comprehensive
guide or text on the subject. I’m going to provide a few pointers and
tie those to some general remarks, typical errors that I see, and, yes,
some of my pet peeves.
Assuming that an analyst has chosen appropriate metrics, appropri‐
ate dimensions (i.e., how the data has been sliced, say by month or
by sales channel) and has found some interesting and significant
pattern in those data, he next needs to select a way to present the
data. In some cases, that might be a data table, but typically it will
involve a chart. 
Choosing a Chart
An analyst has a lot of choice in terms of chart types. The appropri‐
ate type of chart or visualization depends upon the type of variables
(continuous, discrete, categorical, or ordinal), how many variables
or factors one wants to incorporate into a single chart, and even the
data values themselves. For instance, stacked bar charts can work
134 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

well with two categories of data but fail miserably with a larger num‐
ber (Figure 7-3).
Figure 7-3. Example of a stacked bar chart (showing how BI customers
use BI products) with a reasonably large number of categories (eight).
The leftmost category is most easily compared among platforms
because it is all aligned along the y-axis. For other categories, however,
it becomes very hard to interpret because those data points vary in
both width and offset. For example, how does the rightmost category
vary among platforms? From Jon Peltier.
For comparison, Figure 7-3 is another view of that same data, one
that is more easily comparable among platforms but at the expense
of losing sense of the total cumulative percentage of respondents
(i.e., total bar width in Figure 7-3).
Selecting a chart type is central in terms of the ability to get the story
across to the viewer. So, how does one choose when there are so
many? One way to categorize the many different chart types is to
focus on four types of reason for that chart:
Data Visualization 
| 
135

Comparisons
For example, how cohorts compare, how something changes
with time
Distribution
To show the variability of a set of data
Relationships
To show correlations or associations among variables
Comparisons
To show how data is divided among two or more categories
Figure 7-4. The same data as in Figure 7-3 but here displayed in a
panel bar chart. Here, within-category comparisons are far easier to
interpret. From Jon Peltier.
Figure 7-5 shows an example of the different types of charts and
how they relate to those four objectives and guides. That figure cov‐
ers the most common chart types, but there are many others. For
instance, this doesn’t cover social network or geospatial data. A
more comprehensive diagram of chart types can be found in the
Graphic Continuum, but that is too large and detailed to be repro‐
ducible and readable on a single page of this book. I would also sug‐
136 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

gest viewing the gallery of D3 visualizations. D3 is a popular
JavaScript library that can be used for interesting, interactive, and
more experimental or specialized visualizations.
Figure 7-5. There are many types of charts, each of which is designed to
meet a particular task. Choose the appropriate one to meet your needs.
Created by Andrew Abela. Reproduced with permission.
As you can see, for a given dataset, different chart types can be
appropriate and yet work in different ways, each providing a differ‐
ent lens highlighting different characteristics of the data. The key is
to experiment, to try out different ones. Search the “design space” to
Data Visualization 
| 
137

2 Fox, J., “The Rise of the Y-Axis-Zero Fundamentalists,” December 14, 2014.
find the view that tells the strongest story but remains honest and
objective. (For instance, don’t truncate y-axes to distort the gradient
of a line graph.2)
Designing Elements of the Chart
Choosing a chart is a relatively easy task because it is a constrained
choice (although it doesn’t stop people from making inappropriate
choices). However, it is just the beginning. The following box shows
a checklist of a number of components that you should both con‐
sider and check your visual with a critical eye. Going through each
of those items in detail is beyond the scope of this book. This is
meant more as a signpost to get you started. I will, instead, refer you
to the experts and the references given at the start of the chapter.
While many of the items in this checklist may seem obvious, it is
surprising how many charts violate one or more of these criteria,
leading to a suboptimal, less-effective visual. 
Data Visualization Checklist
A data visualization has many components, each of which needs
careful consideration. A single bad choice, such as low contrast col‐
ors, tiny font size, or the inappropriate chart choice, can render the
whole visualization ugly, off-putting, and useless. The items in the
following list are the headings from a very useful checklist from
Stephanie Evergreen. See the complete checklist for full details
about each line item.
Text
• 6-12 word descriptive title is left-justified in upper left corner.
• Subtitle and/or annotations provide additional information.
• Text size is hierarchical and readable.
• Text is horizontal.
• Data are labeled directly.
• Labels are used sparingly.
138 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

Arrangement
• Proportions are accurate.
• Data are intentionally ordered.
• Axis intervals are equidistant.
• Graph is two dimensional.
• Display is free from decoration.
Color
• Color scheme is intentional.
• Color is used to highlight key patterns.
• Color is legible when printed in black and white.
• Color is legible for people with colorblindness.
• Text sufficiently contrasts background.
Lines
• Gridlines, if present, are muted.
• Graph does not have border line.
• Axes do not have unnecessary tick marks.
• Graph has one horizontal and one vertical axis.
Overall
• Graph highlights significant finding or conclusion.
• The type of graph is appropriate for data.
• Graph has appropriate level of precision.
• Contextualized or comparison data are present.
• Individual chart elements work together to reinforce the
overarching takeaway message.
Focusing the message
The purpose of creating a visual is to convey a message clearly. You
have a number of “weapons” in the arsenal, such as fonts, gridlines,
and orientation. Another is the use of highlight colors. One
approach to focus the message and reader is to show only the data of
interest. However, that can lead to data out of context. For instance,
imagine that a chart showed that Japan generated 260 terawatt hours
of power in 2009. Is that a lot? I have no idea. However, another
approach is keep the focal data within context but use highlight
color (Figure 7-6). Our eyes instantly pick out the Japan row
through the use of the bold label and lighter color. However, the
shape of the surrounding bars put its generation in context: it is high
but less than one-third that of US production.
Data Visualization 
| 
139

Figure 7-6. Example of good use of highlighting. For the Japan row, the
label is emboldened and the bar is lighter, thus making it stand out yet
remain in context. From http://bit.ly/economist-nuclear.
That was an example of adding to the chart to strengthen the mes‐
sage. Now for the opposite. You must avoid what Stephanie Ever‐
green calls going “Martha Stewart” on your chart, that is to say,
overdecorating it. Keep it simple. You need to strip away any clutter,
any excesses, to let the data and its message shine through.
Edward Tufte coined the term chartjunk to cover these visual dis‐
tractions: “Chartjunk refers to all visual elements in charts and
graphs that are not necessary to comprehend the information repre‐
sented on the graph, or that distract the viewer from this informa‐
tion.” Tufte takes it to an extreme, proffering a minimalist approach.
I prefer Robert Kosara’s more modern and pragmatic definition:
“any element of a chart that does not contribute to clarifying the
intended message.” Kosara recognizes that you sometimes may need
to add elements to the chart to highlight specific components to
strengthen the core message or story.
140 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

3 Do a Google image search for chartjunk, and you will see many USA Today examples.
However, I would also suggest that the New York Times Magazine’s Analysis column is
full of egregious examples, too.
It is at this juncture that many data visualization books pick on USA
Today to exemplify chartjunk (including Tufte).3 Instead, I will pick
on the new gold standard: the NSA PRISM slides (Figure 7-7).
In Figure 7-7, we see a timeline of when different tech companies
became part of the PRISM data-collection program. That’s the core
message, but it is diluted by lots of additional visual compo‐
nents. There are 11 logos at top. They relate to the yellow circles but
not with a 1:1 match (there are only 9 yellow blobs) and are placed
in an unstructured mass. They distract the reader. In addition, there
is the NSA division logo as well as the program logo. Finally, there is
the green arrow. What does that convey, and what does up mean?
These are all chartjunk.
Figure 7-7. A chartjunk-ridden slide from the NSA PRISM program.
Data Visualization 
| 
141

Such embellishments draw your attention away from the core point
in two ways:
• It gives viewers other things to spend time looking at and think‐
ing about.
• It is harder for viewers to work out which is the thing that they
should be looking at. They don’t know where to focus.
Figure 7-8 shows one possible rework of that slide. This was created
by Emiland De Cubber. Here, the slide is stripped down to the
essentials: these are the companies and the dates at which they
became part of the program. Nine logos and nine dates. Your eye
can almost instantly survey the landscape, counting the number of
companies per time point (1,1,3,1,2,1) and then on a second pass
glance at the logos to see what those companies are. It is not perfect,
but it is a significantly more effective visual than the original.
Figure 7-8. A rework of the PRISM slide by Emiland De Cubber)
Organizing your data
The primary decision of how the data is organized within a chart
will be determined by the chart choice and vice versa. Within the
constraint of that chart choice there are still high-level structural
choices, such as whether to set a bar chart horizontally or verti‐
cally. What I find fascinating is that even after this level, there are
142 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

subtle changes in how the data is organized that can impact the mes‐
sage significantly.
Figure 7-9 shows average annual salary in UK government jobs by
pay grade, broken out by gender.
Figure 7-9. Average annual salary (in £ thousands) of UK government
jobs by pay grade (lower numbers are more senior) and by gender.
Data from http://bit.ly/bbc-pay-gap.
The chart looks OK. We have a clear title and axis labels. Pay grades
are on the x-axis increase with seniority from left to right (although,
confusingly, the pay grade number decreases with seniority), as one
would expect, given our Western, left-to-right cultural bias. The y-
axis looks good, too. There is no truncation. The choice of £25,000
increments seems appropriate. One does have a lot of choice with
colors. Here I used blue (most often associated with boys) and the
complementary color, orange, for women. These are good choices.
There is nothing fundamentally wrong with this chart.
Now look what happens when you swap the order of male and
female bars within each pay grade (Figure 7-10).
Data Visualization 
| 
143

4 As Stephen Few explains it, our brain is wired to look for patterns, and we prefer sim‐
pler, smoother curves. From a computational perspective, they would be easier to
encode. The second version, which is more jagged, commands our attention because
we have to work harder to categorize its shape.
Figure 7-10. The same chart as Figure 7-9, except that the order of the
genders within each pay grade is reversed. Does the pay inequality
seem stronger?
The difference is remarkable. These are the same data, same axes,
same box plots with the same color scheme. Yet this one small
change completely changes how one perceives the gender inequality.
4 The central story, the inequality, is much more visible. There was
nothing wrong with the first version; this second one is just
enhanced.
This example demonstrates clearly, I think, that you really have to
experiment with each and every chart that you create, that you have
to train yourself to have a very critical eye. That comes with expo‐
sure and practice dissecting examples such as these. Thus, I would
strongly recommend all analysts to pick up some of the books men‐
tioned at the start of the chapter, study Kaiser Fung’s trifecta
144 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

checkup, attend a data visualization class, and above all, practice.
Examine the charts in the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, and
The Economist, all of which set a very high bar. What makes them
work, and where do they fail? (And they do fail at times.) Compare
the charts in /r/dataisbeautiful/ versus r/dataisugly. What makes
them beautiful and ugly, respectively? Ask yourself how would you
do it differently.
Delivery
In this section, I dip into ways of delivering insights. First, I briefly
cover infographics, which have become especially popular with mar‐
keting departments in recent years. Second, I cover the far more
important topic of dashboards. As mentioned at the start of this
book, many organizations believe that they are data-driven because
they have lots of dashboards. They are certainly useful and preva‐
lent. I’ll cover several types of dashboards and discuss their utility
(or not) in decision making.
Infographics
In a data-driven business context, I’m not a huge fan of infograph‐
ics, meant in the modern sense of flashy, colorful visuals peppered
with a few facts, typically created by designers rather than analysts. I
find that they have a very low data-to-ink ratio (a term coined by 
Tufte) to capture the information density of a visual. In fact, most
infographics have both lots of chartjunk and sparse data. For 
instance, Figure 7-11 is a fun and visually appealing display of brain
size in different-sized animals.
But a more dense way of presenting that exact same data would be a
bar chart or table:
Animal
Weight in grams (pounds)
Sperm whale
7,800 (17.2)
Dolphin
1,600 (3.5)
Human (adult) 1,400 (3)
...
...
Frog
0.24 (0.008oz)
Delivery 
| 
145

5 Both axes are logarithmic. It is not obvious at first glance but the x-axis has intervals of
100x while the y-axis has intervals of only 10x, so this is a very steep curve. Take the
squirrel. That is about 10 gram brain/1 kilogram body. The whale, however, is about
10,000/10,000, which is only 1 gram brain/1 kilogram body. Note humans and dol‐
phins, which are both far from the line, so they have relatively large brains for their
body size, but still less (~5x) than a mouse.
Figure 7-11. Big Thinkers infographic from Rogers and Blechman
(2014) Information Graphics: Animal Kingdom. Big Picture Press.
However, what is most interesting, the true story, is the ratio of brain
size to body size. Thus, a chart that brings in that other dimension
reveals one of the amazing findings out of comparative biology, a
strong scaling law. Figure 7-12 shows brain size relative to body size
decreases with increasing body size.5
I’ve deliberately chosen an extreme example here to make a point.
The Big Thinkers infographic was part of a children’s book and so
was designed to be fun, informative, and memorable. It achieves its
goal admirably. Generally, however, a data-driven organization will
have little use for such infographics internally and certainly not for
any decision making. Having said that, they do have their place. My
team recently used one to give a “year in review” of our work at an
all-hands meeting. The audience was diverse and mostly nontechni‐
cal, and the point was a quick scan of some of the year’s highlights.
Thus, the infographic format worked well in that situation, and it
can also be useful to communicate externally to the public.
146 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

Figure 7-12. Brain size versus body weight. (Note the axes, both loga‐
rithmic but with 100× intervals on the x-axis but only 10× on the y-
axis.) From Dongen, P.A.M. 1998. Brain Size in Vertebrates. In: The
Central Nervous System of Vertebrates, Vol 3. Ed. by R. Nieuwenhuys
et al., Springer.
Interestingly, recent research found that chartjunk, pictograms,
color, and contrast—all of which are prominent in infographics—
made charts memorable. You were more likely to remember having
seen the chart before. However, to reiterate the core message: the
goal is communication to drive action. Decision makers need high-
quality information that allows them not just to see and remember
the point, but to evaluate it and be sure that the decision being made
is right. 
The viewer should understand the central point(s) that the data
shows quickly and easily. Chartjunk hinders that.
Dashboards
Many organizations mistakenly measure their data-drivenness by
the number of reports and dashboards they produce. Dashboards
are very useful and can support a range of activities, such as provid‐
Delivery 
| 
147

ing an interface for data discovery and query drill down, alerts, and
an accessible view or “face” to forecasts and predictive models.
We can think of dashboards as falling into three categories:
• Executive or strategic
• Analytical
• Operational
Executive dashboards (Figure 7-13) provide a very high-level view
of the organization and typically focus on the scorecard (the KPIs 
and their targets). The dashboard should provide a quick and easy
view as to whether the organization is meeting its targets and
whether there is anything to be concerned about. In short, it should
capture the pulse of the organization at the 50,000-foot level.
The primary audience is senior management, but an enlightened
data-driven organization will provide much broader access. 
Figure 7-13. An executive-level dashboard, implemented in Qlik‐
View, showing sales KPIs versus region. Image from http://bit.ly/
imaps-qlikview.
Analytical dashboards (Figure 7-14) take a lower level view, captur‐
ing key trends and metrics within one unit or particular facet of the
business, such as the sales pipeline, marketing, or supply chain. Typ‐
ically, these will be interactive, allowing the user to drill down into
any unusual trends and outliers and to do data discovery work.
148 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

Their users are typically the analytics org and the managers of the
business units.
Finally, operational dashboards (Figure 7-15) provide lower latency,
more detailed views of very specific parts of the business, such as
real time sales, web traffic, or customer service cases and phone call
queues. Those typically have more of an alerting role for issues and
are also used in a more responsive manner by staff who can take
immediate actions, such as spin up more servers, switch staff from
one task to another to reduce a backlog, or sell stock.
Figure 7-14. An example of an analytical dashboard for website visi‐
tors from Google Analytics.
With all of these types, the dashboards should be targeted. There
should be a clear sense of who the users are and what they need to
see. As in the previous section, the KISS principle (Keep it simple,
Stupid!) applies: there should be a clear use case and compelling rea‐
son for each and every chart or number that appears in the dash‐
board. In other words, resist the temptation to add more and more
Delivery 
| 
149

views. As the dashboard becomes cluttered, it will become harder to
read and to interpret and will become less effective. Less is more.
Figure 7-15. An example of an operational dashboard. This one, also
from Google Analytics but showing a more detailed view than
Figure 7-14, provides a near real-time view of website activity: where
they are coming from, which pages they are going to, and at what rate.
From http://bit.ly/naren-analytics.
However, as DJ Patil and Hilary Mason suggest, it can make sense to
have multiple dashboards covering the same data but for different
timescales or audiences. For instance, at One Kings Lane, the cus‐
tomer service associates answering the phones could view an opera‐
tional dashboard on a wall-mounted monitor that showed key
metrics, such as real-time call volume, response time, and case reso‐
lution. Their manager had access to that as well a more detailed ana‐
lytical dashboard in which she could slice data by group, by
individual, and by case type. In addition, the top-level metrics fed
into the executive dashboards that senior management viewed
throughout the day. Each of those was tailored to the target audience
and use case.
In the context of this book, it is useful to examine whether dash‐
boards are really used for decision making. As mentioned previ‐
ously,  operational dashboards show changes in (near) real time and
are often configured to alert the end user to issues, who can then
decide to act appropriately. For instance, if call center volume
increases, a manager can direct resources from other tasks to help
deal with the spike. However, analytical and executive dashboards,
150 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

or at least their top-level views, are unlikely to be the sole informa‐
tion used for important decisions. One recent report remarks:
It is rare that a report or dashboard containing insightful informa‐
tion is the ultimate end only driver of a critical decision. More often
than not, the end-user will find they ask the inevitable question,
“why?” Why are sales down 30% in the northeast region? Why did
sell-through of widget a skyrocket in Q4? With interactive drill-
down capabilities that holistic BI users [i.e., tools in a data-driven
organization] provide, these vital follow-up questions can be asked
and answered in a timely way.
I will cover decision making in more detail in Chapter 9.
Monitoring use
A dashboard may have no value anyway, but it certainly cannot have
any value if no one views it (even when viewed, it may have no value
if no one changes because of it or takes action upon it). In a 2011
interview with Kevin Rose, Jack Dorsey, cofounder of Twitter and
CEO of Square, mentioned an interesting idea that I hadn’t heard
before:
We have a dashboard in Square and we have a metric “how many
times do people actually look at that dashboard to see how the
company is doing?” That speaks to how much people care about
how the company is doing.
Of course, a data-driven org can instrument more than dashboard
use. If reports are emailed to stakeholders from a server, you can
probably turn on email read receipts and track open rate. Avinash
Kaushik goes further and suggests “all automated reports are turned
off on a random day/week/month each quarter to assess use/value.”
Summary
This has been somewhat of a whirlwind tour of storytelling and data
visualization. Once again, I refer you to the experts. What I hope to
have conveyed is the importance of getting this right in a data-
driven organization. A lot of work goes into getting to the point of
having an analysis performed or an insight obtained; and too often,
shoddy presentations bury what are interesting and important sto‐
ries. Data presentation and visualization skills can be learned and
honed by anyone and everyone and it is a really good investment for
the analytics org.
Summary 
| 
151

In 1657, Blaise Pascal, the famous French mathematician and physi‐
cist, wrote in Lettres Provinciales (translated), “I have made this
longer than usual because I have not had time to make it shorter.”
His point, of course, is that it requires time and effort to edit, to dis‐
till content down to its core, to convey the minimal, pertinent infor‐
mation to impart an idea. And so it is with data visualization and
storytelling.
Stephanie Evergreen considers that the goals of presenting data are:
• To persuade others
• To frame thinking
• To drive to action
To do any of those, you need to remove chartjunk, to let the viewer
know where to focus. However, you also need to make the viewer
think as little as possible. Importantly, this doesn’t mean dumb
down the content.
First, start with a very clear understanding of the question that you
are trying to answer, and a clear expectation of the audience, includ‐
ing their expectations and needs. 
Second, choose your visual carefully so that it is both appropriate to
the data and to maximize the signal that shines through.
Third, have one key message per visual, table, or slide. Feed the
viewer in bite-sized chunks. In De Cubber’s rework of the PRISM
slides, he placed the timeline of data collection in one slide and the
simple, single number of the $20 million price tag in a separate slide.
In this way, both are easily consumed. I often see large financial data
tables. They are typically crammed with data, a suite of financial
metrics for each month over the last year with actuals and budgets,
and month over month and year over year comparisons, and so on.
There are many stories in that data, but they are all buried. Maybe
one or two cells are highlighted, but your eye has to swim against a
tide of cells to get to the row and column header cells to obtain the
context. Instead, I would suggest that an analyst determines the
story that she needs to tell and pick out those information morsels
in individual slides. Boil it down to just the key information and
interpretation. Give them a Michelin-star experience with a series of
amuse-bouches.
Fourth, add useful signposts such as title, axis labels, and highlight
colors (see the earlier checklist) to provide the necessary context.
152 
| 
Chapter 7: Storytelling with Data

Further, format them to make them easily consumable. For
instance, avoid requiring viewers to tilt their heads to read vertical
text or having to squint to read text with tiny fonts. 
Fifth, remove any mental steps or calculations that the viewer would
need to perform to make the connection or obtain the underlying
message in the data. One example is having a legend far away from
the bars of a bar chart and requiring the viewer to do what Stepha‐
nie calls “mental gymnastics” to associate the label, and hence mean‐
ing, to the bars and their values. Another example hen comparing
bars, this time from Stephen Few, is what he calls deviation analysis.
Imagine a bar chart showing actual versus budget for a set of depart‐
ments. If the core message is the delta between each pair, then you
are asking the viewers to mentally compute the difference. An
approach that makes it quicker and easier to consume is to do the
math for them and show the set of deltas and not the original pairs
of bars. Focus on what you want to show, what you want the viewers
to take away from the visuals, and then put yourself in the shoes of
the viewers: what do they need to do to receive that message? Strip
away any tasks that require effort on the part of the viewer.
If you do all of these—lead the viewer/reader through a single or
series of simple pieces of information and insights—you will have a
more direct and compelling visual that conveys your core message
effectively and unambiguously.
This concludes the trio of chapters around metrics, analysis, and
presentation, which are the “meat” of an analyst’s role. In the next
chapter, I cover an important aspect of a data-driven organization’s
culture, which is testing. That is, setting up a more “Prove it!” cul‐
ture in which ideas are tested under real circumstances with real
customers, thereby providing the most direct possible evidence
about the impact of a proposed change or new feature.
Summary 
| 
153


1 “PJ McCormick, Challenging Data Driven Design, WarmGun 2013,” November 27,
2013, video clip, YouTube.
CHAPTER 8
A/B Testing
He who consistently uses #abtesting to make data-driven decisions
has invariably been humbled by the poor success rate of ideas.
—Ron Kohavi
I’ve come to terms with the fact that the point of experiments, data, and
testing, isn’t for me to be right…I needed the information from these
tests to get to the right answer, eventually.
—PJ McCormick1
It was 1998, and Greg Linden, one of Amazon’s early engineers, had
an idea. Why not create recommendations on checkout? Supermar‐
kets put candy at the checkout aisle to stimulate impulse buys. That
works. Why not peek into the Amazon.com cart and make personal‐
ized, relevant recommendations that the customer might appreci‐
ate? He hacked up a prototype, got it working, and showed it
around. The rest of the story is best told in his own words:
While the reaction was positive, there was some concern. In partic‐
ular, a marketing senior vice-president was dead set against it. His
main objection was that it might distract people away from check‐
ing out—it is true that it is much easier and more common to see
customers abandon their cart at the register in online retail—and
he rallied others to his cause.
155

2 Gabbert, A., “The Importance of A/B Testing: 24 Marketing Experts on Their Most
Surprising A/B Test,” September 25, 2012.
At this point, I was told I was forbidden to work on this any further.
I was told Amazon was not ready to launch this feature. It should
have stopped there.
Instead, I prepared the feature for an online test. I believed in shop‐
ping cart recommendations. I wanted to measure the sales impact.
I heard the SVP was angry when he discovered I was pushing out a
test. But, even for top executives, it was hard to block a test. Meas‐
urement is good. The only good argument against testing would be
that the negative impact might be so severe that Amazon couldn’t
afford it, a difficult claim to make. The test rolled out.
The results were clear. Not only did it win, but the feature won by
such a wide margin that not having it live was costing Amazon a
noticeable chunk of change. With new urgency, shopping cart rec‐
ommendations launched.
Greg was lucky. Not so much because it worked (that is, of course,
significant), but because even back then Amazon had enough testing
infrastructure and data-driven culture for him to be able to roll out
a test. He was able to prove its value, roll it out, and impact the bot‐
tom line. 
In many situations, especially those that are novel, our intuition or
gut instinct is poor. We are often surprised by results. Don’t believe
me? Let’s look at a few quick examples from online experiments. The
first is a call to action in an ad. In terms of click-through rate (CTR),
which won, and by how much?
• Get $10 off the first purchase. Book online now!
• Get an additional $10 off. Book online now. 
The answer is that the second version won with a CTR double that
of the first version.2 OK, how about the pair in Figure 8-1? (Can you
even spot the difference?) Which won and by how much?
The version at left, grammatically correct by the addition of a single
comma, won by 8%.
156 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

Figure 8-1. Which of these versions performed better in terms of CTR?
The grammatically correct version on the left had an 8% higher CTR
(4.4% versus 4.12%). Ibid.
Finally, the last example (Figure 8-2) consists of two almost identical
versions of a page except in the right, all the form fields are optional.
That version led to a 31% higher conversion rate. Moreover, the
quality of those leads was higher.
Figure 8-2. In the version at left, all form fields are optional while in
the version at right, all fields are required. The former led to 31%
higher conversions, and moreover had higher quality leads. Image
from http://bit.ly/optional-vs-required, copyright protected.
In all these examples, it would have been hard to predict which won,
harder to predict by how much, and hard to predict the impact on
other metrics. This is why well-designed experimentation is so val‐
uable. It switches the conversation from “I think...” to “The data
shows...” Thus, this is an invaluable component of a data-driven
organization.
Let’s put this into perspective. In Chapter 5, we covered types of
analysis, including causal analysis, the effective pinnacle at least in
terms of a typical business. Controlled experimentation, the applica‐
A/B Testing 
| 
157

3 Patil, DJ, and H. Mason. Data Driven: Creating a Data Culture. Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly, 2015.
tion of the scientific method or “data scientific methods,”3 is the
direct way to get at those causal relationships.
The three examples discussed were instances of a type of experiment
called an A/B test. The following is a crude description of such a
test. There are many missing caveats and details that I will fill in
later in this chapter, but this lays out the basic idea. In an A/B test,
you set up a control, such as current state of your website (the A-
variant). You send half your website traffic to that version. Those
visitors are the “A” group. The other half are sent to another version
of the site with some change, say the checkout button says “pur‐
chase” rather than “buy now” (the B-variant). Those visitors are the
“B” group. You determine what you are testing, the success metric:
say, does the button text impact average revenue per visitor? You run
the experiment for a predetermined number of days or weeks, and
then you run a statistical analysis. You analyze whether there was a
statistically significant difference in the focal behavior—in this
example, revenue per visitor—between the A-group and the B-
group. If there is a difference, what’s the cause? Well, if everything
was controlled (i.e., was the same except for this one small change),
there are two possibilities. It could be due to random chance, which
can happen if the sample size is too small (i.e., the experiment is
“under-powered”). Alternatively, the change between the A- and B-
variant was the causal factor. The data shows that this feature caused
this change in behavior.
Because active, objective experimentation and the cultural implica‐
tions that go with it are such a crucial aspect of a data-driven orga‐
nization, this chapter will overview what A/B testing is. It will
encompass both the more common “classical” frequentist approach
as well as the more modern Bayesian approach, both of which I’ll
describe. I’ll detail how to implement tests, covering best practices
of how to do it and how not to do it. In addition to the examples
described earlier, I’ll provide a number of examples that will high‐
light why we need it and the significant impact that it can make to a
business. With that, let’s get started.
158 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

Why A/B Test?
As mentioned, our intuition can be very poor (something that is
touched upon in greater detail in Chapter 9). Even domain experts
get it wrong more often that they would like to admit. In his book
A/B Testing: The Most Powerful Way To Turn Clicks Into Customers
(Wiley & Sons), Dan Siroker, CEO and cofounder of the A/B testing
platform Optimizely, tells of his time during the 2008 Obama cam‐
paign. They set out to optimize the supporter signup page, the hook
designed to gather people’s emails. The original page was a “Get
involved” static image with a red button that said “SIGN UP.” The
team thought that videos of the most powerful speeches would out‐
perform that static image. After testing various static images and
different videos, they discovered that “every video dramatically
underperformed every image.” The best combination of image and
signup button text (the best was “LEARN MORE”) improved sign‐
ups by 40.6%. That translated to 2.8 more million email subscribers,
280,000 more volunteers, and a staggering additional $57 million
dollars in donations. You often just can’t tell in advance what will
work—humans are just messy, fickle, and unpredictable—and by
how much. However, with results like this, it is easy to see that this
can convey significant competitive advantage and inform you about
your actual users, customers, and prospects in a direct, tangible way.
Moreover, online testing is relatively cheap and easy. It doesn’t nec‐
essarily take a lot of development or creative time to create a new
version of a button that says “LEARN MORE” rather than “SIGN
UP.” It is also not permanent. If you try something and it doesn’t
work, roll back to the original, and you’ve learned a lesson about
your customers. It is relatively low risk.
You can also test just about everything. Whatever your industry,
there are always optimizations to be made and lessons to be learned.
The Obama campaign team tested very heavily. They tested email
subject lines, email content, timing and frequency of email sends, all
aspects of the website, even the scripts that volunteers used to talk to
potential donors. As this last example shows, such testing is not
restricted to the online world. A second offline example is the “sur‐
prise and delight” marketing campaigns that some companies
engage in where they send, out of the blue, a gift to some subset of
customers. Those should be run as carefully crafted experiments.
One can compare metrics such as return rate, lifetime value, or even
Why A/B Test? 
| 
159

3 Kohavi, R., “Planning, Running, and Analyzing Controlled Experiments on the Web,”,
June 2012.
positive social media word of mouth (such as tweets) between those
who received the gift and, importantly, a comparable set of custom‐
ers who did not. In all these cases, they should be treated with
exactly the same degree of scientific rigor and structured in the same
manner as an online A/B experiment.
One of the nice things about A/B testing is that you don’t have to
have an a priori causal explanation of why something should work;
you just need to test, explore, and find those improvements that
make a positive impact. Kohavi remarks that at Amazon, half of the
experiments failed to show improvements, and at Microsoft, it was
two thirds.3 You don’t need every experiment to work in order to
win in the long term. A single improvement can make a huge differ‐
ence to the bottom line.
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing
With that background into the appeal and benefit of A/B testing, let
us switch gears and look at details and best practices of how to do it
well.
Before the Experiment
In this section, I cover a number of aspects of experimental design,
that is, what should be done before the experiments runs. The first,
and most important, aspect is to define your success metrics. I then
cover something called A/A tests, which are important for testing
your apparatus but can also be used to generate a few false positives
and inform your bosses and colleagues about statistical significance
and the importance of a sufficiently large sample size. I then cover a
detailed A/B test plan (what are we testing, who is part of the test,
what analyses will be performed, etc.). Finally, I cover a crucial
aspect, and typically the #1 question asked by beginners: what is the
required sample size?
160 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

Success metrics
Best practice: clearly define the success metrics before the test
starts.
It is important to have a clear understanding of the objective and the
treatment(s). Why are we doing this? It is especially important to
define the key metrics, sometimes called the “overall evaluation cri‐
terion,” before the test starts. What defines success? If you don’t, you
may be tempted to instrument the test as much as possible, and col‐
lect lots of data, but when it comes to analysis, there is strong chance
of “fishing,” which is statistically testing everything and jumping on
significant results. Worse, there is a chance of cherry picking, which
is just reporting the metrics and results that look good. These
approaches are only going to get you into trouble and are not going
to deliver long-term value to the organization.
A/A tests
Best practice:  run A/A tests.
If A represents the control group, then, as you might imagine, an
A/A test pits a control group against another control group, both of
which are encountering the same website experience. What, you
might ask, is the value of that? There are several benefits.
First, you can use it to test and keep tabs on your testing infrastruc‐
ture and assignment processes. If you set your system to split traffic
50/50 but you encounter very different samples sizes in the two
groups, then it indicates that something is wrong in the assignment
process.
Second, if you see comparable samples sizes but very different per‐
formance metrics, that can indicate a problem in event track‐
ing, analytics, or reporting. However, we should expect to see
significant differences in A/A tests about 5% of the time, assuming
that you use the standard 5% significance level. Thus, differences in
A/A tests are to be expected. What you need to track is, over the
course of many A/A tests, whether you are seeing significant differ‐
ences at a rate greater than your significance level. If so, that can
indicate an issue. However, Georgi Georgiev makes a good point
that “Even if you only need 500 or a 100 A/A tests to observe statis‐
tically significant deviations from the expected results, it’s still a
huge waste of money. Simply because impressions, clicks and visi‐
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing 
| 
161

tors aren’t for free, not to mention what you could have been doing
with that traffic.” You should be running lots and lots of A/B tests,
constantly innovating. However, if you don’t have a constant stream
and there is testing downtime, you may as well run A/A tests.
Third, you can use the results of the test to estimate the variability of
your metric in your control. In some sample size calculations, such
as when testing the mean of a value (say, average basket size or time
on site), you will need that value to compute the sample size. 
Finally, the Nelio A/B Testing blog remarks that there is a cultural,
educational benefit to running A/A tests. For those organizations,
end users, and decision makers new to A/B testing, especially those
that are less well versed in the underlying probability and statistical
theory, it serves a useful lesson. Don’t jump the gun in an A/B test
and assume that a treatment must be better than the control even
when results are significant. A statistically significant result can still
occur from chance effects alone, and the greatest evidence of that is
an A/A test.
A/B test plan
Best practice: think through the whole test before you run it.
There  is a lot to think about when setting up a test. I would suggest
that organizations starting to ramp up an A/B testing culture ask the
stakeholders to think through all of the following before the test
runs. You don’t want discussions on the success metrics after the test
is live. You don’t want anyone gaming the system during analysis. 
Front load all the discussion and agreement.
Goal:
• What is the goal of this test?
Ownership:
• Who is the primary business owner?
• Who is in charge of implementation?
• Who is the business analyst?
Experimental design:
• What are the treatments and control (i.e., the experiences)?
• What are your control and treatment groups (i.e., the people)?
162 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

3 Null hypothesis is your base assumption that there is no difference (e.g., click-through
rate (CTR) of control = CTR of treatment). The alternative hypothesis is what you fall
back on if you reject the null hypothesis. This can be one of three types: CTR control !=
CTR treatment; CTR control > CTR treatment; or CTR control < CTR treatment. Stick
to a two-sided alternative (i.e., !=) unless you have very good reasons to choose a direc‐
tional alternative (i.e., > or <).
• What are your null and alternative hypotheses?3
• What metrics will be tracked?
• When is the period for discussion and feedback?
• When will the test start?
• Is there a burn-in period? If so, at what date do you consider the
experiment started for analytical purposes?
• How long will the test run?
• How was the sample size determined?
Analysis:
• Who will perform the analysis? (Ideally, there will be a separa‐
tion between those who create the experiment and those who
evaluate it.) 
• What analysis will be performed?
• When will the analysis start?
• When will the analysis be complete?
• What software will be used to perform the analysis?
Output:
• How will the results be communicated?
• How will the final decision be made?
This seems a long list, but as you run more and more tests, some of
these answers will become standardized. For instance, the answers
might be, “We always use R for analysis,” or “It is Sarah’s job to per‐
form the statistical analysis.” This set of questions will get internal‐
ized into the culture, and the process will become more automated
and streamlined until it is second nature.
As I’ve described it so far, the experimental procedure and analysis
is very clean, almost clinical and robotic—test A versus B, whichever
wins, roll it out. If it were like this, it would be completely data-
driven. However, the world is more complex that. There are other
factors at play. First, results are not always clear-cut. There can be
ambiguity. Maybe the treatment’s metric was consistently higher
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing 
| 
163

3 This does beg the question: why test? If a test outcome is not going to drive an action, is
this a valuable use of time and effort?
throughout the test but not significantly so; maybe there was a
trade-off between factors (say, sales volume and conversion); or
maybe, during analysis, you discovered a possible element of bias.
All of these can muddy the analysis and interpretation. Such ambi‐
guity is reality. Second, an individual experiment doesn’t necessarily
capture a longer-term strategy being played out. PJ McCormick dis‐
cusses an example of this at Amazon. He describes an A/B test
where the control, the current experience, was a tiny product image
so small the user could not see the product well. The treatment was
simply a larger product image. No-brainer, you would think. The
smaller image, the one so small you could not see what you were
clicking on, won out! Instead, they decided to go with the larger
product image. Why?
We launched the larger version because customers could see the
product. It was a better experience. Furthermore, it aligns where we
want to take our experience in the long term. It aligns with our
vision. Data can’t think long term for you. It doesn’t make deci‐
sions. It is information that you need to inform your thinking. But
if you make knee-jerk reactions without thinking more about what
these numbers mean, and then balancing that with the long term
vision that you have for your product, or for your users, you’re
going to make the wrong decisions.3
(Decision making is the subject of the next chapter.) 
Sample size
Best practice: use a sample-size calculator.
By far the most common question I am asked concerning A/B tests
is, “How long do I need to run this for?” My typical answer is, “I
don’t know, we’ll have to calculate it using a sample-size calculator.”
This section is a little more technical than oth‐
ers, and those terrified of statistics can safely
skip this section. The bottom line is that you
need to calculate the minimal sample sizes using
a simple, online statistical tool, and you need to
stick to those sample sizes. You can’t cut experi‐
ments off early and expect meaningful results.
164 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

The reason that it is not simple to answer is that there are multiple
effects that we are trying to optimize.
Imagine that we run a typical A/B test. There are four possible sce‐
narios:
There is no actual, underlying difference between the control and
treatment, and:
1. We conclude correctly that there is no difference.
2. We conclude incorrectly that there is a difference. This is a false
positive.
Or, there is an actual difference between the control and treatment:
3. We conclude incorrectly that there is no difference. This is a 
false negative.
4. We conclude correctly that there is a difference.
This is summarized here:
 
 
Truth
 
 
No difference
Is a difference
Your findings
No difference
1) Correct
3) False negative
Is a difference 2) False positive 4) Correct
We want to try to maximize our chance of making the correct con‐
clusion (1 or 4) and minimize the chance of making either a false
positive (2) or false negative (3). 
We have two levers that we can use.
The first lever is the more obvious sample size. If you were running
an exit poll for a presidential election, you would be more confident
in your results if you asked 500,000 voters than if you asked 5,000.
Likewise in an A/B test. Having a larger sample size increases your
“power,” a statistical term, to detect a difference if there is a differ‐
ence. Looking back to our four possibilities, if there is an underlying
difference, larger samples reduce the chance of false negatives (i.e.,
more likely to conclude 4 than 3). Typically, we use a power of 0.8.
That means we will be 80% likely to detect a difference if there is a
difference. Keep this in mind, and we’ll come back to it in just a sec‐
ond.
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing 
| 
165

3 Why 5%? It is most associated with a single sentence in a 1925 paper from R. A. Fisher,
but in reality, the story starts with F. W. Bessel in 1818. I summarized the story on my
blog.
The second lever we have is statistical significance, typically set at
5%.3 (For massive scale, a good approach is to pick p ≤ 10-4.) This
means the acceptable chance of making a false positive if there is no
actual difference between treatment and control. Imagine that we
had an unbiased coin, but we did not know whether it was unbiased
or not. We toss it 10 times, and it comes up heads 10 times. That
seems highly biased toward heads. However, an unbiased coin could
still come up with 10 heads but only 1 in 1,024 times, or about 0.1%.
If we conclude it was biased, we do so at a risk of being wrong of
0.1%. That seems an acceptable risk. Next, imagine we decide that if
we see 8, 9, or 10 heads, or the opposite extreme 0, 1, or 2 heads, we
will conclude it is biased. That has a chance of being wrong of about
11%. That seems too risky. The point is that we need to strike a bal‐
ance between the strength of evidence that the treatment does have a
real effect versus the chance that we are just observing random
effects (given there is no underlying difference).
OK, armed with our criteria of power = 0.8 and significance level =
0.05, we head to a sample-size calculator (Figure 8-3).  Here you
enter those two values (see bottom of the figure), but you also need
to provide some additional information. In this sample-size calcula‐
tor (one optimized for conversion events, such as checkout for web‐
site visit), it asks for the baseline conversion rate. This means the
current rate in your control. It also asks what is the minimum
detectable effect. This means if there is a really big underlying effect
of the treatment, say 7%, you are probably going to spot it straight
away, and you can get away with a small sample size. If you want to
detect a smaller difference, say 1%, then you are going to need a
larger sample size to be really sure you have a real effect and not
chance effects. For 10% conversion rate and 1% difference, you are
going to need 28,616 subjects: 14,313 in the control and the same
number in the treatment.
There are different sample-size calculators for different situations.
For instance, if you are comparing means, say, average basket size in
the control versus the treatment, there is a similar calculator but
with slightly different input requirements, such as baseline variabil‐
ity. See http://bit.ly/brant-calculator.
166 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

Figure 8-3. A sample-size calculator for conversion events, from http://
bit.ly/miller-calculator.
You can use average daily traffic divided by the total sample size to
get an estimate of the number of days to run the experiment.
I should stress that these sample sizes are minimal sample sizes. Sup‐
pose that your sample size calculation and traffic rates indicated that
you needed to run your experiment for four days. If you happen to
have lower than average traffic over those four days, you must con‐
tinue the experiment until those minimal sample sizes are met. If
you don’t extend the experiment or if you cut any experiment off
early, you are going to underpower your experiment. This will result
in an elevated false negative rate: you are not able to detect differ‐
ences that exist. Moreover, if you do see a positive result, it increases
the chance that it is not real (see “Most Winning A/B Test Results
Are Illusory”). That is a really important effect. You’ll see a positive
effect, you celebrate, roll that treatment feature out to production,
but then fail to see a lift. You’ve wasted time, effort, and trust.
We now have our sample sizes. Or do we? If you ran the experiment
for four days, from Monday to Thursday, would you expect the same
effect, the same demographics of visitors and online behavior than if
you ran it from Friday to Monday? In many cases, no, they differ.
There is a day-of the-week effect; weekend visitors and behavior are
often different from weekdays. Thus, if the sample-size calculator
says four days, it is often advised to run it for seven days to capture a
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing 
| 
167

complete week. If the sample size calculator says 25 days, run it for
four weeks. 
As you can see, determining sample size is important. If you try to
get away with a smaller-than-necessary sample size, you are likely to
be subject to false results, ones that indicate an effect but that will
fail to materialize extra revenue. Or you will fail to identify real
treatment effects and thus lose out on potential revenue. Clearly,
both of these are undesirable. Finally, the underlying math of those
sample size calculators is tricky. It is hard to estimate well without
these. Use the tools available.
Running the Experiment
Assuming that you have the treatments implemented and the site
instrumented to collect the data that you need, the issues of assign‐
ing individuals and starting and stopping the test still remain.
Assignment
Best practice: roll treatment out to 50% of eligible users and
ensure constancy.
In assigning individuals to groups, the first question to address is
which visitors are eligible to be in the experiment at all. It is possible
that some visitors may be excluded from the experiment completely.
That is, for many A/B tests, one’s source population is the complete
website traffic, or all visitors. However, you may be interested only
in a certain subset of the visitors. Those might be returning custom‐
ers only, or customers from a particular geography or demographic,
or only those in a particular membership tier. It depends on the
treatment and its target audience. Those entry criteria need to be
well defined.
That subset represents the totality of who could be sent to the con‐
trol or treatment. The next question is to address how many of those
should be sent to the treatment. Ideally, one splits the traffic 50/50,
but that is not always the case. Kohavi et al. remark that “one com‐
mon practice among novice experimenters is to run new variants for
only a small percentage of users.” They suggest that these practition‐
ers do so acting in a risk-averse manner, to limit exposure if there is
a problem with the treatment. However, they argue that this is bad
practice because experiments will have to run longer. Tests have to
meet a minimum sample size in both the control and treatment, and
168 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

so if traffic to the treatment is limited to, say, only 10%, clearly it is
going to take significantly longer to reach that required sample size.
They suggest that one should “ramp up” the experiment, increasing
the proportion of traffic sent to the treatment over time (discussed
later) to limit risk but ultimately reach 50% traffic being diverted to
the treatment.
There must be a reliable mechanism to assign visitors to the control
or to the treatment. That is, users must be assigned to the control (or
treatment) both randomly and consistently. In terms of random,
there should be no bias. Assuming a desired 50/50 split, they should
be equally likely to end up in each variant. One approach is to use a
good random-number generator, preassign users to a variant, and
store which variant they belong to in some database table or perhaps
a cookie. The UI can then serve up the correct experience based on a
database lookup on login. This can work well in sites where all users
are authenticated. Another approach is to assign users on the fly.
However, we require that the user is consistently assigned to the
same variant on multiple visits to the site. Thus, for that, we require
a deterministic assignment process. For instance, one could apply a
mod or suitable hash function to each customer’s ID. (Kohavi et al.
discuss different protocols for consistent assignment in detail.) Pro‐
viding a consistent experience for the user is important. Having a
user switch variants will be confusing for them and muddy the data
and its analysis.
Even with consistent experience, confusion can arise. Imagine an
existing customer who is assigned to the treatment and is arriving at
the modified site for the first time. He has expectations from his last
visit, and it can take him longer to navigate the new experience.
However, a new visitor has no such expectations and can be less
confused. Such so-called “primacy effects” can be significant and is
something to dig into during analysis.
Starting the test
Best practice: ramp up the users to 50%.
When you start a test, you can flip the switch and divert 50% of your
traffic to the treatment. The problem is that if there are any major
software bugs, and you present customers with a mangled, broken
experience, you are likely to drive those customers away, and you’ve
exposed 50% of your site traffic to that experience. Instead, you can
How To: Best Practices in A/B Testing 
| 
169

take a more risk-averse approach and do a slower ramp up, moni‐
toring the metrics carefully. Ronny Kohavi suggests the following
schedule:
• 1% in treatment for 4 hours.
• 5% in treatment for 4 hours (i.e., switch an additional 4% from
control to treatment).
• 20% in treatment for 4 hours.
• 50 % in treatment for the remainder of experiment.
Of course, if you do see an issue, it is important that there is an
abort button that can be hit, a way to kill the experiment immedi‐
ately and divert all the traffic back to the control.
When do you stop?
Best practice: run the experiment until minimal sample size has
been achieved, or longer.
I went through the section on determining sample size in detail
because it has significant consequences. If you underpower an
experiment, you are going to increase the error rate. You will over‐
look real, positive treatment effects that could drive incremental rev‐
enue, and you will mistake chance effects as treatments effects (i.e.,
you will roll out a feature that has no real impact). In short, you will
be subject to more false negatives and false positives. Never cut short
an experiment because things are looking good for a treatment.
It is very unfortunate that many of the A/B testing vendors encour‐
age users to run experiments until significance is achieved. Never
run a test like this! (Can you tell that I view this as being really really
important?) Citing four vendors, Martin Goodson remarks, “Some
software for A/B testing is designed in such a way that it’s natural to
constantly monitor the results of a test, stopping the test as soon as a
significant result is achieved. Alarmingly, false positives can com‐
prise as much as 80% of winning test results when tests are per‐
formed in this way.” (See also “How Not To Run An A/B Test”.)
Once you have ramped up the experiment and you are confident
that there are no egregious issues, the best advice is to do it the
Ronco way: “Set it and forget it.” Monitor sample sizes over time but
not the evaluation metrics. 
170 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

Other Approaches
Here I briefly touch upon two other approaches that can be used in
addition to or instead of simple A/B or A/A testing.
Multivariate Testing
So far, I have discussed paired (two sample) tests only, one control
with either one treatment (A/B) or another control (A/A). That
experimental design is very simple yet very effective. However, there
are some drawbacks. Recall the Obama campaign story earlier
where they tested different submit button text and different images.
Because they had five different button texts and at least six different
images, there were at least thirty different combinations. To test all
those combinations sequentially means thirty times as long as a sin‐
gle A/B test. It is for this reason that multivariate tests are sometimes
used. 
Also known as multivariable or factorial tests, these tests run differ‐
ent combinations (or “recipes”) simultaneously. Thus, group 1 will
be exposed to image1 and text1, group 2 to image2 and text2, all the
way to group 30, exposed to image6 and text5.
What are the pros and cons of such a design? If you have sufficiently
high traffic and can afford to split it among the different combina‐
tions, you can run the tests in parallel and thus in a shorter duration.
(YouTube, which obviously has huge traffic, conducted an experi‐
ment in 2009 involving a staggering 1,024 combinations. The best
combination resulted in a 15% increase in signups.) You can also
test so-called interaction effects. Maybe a larger submit button does
better than a normal-sized button, and a red submit button does
better than a blue button, but when you combine the two, a large red
submit button does amazingly well, better than large alone and bet‐
ter than red alone. 
Not all combinations will make sense and can or should be tested.
Imagine the first factor to be tested was making a checkout button
red (current state) versus black (treatment). Now imagine the sec‐
ond factor was having the button text black  (current state) versus
white (treatment). This generates four combinations, but the black/
black combination is just not going to work. Or, as Kohavi et al. sug‐
gest, on a product page, a larger product image plus additional
product information may be a poor combination because it pushes
Other Approaches 
| 
171

the purchase button too far down the page, below the fold. These
effects should be caught at the design stage and should not be tested.
Even when you have a complete set of combinations that make
sense, it is possible to get away with running a subset of those com‐
binations. These are known as partial or fractional factorial experi‐
ments. They consist of a very carefully selected subset of
combinations that allow one to get at a reasonable estimate of the
main effects as well as the interaction effects. However, they are
more complex to design and don’t provide the level of information
that a full multivariate design or sequential set of A/B tests provide.
If you do run multivariate tests, favor exploring more factors (i.e,
different types of things to tests such as images and button text)
than levels (number of different variants within a factor, for exam‐
ple, five different button texts). Also, you will need to go “all in” and
roll this out to 100% of your traffic to maximize sample size and
statistical power. 
Analysis of multivariate test results is, unsurprisingly, more com‐
plex. One needs more advanced statistical tools (such as analysis of
variance or ANOVA) compared to A/B tests, and it is harder to visu‐
alize the results. 
In summary, multivariate testing allows you to explore “design
space” or other aspects of your business more rapidly and also test
for interaction effects (although Kohavi et al. argue that they are not
that prevalent). However, this increased power comes at a cost of
increased complexity of setting up, running, and analyzing tests and
is only viable with sufficiently high traffic to retain statistical power.
Bayesian Bandits
The A/B testing approach described so far in this chapter, and which
is more common and popular “in the wild,” comes under classical or
“frequentist” statistics. However, there is another approach—one
that has increased in popularity over recent years as computational
power has increased—called Bayesian statistics.
In a frequentist approach, one starts with a hypothesis, say that the
click-through rate of the control experience is the same as the click-
through rate of the experiment experience. You gather data and
essentially ask, “What is the likelihood of seeing these results (or
more extreme) if that hypothesis were true and we ran this experi‐
ment many, many times?” It assumes that the state of the world is
172 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

constant, that we draw probabilistically from a distribution but that
distribution and its parameters don’t change over time.
A Bayesian approach is different. It starts with a prior belief. What
do I know about this system? Maybe you have never tested this type
of treatment before, so you start with a simple naive guess. Maybe
you’ve done a previous experiment with a similar treatment. You are
allowed to use that information as a starting point. Your prior beliefs
are actually not that important because you will update these over
time as you gather more evidence. Even if it is wrong, it should
evolve toward the correct state of the world. That is the key differ‐
ence from frequentism. Each piece of data collected—a view, sale, or
a click—is additional evidence that you should incorporate into
your knowledge. It is very iterative. Moreover, instead of asking, “Is
there a difference?,” it asks, “Which is the better out of the control or
treatment?”; and that, ultimately, is what the business wants to
know.
If you were wondering about the term “bandits,” it comes from
making an analogy with slot machines, also called one-armed ban‐
dits. The idea here is that we have multiple bandits (the control and
treatments), each of which has a different payout frequency (under‐
lying click-through rate). We want to determine the best bandit
(highest click-through rate) but only can do so by a series of pulls
(exposures). Because each pays out stochastically, we have to balance
pulling potentially poorer-performing bandits to get more informa‐
tion versus pulling only on what we think is the best bandit to maxi‐
mize payoff.
The system will change the proportion of users seeing the better
experience over time. Crudely, we might start out with a 50% con‐
trol and 50% treatment. Let’s suppose that the treatment is really
good (we are seeing lots more clicks per treatment view than per
control view), so the system decreases the proportion going to the
control and increases those going to the treatment. So now we have
40% control and 60% treatment. We continue to see great perfor‐
mance in the treatment, so we up its percentage—now it’s 30% con‐
trol and 70% treatment, and so on. This has two impacts. First, we
don’t need to run any analysis to understand which is better. We can
look at the relative proportions. Second, because we run the better
experience longer, we realize or benefit from that increased lift
immediately. (In statistical terms, we don’t have the “regret” or loss
Other Approaches 
| 
173

of running the known poorer experience for the duration of an
experiment.) 
Unlike the frequentist approach, we are allowed to peek and observe
the changing system over time, and there is no fixed duration; we
can run and run the experiment indefinitely. In fact, we can throw
in new treatments, remove treatments, and modify treatments, all of
which are not allowed in  a frequentist approach. We keep running
it or provide some stopping criterion: if treatment is 5% better than
control, declare it the winner and divert 100% of traffic to it.
Obviously I have glossed over a lot of mathematical details, the meat
of which is the update rule, or how the probabilities are
changed. The system is actually designed to go through a period
of exploration, where you try out all the different controls and treat‐
ments with the relative frequencies, and then exploitation, where you
hit the current winner hard (which minimizes the regret). This
Bayesian approach will also suffer the same issues as the frequentist
approach: a winning streak for the treatment could be due to a fun‐
damental better rate, or it could be due to chance effects. If it were
due to chance, then later treatment exposures would likely generate
a lower click-through rate, and the treatment proportion would be
ratcheted down by the update rule. This does mean that such a sys‐
tem cannot guarantee consistency of experience per user, or at least
for returning users.
The Bayesian approach is gaining popularity, but slowly. It is much
harder to explain in nontechnical terms how the system operates
under the hood, but it is much easier to interpret the results. Unlike
the frequentist approach, you don’t have to spell out a test duration
but instead you define a stopping criterion, which is easier to deter‐
mine from a business perspective. I also wonder whether part of the
reason for the slow adoption is the comfort with an algorithm mak‐
ing modifications and determining the website experience. That is,
the Bayesian update rule is essentially in charge, actively changing
the proportion of treatments seen by users, and evolving that over
time. It takes a very data-driven organization to trust that process,
which for many on the business side represents a magic black box. 
Cultural Implications
Having gone through the more technical material of best practices,
and how to run tests well to maximize the impact, I now want to
174 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

step back and consider the cultural implications of a great testing
culture within a data-driven organization.
Scott Cook, founder of Intuit, considers that A/B testing shifts the
culture from “decisions by persuasion to decisions by experiment.” It
is a very anti-ego philosophy. Instead of the HiPPOs (highest paid
person’s opinion; covered in more detail in the next chapter) ruling
the roost, there is a more democratic shift from higher-level deci‐
sions to lower-level hypothesis generation. He suggests that “you
enable your most junior people to test their best ideas.” Good ideas
and a fresh perspective can come from everywhere. You’ll get more
ideas, better ideas, and a sense of participation, ownership, and
engagement. As I advocated in a blog post (the origin of this book,
in fact), “let the interns speak.”
Siroker and Koomen argue that this ego-liberation allows an organi‐
zation to push boundaries and be more innovative. “It eliminates the
requirement for everyone involved to be a know-it-all,” they say.
“When people feel comfortable saying, ‘I don’t know, but let’s run an
experiment,’ they’re more inclined to take risks by trying things out‐
side the norm.” Scott Cook clearly agrees. He says that with experi‐
mentation, “you get surprises more often, and surprises are a key
source of innovation. You only get a surprise when you are trying
something and the result is different than you expected, so the
sooner you run the experiment, the sooner you are likely to find a
surprise, and the surprise is the market speaking to you, telling you
something you didn’t know.”
Siroker and Koomen also suggest that meetings can be shorter. They
cite Jarred Colli, a former senior product marketing manager at
Rocket Lawyer, who claims “Where previously, people would argue
over what kind of headlines you use or what kind of picture, and
you would spend hours drilling down on some stupid detail, now
we don’t have those conversations anymore, since we’ll test all that
stuff. We’ll figure what is best.” Again, you eliminate the battle of the
egos, you eliminate the need to generate theories and instead focus
on ideas, ideas that might just work and make a difference. While
the majority of ideas don’t make a difference, or they move the nee‐
dle in the wrong direction, you only need one or two hits to make a
huge impact. Recall the $57 million that came from optimizing the
Obama campaign signup page. That’s a huge return. While impres‐
sive, that probably pales into comparison with the lifetime value of 
Greg Linden’s Amazon.com checkout recommender. Bing recently
Cultural Implications 
| 
175

tested whether increasing the number of links in featured ads
improved results. That test result, that two or more links are better
than one, is supposedly worth $100 million annually. That wasn’t
luck. They run 300 experiments concurrently per day. Google is run‐
ning thousands of experiments at any one time. You have to be in it
to win it. As the joke has it: A/B testing actually stands for always be
testing.
176 
| 
Chapter 8: A/B Testing

3 Economist Intelligence Unit, “Decisive Action: how businesses make decisions and
how they could do it better” (London: Economist Intelligence Unit, 2014).
4 Lynch, M., “Is your HiPPO holding you back?” Financial Times, September 14, 2009.
CHAPTER 9
Decision Making
In a significant minority of organizations senior management take
decisions behind closed doors for opaque reasons and, should those deci‐
sions turn out to be the wrong ones, are not held accountable.
This is a disturbing state of affairs.
—Economist Intelligence Unit3
There is no mystique about decision-making. It’s a teachable
and learnable skill for which almost everyone has potential.
—Sydney Finkelstein (ibid.)
Warning: bad joke alert. 
What’s the most data-driven animal? An adder. (Insert groan here.)  
What’s the least data-driven animal? A HiPPO. This is much more
serious. HiPPO, “highest paid person’s opinion” (Figure 9-1), a term
coined by Avinash Kaushik, is the antithesis of data-drivenness. You
all know them. They’re the expert with decades of experience. They
don’t care what the data says, especially when it’s wrong, and they
are going to stick to their plan because they know best. And, besides,
they’re the boss, as the Financial Times explains:4
HiPPOs can be deadly for businesses, because they base their deci‐
sions on ill-understood metrics at best, or on pure guesswork. With
no intelligent tools to derive meaning from the full spectrum of
177

customer interactions and evaluate the how, when, where and why
behind actions, the HiPPO approach can be crippling for busi‐
nesses.
This chapter covers the link in the analytics value chain that perhaps
is least discussed: the decision-making step itself. An organization
can have quality, timely, and relevant data and skilled analysts who
do great work and generate masterful reports and models with care‐
fully crafted and presented insights and recommendations. How‐
ever, if that report sits on a desk, or unopened in an inbox, or the
decision maker has already made up his mind what action he’s going
to take regardless of what the data shows, then it is all for naught.
Figure 9-1. Let data drive decisions, not HiPPOs. (c) Illustration by
Tom Fishburne. Reproduced with permission.
This chapter covers a number of questions related to the decision-
making step. I first cover how decisions are made. Are they typically
data-driven or are they HiPPO-driven? I then examine what
we really mean by data-driven. How does data-driven compare to
the related terms “data-informed” and “data-influenced”? Next, I
detail what makes decision making hard, covering aspects such as
data, culture, and cognitive biases (irrational or illogical thinking).
Having set out the raft of challenges, and at the risk of having
depressed the reader, I then switch gears to focus on a suite of solu‐
tions and suggestions to improve fact-based decision making, all of
178 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

which are positioned under the framework of the Fogg behavioral
model.
How Are Decisions Made?
It’s bad. As much as organizations like to think that they are data-
driven, intuition still rules the roost. Here’s some data: intuition and 
personal experience rank as the top two factors in a 2012 report
from Accenture (n = 600; Figure 9-2).
Figure 9-2. Factors used in senior management decisions. After figure
5 of “Analytics in Action: Breakthroughs and Barriers on the Journey
to ROI.” Accenture.
In a 2014 survey of 1,135 senior executives conducted by the Econo‐
mist Intelligence Unit, we see the same picture (Figure 9-3): intu‐
ition (30%) and experience (28%) together swamp an analytical
approach (29%).
Figure 9-3. Which of the following inputs did you place the most reli‐
ance on for your last big decision?
In yet another survey of more than 700 senior executives, 61% agree
that when making decisions, human insights must precede hard
How Are Decisions Made? 
| 
179

analytics, and 62% say it is often necessary or even preferable to rely
on gut feelings and soft factors.
Finally, from IBM’s survey of 225 business leaders worldwide, intu‐
ition and experience, again, topped the list. See Table 9-1.
Table 9-1. To what extent do you make business decisions based on the
following factors?
Factor
Frequently Always
Total
Personal experience and intuition
54%
25%
79%
Analytically derived
43%
19%
62%
Collective experience
43%
 9%
52%
As can be seen from these four reports, there is a pretty consistent
picture. 
I did, however, find one report where data-driven won out
(Figure 9-4). This was another 2014 report by the Economist Intelli‐
gence Unit (n = 174).
Figure 9-4. Which of the following best describes your personal
approach to making significant management decisions?
(See also figure 7 of “Analytics: a blueprint for value.” IBM.)
What’s driving this? Why does it appear that subjective experience
and intuition win out over a more objective, analytical approach?
Crudely, we can say that there are at least three drivers: the data
itself, culture, and finally that three-pound lump of goo between
your ears, the brain. Later, I touch on these three areas to examine
some of the root causes of issues with decision making. With a bet‐
ter grasp of the issues at hand, the following section will cover some
potential remedies and approaches. 
180 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

3 I think that this post would make for a great brown bag discussion with colleagues in
the analytics org. The post is clearly provocative, debatable in parts, but also contains
some very perceptive and valid points, which should make for stimulating discussion.
First, let’s touch upon whether we can, in fact, be objective when
making decisions. Won’t intuition always play a part? What, in fact,
do we really mean by data-driven at this stage of the analytics chain?
Data-Driven, -Informed, or -Influenced?
Throughout this book, I have used the term “data-driven.” I covered
a high-level overview of the concept in Chapter 1, and most of
the book considers the data component in some way. However, it is
worth considering the second component, “driven,” briefly here.
Are we ever really driven by data? Are other terms, as others have
argued, such as data-informed or data-influenced more appropri‐
ate? 
Scott Berkun raises some really interesting points in a great post
entitled “The Dangers of Faith in Data”.3 He argues: “No team or
organization is Data-driven. Data is non conscious: it is merely a list
of stupid, dead numbers. Data doesn’t have a brain and therefore
can’t drive or lead anything.”
If you think of “driven” in the sense of a driving a car—the data says
turn left, your organization turns left—then most of the the time,
this does not make sense for any organization, unless...they have
reached some of the higher levels of analytics (Chapters 2 and 5). If
you have situations that are regular and predictable and you have
developed really good predictive models, then absolutely you should
have decisions that are data-driven in the sense that they are auto‐
matic. For instance, consider just-in-time replenishment processes
in manufacturing. You can create an automated process where a pre‐
dictive algorithm is monitoring sales and stock levels and sends out
purchase orders to minimize stock outs, but at the same time mini‐
mizes inventory levels. Or, consider automated trading systems
where algorithms are trading real stocks with real money autono‐
mously. In scenarios like these, you essentially have taken the deci‐
sion maker out of the situation but algorithm and data are, in fact,
making real choices that impact their organizations. I agree with
Scott that most of the time, this is not what data-driven does or can
mean.
How Are Decisions Made? 
| 
181

However, that is not the only meaning of “driven.” One of the dictio‐
nary definitions includes the sense “cause (something abstract) to
happen or develop,” with the example, “The consumer has been
driving the economy for a number of years.” Clearly, consumers are
not sitting in their living rooms with a joystick actively controlling
metrics such as inflation, but their actions are indeed a driving
force. Their purchases, the credit card debt that they take on, and
the amount that they save are all forces, in combination with other
factors, including the interpretation of the information by the chair
of the Federal Reserve, that shape the economy. For instance, by
monitoring key metrics such as unemployment, consumer spend‐
ing, and home ownership, Ben Bernanke was motivated to keep
interest rates low to stimulate the economy. He wasn’t forced to do
it, the data didn’t put a gun to his head, but the trends in those key
metrics, plus his skills and experience in monetary policy, really
drove those decisions. (Similarly, I think that the surveys in the pre‐
vious section were not pitting intuition versus data, but instead intu‐
ition alone; i.e., in the absence of any recent data. This is in contrast
to an analytical approach in which data was collected, analyzed, and
used in combination with a decision maker’s experience and knowl‐
edge to drive a decision.) I tend to think about data-driven in this
sense. Scott continues, “At best you want to be data influenced,
where (living) decision makers have good data available that they
can use to help answer good questions about what they’re doing,
how well it’s being done and what perhaps they should be doing in
the future.” I whole-heartedly agree, except that I think that data-
driven can take on the same sense, although data-influenced is per‐
haps a more explicit term.
Knapp et al. prefer the term “data-informed,” at least in the context
of educational leadership. “We find the term data-informed leader‐
ship a more useful concept...The term broadens the scope of think‐
ing and action in two productive ways. First, shifting to the concept
of data-informed leadership escapes the occasional deterministic
implication of data ‘driving’ action.” (This harks back to the earlier
car example.) They continue, “Second, the concept presumes that
data are useful for more in the practice of leadership than making
decisions per se...data may prompt questions and deliberation more
than they point to specific decision options.” In other words, they
argue that data can inform decisions in same sense as Scott argues
for “data-influenced,” and data can help raise questions and inform
what is going on in the organization, in the sense of KPIs, reports,
182 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

and alerts. They also quote Bernhardt, who says “True data-driven
decision making is only partly about data. A clear and shared vision
and leadership play major roles in data-decision making.”
All three of these terms are sensible and acceptable. “Influence”
sounds, to me at least, the weakest and most passive and “driven” the
strongest and most active. Whether it is the best term or not, the lat‐
ter is the one that has stuck; at time of writing, the number of results
from Google searches for “data-influenced” is 16,000, for “data-
informed” it is greater at a 170,000, but this is dwarfed by the 11.5
million for “data-driven.” Thus, rightly or wrongly, data-driven is the
most popular term, the one that has the widest adoption, and is the
one that I therefore use in the book.
What Makes Decision Making Hard?
In this section, we are going to cover factors that hinder data-driven
decision making and that promote decisions primarily based on
experience and gut.
Data
As mentioned earlier (Chapter 2), data has to be timely, relevant,
and trustworthy. If it is not, decision makers have limited options.
They can postpone the decision, get more data, or they can steam
ahead and make the decision anyway with whatever data and tools
they might possess, which typically might come down to experience
only.
What are some of the potential issues with data?
Data quality and lack of trust
Returning to one of the earlier surveys in the chapter, data itself is a
real and primary problem for decision makers: “Across the sample,
the main impediment to making greater use of this asset for decision
making is the quality, accuracy, or completeness of data.”
Harvard Business Review states that “51% have had the necessary
information to feel confident about their business decisions in the
past six months. And this group is reaping the rewards—it is more
confident with high risk decisions and feels prepared to make criti‐
cal business decisions in a timely manner.” That’s great, but what
about the 49% that don’t have necessary data to be confident? In
What Makes Decision Making Hard? 
| 
183

3 Mussweiler, T., and K. Schneller, “‘What goes up must come down'—how charts influ‐
ence decisions to buy and sell stocks,” Journal of Behavioral Finance 4, no. 3 (2003):
121–130.
another survey, one in three have made major decisions with
incomplete information or information that they don’t trust. This
can only be fixed by data leadership that invests in data management
and data quality programs.
Volume
For others, it is not the lack of data but the opposite: the sheer vol‐
ume of data. They can’t keep up. That same HBR paper states, “More
than half of respondents said both internal and external data needed
for decision-making is increasing more quickly than their compa‐
nies can process.” In that case, focus on a subset of data, pare it
down to what’s most important, aggregate, and automate—and if
necessary, hire more data engineers.
Sifting signal from the noise
Volume presents other issues, too. The more data you collect, the
more signal you’ll get, and along with that, more noise. It becomes
harder and harder to work out what is truly relevant. This is espe‐
cially a problem with big data in which everything, including the
kitchen sink, is encouraged to be recorded and stored. The amount
of relevant data will become diluted, and it is hard for analysts to
determine the signal from the noise.
Having a very specific and well-defined question, versus general
data mining hoping to find something significant and insightful, will
help here. However, even then it may be hard to know where to
draw the line of what might be useful. “Too much evidence can be as
bad as too little—you can drown in detail,” said Gerard Hodgkin‐
son, professor of strategic management at Warwick Business School
(Decisive Action report).
Paul Andreassen (1988)3 ran an experiment with a group of MIT
business students whereby they selected a portfolio of stock invest‐
ments. The students were split into two groups. The low-
information group had limited information access and only knew
whether the stock had gone up or down. The high-information
group had access to changes in stock price but also access to a nor‐
184 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

3 Shah, S., A. Horne, A., and J. Capellá, “Good data won’t guarantee good decisions,” Har‐
vard Business Review 90, no. 4 (2012): 23-5.
mal stream of financial news from newspapers, radio, TV, etc. The
two groups were then allowed to trade. Which group fared better?
Surprisingly, the answer is the low-information group, who earned
twice as much. The high-information group was exposed to a larger
number of potential signals, rumors, and gossip and overly fixated
on irrelevancies. They chased noise for signals and traded more
often. (This is called information bias.) For instance, traders fixate
on recent stock value highs or lows, which by definition are
extremal, and use those as an anchor (discussed in more detail
later). Consequently, this makes them more likely to sell or buy,
respectively.
For nonfinancial examples, see Barry Schwartz’s Paradox of Choice
(Harper Perennial), which contains many examples in which too
many options and too much data overwhelms us and can lead to
“analytical paralysis.”
Those are just some of the problems with data. From a large sample
of executives, “Fewer than 44% of employees say they know where
to find the information they need for their day-to-day work.” Even if
they do find it, it might not contain all they need, or the quality
might not be sufficient. Unsurprisingly, “If given the option of good-
enough data now or perfect data later, most executives choose the
former, confident that they can apply judgment to bridge the gaps.”3
Therein lies the problem.
Culture
Another major aspect inhibiting data-driven decision making is the
existing culture of the organization. (Culture, probably the most
influential aspect of a data-driven organization, will be covered as
the primary focus of Chapter 10.)
Intuition is valued
Senior managers, the decision makers, are typically hired for their
abilities to think at the strategic level. That often means their ability
to create a vision, implement it, see it through to fruition and
remove barriers, irrespective of what the data says. Intuition is
respected. Intuition is often hired for. Heck, Jack Welch’s—the
What Makes Decision Making Hard? 
| 
185

highly revered and influential former CEO of General Electric—
biography is called Straight from the Gut. (To be fair, Welch was
data-driven and promoted Six Sigma.)
Lack of data literacy
Another significant issue is that many senior managers are not data
literate. That is, it has been many years or decades since they took a
statistics class, if they ever took one at all. It is not part of the curric‐
ulum of an MBA, and executive coaches don’t teach it. This illiteracy
is highly unfortunate because they are the final line of defense. They
are the ones taking this set of aggregated data and interpreting the
insights and findings from the analysts and evaluating the degree of
evidence, risk, and impact that is going to move the organization
forward.
Together, these two factors mean that HiPPOs are not an unusual
occurrence and often have a certain amount of power.
Lack of accountability
When you combine intuition and lack of data illiteracy with a third
factor, a lack of accountability, the combination is deadly. In one
survey (Figure 9-5), 41% report that poor decision makers will not
progress within the organization—meaning that the majority, 59%,
will progress—and 19% of respondents say that decision makers at
their organization are not held accountable for their decisions at all.
In addition, 64% say that information about who made certain deci‐
sions is only available to senior management.
Figure 9-5. How are decision-makers held accountable for their deci‐
sions at your organization? From: “Decisive Action: how businesses
make decisions and how they could do it better.” Economist Intelligence
Unit.
186 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

3 Much of this comes from Kahneman’s 2011 book Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar,
Straus and Giroux), which I would highly recommend. If you don’t have time to read
that book, at least read the wonderful review article Kahneman, D., and G. Klein, “Con‐
ditions for intuitive expertise: A failure to disagree,” American Psychologist 64, no. 6
(2009): 515–526. See also McAfee, A., “The Future of Decision Making: Less Intuition,
More Evidence,”, Harvard Business Review, January 7, 2010.
This means that half of those managers are not assessed on the qual‐
ity of their decisions, and they are not held accountable. If you are
not very quantitatively minded, then why wouldn’t you be a HiPPO?
Accountability has to exist at the analyst level, too. (Recall Ken
Rudin: “Analytics is about impact…In our company [Zynga], if you
have brilliant insight and you did great research and no one
changes, you get zero credit.”) Analysts have to sell their ideas to the
decision makers. Part of that pitch should be the strength of evi‐
dence. They have to be honest about sample sizes, margin of errors,
and confidence intervals, but they may have to do that by interpret‐
ing that into language that the decision makers can understand.
The Cognitive Barriers
The previous section covered the lack of accountability, lack of
skills, and some of the culture around intuition. However, there is
another huge barrier to effective data-based decision making, one
that favors (bad) intuition: our brain.
The uncomfortable truth is that we are far-from-perfect decision
makers. We don’t always approach problems in the most objective
manner, often bringing stale experience and latching onto irrelevant
details. This leads to flawed, illogical thinking and decisions. These
influences and mechanisms are called cognitive biases. For a whirl‐
wind tour, see Rolf Dobelli’s The Art of Thinking Clearly or view this
list.
In human cognition, decision making occurs in two main ways: a
fast, involuntary, unconscious manner, called System 1 by Nobel
Prize winner Daniel Kahneman, and a slower, more deliberate man‐
ner, called System 2. System 1 is our “gut” or intuition, while System
2 is conscious, deliberate thought and the one that we use for
deeper, mathematical analysis.
Let’s examine why we can’t always trust our gut:3
What Makes Decision Making Hard? 
| 
187

3 Frick, W., “What to Do When People Draw Different Conclusions From the Same
Data,” Harvard Business Review, March 31, 2015.
We are inconsistent
When presented with the same evidence at different times, we
come to different conclusions; and when different people are
presented with the same evidence, we can come to different
conclusions.3
We remember things that didn’t happen
Our intuition is based on a subconscious collection of data
points, some of which are wrong. In a fascinating story about
eye witnesses recalling events that did not happen, the New York
Times suggests that “our memory is made of bits of true facts,
surrounded by holes that we Spackle over with guesses and
beliefs.”
We are not as good as we think we are
In Kahneman’s terms, we have an “illusion of validity.” Here’s a
simple (embarrassing) example. Answer this as quickly as you
can:
A bat and ball together cost $1.10. 
The bat costs a dollar more than the ball. 
How much does the ball cost?
If you are like most people, including me, you said $0.10...and
you would be wrong. The answer is $0.05. Our intuitive System
1 answer is incorrect—and our System 2 is too lazy is too check
—but if we switch to active System 2 thinking, you can both
easily get the correct answer bat = $1.05 and ball = $0.05, and
verify that it is correct: $1.05 + $0.05 = $1.10 and $1.05 - $0.05 =
$1.0. (If you got this wrong, don’t feel too bad about it. The
error rate among undergrads in top US schools such as MIT,
Princeton, and Harvard is 50% and is as high as 90% in lower-
ranked schools.)
We won’t give up bad data
We internalize facts, build up mental models, and then when
new evidence contradicts those facts, we are very resistant to
changing our model or accepting the new data. Brendan Nyhan
and Jason Reifler from Dartmouth ran some experiments in
which subjects read mock news articles that included either a
188 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

misleading claim from a politician, or a misleading claim and a
correction. Interestingly, they found that “individuals who
receive unwelcome information [i.e., corrections that went
against their beliefs] may not simply resist challenges to their
views. Instead, they may come to support their original opinion
even more strongly – what we call a ‘backfire effect’.” They
quote Mark Twain, who quips, “It ain’t what you don’t know
that gets you into trouble. It’s what you know for sure that just
ain’t so.” In other words, the misinformed are far more danger‐
ous than the uninformed; misinformation is sticky. “Knowledge
actually doesn’t make our misinformation better, sometimes it
can’t make our misinformation worse,” said Shankar Vendan‐
tam, author of The Hidden Brain (Spiegel & Grau), speaking at
2014 Strata+Hadoop World in New York.
We anchor on irrelevant data
If you’ve ever bought a car, no doubt you’ve seen the “official”
sticker price pasted on the window. If you are sensible, you’ve
probably haggled with the dealer—who groaned, hummed, and
hawed and had to talk to his boss—down to a lower price. With
that reduction, you probably felt that you got a good deal. The
problem is that that sticker price is bullshit. It is a psychological
trick to get you to think in relative terms and compare the cur‐
rent best offer against a higher value rather than focusing on the
absolute amount or on other direct evidence. You “anchor” or
latch on to that value as a reference point.
In this case, the official sticker price is not unreasonable, so you
don’t feel hoodwinked. However, completely irrelevant numbers
can act as anchors and cause us to make bad judgments. Amos
Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1974) conducted an experiment
in which they spun a wheel of fortune containing the numbers 0
to 100, but which unbeknownst to the experimental subjects
was rigged to land on 10 or 65 only. For each subject, they spun
the wheel, waited for it to stop, and then asked them whether
the number of African countries within the United Nations
countries was higher or lower than that value (this is the
anchoring step). They then asked them to estimate the actual
percentage. Those that landed on 10 estimated the proportion
of African nations at 25% percent, while those that landed at 65
estimated at 45%, a change in 20% from a seemingly “random”
irrelevant spin.
What Makes Decision Making Hard? 
| 
189

3 Danzinger, S., J. Levav, and L. Avnaim-Pesso, “Extraneous factors in judicial decisions,”
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 (2011): 6889–6892.
We get tired and hungry
Our decisions are affected by other internal, extraneous factors,
such as hunger, mood, and energy. In a remarkable 2011 analy‐
sis,3 the rulings of eight Jewish-Israeli judges, who sit on two
parole boards, were tracked. Danzinger et al. monitored the
1,112 rulings that the judges made over 50 days within a 10-
month period and, importantly, they also tracked when the
judges stopped for a mid-morning break and snack (40 minutes
on average) and also for lunch (an hour). The status quo, the
easiest decision to make, was to deny parole. A harder task was
to grant parole. That took longer to deliberate (5 minutes versus
7 minutes, respectively) and longer to write out the ruling (47
words versus 90 words). The percentage of favorable rulings
(granting parole) started out at 65% at the start of the day and
decreased to almost 0% before their mid-morning break. After‐
wards, it jumped back up to 65% and steadily decreased to zero
again before lunch. Guess what? After lunch it jumped back up
to 65% and decreased steadily toward the end of the session.
(The results could not be explained by race, gravity of offense,
time served, or other factors.) The authors could not control
whether it was the act of taking a break or it was glucose spike
from eating that caused the difference, but it is clear that extra‐
neous factors affected their decision making. The authors con‐
clude “Indeed, the caricature that justice is what the judge ate
for breakfast might be an appropriate caricature for human
decisionmaking in general.”
I’ve listed a few cognitive biases that we suffer. There are many more
(see earlier references). Other important biases that could impair
our judgments:
Survivorship bias
We consider the data that “survives” to be sampled as being rep‐
resentative of the population. If you read technology blogs such
as Techcrunch, Re/Code, or O’Reilly Radar, you get bombarded
by successful startups, inflated funding rounds, and exits. Start‐
ing a startup seems like a sure thing. What you don’t read about
is the vast majority of startups that don’t get off the ground, and
190 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

3 I’ve noticed that when radio stations compile listener-voted greatest hits of all time, the
top 20 or so are dominated by hits within the last year. This is the recency bias at work.
Customers are subject to this bias, too: they too are swayed more by recent interactions,
and if that is bad interaction, it can wash out multiple great interactions before that.
You are only as good as your last performance.
4 Fiske, S. T., and C. Dupree, “Gaining trust as well as respect in communicating to moti‐
vated audiences about science topics,” PNAS 111, no. 4 (2014): 13593–13597.
of those that do, the 97% or so that don’t make an exit. We focus
on the survivors.
Confirmation bias
Related to “We won’t give up bad data” from earlier is a bias that
seeks or prefers data that confirms what we think that we know.
Although Einstein joked, “If the facts don’t fit the theory,
change the facts,” research is finding that is exactly what the left
hemisphere of our brain may do (again, see Shankar Vendatam’s
keynote).
Recency bias
We recall and focus on recent data more than older data.3 In
most cases, that is the right thing to do, but not always. Imagine
a stock market that is tanking where there is a clear downward,
sustained trend. Just because it ticked upwards slightly yesterday
doesn’t mean it has hit bottom. When you have a stochastic,
volatile environment, you have to expand the time horizon to
get a sense of overall trend because the short timescale (high
frequency) data provide relatively little and unreliable informa‐
tion.
Friend or foe bias
When someone tells you information, you first judge whether
the person is on your side—whether they are friend or foe, a
competitor or cooperator—and then decide whether to believe
that information. That is, “audiences view trustworthiness as the
motivation to be truthful.”4
Where Does Intuition Work?
There are of course scenarios where intuition can and does work
well. Oft-cited examples include well-trained firefighters who have
an innate sense of when a building is becoming dangerous and get
the crew out, or neonatal ICU nurses who can tell before the doctors
What Makes Decision Making Hard? 
| 
191

3 Macnamara, B. N., D. Z. Hambrick, and F. L. Oswald, “Deliberate practice and perfor‐
mance in music, games, sports, education, and professions: a meta analysis,”Psychologi‐
cal Science 25 (2014): 1608–1618.
and before clinical test results come back whether an infant is devel‐
oping a fever or complications, or chess grandmasters who are able
to sense the other player’s strategy and evaluate what seems like an
inordinate amount of moves and counter-moves. This type of per‐
formant intuition can only develop in “valid” environments in
which cues and signals are reliable and consistent. Thus, this works
in a neonatal unit where the patient spends many days or weeks in
the same place interacting with the same staff, but it can’t work in a
volatile environment, such as a stock exchange.
It also takes a long time to develop such intuition. While the 10,000-
hour rule has largely been discredited,3 it is true at some level that
practice makes perfect. Few business decision makers will have suf‐
ficient time in a small, consistent domain to become a true expert.
We may switch careers five to seven times on average (although no
one really knows the number for sure), and we often switch roles
and domains within organizations. Gone are the days where you
join a firm and stay there for the bulk of your career. In other words,
I think that in business at least we now more frequently reset the
expert counter.
Intuition can have immense value if used as a “gut check.” If data
doesn’t match what one might expect, then it can be a clear signal
that one should double check the data. I mentioned this in Chap‐
ter 2 where I suggested that if one develops expectations of what
data or values should be, it can be used as part of the data quality
control processes. The “Decisive Action” report states “Intuition can
act as warning sign there may be something wrong with the way that
the data have been collected or analyzed. This allows leaders to
check that the data on which they are basing their decisions are
valid.”
I am encouraged by the response to the following question: “When
taking a decision, if the available data contradicted your gut feeling,
what would you do?” 57% said that they would reanalyze the data,
and 30% would collect more. Only 10% said that they would go
ahead with the existing data (Figure 9-6).
192 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

Figure 9-6. When taking a decision, if the available data contradicted
your gut feeling, what would you do? From the “Decisive Action”
report.
Solutions
Are you depressed yet? The preceding discussion seems to paint a
pretty grim picture. Let’s now switch tone and move to a solutions-
oriented perspective. What can be done to create a more data-driven
decision-making practice?
I am going to frame this section in terms of the Fogg Behavioral
Model. If the brain is the source of so many issues with intuition-
based decisions, let’s get into the head to understand how we can
motivate and shape decisions and behaviors.
Criminal investigations often focus on whether the suspect had the
means, motive, and opportunity to conduct the crime. If even if one
of those three is missing, US criminal law is unlikely to convict. The
Fogg Behavior Model is very similar to this triad. It attempts to
model the suite of conditions for someone to perform a task by
assuming that:
• They must be sufficiently motivated.
• They have the ability to perform the task.
• They have been triggered somehow to perform the task.
The question at hand is, how can we create the right conditions to
favor more data-driven decision making over intuitive decision
making? Let’s examine this through the eyes of the Fogg model.
Solutions 
| 
193

Motivation
The first condition is motivation. What can create greater motiva‐
tion to use data or at least improve the decision-making processes
(which presumably will involve being more data-driven)?
Fogg lists three motivators:
Pleasure/pain
A primitive, immediate motivator.
Hope/fear
A more anticipatory motivator.
Social acceptance/rejection
“Facebook gains its power to motivate and ultimately influence
users mostly because of this motivator,” says Fogg.
Some ways that Fogg’s three motivators play out in the business
world include pride (encourage staff to do a great job for their own
benefit), pleasure from recognition, praise, and promotion for doing
a good job; and conversely, fear of demotion or being fired for a bad
job.
Naively, I thought that money should have been included as a moti‐
vator, especially in a business context where end-of-year financial
bonuses are tied to job and company performance. Surprisingly,
however, it turns out that in tasks that require complex or creative
thinking, not only is money not a poor motivator, but it actually
leads to decreased performance.
Incentives and accountability
I mentioned the lack of accountability earlier. That has to be
addressed and fixed. One way, of course, is to tie performance and
outcomes back to a quantitative measure, such as sales, signups, or
profit. It may often be the case anyway, but focus on ROI or the
overall downstream effect and impact. If someone has made a bad
decision, it should be reflected in the metrics. Design incentives to
get the right behavior and associated culture in place.
Prove it!
Rather than rely on gut, engender a more “prove it” culture in which
ideas are challenged until clear evidence is presented, such through
A/B tests, proof of concepts, or simulation. 
194 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

Transparency
Foster more open and transparent culture where who the decision
makers are, what decisions they made, and the outcomes of those
decisions are more readily available and interpretable. By making
both the decision and outcome more visible through presentations,
documentation, or through dashboards, you kick in the social-
acceptance motivator.
Ability
Fogg lists six aspects that affect someone’s ability to perform a task:
Time
One has more ability to perform a quick task than a long task.
Money
One has more ability to perform a cheap task than an expensive
task.
Physical effort
One has more ability to perform a task that takes less physical
effort than one that is demanding.
Mental cycles
One has more ability to perform a less brain-taxing task than
one that is mentally challenging.
Social deviance
One has more ability to perform a task that is socially acceptable
than one that is unpopular.
Non-routine
One has greater ability to perform a routine task than one that is
non-routine.
With this framework, it becomes relative easy to start to see how we
can lower the barriers to making good decisions. I’ll highlight the six
abilities addressed in square brackets in the remaining discussion.
Tie actions to outcomes
Analysts can make decisions easier (mental cycles) for decision
makers and so help them make them more quickly (time) by fram‐
ing their findings and recommendations well, showing why it mat‐
ters, and focusing on impact. Yes, present the evidence, but present
Solutions 
| 
195

the recommendation in the clearest manner that requires the least
amount of mental effort to comprehend. I love Tracy Allison Alt‐
man’s suggestion, shown in Figure 9-7 (the rest of that paper is a
great read, too) that highlights the link between action and outcome
—if you do X, then Y will happen—but also documents the support
for the recommendation below. This is a sale: buy this recom‐
mended action because of these objective reasons.
Accenture found that 58% of executives see “outcome from data” as
a key analytics challenge. “Establishing the linkage between data col‐
lection and analysis on the one hand, and the actions and outcomes
predicated by analytics is proving to be a more difficult task for
many than data collection or data integration.” Moreover, they
found that only 39% of execs found that the data they generate is
“relevant to the business strategy.” This is where each and every
member of the analytics org has a role to play. Help embed analytics
into the business processes, and help make it easy, clear, and repeat‐
able with relevant data and metrics. Push back where appropriate
but with a clear, objective rationale.
Figure 9-7. Tie actions to outcomes. Set out the action linked to the
resulting outcome and below set out the causal evidence. From http://
bit.ly/altman-data-easy. Reproduced with permission.
196 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

Collaboration and consensus
I mentioned in Chapter 5 that Nate Silver predicted all US Senate
races and also winners in 49 out of 50 states in the 2008 presidential
elections. He did so in the face of the pundits who attacked and ridi‐
culed him, claiming that, given their years of experience following
politics, they knew better. However, by creating statistical models
combining a suite of different polls and opinions (and also using the
very latest data that he could get his hands on), the various errors
and biases averaged out to produce highly accurate predictions. As 
Larry Keely of the Doblin Group notes, “No one is as smart as
everyone” (cited in Kevin Kelly’s New Rules for the New Economy
[Penguin Books]). In this case, everyone is the electorate reflected in
aggregate data.
If a decision is complex or is likely to be unpopular, one approach is
to get consensus (social deviance). That will enfranchise stakehold‐
ers and make the process more likely to succeed. “What’s important
is that everyone feels part of the process—it’s no good the decision
being right if no one supports it,” says Robin Tye, Ernst and Young’s
COO. 
In a data-driven world, that means making sure that everyone
understands the objective, the data collected, the metrics, and how
the primary decision maker is interpreting the evidence. Give others
a chance to put forward their interpretations and views, if those dif‐
fer, and get everyone on board; but also get inputs on other perspec‐
tives that that the decision maker may have missed. To help, you can
remember this neat mnemonic, DECIDE:
• Define the problem.
• Establish the criteria.
• Consider all the alternatives.
• Identify the best alternative.
• Develop and implement a plan of action.
• Evaluate and monitor the solution and feedback when neces‐
sary.
In other words, make sure that stakeholders are on board with each
of these steps.
There is of course a danger here. With too many inputs, you can get
group think and a diffusion of responsibility that can slow down the
process significantly or increase the chance that you get contradic‐
Solutions 
| 
197

tory perspectives that lead to arguments or frustration. Again, you
need to strike a balance, something that is reflected in the data
(Figure 9-8).
Figure 9-8. Responses to the question, “How collaborative is the typical
decision-making process at your organization?” (From “Decisive
Action: how businesses make decisions and how they could do it bet‐
ter.”) “Decision makers will seek input from...”
Interestingly, the “Decisive Action” report states:
As for seniority, while C-suite executives and heads of department
are most likely to be data-driven decision makers, by their own
reckoning vice presidents and senior vice presidents (or equivalent)
are more likely to be collaborative. This may be a symptom of the
need for executives of this level to build consensus for their initia‐
tives—something that is alleviated when they reach the C-suite.
Training
Increasing the data literacy of the decision makers is an obvious step
to increase ability (mental cycles). The analysts should have done
the statistical analysis, so I wouldn’t suggest that all managers would
need the skills to build sophisticated regression models or under‐
stand the mathematical underpinnings of the expectation-
maximization algorithm or a support vector machine classifier.
Instead, I would suggest focusing more on the principles of sam‐
pling and experimental design so that decision makers can better
assess whether the data collection or experiment is valid, what types
of biases might have crept in, etc. I would also suggest reviewing
variance-like metrics, such as margin of error and standard devia‐
tion, that reflect repeatability and confidence in the resulting aggre‐
gate values. 
198 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

Warning: this type of training is likely to come with some resistance,
so you may need a very senior sponsor, such as CEOs (as I have at
Warby Parker), to get the decision makers in a room and give them
a refresher course, even if only for an hour. 
Consistency
You can make tasks shorter (time) and simpler (mental cycles) by
being more consistent in how data is presented. This doesn’t mean
that every report has to look the same, but a weekly report or dash‐
board should look the same over time, and the same metrics should
be consistent across teams where possible.
For instance, at Procter & Gamble, where they have 50,000 employ‐
ees accessing dashboards, commonality to align those data consum‐
ers is key. In their marketshare heatmaps, green always means above
market share, and red means below market share. Don’t mix things
up unnecessarily. Elsewhere, they have instituted “business suffi‐
ciency models” that specify what data is needed to address a particu‐
lar domain.  That means, as Thomas Davenport notes, “if you’re
focused on supply chain issues, for example, the sufficiency models
specify the key variables, how they should be displayed visually, and
(in some cases) the relationships between the variables and forecasts
based on the relationships.”
Triggers
Of the three conditions in Fogg’s model, the presence of a trigger is
possibly the lowest concern of the three, at least in a business
decision-making context. I say that because decisions in business are
usually in a larger context of goals, KPIs, strategy, and collaborative
teamwork in which there is often some real or arbitrary deadline.
That is, if someone isn’t asking or waiting for the decision, there is
clearly something fundamentally wrong in the process or it can’t be
that important. Of course, someone can postpone a difficult deci‐
sion, perhaps with the real or fake claim that more data is needed.
Make that harder to fall back upon by having a clear, visible project
timeline and bake in unambiguous accountability. 
One example where there definitely is a need for a trigger is automa‐
ted processes “run” by statistical, machine-learned models. Such
models get stale. The underlying assumptions on which the model
was built may no longer hold true; for instance, behavior of the driv‐
Solutions 
| 
199

ers, such as customers or staff, may change. As such, models need
regular maintenance to check performance, verify assumptions, and
retrain as necessary. However, when algorithms are in charge,
humans become more passive and less vigilant, something termed
“automation bias.” A clear process that sets out a regular schedule
and responsibility for model maintenance is needed to combat this.
Conclusion
Decision making is hard. We are beset by a barrage of cognitive,
data, and cultural issues and biases. People have preconceptions and
egos, and they can get in the way.
Intuition has to be part of a data-driven decision-making process.
There is no escaping it. In the conclusion of Dataclysm, Christian
Rudder acknowledges, “behind every number there’s a person mak‐
ing decisions: what to analyze, what to exclude, what frame to set
around whatever pictures the number paint. To make a statement,
even to make just a simple graph, is to make choices, and in those
choices 
human 
imperfection 
inevitably 
comes 
through.”
Related, Scott Berken remarks, “If anyone utters ‘the data says,’ they
are pretending data can have a singular interpretation, which it
never does; and this false faith prevents the asking of good ques‐
tions, such as: is there an equally valid hypothesis based on this data
that suggests a different conclusion than yours?”
The key here is to start with the question to be answered—be ques‐
tion and decision focused rather than data focused. By setting out
the objective clearly and unambiguously, you stand a better chance
of defining which questions need to be answered and consequently
which data should be collected, which experiments should be run,
and what metrics you are trying to drive. With that, you stand a bet‐
ter chance of setting out the results aligned with those metrics and
objectives, and the decision should be simplified.
What you must do, however, is use the available, relevant data. Don’t
rely on intuition alone; we are too fallible to do so. Most impor‐
tantly, don’t put up with HiPPOs. If you must make a decision that
goes against what the data shows, be honest about when and why,
and make sure that it is for the right reasons, such as forcing a
longer timescale strategy (such as the Amazon example in Chap‐
ter 8).
200 
| 
Chapter 9: Decision Making

I covered a number of issues in the decision-making step, including
data, culture, and cognition. Which are perceived as the most
important or more easily achieved by managers? Better ability to
analyze data and more accountability for decision making were the
top two answers (Figure 9-9). Both of these are relatively easy to fix.
However, all of those factors are achievable. They do require buy-in
and support from the whole organization, from data entry clerks to
the board. That is only possible with the right underlying open,
enquiring culture and correctly incentivized and motivated staff. As
one commenter remarked, “As an analyst I can say even further that
presenting data that decisively demolishes the HiPPO’s viewpoint/
agenda can be an invitation to be fired and blackballed at no small
percentage of companies.” That is unacceptable in a data-driven
organization. Culture is thus the subject of the next chapter.
Figure 9-9. Which of the following do you believe would most help
your organization improve decision making? (After chart 7 of “Deci‐
sive Action: how businesses make decisions and how they could do it
better.” Economist Intelligence Unit.)
Conclusion 
| 
201


3 Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Virtuous Circle of Data: Engaging employees in data
and transforming your business” (London: Economist Intelligence Unit, 2015).
4 Nadella, S., “A data culture for everyone,” The Official Microsoft Blog, April 15, 2014.
CHAPTER 10
Data-Driven Culture
The biggest problem facing companies who are trying to innovate and
transform themselves with data is a culture of “we’ve always done it
this way.”
—Gabie Boko3
A data culture isn’t just about deploying technology alone, it’s about
changing culture so that every organization, every team and every
individual is empowered to do great things because of the data
at their fingertips.
—Satya Nadella4
If there is one common theme that runs consistently throughout
this book, it is the importance of culture. As we imagine data flow‐
ing through the analytics value chain, there are a number of differ‐
ent touchpoints; some are human, and some are technological, but
they are all shaped by the prevailing culture. Culture influences who
has access, what can be shared, and what investments are made into
people and tools. Moreover, as I covered in the previous chapter,
culture also determines whether the last link in the chain is driven
by HiPPOs or by facts.
In this chapter, I draw out these different aspects more explicitly and
in more detail and bring them together in one place to paint a more
203

3 Cobb, J., “Data Tip #2 - Build a Data-Driven Culture,” Captricity Blog, October 30,
2013.
coherent picture of an idealized data-driven organization. I will first
discuss the data-centric foundations: data access, sharing, and broad
training to make use of the data. Next, I cover a goals-first culture;
that is to say, defining experimental design, metrics, and success cri‐
teria up front, and also the ability for results, interpretation, and
analysis to be discussed and debated. That is followed by discussion
of iteration, feedback, and learning. I round off by discussing an
anti-HiPPO culture and top-down data leadership.
In some sense, you can consider these topics, or hallmarks, as a list
of key ingredients. Think of all the different cakes and cookies that
can be made from flour, eggs, butter, and sugar. The final form
depends on the ingredient quality, relative proportions, and the way
that they are combined. Likewise for data-driven organizations.
Their final forms vary, too. You have to shape the organization to
what makes sense for you, given the starting point, the domain, and
the size and maturity of your organization. Moreover, you should
never expect to be at equilibrium; you will be constantly evolv‐
ing. Instead, you should invest, experiment, and be patient.
Open, Trusting Culture
Leadership needs to think of ways to reward those who shared data,
incentivizing individuals and departments that develop and nurture
open, accurate and sharable data and analytics.
—Jennifer Cobb3
Data-driven organizations provide broad access to data. That
involves providing access to data to staff outside the core analytics
org, and also sharing data among business units, teams, and individ‐
uals. Let’s tackle the latter first. 
In Chapter 3, I told the story of Belinda Smith’s patio table purchase
and how drawing in other data sources provides a richer context
about the customer’s intent, motivation, and interests. By under‐
standing that context better, the organization can provide superior
services and products to meet that customer’s needs.
204 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

For now, let’s ignore those external data sources, such as the Census
Bureau and the MLS, and consider just some of the possible inter‐
nal touchpoints of a customer at an online retailer:
• Clickstream on company’s website
• History of purchases, returns, and exchanges
• Interactions with customer service representatives via email,
chat, and phone
• Social media interactions with brand
• Social network data, such as through a refer-a-friend incentive
program
• Brand exposure through retargeting
It is not hard to imagine that, typically, these data sources are man‐
aged by multiple different teams or business units. For the organiza‐
tion to maximize the potential of the data, the data must be brought
together to provide that more complete, richer context. This is
where culture comes in.
There has to be a clear signal from the business that the data is not
“owned” by those individual teams but that they belong to the orga‐
nization as a whole. Data leaders (discussed later) need to evangelize
the benefits of sharing to the organization as a whole. However, fail‐
ing that, there has to be the right incentives in place to bust the silos
and share the data.
Of course, you have to do all of this without compromising compli‐
ance or increasing risk. Those are valid concerns. One-third of
respondents in a survey of 530 executives conducted by the Econo‐
mist Intelligence Unit said that “their company struggles to achieve a
data-driven culture in part because of concerns about the privacy
and security issues that arise when data are shared.”
Due in part to these practical concerns, but also inertia, the default
mode from business owners is likely to be data hoarding. Thus, this
is something that the data leaders have be very proactive to prevent.
It won’t happen passively. That same survey listed “promotion of
data-sharing practices” as one of the top strategies (a close second to
top-down mandates) that those executives found successful in pro‐
moting a data-driven culture (Figure 10-1).
Open, Trusting Culture 
| 
205

Figure 10-1. Responses to the question, “Which strategies have proved
successful in promoting a data-driven culture in your organization?”
from a survey of 530 executives sampled by the Economist Intelligence
Unit.
By sharing data like this, you also require trust. First, individuals
have to trust that the data is reliable and accurate. Second, they need
to trust that the data will be used to good effect and not used against
them. For instance, in one hospital, “one doctor was afraid of his
medical data being available to Emergency Room personnel; he
didn’t want them to see his notes in case he made a mistake.” People
have to get over this and focus on increasing the overall quality of
their data. Third, and this takes up the second theme of this section,
is providing broad access to the staff as a whole.
Data-driven organizations are much more open and transparent,
and data is democratized, accessible to many individuals within the
organization. “Everyone in the organization should have access to as
much data as legally possible,” said DJ Patil and Hilary Mason
(although see Chapter 12). Access can be through static reports and
dashboards but also “active access” in terms of business intelligence
tools or even the raw data. This too involves a huge element of trust.
The organization has to trust that the data will not be abused, leaked
to competitors, or used to fuel political battles, but instead will be
used in an appropriate manner to further the business as a whole.
Going further, a data-driven organization has greater potential to
push decision making further down the org chart and out to the
margins. If more employees have access to the data that they need,
the necessary skills to analyze and interpret it, and there is sufficient
trust, then more decision making can be democratized. For instance,
imagine a retail store manager who can use business intelligence
tools provided to analyze sales of SKUs in his store; perform sea‐
206 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

3 Accenture Technology Vision 2012. Data Culture.
sonal trend decomposition; take into account local conditions, such
as weather or construction; skillfully forecast trends; and place
replenishment orders to head off stock outs while minimizing back-
of-store inventory levels.
Obviously, many decisions, especially any important or strategic
ones, are still going to flow up to higher levels of management.
However, in most organizations, there are many decisions, especially
operational, that could be tackled at the margins, provided that the
right data, skills, and trust are in place. It is kind of like our nervous
system. Most decisions are routed to the brain for processing, but if
you step on a tack, a spinal reflex occurs in which the stimulus goes
only as far as the spine before returning back to the muscles to move
your leg. “Local” processing and decision making is sufficient to
solve the problem.
Broad Data Literacy
If organizations are to take on a data-centered mindset—if there is to be
a corporate culture that understands and reveres data—then intimate
understanding of data must be embedded in the skills and characteris‐
tics of all employees at all levels, especially within the business.
—Accenture3
Clearly, analysts need training in experimental design, critical think‐
ing, data presentation, use of business intelligence tools, statistics,
etc. However, for a company to be data-driven, this set of skills and
evidence- and fact-based perspective should be ingrained at a much
broader scale. You need the managers and other decision makers to
be data-literate too. Why is this?
• Managers sign the checks to purchase, install, and maintain a
new business intelligence tool or predictive modeling service.
They have to understand the value that this will bring to the
organization.
• Managers sign off on disruption to their teams’ workflow and
suffer reduced productivity as analysts take classes, train, and
learn new tools. In short, they take a hit during the transition,
so they must buy into the longer-term gains.
Broad Data Literacy 
| 
207

• Managers make the ultimate strategic and tactical decisions
based on the analyses. They have to recognize the flaws and
then push back when presented with a sloppy analysis. They
should be constantly asking deeper, richer, more probing ques‐
tions of the data and expecting more from the analysts. They
also have to present their findings and conclusions to more
senior managers, to the board, or to investors. That is, they have
to understand the nuances of the analysis, have confidence in it,
and be prepared to defend it.
In summary, managers don’t necessarily need to understand the
mechanics of how to gather, clean, process, and aggregate the data,
but they should have an understanding of good experimental
design, basic statistical inference, and the dangers of extrapolation.
For instance, I saw an analyst present what I thought was a good and
clean analysis to her manager—the decision maker—and then the
manager asked me, “So, what’s a p-value?” While it is up to the ana‐
lyst to present the analysis in a meaningful, digestible form tailored
to the audience, I believe that in a thriving data-driven environment,
there should be some responsibility of the managers to learn some
of those basic metrics, terminology, and inference tests, too.
Davenport and coauthors (Analysts at Work, p. 15) make this same
point:
As the financial and investment industries (and for that matter, all
industries) become more data oriented and analytical, it is incum‐
bent upon senior executives to master some degree of analytical
complexity. Otherwise, they’re not going to be able to push back
when some trader suggests that they take on inordinate and poorly
understood risk, putting their institutions and the customers in
jeopardy.
And likewise at Strata+Hadoop World, Brian d’Alessandro urged:
As managers and executives in the data business, if you have data
scientists or data engineers in your team, you don’t necessarily have
to learn how to build predictive models, or implement the data
hardware yourself, but you should have some statistical literacy
because they are going to show up to you one day with a power‐
point presentation or a report and here is my analysis and frankly
you are the last person who gets to call bullshit on any of the analy‐
sis that came through.
So what’s to be done? A recent report found that “data-driven com‐
panies are ahead of their more gut-driven peers in offering
208 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

employee training and implementation support as part of data ini‐
tiatives (67% vs 53%).” In his 2013 Strata+Hadoop talk, Ken Rudin
describes the approach at Facebook: data camp. He tells of a two-
week intensive, immersive camp that not only analysts go through
but project managers, designers, finance, customer service workers,
and operations, too. They even have a special version for engineers.
The camp is structured so that participants face three hours of lec‐
tures each morning, part of which focuses on Facebook’s data tool‐
ing. The afternoons, however, are spent working on a self-selected
actual business problem. Working with a mentor for those two
weeks, they learn how to explore data, to come up with hypotheses,
to ask the right business questions, and to become more business
savvy. Rudin says:
If we continue down the path that we’re going, and I think that we’ll
get there, then we’ll have a culture where everyone feels that data is
something they should be using as part of their jobs. Everybody
should be doing analysis.
Not everyone is a Facebook that has the staff, resources, and clout to
create such a program. However, every organization can start some‐
where, and there are plenty of resources to help. Free, online classes
in statistics abound and are offered by Coursera, Udacity, Khan
Academy, and the like. There are some excellent books. I happen to
like the free and open source OpenIntro Statistics, but pick a book or
set of training materials that match your audience’s level and back‐
ground. The key is to start somewhere, do something, and have buy-
in to push staff—ultimately, a broad swathe of staff beyond the
analysts—to develop their skills and get comfortable with data,
tools, and analysis.
Goals-First Culture
Alice: Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?
The Cheshire Cat: That depends a good deal on where
you want to get to.
—Lewis Carroll,
Alice in Wonderland
A focused organization, independent of whether it is data-driven or
not, should have a clear direction, a commonly held vision of where
the business is heading. The leadership’s role is to gather people
around that vision, align them, and get them working toward that
joint goal. In a data-driven organization, that goal will be more
Goals-First Culture 
| 
209

3 For more on running data projects, see Max Shron’s Thinking with Data (O’Reilly) and
Judah Phillips’s Building a Digital Analytics Organization (Pearson FT Press).
transparent with clearly defined KPIs and associated definitions,
clear targets, and a clear current state. That scorecard should be
broadly accessible, with each member of the team understanding
how their work contributes to nudging those top-level needles. 
That set of top-level goals and KPIs will cascade down to business
units that then may set their own dependent sub KPIs, which may
flow down to lower-level metrics and targets. At some point, you get
to individual projects, a coarse unit of “work” that requires setting a
goal and success criteria. However, as best practice, it is not just with
an A/B test (Chapter 8) that one should define the success metrics
and criteria in advance. It pretty much goes with any analytical
project. When running a data project, it is always possible to put a
post-hoc spin on the data, to pick out something that goes in the
right direction, which shows some sort of positive ROI. It is for this
reason, in the interests of objectivity, that a data-driven organization
should develop a goals-first culture. Define the metrics in advance
of the go-live date.3
In the case where one is making a next-steps decision based on a
number of variables, some of which are likely pros and some of
which are likely cons, try to define the relative weights or a ranking
for those variables in advance of the data collection process. That is,
if the approach is to create a weighted decision matrix, define the
weights very early on in the process. Thus, suppose that in choosing
among three different vendors for a service, you will consider price,
volume, and quality. Price and quality are likely negatively correla‐
ted in that vendor space. After the fact, it is easy enough to post-
rationalize the relative weighting so that any of the three vendors
comes out on top. By defining the relative importance of the three
variables in advance of data collection, you make a clear case of what
is important to the organization and reduce the ability to game the
system or cherry pick data points to make a particular outcome win.
 
210 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

3 Arsenault, J., “How to Create a Data-driven Culture,” PagerDuty, October 2, 2014.
4 Example: active voice (focus on doer): “we applied a fertilizer to the plants” versus pas‐
sive voice (focus on subject): “the plants were treated with a fertilizer.”
Inquisitive, Questioning Culture
“Do you have data to back that up?” should be a question that
no one is afraid to ask (and everyone is prepared to answer).
—Julie Arsenault3
In Chapter 8, I suggested that an experimentation mindset changes
the conversation from opinions to hypotheses and thus that can be
tested objectively. Because they are merely hypotheses, and not an
expression of power or experience, those hypotheses can come
broadly from across the organization. This doesn’t mean that every‐
one gets to test every crazy idea they come up with—there are many
considerations to take into account, including branding, usability,
development costs, and “risk”—but a broader set of stakeholders are
more likely to come up with a broader set of ideas. (Recall from ear‐
lier, “No one is as smart as everyone” and “Let the interns speak.”)
In addition to giving everyone a voice, a data-driven organization
should encourage an inquisitive culture. It should engender an
atmosphere of healthy debate where one can ask for additional
information, challenge assumptions, and discuss recommendations
or additional tests. Have presentations and analyses provide refer‐
ences to the raw data. Frank and open discussion of possible issues
with experimental setup or interpretation and possible improve‐
ments can only serve to improve the business, but the key is that the
discussion should be nonconfrontational and neutral—it’s about the
data, and not people.
A good model for this are scientists. A key component of classic
Western scientific training is to make young scientists as objective as
possible. Part of that culture is an active effort to depersonalize their
work. Scientific journals used to be written in the active voice but
they mostly switched to a passive voice4 during the 1920s, a feature
that continues today.
While a passive voice can be considered less interesting to read, it
does reinforce the idea that results are far more about the experi‐
Inquisitive, Questioning Culture 
| 
211

mental setup and the data per se and less about the people, or the
experimenters.
A data-driven organization should encourage that same objective
attitude, too. If a website A/B test shows that a larger checkout but‐
ton does not drive more revenue or a higher conversion rate than
the current smaller button, then so be it. It is no one’s fault. That is
just the way the world is. Instead, celebrate that finding as a new,
valuable data point. (You can use that extra screen real estate for
something else.)
Michele Nemschoff goes further:
Embrace dissent. Challenging the status quo is good, so long as
data verifies it. Not all businesses have a C-team that embraces
outlandish suggestions. If creating a data-driven environment
is a high priority to you, a certain level of dissent should be
acceptable. In some cases you should even reward dissent.
With the blessing of a C-team member, you need to instruct
your employees to search off the beaten path within your data.
New ideas—that are data-verified—are tremendous starting
points for positive innovations.
Iterative, Learning Culture
Mistakes are the portals of discovery.
—James Joyce
In the previous chapter, I discussed that lack of accountability was
cited as a key issue with decision makers. Someone should be keep‐
ing score, not only to make the decision makers accountable but for
the organization to learn and grow. For instance, when involved in
forward-looking activities, such as predictive modeling, it is impor‐
tant to have a feedback loop in which you frequently review the
results, dig into individual cases (called error analysis), and under‐
stand where you can do better.
I used to be a data scientist at One Kings Lane, a home décor flash
sales website. Each morning we opened the doors with about 4,000
products, about 60% of which had never been previously sold on the
site. (These items were all limited quantity and would be sold for
three days or until we ran out of product, whichever was sooner.) A
colleague and I built a set of models to predict how many units of
each SKU would be sold by the end of one and three days. We built a
212 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

dashboard that showed our prediction errors: where our models got
it wrong. Each morning, we would come in and spend an hour dig‐
ging into those errors. What was it about this set of rugs that we pre‐
dicted so badly? Are people are essentially choosing randomly
among a set of very similar items? The daily routine was a lot of fun,
in part because we set this modeling activity as a friendly competi‐
tion between my colleague and I. We traded ideas back and forth, we
understood the data better, and our models got significantly better.
The key was a constant iteration and feedback, always digging into
the edge cases, trying to understand causes, and looking for ways to
improve.
The same is true of testing and experimentation, of course. As dis‐
cussed in Chapters 8 and 9, our intuition is often very poor. More
than half of online experiments fail to move the needle in the right
direction or indeed at all. However, these are not failures if you eval‐
uate why and learn from them.
Figure 10-2 shows a generic feedback loop. You design and run an
experiment, instrument it and measure results, analyze the data,
interpret the results, learn, hypothesize, and build a new experiment.
Back at the top, around you go again. The “build experiment” step
here is essentially a placeholder. It could easily be “build model” or
“devise PR campaign.” My point is that a data-driven organization
should be making the most of all data, even the “fails,” learning from
them and then doing one more thing: act, to move the business for‐
ward.
This is an aspect that should be deeply rooted in the culture. In a
data-driven organization, where everyone is watching the num‐
bers, hypotheses can come from anywhere, and a large proportion of
the staff is actively using data, there is a broad engagement and
investment. People are able to watch and be watched. When you
have a clear set of goals and people are focused on the top-levels
KPIs, they will truly care when an experiment fails or a program
soars. They will want to understand why and dig deeper and do even
better. In a sense, you have to keep up the momentum around this
cycle and not stumble when an A/B experiment “fails” but instead
view this as a learning that is going to help provide inputs to new,
and hopefully better, testable hypotheses next time around.
Iterative, Learning Culture 
| 
213

Figure 10-2. A feedback loop: build, measure, learn, and repeat.
Redrawn from figure from Andrew Francis Freeman (with permis‐
sion).
On an organizational scale, too, data-drivenness requires flexibility
and iteration: as your organization grows and changes, you may find
it necessary to reorganize your data teams and their place in the
business structure.
Anti-HiPPO Culture
Hippos are among the most dangerous animals
in Africa. Conference rooms too.
—Jonathan Rosenberg
As discussed in the previous chapter, HiPPOs are anti-data-driven.
They make decisions based on their experience, preconceived
notions, and their gut, without regard to the available data. This is
bad for business, literally. One approach is to force their hand by
making all decision makers accountable. If they are making excel‐
lent, impactful, gut-based decisions that propel the business for‐
ward, then great: that is what counts. However, if they are making
poor decisions, they should be forced to change or perhaps more
sensibly, be shown the door. HiPPOs will have a highly negative
impact on a culture that is striving to be data-driven. Decisions are
likely to be suboptimal; and HiPPOs, by the nature of their senior
position in the company, hinder an honest, questioning cul‐
214 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

3 Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Virtuous Circle of Data: Engaging employees in data
and transforming your business” (London: Economist Intelligence Unit, 2015).
ture. (Recall the quote from the last chapter: “Presenting data that
decisively demolishes the HiPPO’s viewpoint/agenda can be an invi‐
tation to be fired and blackballed at no small percentage of compa‐
nies.”) In other words, they impede an open, collaborative culture
where ideas can come from anyone or anywhere, where people will
readily admit, “I don’t know, but let’s test it,” and the best, objective,
and fact-based insights win out.
I want to be clear that intuition and experience do have a role to
play. Sometimes, you just don’t have the data available, especially if
you are innovating in new, unchartered territory. Sometimes the
data is highly informative but someone has to make a final decision,
often in the face of some unknowns or uncertainty. I’m talking here
specifically about those individuals who refuse to use or consider
available data, especially if they have a track record of bad decisions
and are unaccountable. Imagine being an analyst working alongside
(against?) them. If the data lines up against the leadership, but the
leader doesn’t budge, it creates a situation of rebellion, which rarely
comes out well. 
Data Leadership
There is no substitute for a corporate leader who
has found religion in data and analytics.
—Russell Glass3
Data-drivenorganizations require strong, top-down data leadership.
They need a leadership that inspires, that promotes a data-driven
culture, and actively drives and supports all aspects of the analytics
value chain, from data collection through to data-driven decision
making and institutional learning. They should be evangelists for
data and data-driven practices.
Such leadership allow organizations to, in the words of Davenport
and his colleagues, “compete on analytics.” In a recent survey, 58% of
respondents in outperforming companies agreed that top manage‐
ment leads by example in promoting data compared to 49% in the
average and subpar performers, or the laggards (Figure 10-3). Con‐
versely, 41% of laggards reported the lack of leadership in their orga‐
Data Leadership 
| 
215

nization prevents greater data adoption compared to only 23% of
out-performers.
Figure 10-3. Organizations that outperform competitors are more
likely to have strong leadership. From Economist Intelligence Unit,
“The Virtuous Circle of Data: Engaging employees in data and trans‐
forming your business.”
A data leader has several constituencies.
First, she has to support the analytics organization per se. That
leader must provide them with the data, tools, and training that they
need. She should define the organizational structure, modifying it as
appropriate as the company evolves, and should also provide a clear
career path and incentives for the analysts to be happy, productive,
and do great work.
Second, the leader also needs to get buy-in from the rest of organi‐
zation, especially the business. They need to believe that a data-
driven approach is the right way to go. To garner that support, the
leader needs to show results, even if they are only small wins at first.
With that, the data leader has a better chance of fostering a data-
sharing culture, a culture in which the business units are fully sold
and part of that organizational-wide effort.
Finally, the leader has to have support from the rest of the senior
management team. They hold the purse strings to the necessary IT
infrastructure needed, the training budgets, and the key to develop‐
ment of a pro-data/anti-HiPPO culture within their teams.
This is clearly a superficial overview of data leadership and requires
deeper inspection. Because data leadership is such a pivotal aspect of
a data-driven organization, it forms the focus of the next chapter.
216 
| 
Chapter 10: Data-Driven Culture

3 Steele, J. Understanding the Chief Data Officer. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly, 2015.
4 Shaw, T., J. Ladley, and C. Roe, “Status of the Chief Data Officer: An update on the
CDO role in organizations today,” Dataversity, November 5, 2014.
CHAPTER 11
The Data-Driven C-Suite
The ideal CDO exists to drive business value.
—Julie Steele3
If the organization wants to be data driven there has to be
an evangelist that makes noise about what it needs.
—Anon. in Shaw et al. 2014.4
So far, we’ve covered a lot of ground. I adopted a bottom-up per‐
spective, following the data, influence, and impact from the raw data
up through the analytics value chain. I started with the foundation
of a data-driven organization: the data layer (i.e., collecting the right
data and collecting the data right). I also covered the analyst org:
hiring the right people with the right skills, combined in the right
way, who have the potential to do insightful, impactful analysis.
And, I covered the types of statistical and visualization tools and
fact-based storytelling approaches that ultimately can turn raw data
into sales pitches to aid the decision makers. Importantly, I also
highlighted what analysts, and their direct managers, can do to con‐
tribute to a data-driven culture and success. 
At this point, we turn things around and adopt a top-down perspec‐
tive. While a data-driven organization and its culture can certainly
blossom from below, to reach its full potential, it also needs shaping,
217

3 There are around 200 CDOs globally today. Gartner predicts that by 2015, 25 percent
of large global organizations will have appointed a CDO, and Shaw et al. suggest that
numbers of CDOs will double approximately every 15–18 months for the next 5 years.
sponsorship, and direction from above: data leadership. That is the
focus of this chapter.
Someone has to hold the top data position in the company. For a
long time, that has been the CTO or CIO. However, they have little
time and breadth to regard the data as a strategic asset because they
are primarily focused on the basic information systems themselves,
the infrastructure to “keep the lights on.” Fortunately, in the past
decade, there has been a shift as more and more organizations view
data not just as business “exhaust,” cost, or liability, but as an asset
per se. In that light, data, information, and analytics take on a
greater importance and must be actively managed, cared for, and
optimized. To that end, we have started to see a new set of C-level
positions: chief data officer (CDO), chief analytics officer (CAO),
and chief digital officer (CDO)—if you thought that two CDO posi‐
tions was confusing, Johnson & Johnson recently hired a chief
design officer, so that makes three.
There is a great deal of confusion among these new roles, so I will go
through both the chief data officer and chief analytics officer in
some detail. (I’ll only briefly contrast those against the chief digital
officer because that role is less central to creating a data-driven orga‐
nization.) For each, I’ll highlight the role, history, and qualities that
make a successful officer. I’ll also cover some of the potential
impacts to an organization and how you might choose whether your
organization needs one, both, or none.
Chief Data Officer
The chief data officer, hereafter CDO, is the oldest of the three
roles. The first appointee was Cathryne Clay Doss who took up the
role at Capital One, a highly data-driven organization, in January
2002. Since then, the number of CDO appointments has risen rap‐
idly.3
218 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Although the breadth is growing to information services, insurance, and e-commerce
(Shaw et al., 2014) and media and manufacturing (via Dave Vellante).
4 Crosman, P., Chief Data Officers Battle Complexity, Complacency: Wells’ Thomas,”
Information Management, October 30, 2014.
Currently, CDOs are primarily found in the following sectors:
• Banking and financial services (40% of total)
• Government
• Healthcare
And that itself provides a clue as to at least part of their role.3 What
is the common theme among those areas? Regulation. All of these
are highly regulated, or it is the local, state, or federal government
itself that sets the rules and regulations. Complying with Sarbanes–
Oxley financial reporting or HIPAA compliance in healthcare or
anti-money-laundering requirements in banking—all data-centric
activities—are complex, closely monitored, and come with stiff pen‐
alties. It’s a major risk for these organizations. 
However, there is more to it than that. These types of organizations
have been required to collect and protect data long before 2002.
What changed? Likely, they started to realize that the data could be
leveraged in new ways, could be an asset and not just a cost and lia‐
bility, and that could be made actionable in new ways. At a recent
Banking Analytics Symposium in New Orleans, only about 15% of
participants had a CDO-like role in their organization. Charles Tho‐
mas, Wells Fargo’s newly minted CDO, speaking at the event said,
“You’ll start to see more of a trend [in banking] because ultimately,
we’re sitting on tons of data, and we’re not really using it in a rele‐
vant and timely fashion.”4
Thus, the heart of a CDO’s role is, or should be, to leverage data
strategically. Mario Faria, an early CDO, told me, “The best of breed
CDOs are doing more than compliance and governance. They are
driving value and using their teams to pursue new ways to leverage
data for business needs.” With that, let’s examine the role in more
detail.
Chief Data Officer 
| 
219

3 IBM Software, “Insights for the New Chief Data Officer,” IBM Corp., June 2014. See
also “The Role of Chief Data Officer in the 21st Century.”
4 Anderson, C., “Creating a Data-Driven Organization: Two Years On,” April 6, 2015.
CDO Role
IBM defines a CDO as “a business leader who creates and executes
data and analytics strategies to drive business value.”3 As such, a
CDO’s role is an especially broad one, covering a range of areas and
responsibilities, both technical and nontechnical in nature. The
items discussed here essentially represent an idealized list. No two
CDOs have exactly the same role because it is very situational,
depending on budget, staff, and where they report (all discussed in
the next section).
One potential CDO function is overseeing or leading data engineer‐
ing and data management. They should define the vision, strategy,
processes, and methods by which the organization acquires, stores,
and manages its data and its quality. That may mean managing staff
such as data engineers and data stewards. As discussed in Chapter 2,
this is a foundational piece that, when missing, can lead to garbage
in/garbage out and low or misleading impacts.
CDOs frequently oversee the definition of standards and policies.
This ranges from policies around data quality and data sharing to
service levels for access. They also cover the creation, maintenance,
and visibility of data dictionaries across the organization. This is a
key component that helps align stakeholders and avoids confusion
by ensuring that everyone speaks the same language. This is not to
be underestimated. At Warby Parker, my team worked closely with
business owners to define a data dictionary, document it, and imple‐
ment those precise business rules in a central business intelligence
tool.4 This may be the most impactful work that my team has done
to date as it has reduced confusion, allows meaningful comparisons
of metrics, and contributes to a reliable, central source of truth.
A thriving data-driven organization will have numerous data
projects running at any one time, both within teams under the
CDO, if any, and in other units. Thus, the CDO’s role must be to
support those endeavors by providing guidance, higher-level strat‐
egy, and coordination. The CDO should also measure and monitor
220 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Application Programming Interface (APIs), which is how computers can communicate
with each other and share data.
the effectiveness of those projects, driving work to maximize analyt‐
ical ROI and impact.
The CDO may run the analytics org, supervising teams of analysts
and/or data scientists. If not, he or she will at least work extremely
closely with members and managers of those teams. All of these
resources cost money, so the CDO may maintain a budget, spending
it on lines items such as data quality programs, hiring good analysts,
training, purchasing data to augment existing internal data, and so
on.
A key component of the role is identifying and exploiting new busi‐
ness opportunities. That is both an opportunity to generate new
sources of revenue and take the business in new directions. Depend‐
ing on where the CDO sits in the organization, and the budget and
resources she has access to, this can mean exploring ideas them‐
selves or providing opportunities for other teams to think and
explore data, data visualization, and data products.
What types of opportunities make sense will greatly depend upon
the sector and business model. For instance, in government, where
CDOs are focused on public accountability and transparency, that
can mean identifying and making datasets publicly available—
ideally, in a programmatically consumable way3—that can provide
value to other cities, states, or citizens in general. Success is others
using your data and deriving value from it for the common good.
For many, success can mean being innovative with the data that you
currently possess. Speaking at Strata+Hadoop World 2014 in New
York, Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs Mark
Doms described how the response rate to US census surveys is 88%.
To reach the rest, you have to knock on doors, which is very expen‐
sive. To maximize their “hit” rate, they augment the census data with
that from Social Security to estimate who should be at home and
when.
Other organizations, however, are in the business of collating,
enriching, and selling data. For those, success centers around find‐
ing new data sources, enriching them in novel ways, and educating
Chief Data Officer 
| 
221

3 There are of course exceptions. John Minkoff is the CDO of the enforcement bureau of
the Federal Communications Commission. Because his team centers around prosecu‐
torial data, he says that no other FCC bureau has access to their data, which makes
sense.
the sales team about new products that may provide value to their
clients. 
Matthew Graves is CDO of InfoGroup, a data and marketing serv‐
ices organization, which is a growing category of organizations
appointing CDOs. Speaking at the CDO Executive Forum in New
York, for him, a key component is
being an evangelist. Working, even in an organization with sales
that sells data, data continues to change. Educating them on
improvements around the data, new data assets, educating internal
sales organization, and our clients. Clients aren’t used to leveraging
data. That’s the whole reason why these companies are trying to
create a chief data officer to manage their own data.
Matthew mentioned the one concept that captures the heart of the
CDO role: evangelism. To become data-driven, an organization has
to leverage data as a strategic asset; and to achieve that, all parts of
the organization needs some prodding, and they need some con‐
crete examples of how data is, or could be, enriching and delivering
impact. For this reason, a CDO has to have great communication
skills with the ability to talk to IT staff in terms they understand and
in ways that will stimulate, motivate, and inspire them.
Thus, CDOs should be shaping the culture, influencing others (both
laterally in the C-suite and downward in the organization) to change
attitudes as to how to view and use data. They should be creating an
open, sharing culture, democratizing data by integrating data sour‐
ces, which includes busting silos.3 In short, they should be increas‐
ing data access and data literacy of the organization as a whole. It is
a broad and challenging role.
Secrets of Success
In essence, the CDO is an evangelistic and change-agent role. As 
Peter Aiken, co-author of The Case for the Chief Data Officer (Mor‐
gan Kaufmann), told me, “CDOs aren’t brought in if things are
going swimmingly.” If so, what’s needed for success? Certainly, a mix
of hard and soft skills are critical. For instance, when I asked Mario
222 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Aiken, P., “The Precarious State of the CDO: Insights into a burgeoning role,” Data
Blueprint, July 16, 2013.
4 Shaw et al. (2014) state that “CDOs mostly report to the CEO, COO or a key business
function. Very few CDOs report to IT and the CDO is often a peer of the CIO.” It may
be that things have changed significantly in one year. However, Shaw’s sample size is
significantly smaller. Thus, there may be an element of sample size effects, survivor bias
(those sampled are more successful, better supported, and prominent because they
report to business), or other bias.
Faria what makes a great CDO, he said, “We are able to combine
hard skills (data, technology and statistics expertise, vertical knowl‐
edge, business acumen) with soft skills (communication, leadership,
respect to adversity, willingness to change the status quo).”
Sampling more broadly across data leaders, a survey conducted by
Aiken3 found that the top three CDO traits were:
• A balance of technical skills, business knowledge, and people
skills
• Outstanding relationship building and communication skills
• Politically savvy
This is clearly much more than a technical role.
Where do CDOs report?
So, where do CDOs report? Ideally, they will report to the CEO and
be a peer to CTO, CIO, CFO, COO, CISO, etc. Failing that, they
should at least report to the business side (COO, CMO, etc.). How‐
ever, in reality, 80% report to the CTO (Aiken, pers. comm. based
on his 2013 survey4).
What’s wrong with reporting to IT? Aiken (p. 52) argues strongly
that “the CDO cannot accomplish data leveraging while subject to
the structured deadlines of IT. Further, if they report through some‐
one who is not data-knowledgeable, it will be impossible to improve
the data decision-making process.” He suggests that most CTOs are
not trained or experienced in data management, are slammed, and
have a different mindset to managing projects. He told me, “Data
operates on a different rhythm than necessarily is going on in soft‐
ware, and it can’t be treated like a project. It has to be managed at
the programmatic level. And, if you are not managing it at the pro‐
grammatic level, there’s got to be a beginning and an end, and data
doesn’t do that.”
Chief Data Officer 
| 
223

3 Logan, D., and M. Raskino, “CIO Advisory: The Chief Data Officer Trend Gains
Momentum,” January 13, 2014.
4 Reyes, J., “Why Philadelphia’s first Chief Data Officer quit,” Technical.ly Philly, June 19,
2014.
In other words, data can support multiple projects simultaneously,
and as a foundational piece, will often outlast and transcend those
projects. As such, CDOs can better serve the organization through
the business side rather than IT. 
A mandate to influence
The most shocking revelations from Aiken’s survey are that “almost
half the CDOs had no budget, over half had no staff, and more than
70% had insufficient organizational support.”
With so few resources, a CDO can essentially only be an evangelist
and a cheerleader. However, that will only get you so far and for so
long. Ultimately, you need to show results and, realistically, that will
only come from a team and a budget. Recognizing this, Gartner sug‐
gests3 “new and aspiring CDOs will face daunting challenges and
conflicting priorities as this new and evolving role has little profes‐
sional structure and lacks established best practices.”
To succeed in the role, even if you don’t have a team or budget, you
have to have a mandate to influence. There are some notable exam‐
ples where that was not the case. Mark Headd, the city of Philadel‐
phia’s first CDO, successfully released a number of datasets but hit a
roadblock with an API around property tax owed to the city.4 He
encountered heavy resistance from the revenue department’s com‐
missioner. Mark said,
Philadelphia is at a juncture where it is ready to take the next step
in its open data evolution. To start sharing data across departments
(hell, even across governments) and start identifying new ways of
doing things—ways that are more efficient and more effective.
I tried very hard to move us past this juncture and onto the next
steps. I was not able to do so, and it became clear that I was never
going to be able to do so...A self-certifying website is a 20th century
answer to the problem of tax deadbeats. An open data API is a 21st
century answer to the problem. And that was my single biggest
frustration during my time at the city—we were constantly using
20th century answers to problems that required a 21st century solu‐
tion.
224 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Peter explains that the data team gained traction when BoA focused on business value,
specifically deepening relationships with customers. With a “business imperative” com‐
ing down from the chairman, Brian Moynihan, the business(es) had good reason and
incentive to get on board with data quality, governance, and sharing.
4 Federal Reserve Board. Strategic Framework 2012–2015, 2013.
Changing attitude and culture is hard.
Coming to the Bank of America, John Bottega had a stellar
record: CDO at both Citi (2006–2009) and the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York (2009–2011). He says, “When most firms created a
CDO-type position—whether it was a head of market data, a head of
reference data, a chief data architect or whatever the actual title—it
started as a siloed business focus. Today, it’s more of a horizontal
responsibility across the enterprise.” Having said that, he was given
no organization to take on and shape that responsibility and was
provided little support. Moreover, he had an especially tough situa‐
tion. BoA is enormous (more than 200,000 employees), and the dif‐
ferent lines of businesses are literally businesses themselves: wealth
management, deposits, mortgages, cards, etc. “If you are trying to
get people aligned around a corporate goal or objective, it becomes
really, really difficult,” said Peter Presland-Bryne, SVP, Chief Archi‐
tect, Consumer Real Estate Division at BoA at that time. “Imagine
coming into Bank Of America as chief data officer. It is a corporate
level position and you are supposed to drive influence over all these
lines of business who are perfectly successful and rewarded in spite
of the chief data officer.” Bottega’s position at BoA was shuttered
after just two years.3
There are of course a number of counter examples. Some CDOs
have the budget, resources, and support that they need to suc‐
ceed. Charles Thomas from Wells Fargo has, in his words, a “small
team” of 600 and a $100 million budget. Kyle Evans, CDO of RP
Data, has a staff of 200. Micheline Casey, CDO of the Federal
Reserve Board (and CDO for State of Colorado from 2009–2011)
had a 2014 operating budget of around $10 million and a team of
25. “If you read the strategy document for the FRB,4 it’s the ideal
chief data officer job,” said Lewis Broome. “She reports to the COO
who reports into the chairman.” Moreover, it was the chairman who
created the position. So, what is needed then is support from the
CEO and the board that data management and leveraging data stra‐
tegically is a sufficiently high priority to require a top-level C-suite
Chief Data Officer 
| 
225

position and, importantly, to back that up with associated budget,
support, and protection.
Another strategy for success is to find a partner in crime. For Greg
Elin, the first commissioned CDO of the FCC, that was Michael
Bryne. “Michael, also the FCC’s first Geographic Information Offi‐
cer—believed like me in the power of RESTful APIs,” Greg told me.
“I’d like to think there was something special about having these two
roles, CDO and GIO, promoting a particular way of thinking about
working with data made it easier to bring APIs to such a high profile
project [National Broadband Map] in an agency that had never built
an API.”
The First 90 Days
I asked Mario Faria his strategy for the first 90 days:
The first 90 days are critical, especially if you are new to the orga‐
nization you landed. The first month should be used to talk to as
many people as you can, from C-level executives to the trainees.
You have to understand what it is going on and you have to start
building your political bridges. 
The second month should be used to start crafting your short,
medium, and long term plan. Above all, during this time you
should have the mission and vision ready for your organization.
With that in place, you are going to have the future view for your
team.
The third month, after your plan is ready and approved, is where
the true action starts. Here you are going to start to delivering the
initial quick wins. You will always need to strike points, make
quick and small wins all the time, to show progress to your team,
in order to motivate them and to the rest of the organization, to
prove it was a wise decision for them to hire you.
Greg Elin:
Evangelism and looking for distinct opportunities to improve
how the FCC collected, used, managed, and distributed data in
order to create momentum and change how people thought
about data. Important data projects had already started up when
I became the chief data officer. The National Broadband Plan had
been published and the FCC had launched a broadband perfor‐
mance test. The Broadband Map was under development. The
Chairman wanted a zero-based review of all FCC data sets and
we were publishing a list of data sets from three major bureaus
for public comment about what to keep, get rid of, and change.
So there were many immediate tasks that I was just trying to keep
226 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

up with and help make a bit smarter in how they worked with
data.
My strategy was similar to Mario’s. I talked to many people from
each of the different teams to get the lay of the land, inventory the
different data sources, and get a sense of their relative importance.
With each team, I asked them two key questions. With your current
data and processes, what do you need help with? That helped iden‐
tify inefficiencies and automations that we could put in place to
deliver those quick wins. I also asked a broader question: what are
you not able to do that we can help with? This helped identify new,
additional data sources or functionality not in place that formed
our more longer-term plans. 
Future of the CDO Role
If the CDO role is primarily a data evangelist and change-agent role,
what happens when everyone “gets it”? Will it still be needed? Aiken
(2013: p. 65) hints that this might be a temporary role when he
draws parallels to the chief electrification officer role, a position that
came about in the 1880s as organizations switched from steam to
the latest hot technology, electricity. Of course, everyone today gets
electricity; it’s a commodity, so that particular CEO position was
largely gone by the 1940s. Could the same become true of data and,
in particular, the CDO role? 
Greg Elin largely agrees:
I hope the role of CDO as it is established now as some type of C-
suite official responsible for transforming data into an asset for
daily use fades over the next couple of decades as using data and
analytics becomes an integrated part of the business. Enterprises
benefit most when data, and IT in general, is developed integrally
with business processes. In other words, CDOs now should be
focusing on developing the data capabilities and even self-
sufficiency throughout their organization.
Unfortunately, like the many roles created in organizations to
address a real need, the role of CDOs will likely remain a fixture
past its useful life. The role makes sense now because enterprises
find it easier to have an identified point person to spearhead and
manage change.
Richard Stanton, CDO of Penton Media, is more definite: “There’s
no question the CDO role will become more important. I don’t
know what that title will be, but the role—the accountability that’s
Chief Data Officer 
| 
227

3 Bien, F., “It’s Time To Welcome The Chief Analytics Officer To The C-Suite,” Fast Com‐
pany, July 28, 2014.
4 O’Regan, R., Chief analytics officer: The ultimate big data job?” Computerworld, Octo‐
ber 3, 2014.
currently being played in that role—will be in every organization. I
absolutely believe that to be the case.”
In a conversation between Courtnie Abercrombie, Emerging Roles
leader at IBM, and Dave Vellante, co-CEO at SiliconANGLE, Court‐
nie remarked that  “I think [CDO] is absolutely here to stay and I
think it will cause other positions to morph around it because data is
so incredibly important to competitive advantage for companies
right now. It really is the new way to be innovative, learn new things
about your customer segments...I don’t see the role going away at all
and it’s only going to grow in importance.” Dave responded, “I
agree, especially inside those regulated businesses...It’s going to
become the norm.” Lewis Broome, however, is not so sure: “I don’t
think that people have figured out data enough to know whether it
needs a role or not.” Time will tell.
With that overview of the CDO, let us now contrast that with the 
chief analytics officer.
Chief Analytics Officer
The chief analytics officer (CAO) overlaps considerably with the
CDO position. While the CDO focuses more on the backend (i.e.,
data management), the CAO focuses significantly more on the stra‐
tegic use of the data and, as the name suggests, analytics. While the
CDO may have the analysts report into him or her, the CAO should
always head up the analytics org and so be closest to the analysts,
data scientists, and other data-related roles.
“Data is only strategic if its analyzed, understood, and actionable
throughout the enterprise, so the value in all that data can be real‐
ized,”3 said Frank Bien, CEO at Looker. Importantly, he continued,
“the CAO is about creating real business value through data analyt‐
ics and promoting the company’s data-driven culture.”
This then brings us to the heart of the book. The role is to enhance
the data-driven practices and culture, and deliver tangible results to
the organization. Bill Franks, CAO at Teradata, claims:4
228 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Rajaram, D., “Does Your Company Need A Chief Analytics Officer?” Forbes, August 8,
2013.
4 Akmeemana, C., E. Stubbs, L. Schutz, and J. Kestle, “Do You Need a Chief Analytics
Officer?” Ontario: Huntel Global, 2013.
5 Netke, S., and M. R. Rangaswami, “Selecting a Chief Analytics Officer — You Are What
You Analyze”, SandHill Group, March 3, 2014. I did not have the $1995 spare to read
the full report.
As the technology matures, companies are seeing the power of what
analytics does. The CAO is a natural extension of that, because the
more that analytics is embedded across the organization, the more
you need an executive-level position to convey that strategic
emphasis.
A CAO should have sufficient vision to see the potential in existing
data, understand how it relates, and have sufficient clout to bust
silos and bring that data together in the best, most impactful way.
The CAO should also monitor the performance of the analytics org,
provide training and mentoring, and restructure the organization as
necessary. Typically, that would mean greater centralization3 into a 
center of excellence, federated, or hybrid model. That is, a CAO is
likely only brought into an organization when there are already
pockets of analysts embedded in various parts of the organization,
such as within individual business units. As discussed earlier (Chap‐
ter 4), that model leads to lack of standards, redundancy of effort,
and an unclear career path for the analysts themselves. By centraliz‐
ing all that analytical activity under the umbrella of a single, vision‐
ary leader, you gain economies of scale, standardization, and a better
trained, more mentored, and happier analyst team.
As one report4 puts it, “More than just managers, CAOs are the
champions for the need to generate value from data... More than
senior data scientists, they must work across the executive ranks to
make sure that their insights are turned into repeatable action. And,
more than IT managers, they must understand how to steer the
company through the turbulent waters of big data and big analytics.”
More concretely, the Sandhill Group produced a report titled
“Mindset over data set: a big data prescription for setting the market
pace,”5 which listed out the following qualities of a CAO:
Chief Analytics Officer 
| 
229

3 According to Gartner’s 2014 Hype cycle for emerging technologies, big data is close
moving out of the peak of inflated expectations to entering the trough of disillusion‐
ment.
Characteristics
Attributes
Analyst
• Possesses superior business and data analysis skills
• Formulates and evaluates sound business performance metrics
• Brings strong analytics experience that earns the respect of staff and
stakeholders
Evangelist
• Helps others understand the value of big data and its many applications
• Provides examples that inspire others to embrace the big data mindset
Explorer
• Innate curiosity leads to interesting business questions and innovative, high-
impact solutions
Leader
• Staffs and develops a high-performance big data team
• Enlists the support and active participation of other organizations
• Effectively manages teams directly and on a matrix basis to achieve agreed-
upon commitments
• Provides a realistic schedule, resource requirements, and cost estimates
Pragmatist
• Operates with a fail-early mentality
• Sets appropriate expectations regarding timing and results
• Gains consensus across groups with competing interests and priorities
• Maintains a sound prioritization of initiatives from across the enterprise
Technologist
• Understands the associated technologies and can be a solid partner to the CIO,
CTO, and chief information security officer
As you can see, part of the COA’s role is listed as being a big data
evangelist. In my research, just about every description of CAO’s
role contained this component. This of course reflects the current
hype.3 To me, data doesn’t have to be big to be valuable, and what is
big today will be small tomorrow. Technologies and terminologies
will change, but what the CAO needs to do is get the rest of the C-
suite and the rest of the organization to buy into and understand is
the power of broad, rich, augmented, and high-quality contextual‐
ized data—such as Belinda Smith’s patio set purchase in Chapter 3. 
Contextual data is the true foundation for highly impactful and
transformative predictive models and recommendation engines or
230 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

3 Franks, B., “Do You Know Who Owns Analytics at Your Company?” Harvard Business
Review, September 23, 2014.
4 Akmeemana, C., E. Stubbs, L. Schutz, and J. Kestle. “Do You Need a Chief Analytics
Officer?” Ontario: Huntel Global, 2013.
indeed any of those higher levels of analytics (Chapter 1). A CAO’s
role is to make that happen.
As with a CDO, the CAO will need sufficient support from the high‐
est levels of the organization. Currently, few CAOs sit at the top level
of the C-suite. Instead, they typically report to a C-level position on
the business side. “The CAO should be viewed neutrally—a Switzer‐
land of the executive suite. The CAO should be under an executive
that naturally spans all of the business units that have analytical
needs, such as the Chief Strategy Officer, the CFO, and the COO,” 
says Bill Franks.3 “It is often easier to see where a CAO role
should not report. For example, marketing analytics is quite impor‐
tant to many organizations. However, if the CAO reports to the
CMO, then other business units such as product development or
customer service might not feel that they get equitable treatment.”
The CAO role is newer than the CDO role. According to one report,
4 in November 2013, 477 LinkedIn members listed CDO as their
current title compared to only 298 for CAO. (Presumably those are
global figures, but they do seem high. In December 2014, I found
347 for “chief data officer” and 248 for “chief analytics officer” for
global with “current title only”; in the US, results were 181 and 171,
respectively, in line with Gartner’s projections.) I found those CAOs
most often in healthcare, media, and financial services.
As with the CDO, the CAO is fundamentally about change and
shifting culture. That is terribly hard to do and often meets resist‐
ance. You need buy-in from the business units. Thus, it is not sur‐
prising that there are some casualties. In one telecommunications
company, the business unit managers were slow to train and use the
customer retention and pricing models developed under the new
analytics leader. They “didn’t see the potential, which, frankly, wasn’t
part of ‘their’ strategic priorities,” McKinsey consultants said. “In
our experience, many companies spend 90 per cent of their invest‐
ment on building models and only 10 per cent on frontline usage,
when, in fact, closer to half of the analytics investment should go to
the front lines.” A CAO has to invest time, money, and effort in the
Chief Analytics Officer 
| 
231

3 I’m assuming that more of these insights will be autogenerated by machine learning,
powered by ever more sophisticated technologies such as next generation deep learn‐
ing.
last mile, getting the frontline business users and their managers to
see the value in the models and analytical tools but also train those
personnel to realize the value. In other words, this is a weak point in
the analytics value chain and must be shored up.
One approach that worked well, at least for one consumer company,
is to use the CEO as a forcing function. They insisted that a data
leader work with a business unit leader who was not familiar with
big data in developing a plan to realize the potential of analytics.
“This partnership—combining a data and analytics expert and an
experienced frontline change operator—ensured that the analytics
goal outlined in the plan were focused on actual, high-impact busi‐
ness decisions. Moreover, after these executives shared their pro‐
gress with top-team counterparts, their collaborative model became
a blueprint for the planning efforts of other business units.” In other
words, by forcing the analytics leader and the representative of busi‐
ness end users to collaborate so closely and, importantly, making
them jointly responsible with success, it created a laser focus on ROI
and real actionable impact.
Unlike the current CDO uncertainties, I believe that the CAO role
definitely has a rosy future. I’m bullish on it. Even if enterprises “get”
data and it becomes a democratized commodity, they will still need a
team of analysts and data scientists to ask the right questions, to fil‐
ter and interpret insights,3 and to work with decision makers. That
team will need leadership from someone such as a CAO.
Chief Digital Officer
The chief digital officer is another new addition to the C-Suite, with
the first appointment made by MTV in 2005. Their primary role is
to oversee digital strategy. While they are less central to creating a
data-driven organization, I mention them here because, first, they
are, unsurprisingly, often confused with chief data officers. Second,
their role is also a transformative (and transitional?) one, bringing
organizations more heavily into the digital age. This has major
implications on the data sources available, especially the types,
modes, and variety of interactions with users and customers. Those
232 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

novel data streams, often contextualized with location from mobile
devices, provide rich additional context for the analysts and new
outlets and sources of interactions with which to place data prod‐
ucts such as recommendations, real-time credit approval, and other
services.
The chief digital officer is a very rapidly growing role, having dou‐
bled every year from 2005–2013 (see Chief Digital Officer Talent
Map) to more than a thousand today. In fact, there are more chief
digital officers than chief data officers and CAOs combined. As the
number and uses of mobile devices explodes, and the Internet of
Things gains traction, the way that we interact in a digital world is
rapidly evolving. The chief digital officer’s role is to understand and
oversee that change, to identify new services and digital offerings
that the organization can provide, and to understand the new ways
of engaging with customers. CDOs understand when and how to
bring marketing spend from analog to (highly targeted) digital and
to make effective use of social media. Importantly, they help to tie
all those interactions on those different devices to a seamless omni-
channel experience both from the user’s perspectives and from an
analytics perspective.
“The [chief digital officer] understands and leverages business
intelligence data, empowering organizations’ user psychologies and
consumer profiles in response to brand messaging,” said Olivier
Naimi, senior director of the global web platform and analytics for
Sony. “Analytics data from digital channels is still an emerging
paradigm, so it can be challenging to identify the right metrics. A
[chief digital officer] can empower organizations by providing
actionable insights by measuring, analyzing, and optimizing busi‐
ness intelligence data from all digital initiatives across multiple
channels.”
Conclusion
Hopefully, the distinction between these two important roles is now
clear. As can be seen, to create a data-driven culture requires active
top-down data leadership, someone who is focused on the bigger
picture of what the organization can and should be achieving with
data, information, and analytics. They are the ones that should be
focusing on data and analytics strategy, looking out for new oppor‐
tunities, defining the top-level metrics, and restructuring the organi‐
zation as necessary to maximize agility, productivity, and impact.
Conclusion 
| 
233

3 Franks, B., “Do You Know Who Owns Analytics at Your Company?”, Harvard Business
Review, September 23, 2014.
4 Brown, B., D. Court, and P. Willmott, “Mobilizing your C-suite for big-data analytics,”
McKinsey Quarterly, November 2013.
How do you choose whether you need one, both, or neither of these
positions? The particular title is not that important—they could be a
chief data scientist or head of data—but the key, I think, is that
someone has this broader, strategic role.3 First off, very few organiza‐
tions have both a CDO and CAO. A recent McKinsey report4 does
mention at least one unspecified “large financial-services company”
that added a CDO “who reports to the CIO but works daily with the
chief analytics officer to help knit together data and new analytics
tools and to speed frontline change.” That, however, is an exception.
Generally, to have both would feel a little confusing and redundant.
CDOs historically are more often found in regulated industries, and
that is likely continue as other organizations in those areas catch up
and adopt a “me too” approach. However, there is mixed opinion as
to whether they are a short-term fix or not. The exception is the
government sector, which is focused more on transparency and
openness; and in that case, the CDO has a stronger future and a def‐
inite edge over the CAO. As mentioned earlier, CAOs tend to be
where there is already some analytics around the organization, and
their role is to broaden, strengthen, and evangelize that function. If
that describes your situation, that could make sense. Generally, if in
doubt, I would go for CAO because data is more likely to become a
commodity than analytics, and it can be easier to evangelize around
value from analytics. 
Whoever they are and whatever their title, to succeed at their objec‐
tive, these data leaders have to collaborate closely with, and have full
backing of, other senior executives, the CEO, and the board. They
need a budget, a team, and the ability to break through the barriers
of individual business units and create an open-sharing culture
where data is brought together to provide a richer, more valuable
context. This will create an environment where analytics, insights,
and data-driven impact can thrive.
Because individual data sources have a long life span and drive
many different products, analyses, and projects, the data “should be
run as a program, not as a project.” This means breaking away from
234 
| 
Chapter 11: The Data-Driven C-Suite

IT and shepherding it primarily under the business. Again, this
more naturally aligns with a CAO, but it is better to have a CDO,
even one that reports into IT, than to have no strategic data leader.
In the next chapter, I am going to explore one final but increasingly
discussed and important aspect of data: privacy (or lack thereof)
and ethics. How should a data-driven organization treat personal
and sensitive data?
Conclusion 
| 
235


3 Sprenger, P., “Sun on Privacy: ‘Get Over It',” Wired, January 26, 1999.
CHAPTER 12
Privacy, Ethics, and Risk
You have zero privacy anyway. Get over it.
—Scott McNealy3
An ethical person ought to do more than he’s
required to do and less than he’s allowed to do.
—Michael Josephson
In the previous chapter, I quoted Patil and Mason, who suggest that
“Everyone in the organization should have access to as much data as
legally possible.” While I agree in theory, in practice there are some
important caveats when you consider the issue from a privacy, eth‐
ics, and risk standpoint. In many cases, who should access which
data and, further, what they may do with the data, is often more
restrictive from a self-imposed ethical and risk perspective than
from a legal one. A data-driven culture is one that respects both the
power of data and the humanity of the people who are the source of
that data. 
How should a data-driven organization treat its users’ or customers’
data from these three perspectives?
I’m assuming here that a data-driven organization has:
• More data
• A richer context than other organizations
237

3 Federal Trade Commission. Privacy Online: A Report to Congress, June 1998.
• More points of integration among the nonsiloed data sources
• Greater data access and visibility
• More staff across the organization who are skilled at analytics
• More data scientists who can eke out subtle patterns
Principles of Privacy
In 1998, the Federal Trade Commission published an important
document entitled “Privacy Online: a Report to Congress.”3 Much
of the content now seems dated. For instance, then only 14% of all
children were online; today, 80% of children under 5 are online
weekly. However, one aspect that has stood the test of time are the
five fundamental principles of privacy:
Notice/Awareness
“Consumers should be given notice of an entity’s information
practices before any personal information is collected from
them.”
Choice/Consent
“Giving consumers options as to how any personal informa‐
tion collected from them may be used.”
Access/Participation
“An individual’s ability to both to access data about him or her‐
self—i.e. to view the data in an entity’s files—and to contest
that data’s accuracy and completeness.”
Integrity/Security
“Managerial and technical measures to protect against loss and
the authorized access, destruction, use, or disclosure of the
data.”
Enforcement/Redress
A mechanism to enforce the other principles.
In short, I assume that more data, more access, and more data sci‐
ence translates to more power and more risk.
Data is powerful, but also dangerous. As such, this chapter covers a
number of aspects to do with privacy, ethics, and risk, covering
238 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

3 Kosoff, M., “Uber’s Top New York Executive Is Being Investigated After Using Uber’s
‘God View’ Tool To Track A Journalist’s Location,” Business Insider, November 19, 2014.
4 Sims, P., “Can We Trust Uber?” Silicon Guild, September 26, 2014.
some of the dangers and the seemingly nonaligning interests of
organizations and their users. I argue that organizations should, as a
guiding principle, practice empathy. By acting in an ethical manner
—both by setting out policies and also training staff to act in an
empathetic manner—and putting users’ interests foremost, they will
develop and retain their users’ trust, protect both their and their
users’ interests, and so mitigate some of the risk.
Respect Privacy
As the car pulled up to Uber’s Long Island Office, Josh Mohrer,
Uber’s New York general manager, was waiting outside, iPhone in
hand. As journalist Johana Bhuiyan stepped out, Josh said, “There
you are. I was tracking you.”3 He was using an internal tool called
the “God View,” allegedly widely accessible to Uber’s corporate staff,
that provides a real-time view of vehicle and customer locations.
This wasn’t the first time Uber had violated users’ privacy. At a Chi‐
cago launch party three years before, partygoers watched a live map
of where identifiable customers, including venture capitalist Peter
Sims, were traveling around New York.4
The issue here is that neither of these two customers was informed
that their data would be used and shared in this manner, nor did
they consent. Yes, Uber may need such access and tools to help
improve the service, but neither fall under what the FTC had previ‐
ously set out: “necessary to complete the contemplated transaction.”
Both of these examples go beyond that use case.
In these particular cases, no actual harm was done, but it is not hard
to imagine scenarios that could be damaging or dangerous: someone
fleeing an abusive partner, a customer being dropped off at an HIV
testing clinic, or a celebrity with restraint orders against a stalker.
(Danah Boyd provides additional examples in the context of Face‐
book’s privacy settings.)
A privacy policy, essentially a contract between the user or customer
and the business, must set out clearly who is collecting the data,
what data will be collected, how it will and will not be used, how it
Respect Privacy 
| 
239

3 See Uber’s Data Privacy Policy and this Slate article.
may be shared with or sold to third parties, any consequences of
refusing to allow consent, and “the steps taken by the data collector
to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and quality of the data.”
Uber had clearly violated its privacy policy,3 but adherence is not the
only issue that all companies should consider. Users should be able
to comprehend policies. End-user license agreements (EULA) are
sometimes very long. While Hamlet is about 30,000 words, Paypal’s
service agreement is 50,000 words, or equivalent to the first seven
chapters of this book. These documents are written in legalese, but
“normal” people are expected to agree to all the terms. An organiza‐
tion can respect its users by trying to write privacy policies that all of
us can understand (i.e., are human-readable). (Any insinuation that
lawyers are nonhuman is purely coincidental.) A fun example, one
that shows both the legalese and the human readable side-by-side
can be found at CodePen.
While I may joke about being human readable, this is actually a very
important distinction for Creative Commons, which considers and
provides notices in terms of three layers in order to make protec‐
tions “effective, enforceable, and invisible”:
Human
Users should be able to understand what they are agreeing to.
Facebook, which has been mired in controversy and complaints
over the years concerning sharing settings, has, in fact, made
significant strides recently, and its privacy policy, while still
long, is much more clearly structured and accessible to us non‐
lawyer users.
Legal
Full license in legalese that provides watertight protections.
Machine
Using technological approaches such as P3P, Creative Com‐
mons make its licenses machine readable, and thus indexable
and searchable by search engines. (Here is how Lawrence Lessig
sees it.)
In summary, respect your users by having a policy that they can
understand and make an informed decision about, and respect
240 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

3 See also Chen, B. X., “Using E-Mail Data to Connect the Dots of Your Life,”. The New
York Times, July 5, 2013.
4 Sweeney, L., “Simple Demographics Often Identify People Uniquelym”, Carnegie Mel‐
lon University, 2000.
users’ privacy by sticking to the principles and terms within the
document.
Inadvertent Leakage
The Uber launch party was an example where users’ data or context
—who was where, at what time—was explicitly shared. However,
one of the issues that I envision increasing as numbers of organiza‐
tions become data-driven, is that as more and more seemingly
innocuous snippets of data are collected, and the greater data sci‐
ence firepower they possess, the greater the risk of inadvertent leak‐
age to the wrong parties.
A few years ago, when Edward Snowden’s revelations about NSA
snooping first came to light and privacy was being hotly debated, I
remember trying out a tool called immersion.3 Immersion analyzes 
email metadata only. Metadata are attributes about an email, such as
who it was sent from and to whom at what time, but does not ana‐
lyze the content of the email itself. You might think that this has
limited utility. However, running this on my email account, I was
shocked at what it revealed. The tool clearly showed me groups of
people who knew each other from different facets of my life, who
likely introduced me to others, and the relative strength of those
social ties. It essentially showed a very accurate reflection of my
social network at that time. All this without accessing the email con‐
tent. In another example, Latanya Sweeney demonstrated that you
can identify 87% of Americans uniquely from ZIP code, gender, and
date of birth.4 We have increasingly more data and sophisticated
tools and skills to paint this broader picture. It is like a Seurat poin‐
tillist picture but with data.
These data breadcrumbs across our online and offline world add up,
and we data scientists are happy to piece them together. But, we
have to do that in a way that is ethical—which is often more restrict‐
ing than legal—and use that power carefully.
Respect Privacy 
| 
241

3 Duhigg, C., “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” The New York Times, February 16,
2012.
A legitimate legal use case, but one that had unfortunate conse‐
quences, comes from Target. In an article3 much discussed in the
data science world, New York Times journalist Charles Duhigg tells
the story of how Target marketers approached one of their statisti‐
cians, Andrew Pole, and asked whether he would be able to identify
customers who were pregnant in their third trimester, before the
birth records were made available to them and the competition.
They figured that if they could identify these women early enough,
they stood a better chance of targeting them with coupons and
developing a loyal, over-tired new parent customer base.
Andrew and his colleagues successfully identified the types of pur‐
chases that pregnant women tend to make and Target started mail‐
ing coupons to them. All of this is legal, but the reason that this
story generated so much discussion among analysts is because of the
ethics involved and the story of the father of one teen.
Target sends out personalized coupon booklets. Normally, custom‐
ers appreciate coupons for things that they buy anyway. However,
pregnant women reacted differently. They didn’t like it. Thus, Target
started adding unrelated recommendations, such as a lawnmower
coupon next to a diaper coupon, to bury what they knew in the
booklets. One Target executive said, “We found out that as long as a
pregnant woman thinks she hasn’t been spied on, she’ll use the cou‐
pons. She just assumes that everyone else on her block got the same
mailer for diapers and cribs. As long as we don’t spook her, it
works.”
While Target worked hard to disguise what they knew, it didn’t get
past one concerned father:
About a year after Pole created his pregnancy-prediction model, a
man walked into a Target outside Minneapolis and demanded to
see the manager. He was clutching coupons that had been sent to
his daughter, and he was angry, according to an employee who par‐
ticipated in the conversation.
“My daughter got this in the mail!” he said. “She’s still in high
school, and you’re sending her coupons for baby clothes and cribs?
Are you trying to encourage her to get pregnant?”
242 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

The manager didn’t have any idea what the man was talking about.
He looked at the mailer. Sure enough, it was addressed to the man’s
daughter and contained advertisements for maternity clothing,
nursery furniture and pictures of smiling infants. The manager
apologized and then called a few days later to apologize again.
On the phone, though, the father was somewhat abashed. “I had a
talk with my daughter,” he said. “It turns out there’s been some
activities in my house I haven’t been completely aware of. She’s due
in August. I owe you an apology.”
These product recommendations, manifested in coupons, had
leaked the girl’s gravid state to a family member. They had leaked
not P.I.I. but what Danah Boyd calls P.E.I., personally embarrassing
information. 
Most medical data is covered by protections such as the 1996 Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Here, her
state was pieced together by her prior purchases of innocuous prod‐
ucts such as unscented lotion. With the right data and tools, analysts
have tremendous ability to peek inside people’s lives, and so they
have to consider the consequences carefully, not just to avoid creep‐
ing those people out.
Practice Empathy 
I believe that data-driven organizations have to respect their users’
rights and sensibilities. While those organizations may wish to push
the envelope allowing them to collect more and more data that pro‐
vides richer fodder for advertising, services, and data products, they
will ultimately fare better in the long run if they are trusted by users.
There’s a simple test when choosing default privacy settings or
developing new data-centric strategies, features, or campaigns:
would you like it if it were your or a close family member’s account?
How would you feel? If it feels uncomfortable, then don’t do it.
At Warby Parker, General Counsel Anjali Kumar has a name for
this: the “ick factor.” It is a qualitative measure of creepiness, not
meant to have any specific legal definition, but instead it is a
reminder that we hold ourselves to higher-than-legal standards and
must consider the customer’s perspective, to exhibit empathy. How
would the customer feel about this?
Here is an example: Anjali was traveling on a train back to New
York, and the person sitting in front of her got off but, unfortu‐
Practice Empathy  
| 
243

3 Phelps, S., “Heroic Customer Service by a Senior Executive at Warby Parker.” Forbes,
August 1, 2014.class
nately, left his glasses behind. They happened to be Warby Parker
glasses. When she returned to the office, the two of us got together
and asked: would it be creepy to try and track this person down and
return his glasses to him? What’s the ick-factor on that? We had a
serious discussion and decided that we would be acting in the cus‐
tomer’s best interests. Thus, we used our databases to track down the
likely customers (remember that we had the frames, gender, rough
age range, and knew which stop he got off), narrowed it down, and
made the final confirmation using the photo on his LinkedIn page.
Anjali then sent that person a new pair of glasses, a copy of “On The
Road” by Jack Kerouac, and a note:
Hi Michael, This might be odd… but you sat across from me on the
train ride from NYC to Boston a few weeks ago and left your
glasses on the train! As luck would have it, I happen to be the GC of
Warby Parker, and there is nothing I like more than a good mys‐
tery… I hope these find you in good health! (also, we noticed your
lenses were scratched so we made you a fresh pair!) Sincerely, AK3
The point is that we took his privacy very seriously. We didn’t do it
for fun or because we could. Instead, we asked the question among
legal and data leadership whether that customer would find it
creepy, whether we were doing it for the right reason, and whether
that customer would perceive our motivations correctly: to provide
great customer service.
244 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

Pushing the Envelope
Facebook has had an ongoing battle with its users, frequently push‐
ing the boundaries about what is shared and to whom, but a few
times has had to retreat when users complained in droves. Mark
Zuckerberg has said that privacy controls were “the vector around
which Facebook operates” and appears to believe that Facebook is
simply tracking changing social norms: “People have really gotten
comfortable not only sharing more information and different
kinds, but more openly and with more people. That social norm is
just something that has evolved over time.”
The evolution of their stance, the default privacy settings for differ‐
ent aspects of the site, is striking. Compare the following two fig‐
ures, which show the defaults from 2005 (upper) with those five
years later in 2010 (lower). Both figures from “The Evolution of
Privacy on Facebook.”
 
Practice Empathy  
| 
245

It was a calculated risk, but fortunately the customer did appreciate
it and remarked on social media, “I just experienced possibly the
very best customer service of all time.” (To be clear, we did not
advertise what we had done in any way. Our only motivation was to
do right by the customer. It was only picked up by the media
because the customer, pleased, shared his story though his social
network which, ultimately, included a journalist.)
Data-driven organizations have a lot of power. Use it to be the good
guys.
Provide Choice
Where possible, provide users intuitive and appropriate controls
over how their data is used or shared with others. Simple examples
include providing users the ability to control the type and frequency
of marketing emails that they might receive, whether to receive push
notifications from apps, and whether they wish to receive offers
from partner organizations. More controversial, however, is the
aspect of sharing data with other parties. This has been a particular
issue with various social networks (Facebook being just one exam‐
246 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

ple; see box), where changing default settings are ever more
encroaching on privacy.
One problem is that even if you do provide controls, many users
don’t understand the various options available to them. Conse‐
quently, the vast majority of people simply accept the defaults. There
are at least two things that an organization can do. First, design with
empathy. Make the controls simple, intuitive, and clearly docu‐
mented. Second, put privacy and respect foremost and design with
an opt-in versus opt-out mentality. Provide the user choice and
control.
Netflix provides an interesting feature in its “account settings” panel.
Users can opt-out of A/B test participation (Figure 12-1), something
that I have not noticed before with other services.
Figure 12-1. Netflix provides customers the opportunity to opt out of
A/B tests in the account settings.
You can see the conflict here. Netflix is doing right by its customers,
providing choices. However, it is an extremely data-driven organiza‐
tion, a company that A/B tests very heavily. It wants large samples to
draw meaningful conclusions from A/B tests as quickly as possible.
Opt-outs would reduce sample size, increase test duration, and
potentially introduce some bias into samples.
I would hazard a guess, however, that only a tiny fraction of users
have actually opted-out. If I am right, this is a win for subscribers
(they can opt-out if they have any concerns), and a very low opt-out
rate would actually have negligible impact on the testing data and
the organization as whole. In this situation, Netflix is, and is per‐
ceived to be, good guys without actually giving up much. This
should serve as model for other data-driven organizations.
Practice Empathy  
| 
247

Data Quality
One of the FTC’s core principles of privacy concerns is access/
participation. That is, the ability to view the data that the organiza‐
tion has and to be able to contest or correct the information.
I would argue that this is probably the least developed of all its five
principles. Most online services provide users the ability to edit their
profile page and update their current name, address, email, and
other personally identifiable information. Some organizations, espe‐
cially social networks, allow you to export an archive of your data
(e.g., Twitter and Facebook). What you can’t do in most cases is edit
all the historical data, such as prior purchase orders, or review all
the “adjacent” data that the organization may have collected about
you (e.g., from the US Census, MLS, data brokers, social media, and
so on). Frankly, that would be very difficult to provide, would likely
be difficult for the customer to comprehend the disparate set of
database records, might violate agreements with any data that was
purchased from other organizations, and would likely expose some
secret sauce of the organization. Thus, I don’t envision much pro‐
gress being made in this area.
However, data-driven organizations certainly should make it as easy
as possible to review and correct core customer data. It aligns with
the interests of the customers and themselves. With data from dif‐
ferent internal sources, for instance from a loan application and
checking account data within the same bank, there are plenty of
opportunities to associate the same customer with different cus‐
tomer IDs or introduce slight variations in address in different entry
points (e.g., “Street” versus “St.” or “Apt. 6” versus “#6”). Making it is
as easy as possible to correct and standardize customer’s data leads
to higher-quality data for the organization.
If you were to look at my Netflix account, you would get a very
skewed sense of my tastes. You’ll see recommendations for highly
diverse shows such as The Magic School Bus, Gilmore Girls, and
M*A*S*H. Those do not, I should hasten to add, accurately reflect
what I watch. This is because our family shares the account, and so
the shows viewed and the consequent recommendations are really a
melange of four users, not one. While Netflix has the concept of a
profile to help tease out multiple users, this feature is not available
on the device that I use to watch the service. 
248 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

Create opportunities for customers to provide additional context
about their data to influence how the organization views or uses it. 
Amazon, for instance, provides an “Improve Your Recommenda‐
tions” feature, whereby the user can specify that “this was a gift” or
“don’t use for recommendations.” There are many reasons why
someone doesn’t want an item influencing recommendations and
showing similar items in the future, some potentially embarrassing.
Whatever the reason, enabling the user to correct, filter, and exclude
data, the organization gains a more accurate picture of intent, con‐
text, and taste. In the reverse direction, providing the user some
context of why a recommendation was made can be reassuring. For
instance, my Netflix account currently shows, “Because you watched
M*A*S*H” and a recommendation for Magnum P.I., which makes
sense. Such explanations can also reveal if there is inaccurate infor‐
mation that the user wishes to exclude or correct. In summary, by
adding such features, you can create more of a two-way conversa‐
tion between the user and the organization, leading to higher-
quality data, a more accurate context, and, ultimately, a higher-value
service to the users themselves.
Security
I hinted earlier that risk mitigation can often restrict activity more
than is legally required. Why is that?
Let’s start with a simple example. Many data workers, such as data
engineers and database administrators, have access to raw customer
records. Those records often have name, address, phone, email, and
other PII. That is allowed by law. They have such access because they
are tasked with making sure that the information is correctly cap‐
tured and securely stored, enabling them to fulfill the obligations of
the business transactions.
Now imagine an analyst downstream who is running an analysis of
the number of sales of different products on different days. There is
nothing legally preventing him from having access to those raw
records. However, does he really need that level of detail? Should he
have access to that data for that analysis? He doesn’t need to know
that it was Belinda Smith from that particular address with that par‐
ticular email and phone number who purchased that patio set; he
only needs to know that one unit of SKU 123456 was sold on that
day.
Security 
| 
249

3 See the results here.
Most analyses are in aggregate and thus don’t need PII.
In his book Dataclysm, Christian Rudder, cofounder of dating site
OKCupid, presented a number of analyses from the site’s data. With
the exception of medical data, you can’t get more sensitive data than
a dating site. Profiles contain photos, gender, age, sexual preferen‐
ces, interests, and other highly personal information. He states (p.
233) very clearly how data was treated:
All the analysis was done anonymously and in aggregate, and I han‐
dled the raw source material with care. There was no personally
identifiable information (PII) in any of my data...Where I had user-
by-user records, the userids were encrypted. And in any analysis
the scope of the data was limited to only the essential variables, so
nothing could be tied back to individuals.
There are a couple of reasons why he would go to this trouble. First,
he doesn’t want any information to color his analysis, either con‐
sciously or unconsciously. As analysts, we want to perform the most
objective analysis possible. Additional information can skew our
interpretation. For instance, if you saw a user with first name Ger‐
trude, do you imagine her to be young or old? Old, right?3 You can’t
help making these assumptions and judgements. By not including
those additional variables, you reduce the risk of doing so and
increase the chance of letting the patterns in the aggregate data shine
through untainted.
Second, analysts often make copies of data to perform analyses and
models in other tools. Thus, while one may use a business intelli‐
gence tool to perform some high-level aggregation, you may need to
crunch the data in Python or R to develop sophisticated predictive
models. That often means exporting data from the source data store
onto files on your laptop. Every copy of the data outside the raw data
store increases risk for the organization. Laptops gets stolen. Lap‐
tops can get hacked. An analyst working on her computer in an air‐
port or at Starbucks is at risk of “over-the-shoulder attacks,”
meaning a bad actor looking at the information on her screen. Thus,
the less information the analyst has in those files and the more lay‐
ers of obscurification and protection, the better.
It is for these reasons that many organizations choose to anonymize
the information that is exposed in data warehouses and business
250 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

3 Economist Intelligence Unit, “Fostering a Data-Driven Culture.” (London: Economist
Intelligence Unit, 2013).
intelligence tools for reporting and analysis. Names, addresses,
and emails are hidden completely or they are encrypted. For
instance, 
belinda.smith@example.com 
might 
be 
encrypted
as f7bf49636a69c6ed45da8dc8d3f445a8a5e6bcc2e08c9a6b2bb6644
6c402f75c using a SHA-256 hash. (This is a one-way street. You can
reproducibly and easily convert from the email to the encrypted
string, but it is very difficult, but not impossible, to go the other way
and recover the email.) Again, in most cases, the organizations are
not legally obliged to do this, but it makes sense to.
The more copies of data, the greater the risk. The more human read‐
able the files, the greater the risk. The more shuffling around and
integration of different data sources—which is more likely to be true
of a data-driven organization that fosters data-sharing—the greater
the risk. One third of executives3 say that “their company struggles
to achieve a data-driven culture in part because of concerns about
the privacy and security issues that arise when data are shared.”
We can sum the lessons so far with the following maxims:
• Everyone who needs access to data to perform their function
has access.
• Everyone only has access to the data that they need to perform
their function.
• Sensitive data, such as customer and prescription data, should
be treated with extreme caution: highly restrict access, anonym‐
ize, and encrypt.
Enforcement
The FTC said that “it is generally agreed that the core principles of
privacy protection can only be effective if there is a mechanism in
place to enforce them.”
Of course, there are now many protections governing data collec‐
tion, management, and privacy. Examples include Children’s Online
Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), which protects children’s data and
interests; HIPAA, which protects medical information; and PCI
compliance, which covers payment data.
Enforcement 
| 
251

Obviously, you have to adhere to those. Those represent an upper
bound, legally, of what can be done with the data. However, I would
argue this is insufficient. Data-driven organizations must consider
these broader issues of ethics and the ick-factor and develop their
own internal guidelines and rules. They have to develop a data-
centric moral compass. They should consider whether the user
expects them to use the data in a particular way and whether those
users would be uncomfortable with the organization doing so. Ask
and answer, “How would you like it if this was done to you?” That,
ultimately, will limit some of the activity that analysts may want to
do or be able to do with the data at hand. Like the marketers at Tar‐
get, there will aways be some group trying to push the envelope—
they have their own KPIs to meet after all—so this requires corpo‐
rate culture, data leadership, and training to set out what is accepta‐
ble.
Conclusions
In a data-driven organization, there will always be some healthy ten‐
sion between different teams, such as analysts who want the chance
to build cutting-edge data products and others, such as legal, whose
job is to be conservative and minimize risk to the organization.
While legal restrictions represent a hard bound, there is a definite,
and often large, gray area where activities are both legal but poten‐
tially creepy.
An organization must respect its users and draw up guidelines of
what is acceptable and unacceptable uses of data. Obviously, you will
need to draw a line in the sand for the analysts, the ones that are
working mostly closely with the data. At Warby Parker, we set out
how each of our different data types (customers, sales, prescriptions,
etc.) may or may not be used for different analytical and marketing
activities. For instance, our optical prescription process includes
date of birth. We believe that it is an acceptable use case for an ana‐
lyst to better understand our customer base, at the aggregate level, by
examining the age distribution of our optical and progressives cus‐
tomers but that it is not acceptable for the marketing department to
target 25–34-year-olds at the individual level based on that source of
date of birth information.
At data-driven organizations, however, there will be broader access
to data and thus be available to staff whose primary role is not ana‐
252 
| 
Chapter 12: Privacy, Ethics, and Risk

lytical, but who have access to data as part of their role (such as cus‐
tomer service representatives who need access to customer
accounts) and who are using data to improve their efficiency impact.
Those need very explicit guidelines and training, especially junior
staff fresh out of college. For instance, you should spell out that they
may not use customer’s data, likenesses, posts, etc. in advertisements
or Facebook posts without explicit permission from the customer, or
that they should not explore data unnecessarily, such as searching
databases for famous people, friends, or family. Provide concrete
training around this. As the Spiderman comics state, “With great
power comes great responsibility."” That responsibility and perspec‐
tive has to be installed proactively into the organization.
Conclusions 
| 
253


CHAPTER 13
Conclusion
Data is the new oil!
—Clive Humby, Dunnhumby
What does it mean to be data-driven? You will have noticed that the
answer doesn’t lie in having the latest big data technology or a crack
team of unicorn data scientists. They will certainly help, but being
data-driven isn’t about one particular thing. Instead, as I have
argued, it touches upon the whole analytics value chain, indeed thfe
whole organization. This is summarized in Figure 13-1.
In Chapters 2 and 3, I covered the bottom layer, the data itself—col‐
lecting the right data and collecting the data right. On top of that,
you need people with the right skills, tools, and training to make
good use of the data.
Certainly this includes the analytics org, but a data-driven organiza‐
tion will be far more inclusive than that and have a much larger user
base across the organization.
As I have tried to stress, I believe that everyone in the organization
has a role a play. It is a shared responsibility. The core chain runs
from analysts, their managers, senior management, data leadership,
to the C-Suite and the board. However, in a data-democratized envi‐
ronment where, as Ken Rudin says, “everyone is an analyst,” it is the
whole staff’s responsibility to, among other things, make use of the
data, tools, and training available, to embed facts into their pro‐
cesses where possible, to report data quality issues, to generate test‐
255

able hypotheses, to challenge baseless strategies, opinions, and
HiPPOs, and generally to use data to its best effect.
One aim of the book was to appeal directly to analysts and their
managers. Their role is often underappreciated. Too often, the focus
and discussion concerns top-down change when in fact they can
have a pivotal role in enhancing and shaping the culture and organi‐
zation for the better from the bottom up. This requires being more
vocal, visible, and proactive.
Wells Fargo’s chief data officer, Charles Thomas, sums it up well:
“You’ll hear me talk about analysts as action agents—get out of your
cubicle, take off the geek hat, put on your business hat and show
how those results get moved through the system. You’re going to
have to take extra steps in making sure you put those insights
through the system, operationalize and put them into action.” You’ve
got to get out of your comfort zone and promote change and
impact.
Figure 13-1. High-level overview of the different components that com‐
prise a data-driven organization. (Modeled after Wayne Eckerson’s
framework in his book Secrets of Analytical Leaders.)
The analytics organization needs to be organized in the most appro‐
priate manner (Chapter 4). Typically, this will be in some form of
federated or hybrid model in which analysts are embedded within
the business units but where there is also a centralized unit provid‐
ing mentorship, support, standards, and a clear career path. Those
analysts should be generating quality work, with at least some indi‐
viduals focusing on forward-looking analysis and higher levels of
analytics, such as predictive models and optimization. They should
be selling their insights and recommendations to decision makers
256 
| 
Chapter 13: Conclusion

3 Geckoboard and Econsultancy, “Data Driven Culture: A global survey on the state of
data driven culture in startups,” 2013.
(the next layer in Figure 13-1) and ideally should be assessed on
their actual, ultimate impact to the organization.
Driving the overall analytics program is strong data leadership.
While this could come from personnel such as a VP of analytics or
chief data scientist, increasingly, at least with Fortune 500 compa‐
nies, this comes from a chief data officer and/or chief analytics offi‐
cer (Chapter 11). The actual title is unimportant. What is important
is the actual role and whether that person has a mandate, that is, the
executive support and a budget to drive an analytics program and
culture.
Appendix B sets out a prototype vision state‐
ment for data. A vision statement is an aspira‐
tional description of what an organization
would like to accomplish in the mid-term or
long-term future. In this case, it sets out a future
state sets out a future state of being a more data-
driven organization in terms of facets such as
data skills, literacy, and culture. Think through it
and discuss with colleagues. What do you want
to achieve?
The final layer, one that permeates everything, is the culture that
shapes and is shaped by all of these lower layers. In essence, being
data-driven requires these components and best practices in all
these layers. For instance, HiPPOs break objective, fact-based deci‐
sion making. Political wrangling and data silos break a collaborative,
open culture.
Many organizations are working hard to become more data-driven.
However, any change, but especially cultural change, is extremely
hard. One stands the best chance of creating a thriving data-driven
culture by baking it in as early as possible, creating it de novo rather
than changing it after the fact. This, then, was part of the motivation
for writing the book. I hoped to appeal to younger organizations,
those that aspired to be more data-driven, and, being small with a
lot more hires and growth ahead of them, stood a greater chance of
success. In one survey of 368 startups3, 26% claimed that they are
Conclusion 
| 
257

data-driven and “since the very beginning we made sure that data
was part of our culture.” Another 44%, also claiming to be data-
driven, claim that “we have made great improvement and are still
working on it.” It seems comparable to learning a second language.
Many people successfully learn a second language as adults, but it is
far easier to do when young.
One thing that I have wondered is whether some online businesses
are inherently biased toward being data-driven simply because they
are centered around a data product. Imagine an online dating site
such as OKCupid, a music recommendation site such as Pandora, or
a content recommendation site such as Prismatic. Does being
focused around a core algorithm, data science, and data scientists
bias toward data-driven practices across the organization? Possibly,
but not necessarily. It would be possible to have a core data product
that is developed in a testing-focused data-driven manner but in
which the organization’s customer acquisition or marketing strate‐
gies are run by HiPPOs.
What may happen, however, is what is known in population genetics
as the founder effect and in the social sciences as path dependence.
A bias in the founding team, such as a high proportion of engineers
and data scientists who believe strongly in instrumentation and A/B
testing, can set the early hiring biases, tone, and culture down the
road of being data-driven, an environment to which later hires are
subject to and influenced by. What is clear, however, is that every
business can be data-driven. When competing on analytics, there is
no restriction on domain.
Throughout the book, I have deliberately underplayed the role of
technology. Not because it is unimportant, but I think that, ulti‐
mately, culture is a stronger driver. Let me explain. Imagine a data
scientist joins an organization and turns up with the latest and
greatest toolset (Spark, D3, R, scikit-learn, etc.). If she finds herself
in a environment that doesn’t have a great data culture, for instance
the organization doesn’t get A/B testing and it is run by HiPPOs,
that data scientist won’t be able to make an impact. She will likely
leave, frustrated. Now imagine the converse. Imagine the data scien‐
tist turns up to an organization that does have a great data culture,
but they don’t have all the tools and technology that the data scien‐
tist would want. Maybe they have basic relational databases but have
never had a need, until now, for a graph database or for a Hadoop
cluster. In this environment, that data scientist will be more likely to
258 
| 
Chapter 13: Conclusion

3 Patil, R., “Supermarket Tesco pioneers Big Data,” Dataconomy, February 5, 2014.
4 Schrage, M., “Tesco’s Downfall Is a Warning to Data-Driven Retailers,” Harvard Busi‐
ness Review, October 28, 2014.
be able to get the funds and support to create or buy any tools that
will make an impact. In short, having the right tools can have a mas‐
sive impact. However, not having the right culture, or at least drive
to create the right culture, is a killer.
Caution: The Rise and Fall of Tesco
Tesco, the UK-based multinational grocery chain, and the UK’s
largest private sector employer (330,000 jobs), has often been lau‐
ded as a paragon of a data-drivenness, an organization whose com‐
petitive advantage derived directly from analytics.
In 1995, the company rolled out its loyalty program, Clubcard. This
allowed analysts to collect data on customers, target coupons, and
reward customers. By being more targeted, coupon redemption
rates increased from 3% to 70%.3 By identifying finer segments,
they were able to create new products focusing on high end (“Tesco
Finest”), health conscious (“Tesco Healthy Living”), and value con‐
scious (“Tesco Value”). In 1999, they racked up 145,000 different
segmented mailings.
It was a huge success. Tesco market share soared to over 30 percent
and made it the UK’s largest retail brand. Today, it has 16 million
active members and detailed data on two-thirds of all baskets. Cus‐
tomers have received more than $1.5 billion in savings from club
points. They rolled out products specifically to attract segments
such as new parents to become customers, and developed predic‐
tive models that factored in weather forecasts to optimize supply
chain that saved $150 million in stock. They moved into online
shopping, requiring all customers to sign up for Clubcard, and into
banking. Today, Tesco has moved far beyond groceries. Michael
Schrage said, “With the exception of, say, an Amazon, no global
store chain was thought to have demonstrably keener data-driven
insight into customer loyalty and behavior.”4
The analytical powerhouse behind all this was a startup called 
Dunnhumby, which Tesco later bought a majority stake in. Lord
MacLaurin, then CEO, told the husband-and-wife founders, “What
scares me about this is that you know more about my customers
Conclusion 
| 
259

3 Ruddick, G., “Clubcard built the Tesco of today, but it could be time to ditch it,” The
Telegraph, January 16, 2014.
after three months than I know after 30 years.” Dunnhumby is con‐
sidered “one of the jewels in the Tesco crown.”
So how is Tesco doing today? The stock is at an 11-year low. The
company lost $2.7 billion failing to expand to the US with Fresh &
Easy, and posted a $9.6 billion loss for 2014 fiscal year. The chair‐
man resigned in disgrace after overstating profits by $400 million.
It’s shedding up to 9,000 jobs and closing 43 stores and its head‐
quarters. “I made a mistake on Tesco. That was a huge mistake by
me,” said a humbled Warren Buffet. Moreover, Dunnhumby, whose
Clubcard program costs $750 million per annum, a price at which
is unlikely to show positive ROI, is up for sale for $3 billion.
There is no single reason for the decline. Overstating profits doesn’t
help. However, competitors have developed their own loyalty pro‐
grams, most of which are simpler—simplicity appeals to customers!
—and instead of abstract “points,” they reward users more tangible
benefits, such as a newspaper or, importantly for Britons, a cup of
tea.3
Unfortunately, being data-driven, and even doing it well, doesn’t
guarantee any success or sustained success. First, most successful
strategies can be copied by competitors who can take advantage of
free-rider effects. Second, the C-suite are still commanding the ship.
If they set the wrong vision and strategy for the organization, even
making the best data-driven decisions that support that strategy can
still drive the ship into the rocks. The story of Tesco (see box) is one
such sad example.
However, I’ve mentioned a number of studies throughout the book
that provide evidence that being data-driven pays off. Organizations
make decisions better, faster, and can more quickly innovate. Organ‐
izations that test more not only know if something worked, but are
more likely to know why. Organizations are more inclusive, and
everyone can contribute and see how their contributions roll up to
company success.
260 
| 
Chapter 13: Conclusion

Further Reading
Analytics Organizations
Aiken, P., and M. Gorman, The Case for the Chief Data Officer (New
York: Morgan Kaufmann, 2013).
Davenport, T. H., and J. G. Harris, Analytics at Work (Boston: Har‐
vard Business Press, 2007).
Davenport, T. H., J. G. Harris, and R. Morison, Competing on Ana‐
lytics (Boston: Harvard Business Press, 2010).
Eckerson, W., Secrets of Analytical Leaders: Insights from Information
Insiders (Denville, NJ: Technics Publications, 2012).
Data Analysis & Data Science
O’Neil, C., and R. Schutt, Doing Data Science (Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly, 2014).
Shron, M., Thinking With Data (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly, 2014).
Siegel, E.,Predictive Analytics (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
Silver, N., The Signal and the Noise (New York: Penguin Press, 2012).
Decision Making
Kahneman, D. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, New York.
261

Data Visualization
Few, S., Now You See It (Oakland: Analytics Press, 2009).
Few, S., Show Me the Numbers: Designing Tables and Graphs to
Enlighten (Oakland: Analytics Press, 2012).
Tufte, E. R., Envisioning Information (Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press,
1990).
Tufte, E. R., Visual Explanations (Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press,
1997).
Tufte, E. R., The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Chesh‐
ire, CT: Graphics Press, 2001).
Wong, D. M., The Wall Street Journal Guide To Information Graphics
(New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2010).
A/B Testing
Siroker, D., and P. Koomen, A/B Testing (Hoboken: John Wiley &
Sons, 2013).
262 
| 
Bibliography

3 Halevy, A., P. Norvig, and F. Pereira, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data. Intelli‐
gent Systems, IEEE 24, no. 2 (2009): 8–12.
APPENDIX A
On the Unreasonable Effectiveness
of Data: Why Is More Data 
Better?
This appendix is reproduced (with slight modifi‐
cations and corrections) from a post, of the
same name, from the author’s blog.
In the paper “The unreasonable effectiveness of data,”3 Halevy, Nor‐
vig, and Pererira, all from Google, argue that interesting things hap‐
pen when corpora get to web scale:
simple models and a lot of data trump more elaborate models based
on less data.
In that paper and the more detailed tech talk given by Norvig, they
demonstrate that when corpora get to hundreds of millions or tril‐
lions of training sample or words, very simple models with basic
independence assumptions can outperform more complex models
such as those based on carefully-crafted ontologies with smaller
data. However, they provided relatively little explanation as to why
more data is better. In this appendix, I want to attempt to think
through that.
263

3 Hays, J., and A. A. Efros, “Scene Completion Using Millions of Photographs.” Proceed‐
ings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2007, San Diego, CA, August, 5–9, 2007, pp. 1–7.
I propose that there are several classes of problems and reasons for
why more data is better.
Nearest Neighbor Type Problems
The first are nearest neighbor type problems. Halevy et al. give an
example:
James Hays and Alexei A. Efros addressed the task of scene comple‐
tion: removing an unwanted, unsightly automobile or ex-spouse
from a photograph and filling in the background with pixels taken
from a large corpus of other photos.3
Figure A-1. Hayes and Efros’s (2007) figure 1.
Norvig presented the following schematic:
264 
| 
Appendix A: On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better?

and described it as a “data threshold” in which results went from
really bad to really good.
I’m not convinced that there is any threshold or anything that
resembles a phase transition. This seems to me to be a problem of
finding the closest match. The more data, the closer the expected
match.
Hays and Efros (2007) remark:
Indeed, our initial experiments with the gist descriptor on a dataset
of ten thousand images were very discouraging. However, increas‐
ing the image collection to two million yielded a qualitative leap in
performance... Independently, Torralba et al. [2007] have observed
a similar effect with a dataset of up to 70 million tiny (32x32)
images...It takes a large amount of data for our method to succeed.
We saw dramatic improvement when moving from ten thousand to
two million images.
There is a large difference in those corpus sizes, and a “qualitative
leap” is not the same as a threshold (sensu phase transition).
More data can dramatically affect the metrics from simple effects.
For instance, consider a sample of size n from a standard normal.
How does the minimum of that sample vary with n? Let’s create
samples of different sizes and plot the minimum using the following
R code:
x<-seq(1,7,0.5)
y<-vector(mode="numeric",length=length(x))
for (i in 1:length(x)){ y[i] <- min(rnorm(10^(x[i]))) }
plot(x,y,xlab="Sample size, n (log10 scale)",
  ylab="Minimum value of sample",type="b")
On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better? 
| 
265

The minimum decreases loglinearly. This is a case of extrema from
an unbounded tail. Perhaps more relevantly, here, for a minimiza‐
tion problem such as scene matching there is a lower bound: for all
intents and purposes, a perfect match. For instance, perhaps some‐
one else stood in the same exact tourist spot and took a picture of
the exact same scene but without the obstructing car. 
I think this is what is happening in Norvig’s schematic. At a certain
corpus size, we’ve found a really good match, and a larger corpus
doesn’t and cannot improve results.
In summary, for nearest-neighbor-type minimization problems with
a non-negative distance function (meaning that the cost function
has a lower bound of zero), that distance function will, on average,
decrease monotonically with data or sample size. 
266 
| 
Appendix A: On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better?

Relative Frequency Problems
The second class are counting or relative frequency problems. These
were the primary focus of Halevy et al. Norvig’s presented a few
examples. In segmentation, the task is to split a string such as
“cheapdealsandstuff.com” into the most likely sequence of words.
These strings are short enough to do a brute force in terms of possi‐
ble partition, but for each partition, we have to assess the likelihood
of that partition. The simplest assumption is to assume independ‐
ence among words. Thus, if Pr w  is the probability of a word w
given some corpus we can compute, say:
Pr(che,apdeals,andstuff) = Pr(che) × Pr(apdeals) × Pr(andstuff).
...
Pr(cheap,deals,and,stuff) = Pr(cheap) × Pr(deals) × Pr(and) × 
Pr(stuff).
One can of course also use n-grams (e.g. for bigrams): Pr(“cheap
deals”) × Pr(“and stuff”)
A second example that Norvig covered was spell checking. Here we
can take a misspelled word and compute the likelihood of the possi‐
ble variants to suggest the most likely form. 
In both cases, we need a corpus that includes both common and
uncommon phrases, and we need counts of the occurrences of those
phrases to compute relative frequency. The larger and more compre‐
hensive the corpus, the better. I think that there are two statistical
effects going on here:
• The larger the corpus, the better the quality of the estimate of
the relative frequency. This is the law of large numbers.
• The larger the corpus, the more likely it is to include unusual
phrases (i.e., the long tail). This is an unbounded effect. The
more the Web is indexed, the most new phrases will appear. The
problem is exacerbated in that the distribution of words in the
English language is a power law. (e.g. Zipf, G. The Psycho-
Biology of Language. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1935.).
This means that the tail is especially long; therefore, especially
large samples are needed to capture those rare phrases.
On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better? 
| 
267

3 Skomoroch, P., “Developing Data Products,” December 5, 2012.
4 “Analytics Talk: Peter Skomoroch,” December 13, 2012.
Estimating Univariate Distribution Problems
A third class are estimating univariate distribution problems. I
recently encountered an interesting example while attending a tech
talk3 from Peter Skomoroch from LinkedIn.4 He showed a plot of
likelihood of a member having particular software-related job titles
versus number of months since graduation. What we see from the
data is that the distributions of “Sr Software engineer” and “senior
software engineer” are almost identical, as one would expect as they
are synonyms, as are “CTO” and “chief technology officer.” This
then presents an interesting way of identifying synonyms and so
deduping the data rather than maintaining a huge master list of
acronyms and abbreviations. This is only possible because of the
scale of data that they have where the distribution they can generate
is reliable and presumably close to the true underlying population
distribution.
(From Peter Skomoroch, reproduced with permission.)
268 
| 
Appendix A: On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better?

Multivariate Problems
A fourth class are general multivariate or correlational problems in
which we are trying to estimate the relationship among variables.
This could be estimating the relationship y = f x  or perhaps esti‐
mating the joint PDF of many variables. We might use this for word-
sense disambiguation (e.g., is the document referring to pike the fish
or pike the pointed weapon?) or to build up a dossier of associated
features or concepts about an entity (e.g., a company has an associ‐
ated CEO, head office, tax ID and so on). Here we are interested in
the correlations among words or phrases. The problem is that web
documents are very high dimensional, and embarking on high-
dimensional problems like these we are under the “curse of dimen‐
sionality” that data become very sparse. Thus, one effect of larger
samples is to increase the density of data across state space. Again,
with larger samples, we can estimate metrics such as location met‐
rics (mean, median and other metrics of the center of distributions)
more accurately. We can also estimate joint PDFs more accurately.
The following graph is a simple example derived from this code:
par(mfrow=c(1,2))
plot(mvrnorm(100, mu = c(0, 0), 
 Sigma = matrix(c(1, .9, .9, 1), 2)),xlab="X",ylab="Y",
 ylim=c(-4,4))
title("n = 100")
plot(mvrnorm(10000, mu = c(0, 0),
 Sigma = matrix(c(1, .9, .9, 1), 2)),xlab="X",ylab="Y",
 ylim=c(-4,4))
title("n = 10000")
On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better? 
| 
269

At left is a small sample. It could easily be interpreted as linear. At
right, with a larger sample, the true underlying bivariate normal is
more obvious. Clearly, this is a trivial example. The point is that for
higher dimensions, you will need much larger sample sizes to esti‐
mate the joint PDFs well.
This is clearly a cursory answer as to why more data is better. Qual‐
ity data is still preferred. However, for many organizations, such as
Google, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Facebook, where content is user-
generated, often free-form text and/or covers many domains (and so
deep-cleaning and the use of ontologies is infeasible), then what we
see is that having very large datasets can compensate for the noise. It
all evens out in the end, and in the case of nearest neighbor prob‐
lems, the solution will always be better.
270 
| 
Appendix A: On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Data: Why Is More Data Better?

APPENDIX B
Vision Statement
This appendix can serve as a starting point for a vision statement—
an aspirational description of what an organization would like to
accomplish in the mid-term or long-term future—for a more data-
driven version of your organization. The goal should be to highlight
where you want to get to, align stakeholders, and stimulate discus‐
sion of how to get there. All organizations are different, so tailor it
to represent your organization’s true vision.
A thriving, data-driven [Company Name] has a/an:
STRONG DATA LEADERSHIP
• Data leaders actively evangelize data as a strategic asset, lever‐
aged to its fullest to impact all parts of the business.
• Strong data leadership understands and supports the needs of
the business. It supports the analytics staff by providing them
with a clear career path, enables them to perform their best, to
be happy and productive, and to maximize their impact.
• Managers expect and rely on data insights to make informed
decisions. More generally across organization, data and analyt‐
ics are deeply embedded into our processes and decisions.
OPEN, TRUSTING CULTURE
• There is a centralized set of coherent data sources without any
silos.
• Business units have a sense of data ownership, proactively man‐
aging data quality of their sources.
271

• There is a broad access to data.
— Everyone who needs access to data to perform their func‐
tion, has access.
— Everyone only has access to the data that they need to per‐
form their function. Sensitive data, such as customer and
prescription data, should be treated with extreme caution:
highly restrict access, anonymize, and encrypt.
— All staff can easily get a holistic view of the company
through highly visible and accessible dashboards, reports,
and analysis. Systems are instrumented and alerted as relia‐
ble early warning systems.
• Analysts are highly collaborative, proactively reaching out
(across departments) to help validate ideas and ensure objectiv‐
ity.
SELF-SERVICE ANALYTICS CULTURE
• Standard reporting is fully automated. Analysts spend the
majority of their time on ad-hoc analysis, data discovery, and
forward-looking analytics such as predictive modeling and opti‐
mization.
• Business intelligence tools will serve standard data discovery
work with a SQL interface supporting all other ad hoc queries.
BROAD DATA LITERACY
• All members of the analytics organization are strong in core
analytical, data munging, and statistical skills as appropriate to
their role.
• All decision-makers, including senior management, are data lit‐
erate and have a firm grounding in statistical inference and
experimental design.
• There is significant opportunity to share, learn, and develop
skills through avenues such as workshops, courses, books, lunch
and learns, and mentorship.
OBJECTIVE, GOALS-FIRST CULTURE
• There is a clear, commonly understood vision of where the
company is headed driven by a highly visible, often referenced
KPI scorecard that motivates and drives strategy, actions, and
tactics.
272 
| 
Appendix B: Vision Statement

INQUISITIVE, QUESTIONING CULTURE
• There is a respectful environment with healthy discussion and
the ability to debate others about their data, assumptions, and
analytical interpretation.
• “Do you have data to back that up?” should be a question that
no one is afraid to ask and everyone is prepared to answer.
TESTING CULTURE
• Strong testing culture: all reasonable ideas should be tested
(both online and offline): gather data, learn, repeat. Objective
experimentation is the norm.
Value
Of course, you should then supplement this with reasons why staff
should buy into this vision:
Finances
Controlling for other factors, data-driven organizations have a
5–6% greater output and productivity than their less data-
driven counterparts. They also have higher asset utilization,
return on equity, and market value.
Analytics pays back $13.01 for every dollar spent.
Data leadership
Centralized, more supported analysts are happier and less likely
to leave.
Self-service
If teams have a better grasp of statistics, experimental design,
and have at least one member skilled at SQL, they will be more
self-sufficient. That should translate to being more independent,
nimble, and scalable.
Testing
Make decisions using both quantitative and qualitative data
from real customers. We don’t have to guess how customers
might react or respond to features.
With ability to roll out tests more easily and to interpret the
results properly and consistently at scale, we can innovate more
Vision Statement 
| 
273

rapidly. We can test dozens or hundreds or ideas per month,
optimizing the site.
Activation
Finally, you’ll need to set out or agree upon an actual plan, actions as
to how you are going to realize this vision. What do you need from
your colleagues?
Data leadership
Agree upon an analyst competency matrix.
Raise the bar for new and existing analysts. Push existing ana‐
lysts to further develop their skills.
Open, trusting
Be a proactive partner/business owner in data quality. Develop
views, alerts, and other checks to monitor data volume, quality,
and issues
Self-service
Learn SQL. All teams will need to be more self sufficient and be
able to do more ad hoc queries.
Data literacy
All managers should develop a strong grasp of statistics.
Objective, goals first
Tie all projects back to top-level strategic objectives. Make it
clear why we are or are not doing a project, why work is (de)pri‐
oritized. Use a concrete numbers such as ROI wherever possi‐
ble.
So, for each facet of the culture that you wish to achieve, you will
need to set out the what, the why, and the how.
274 
| 
Appendix B: Vision Statement

Index
A
A/A tests, 161
A/B testing
A/A tests and, 161
alternative approaches to, 171-174
best practices, 160-170
cultural implications, 174
data-drivenness and, 9
examples of, 155-158
Netflix account settings, 247
reasons for, 159
running the experiment, 168-170
sample size calculators, 164-168
success metrics, 161
test plan for, 162-164
Abela, Andrew, 137
Abercrombie, Courtnie, 228
ability (Fogg Behavioral Model)
actions to outcomes, 195
aspects of, 195
collaboration and consensus, 197
consistency and, 199
training and, 198
absolute metrics, 116
Accenture, 207
accessible data, 2, 21
accountability, lack of, 186, 194
accurate data, 21, 38
accurate metrics, 114-115
ad hoc reports, 12, 87
aggregated versus raw data, 50
Aiken, Peter, 222
alerting
data-drivenness and, 5
as level of analytics, 12
mapping with types of analysis, 87
operational dashboards and, 149
Altman, Tracy Allison, 196
Amazon, 57, 249
Amelia package (R), 31
analysis (see data analysis)
analysts
about, 60
CAOs as, 230
data quality and, 19
importance of, viii
organizing into teams, 76-82
team skills and roles, 65-68
tool recommendations, 71-76
traits and qualities, 69-70
types of, 59-65
analytical dashboards, 148
analytical paralysis, 185
analytics engineers, 61
analytics framework (Davenport), 8,
13
analytics maturity (levels of analytics)
about, 11-17
mapping between types of analy‐
sis and, 87
analytics value chain, viii, 10
analyzing data (see data analysis)
anchoring, 189
Anderson, Edgar, 29, 72
Andreassen, Paul, 184
Anscombe's quartet, 95
275

Anscombe, Francis, 95
arithmetic mean (average), 90, 102
arrangement (data visualization
checklist), 139
Arsenault, Julie, 211
aspirational organizations, 15
automation bias, 200
average (arithmetic mean), 90, 102
B
Babbage, Charles, 41
backfire effect, 189
Balanced Scorecard approach (KPIs),
122
bar charts, 134-137
Barr, Stacey, 123
Bayesian statistics, 172-174
Berkun, Scott, 181-183
Bernanke, Ben, 182
Berners-Lee, Tim, 41
Berra, Yogi, 111
Bhuiyan, Johana, 239
bias
automation, 200
confirmation, 191
friend or foe, 191
information, 185
recency, 191
survivorship, 190
biased data, 32, 114, 166
Bien, Frank, 228
big data, 43, 184, 229
Big Thinkers infographic, 145
black swans, 103
Bohr, Niels, 103
Boko, Gabie, 203
Bottega, John, 225
box plots, 96-97
boxplot() function, 29
Boyd, Danah, 239, 243
brain size to body size ratio, 146
Broome, Lewis, 225
Bryne, Michael, 226
Buffet, Warren, 260
business analysts, 61
business sufficiency models, 199
C
C-Suite
about, 217
chief analytics officer, 228-232
chief data officer, 218-228
chief digital officer, 232
Carroll, Lewis, 209
Casey, Micheline, 225
categorical variables, 88, 92, 97-99
causal analysis, 107-109, 157
Center of Excellence model, 80, 229
central tendency measures, 90
centralized analytical organization,
77-82
chartjunk, 130, 140, 145
charts
choosing, 134-138
designing elements of, 138-145
check digit, 27
chief analytics officer (CAO)
about, 218
characteristics and attributes,
229-230
role of, 228-232
chief data officer (CDO)
about, 218
first 90 days strategy, 226
future of role, 227
mandate to influence, 224-226
reporting hierarchy, 223
role of, 220-222
secrets of success, 222-226
chief design officer (CDO), 218
chief digital officer (CDO), 218, 232
Children's Online Privacy Protection
Act (COPPA), 251
click-through rate (CTR), 156
CNN, 128
Coase, Ronald, 83
Cobb, Jennifer, 204
cognitive barriers to decision making,
187-191
coherent data, 21, 39
collaboration in decision making, 197
Colli, Jarred, 175
color (data visualization checklist),
139
complete data, 21, 39
276 
| 
Index

confidence intervals, 101
confirmation bias, 191
consensus in decision making, 197
consistent data, 21, 39, 199
consulting model, 80
contextual data, 230
continuous data, 96
Cook, Scott, 175
correlational problems, 269
Creative Commons, 240
culture
A/A tests and, 162
A/B testing and, 174
about, x
anti-HiPPO, 214
data leadership and, 215, 217-235
data literacy and, 207-209
data-driven, 1, 11
goals-first, 209
importance of, 203
inquisitive and questioning, 211
iterative and learning, 212-214
lack of accountability, 186, 194
lack of data literacy, 186, 198
open and trusting, 204-207
prove it, 194
transparent, 195
valuing intuition, 185
D
d'Alessandro, Brian, 208
D3 library, 137
dashboards, 147-151
data access
data quality and, 21
data-drivenness and, 2
data accuracy, 21, 38
data analysis
about, 83-85
causal, 107-109, 157
data-drivenness and, 6-9
descriptive, 89-93
exploratory (EDA), 28-31, 71-73,
93-99
inferential, 100-102
mechanistic, 86
predictive, 103-106
types of, 86-88
data analysts (see analysts)
data business people, 67
data collection
about, 48
collecting everything, 41-44
connecting the dots, 46-48
data retention and, 56
data-drivenness and, 1
ensuring data quality during, 19,
22-36
prioritizing data sources, 44-46
purchasing data, 50-55
data creatives, 67
data developers, 67
data dictionary, 52
data engineers, 61
data entry
about, 24
error mitigation, 26-28
exploratory data analysis and,
28-31
types of issues, 25
data formats
data entry errors, 26
as purchase consideration, 52
data granularity, 52
data leadership, 215, 217-235
data literacy
broad, 207-209
lack of, 186, 198
data quality
costs of dirty data, 22
data entry and, 24-31
data generation and, 23
data provenance and, 36
data-drivenness and, 2
decision-making issues, 183
default values and, 36
duplicate data and, 33
facets of
about, 20
accessible data, 2, 21
accurate data, 21, 38
coherent data, 21, 39
complete data, 21, 39
consistent data, 21, 39, 199
defined data, 21
relevant data, 22, 189
Index 
| 
277

reliable data, 22, 51
timely data, 22, 39
importance of, 19
inconsistent units and, 35
missing data and, 31-33
privacy considerations, 248-249
as purchase consideration, 51
as shared responsibility, 38-40
truncated data and, 35
data researchers, 67
data scientists, 62
data sources
connecting the dots among, 46-48
prioritizing, 44-46
purchasing data from, 50-55
data visualization
about, 129, 134
choosing charts, 134-138
data visualization checklist, 138
designing elements of charts,
138-145
focusing the message, 139-142
organizing data, 142-145
data visualization specialists, 64
data-drivenness
about, 1, 181-183, 203
alerting and, 5
anti-HiPPO culture, 214
broad data literacy and, 207-209
data access and, 2
data analysis and, 6-9
data collection and, 1
data leadership and, 215, 217-235
data quality and, 2
goals-first culture, 209
hallmarks of, 9-11
inquisitive and questioning cul‐
ture, 211
iterative and learning culture,
212-214
open and trusting culture,
204-207
reporting and, 4-5, 6-9
data-influenced, 182
data-informed, 182
data-to-ink ratios, 130, 145
database queries, 73
Davenport, Thomas H., 8, 12-14, 77,
81, 108, 128, 208, 215
Davis, Jim, 11
De Cubber, Emiland, 142, 152
decentralized analytical organization,
77-82
DECIDE mnemonic, 197
decision making
about, 177-183
cognitive barriers, 187-191
dashboards and, 150
factors hindering, 183-192
solutions-oriented perspective,
193-200
summary, 200
default data values, 36
defined data, 21
deletion data entry errors, 25
delivering insights
via dashboards, 147-151
via infographics, 145-147
Deming, William Edwards, 1
descriptive analysis, 89-93
deviation analysis, 153
dimension, defined, 88
dirty data
about, 22
data entry and, 24-31
data generation and, 23
default values and, 36
duplicate data, 33
inconsistent units, 35
missing data, 31-33
truncated data, 35
discrete data, 96
dispersion (central tendency meas‐
ures), 90
distributions
asymmetry of, 91
inferential analysis and, 102
sharpness of peaks, 91
types of, 92
dittography, 26
Doms, Mark, 221
Dorsey, Jack, 151
Doss, Cathryne Clay, 218
double entry (data entry), 27
Duhigg, Charles, 242
278 
| 
Index

Dunnhumby, 259
duplicate data, 33
E
Eckerson, Wayne, 256
Economist Intelligence Unit, 179, 205
EDA (see exploratory data analysis)
Efros, Alexei A., 264
Elin, Greg, 226, 226
empathy, practicing, 239, 243-247
end user license agreements (EULA),
240
estimating univariate distribution
problems, 268
ethics
about, 237
handling personally identifiable
information, 250
practicing empathy, 239, 243-247
respecting privacy, 238-243
evangelism, 222, 226, 230
Evans, Kyle, 225
Evergreen, Stephanie, 140, 152
executive (strategic) dashboards, 148
expectation-maximization with
maximum-likelihood, 31
experienced organizations, 15
exploratory data analysis (EDA)
about, 93-99
data entry error mitigation and,
28-31
statistical modeling and, 71-73
F
Facebook privacy settings, 245-246
false negative, 165
false positive, 165
Faria, Mario, 84, 222, 226
Federal Trade Commission, 238, 248,
251
feedback loop, 213
Few, Stephen, 129, 153
file inspection and manipulation,
73-76
Finkelstein, Sydney, 177
Fishburne, Tom, 178
Fisher, R. A., 29, 72
Fogg Behavioral Model
ability to perform tasks, 195-199
about, 193
motivators in business, 194
presence of triggers, 199
forecasting
data-drivenness and, 10
as level of analytics, 12
mapping with types of analysis, 87
predictive analysis and, 103
founder effect, 258
Frankel, Stuart, 128
Franks, Bill, 228, 231
frequentist statistics, 172-174
friend or foe bias, 191
functional model, 80
G
Galileo Galilei, 111
Gardner, John, 5
generating data, 23
Geographic Information Officer
(GIO), 226
geometric mean, 90
Georgiev, Georgi, 161
Gini coefficient (metric), 91
glacier service (Amazon), 57
Glass, Russell, 215
goals-first culture, 209
goodness of fit, 102
Goodson, Martin, 170
Google imputation service, 31
granularity of data, 52
Graphic Continuum, 136
Graves, Matthew, 222
Grossman, Randall, 52
gut check, 192
Guttierez, Sebastian, 133
H
haplography, 26
harmonic mean, 90
Harris, J. G., 12-14
Harvard Business Review, 183
Hay, James, 264
Headd, Mark, 224
Index 
| 
279

Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 243,
251
HiPPOs (highest paid person's opin‐
ion), 175, 177, 186, 200, 214
histograms, 96-97
Hodgkinson, Gerard, 184
Holloway, Todd, viii
Howard, Michael, 57
Humby, Clive, 255
hybrid organizational model, 79, 229
I
IBM, 14, 220
ick factor, 243
immersion tool, 241
imputation, 31
inferential analysis, 100-102
infographics, 145
information
decision-making issues, 184
defined, 85
misinformation and, 188
information bias, 185
inquisitive culture, 211
insertion data entry errors, 25
interquartile range, 90
intuition, decision making based on,
179-181, 185, 191
J
Jain, Piyanka, 77
joinable data, 2
Josephson, Michael, 237
Joyce, James, 212
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 187, 189
Kaushik, Avinash, 119, 151, 177
Keely, Larry, 197
KISS principle, 149
knowledge, defined, 85
Kohavi, Ron, 155, 160, 170
Kosara, Robert, 140
KPIs (key performance indicators)
about, 89, 111
common examples, 121-123
critical elements of, 119, 123
determining number needed, 123
executive dashboards and, 148
goals-first culture and, 210
target considerations, 124-125
Kumar, Anjali, 243
kurtosis (metric), 91
Kutcher, Ashton, 128
L
Leek, Jeffrey, 86
Lessig, Lawrence, 240
levels of analytics (see analytics
maturity (levels of analytics))
Linden, Greg, 155, 175
lines (data visualization checklist),
139
location metrics, 90
lower-hinge (Q1), 90
M
Maeda, John, 5
MAR (missing at random), 33
margin of error, 101
Marr, Bernard, 121
Mason, Hilary, 206, 237
Masry, Samer, 20
maximum (metric), 90
Mayer, Marissa, 10
MCAR (missing, completely at ran‐
dom), 32
McCormick, PJ, 155, 164
McKinsey report, 231, 234
McNealy, Scott, 237
mean
arithmetic (average), 90, 102
geometric, 90
harmonic, 90
measures
about, 88
direct versus indirect, 118
mechanistic analysis, 86
median (metric), 90
Mendelevitch, Ofer, 127
metadata
data provenance and, 36
immersion tool, 241
280 
| 
Index

metric design
A/B testing best practices, 161
about, 4, 111
accurate metrics, 114-115
direct measures and, 118
key performance indicators, 89,
111
metric defined, 89, 111
precise metrics, 116
relative versus absolute metrics,
116
robust metrics, 117
simple metrics, 112
standardized metrics, 113
Micallef, Maria, 124
minimum (metric), 90
Mintz, Daniel, 32
misinformation, 188
missing data, 21, 31-33, 36
MIT, 14, 184
MNAR (missing, not at random), 33
mode (metric), 90
Mohrer, Josh, 239
motivation (Fogg Behavioral Model),
194
multivariate problems, 269
multivariate testing, 171
Murray, Dan, 59
Murray, Scott, 64
N
Nadella, Satya, 203
nearest neighbor type problems,
264-266
Nemschoff, Michele, 212
Netflix test participation, 247
Nguyen, Thomson, 19
NHANES (National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey),
25, 29
NSA, 141, 152, 241
Nyhan, Brendan, 188
O
O'Neil, Cathy, 118
Obama campaign (2008), 159
operational dashboards, 149
optimization
data-drivenness and, 9
as level of analytics, 12
mapping with types of analysis, 87
organizing data, 142-145
P
pairs() function, 30, 95, 99
panel bar charts, 135
Pascal, Blaise, 152
path dependence, 258
Patil, DJ, 42, 120, 206, 237
Peltier, Jon, 135
personal experience, decision making
based on, 179-181
personally embarrassing information
(PEI), 243
personally identifiable information
(PII), 248, 250
Pole, Andrew, 242
power, defined, 165
precise metrics, 116
predictive analysis, 103-106
predictive modeling
data-drivenness and, 10
as level of analytics, 12
mapping with types of analysis, 87
Presland-Bryne, Peter, 225
prioritizing data sources, 44-46
PRISM data collection program, 141,
152
privacy
data quality and, 248-249
elements of policies, 239
inadvertent leakage, 241-243
practicing empathy, 239, 243-247
principles of, 238, 248
providing choice, 246
respecting, 239-243
security considerations, 249
Procter & Gamble, 199
prove it culture, 194
provenance, data, 36
proxy (indirect measure), 118
purchasing data, 50-55
Index 
| 
281

Q
Q1 (lower-hinge), 90
Q3 (upper-hinge), 90
quality of data (see data quality)
quantitative analysts, 63
queries, database, 73
query drilldown (level of analytics),
12, 87
queryable data, 3
R
R environment, 29, 31, 71-73
range (metric), 91
raw data
aggregated data versus, 50
defined, 85
recency bias, 191
regression analysis, 102
Reifler, Jason, 188
relative frequency problems, 267
relative metrics, 116
relevant data, 22, 189
reliable data, 22, 51
reporting
alerts and, 5
analytics maturity and, 12
data-drivenness and, 4-5, 6-9
mapping with types of analysis, 87
retention, data, 56
risk mitigation
calculating risk factor, 246
inadvertent leakage, 241-243
security considerations, 249
robust metrics, 117
ROI, evaluating for purchased data‐
sets, 54
Rose, Kevin, 151
Rosenberg, Jonathan, 214
routing numbers, 28
Rudder, Christian, 200, 250
Rudin, Ken, 71, 134, 187, 209, 255
S
S3 (Simple Storage Service), 57
sample size
A/B testing best practices,
164-168
about, 89
inferential analysis and, 102
precision and, 116
sampling data, 49, 102
Schrage, Michael, 259
Schwartz, Barry, 185
scikit-learn library, 106
security
privacy considerations, 249
purchasing data, 51
shape measures, 91
shareable data, 3
Shevlin, Ron, 14
Silver, Nate, 103, 106, 197
simple metrics, 112
simple random samples, 49
Sims, Peter, 239
Siroker, Dan, 159
skew (metric), 91
Skoks, David, 112
SMART acronym, 120, 123
Snowden, Edward, 241
source provenance, 36
SQL, 73
stacked bar charts, 134
standard deviation (metric), 91
standard error (metric), 91, 101, 116
standardized metrics, 113
Stanton, Richard, 227
statistic, defined, 89
statistical analysis, 12, 87-88
statistical inference, 100-102
statistical modeling, 10, 71-73
statistical significance, 166
statisticians, 63
Steele, Julie, 217
stem-and-leaf plots, 96
Stone, Jeb, 79
storytelling with data
about, 128-130
data visualization and, 134-145
delivering insights, 145-151
first steps in, 131-133
identifying audience, 132
identifying medium to use, 132
identifying objective, 131
as marketing exercise, 133
summary, 151-153
282 
| 
Index

strategic (executive) dashboards, 148
summary() function, 29
surprise and delight campaign, 101,
159
survivorship bias, 190
Sweeney, Latanya, 241
T
Target marketing example, 242
Tesco grocery chain, 259
text (data visualization checklist), 138
Thomas, Charles, 219, 225, 256
timely data, 22, 39
transcription data entry errors, 25
transformation provenance, 36
transformed organizations, 15
transparent culture, 195
transposition data entry errors, 25
triggers (Fogg Behavioral Model), 199
truncated data, 35
Tufte, Edward, 140, 145
Tukey, John, 95
Tunkelang, Daniel, 70
Tversky, Amos, 189
Twain, Mark, 189
Twitter example, 128-130
Tye, Robin, 197
U
Uber car service, 239
units, inconsistent, 35
univariate analysis, 89, 96-99
unreasonable effectiveness of data,
263-270
upper-hinge (Q3), 90
V
validating data, 26-28
value (data dimension), 44
variables
choosing charts, 134-138
defined, 88
descriptive analysis and, 92
exploratory analysis and, 93
variance (metric), 91
variety (data dimension), 43
Vellante, Dave, 228
velocity (data dimension), 44
Vendantam, Shankar, 189
veracity (data dimension), 44
vision statement for data, 257,
271-274
VLOOKUP function (Excel), 2, 73
volume (data dimension), 43, 52, 184
W
wc (word count) utility, 74
weasel words, 123
Webber, Susan, 118
Welch, Jack, 185
Wills, Josh, 62
Winfrey, Oprah, 128
Woods, Dan, 260
Z
Zuckerberg, Mark, 245
Index 
| 
283

About the Author
Carl Anderson is the director of data science at Warby Parker in
New York, overseeing data engineering, data science, supporting the
broader analytics organization, and creating a data-driven organiza‐
tion. He has had a broad-ranging career, mostly in scientific com‐
puting, covering areas such as healthcare modeling, data
compression, robotics, and agent-based modeling. He holds a Ph.D.
in mathematical biology from the University of Sheffield, UK.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Creating a Data-Driven Organization is a
superb starling (Lamprotornis superbus). This vibrant species is
common throughout the savannahs of eastern Africa, ranging from
Ethiopia to Tanzania.
Superb starlings, once fully grown, are known for their distinct col‐
oring: their heads are black, while their chests, backs, and wings are
a brilliant metallic blue-green. A thin white band separates the blue
upperparts from bright, rust-colored bellies. Adults measure
roughly 7.5 inches long with a 16-inch wingspan.
Superb starlings are very social birds that use long, rambling calls to
communicate. They typically live in very large flocks and often care
for hatchlings collaboratively. They forage primarily on the ground
for insects and berries; however, these plucky creatures won’t hesi‐
tate to approach humans to beg for food when the opportunity
strikes.
Many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them
are important to the world. To learn more about how you can help,
go to animals.oreilly.com.
The cover image is from Riverside Natural History. The cover fonts
are URW Typewriter and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe
Minion Pro; the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the
code font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.

