 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
Hacking for Profit: 
 
Credit Card Fraud 
A Beginners Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by 
SA E.J. Hilbert II 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Los Angeles Field Office 
Santa Ana Resident Agency 
714-542-8825 
Written August 2002 
Revised December 2004 
      

 
2
 
 
Introduction 
 
     This paper is intended to detail how financially motivated 
hacking groups convert stolen data to monetary instruments.  The 
primary premise for this paper is based on Eastern European 
hacking groups but in recent months, the “financially motivated” 
hacker sub group has expanded to include hackers from the Far and 
Middle East Hackers.  What the individuals are doing with the 
illicit profits of their activities range from childish purchases 
to funding terrorist attacks as was detailed in the recent 
autobiography, “Aku Melawan Teroris” (Me, Fighting the Terrorists)  
by the Bali nightclub bomber.  In the chapter “Hacking, Mengapa 
Tidak” (Hacking, Why not?), Iman Samura, a computer scientist 
provides a primer to Islamic Extremists of how to learn the trade 
of credit card fraud and hacking. 
 
     To quote BigBoss, from forum.Carderplanet.com, “Carding 
shouldn’t be something you do for fun, it is something you do to 
survive.” 
 
     Financially motivated hackers consider hacking and carding as  
their career.  The employment opportunities are in their home 
countries, particularly those whose salaries are enough to pay for 
the life styles these individuals have become accustomed, are 
extremely limited.  They come from a society where the average pay 
is $200 per month but Internet connectivity costs $40 per month. 
Thus they are willing to spend one fifth of their monthly salary 
to be online.  A $1000 profit is more money then most Eastern 
European hackers have ever seen at one time. 
 
     Though they understand the process of credit cards, most 
International hackers do not understand the impact of committing 
credit card fraud.  Most come from cash economies and the use of a 
credit card by regular citizens is extremely uncommon.  They feel 
the attack is directed at a big corporation and not an individual.  
The idea of rising interest rates, chargeback fees or economic 
instability are not concepts they can understand nor are they 
their concern.  Money is the object of their actions. 
 
 
At the time of the first version of this paper in August 
2003, many financially motivated hackers could be found chatting 
in the forums of the web sites carderplanet.com, shadowcrew.com 
and/or darkprofits.com.  These sites are still referenced in this 

 
3
paper because the information provided on the sites are still 
relevant. 
 
Since that time, many of the referenced sites have been 
shutdown or taken over by script-kiddies and the real profiteers 
have moved deeper underground.  Many have also become allied with 
organized crime groups or created their own hacking teams.  
 
 
Also at the time of original publication, EFnet and DALnet on 
IRC initiated a crackdown on channels dedicated to cyber crime.  
Since that time, the criminals have found loop holes in the 
crackdown, such as renaming the groups, attaching messages of the 
day (MOTD)forbidding criminal activity or making the channels 
private.  Many of the channels have also gone native; meaning they 
are dedicated to a particular language group and all posts to the 
channel utilize that language and the corresponding slang for 
carding.   
 
 
The point being, the groups have not gone away.  They still 
exist and communicate on the Internet by adapting to the rules.  
Law Enforcement must now adapt in kind. 
 
     By no means is this paper intended to be the end-all 
authority on this crime.  Comments, questions and revision are 
always welcome. 
 
Definitions, Concepts and Statistics 
 
     Since the readers of this paper will range from skilled 
investigators to neophytes, some basic terms and concepts need to 
be set forth: 
 
Hacker - Individual who gains unauthorized access to computer 
networks and systems 
 
Carder - Individual who uses stolen data, usually Credit cards, to 
fraudulently purchase items or convert the credit into cash. 
 
Credit card - a monetary instrument, often referred to as plastic, 
used in place of cash to make purchases.  Credit cards are 
assigned to entities and have specific monetary limits and an 
interest rate associated with payoff.  Since credit cards do not 
have to be paid off each month, the available limit will 
fluctuate.  Visa or MasterCard does not issue Visa and MasterCard 
credit cards.  They are issued by an issuing bank in conjunction 
with a use agreement between the bank and Visa or MasterCard.  

 
4
This agreement is for the use of the Visanet or the MasterCard 
equivalent for verification and authorization of the card. 
  
Charge card - same as credit card however, a charge card must be 
paid off each month or risk an extremely high interest rate or the 
card being shutdown. 
 
Debit Card - Card associated with a bank account and limited by 
the amount of money in said account, which resembles the credit 
card by the method of purchase. However, these cards may only be 
used with the owners Personalized Identification Number.  
Hacker knowledge 
 
     Below is the “Beginning Carders Dictionary’” as posted online 
by the Russian hacker, KLYKVA on forum.carderplanet.com.  It is 
presented in its original form to illustrate the level of 
knowledge from which these individuals are working. 
Bank-emitent (Issuing bank) - bank which has issued the card  
Billing address - the card owner address  
 
Drop - innerman. His task is to receive the money or goods and, 
accordingly, give the part of the earnings to you.  
 
Drop/Pick-Up guy/Runner - person or location that is setup to 
accept packages or to receive the money. He should be paid nicely 
for this position. 
  
Billing - office, which has agreement with a bank and assumes 
payments for the cards.  
 
COB - Change of Billing address 
 
Card bill - a Bank emitent card bill. 
  
Bank-aquirer - bank, in which the store opens the account. 
  
Merchant account - bank account for accepting credit cards. 
  
Merchant Bank - bank, through which occur the payments between the 
buyer and the seller (frequently it is used as synonym “bank-
equirer”). 
  
Cardholder - owner of the card. 
  

 
5
Validity - suitability of card.  
 
White plastic - a piece of pure plastic, where the information is 
plotted/printed. 
  
CR-80 - rectangular piece of pure white plastic (without the 
drawing image) the size of a credit card with the magnetic strip.  
Transaction - charge to the credit card  
 
POS terminal (Point Of Sale terminal) - reading card device, which 
stands at commercial point.  
 
PIN-code – (Personal Identification Number) the sequence, which 
consists of 4-12 numbers, known only to the owner of card. A 
simple word password for an ATM and so on. 
  
AVS - the card owner address checking. It is used for the 
confirmation of the card belonging exactly to its holder.  
 
“Globe” - card holographic gluing with the image of two 
hemispheres (MasterCard). 
  
Pigeon (hen) - card holographic gluing with the image of the 
flying pigeon (VISA). 
  
Reader - information reading device for the readout from the 
magnetic strip of card. 
  
Encoder - read/write device for the magnetic track of the card. 
  
Embosser - card symbol extrusion device. 
  
Card printer - card information printing device. 
  
Exp.date - card validity period. 
  
Area code - the first of 3 or 6 digits of the card owner’s phone 
number. 
  
CVV2, cvv, cvn - 3 or 4 additional numbers, which stand at the end 
of the number of card.  
 
ePlus - program for checking the cards. 
  

 
6
BIN - first 6 numbers of the card number which make it possible to 
learn what bank issued the card and what type of card (ATM-card, 
credit, gold, etc.). Synonym of word “Prefix”.  
 
Chargeback - the cardholder’s bank voids the removal of money from 
its card. 
  
Dump - information, which is written to the magnetic strip of the 
card, it consists of 1,2 or 3 tracks. 
  
MMN - Mothers Maiden Name (generally the primary account holders 
mother) 
 
Track (road) - a part of the dump with specific information.  
Every 1st track is the information about the owner of the card. 
2nd track - information about the owner of card and about the bank 
who issued the card, etc. 3rd track - it is possible to say - 
spare, it is used by stores for the addition of the points and 
other. 
  
Slip - synonym to the word “cheque” (conformably to card 
settlings). 
  
Card balance – amount of credit remaining for spending in the card 
account. 
  
Automated Clearing House (ACH) - the automated clearinghouse.  The 
voluntary association of depositors, which achieves clearing of 
checks and electronic units by the direct exchange of means 
between the members of association.  
 
Continuous Acquisition and Life-cycle Support (CALS) - the 
integrated system of the production guaranteeing, purchase and 
exploitation. This system makes possible to computerize all data 
about the design, development, production, servicing and the 
propagation of the production. 
 
  
Debit Card - Card, which resembles the credit card by the method 
of using, but making possible to realize direct buyer account 
debiting at the moment of the purchase of goods or service. 
 
Delivery Versus Payment (DVP) - the system of calculations in the 
operations with the valuable papers, which ensures the mechanism, 
that guarantees the delivery will occur only in the case of 
payment and at the moment of payment. 
  

 
7
Direct debit - payment levy method, mainly, with the repetitive 
nature (lease pay, insurance reward, etc.) with which the debitor 
authorizes his financial establishment to debit his current 
account when obtaining calculations on payment from the indicated 
creditor. 
  
Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) - the remittance of means, 
initiated from the terminal, telephone or magnetic carrier (tape 
or diskette), by transfer of instructions or authorities to 
financial establishment, that concern the debiting or crediting of 
the account (see Electronic Fund Transfer/Point of Sale - 
EFT/POS). 
  
Electronic Fund Transfer/Point of Sale - EFT/POS - debiting from 
the electronic terminal, for the transfer purpose from the account 
of a buyer into the payment on the obligations, which arose in the 
course of transaction at the point of sale.  
 
Integrated Circuit (IC) Card - It is known also as chip card.  
Card equipped with one or several computer micro-chips or 
integrated microcircuits for identification and storing of data or 
their special treatment, utilized for the establishment of the 
authenticity of personal identification number (PIN), for delivery 
of permission for the purchase, account balance checking and 
storing the personal records. In certain cases, the card memory 
renewal during each use (renewed account balance).  
 
Internet - the open world communication infrastructure, which 
consists of the interrelated computer networks and provides access 
to the remote information and information exchange between the 
computers. 
  
International Standardization Organization (ISO) - International 
organization, which carries out standardization, with the staff 
office in Geneva, Switzerland. 
  
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) - System, which ensures 
the machine reading of the information, substituted by magnetic 
inks in the lower part of the check, including the number of 
check, the code of department, sum and the number of account.  
 
RSA - the coding and authentication technology, developed in 1977 
in MIT by Rivest, Shamir and Adel’man, which subsequently opened 
their own company RSA Data Security, Inc., purchased recently by 
the company Security Dynamics Technologies, Inc. 
  

 
8
Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) - the payment method, with which 
the transfer of means is achieved for each transaction in 
obtaining instructions about the payment. Decrease the risk with 
the payment. 
  
Smart Card - card equipped with integrated circuit and 
microprocessor, capable of carrying out the calculations. 
  
System risk - the risk, with which the incapacity of one of the 
payment system participants either financial market participants 
as a whole to fulfill their obligations, causes the incapacity of 
other participants or financial establishments to fulfill its 
obligations (including obligations regarding the realization of 
calculations in means transfer systems) properly. This failure can 
cause significant liquidity or crediting problems and, as result, 
it can cause loss to the stability of financial markets (with the 
subsequent action on the level of economic activity). 
  
Truncation - procedure, which makes it possible to limit the 
physical displacements of a paper document (in the ideal version) 
by the bank of the first presentation, by the replacement by 
electronic transfer of entire or part of the information, which is 
contained on this document (check). 
  
Card Balance - Current used Credit  
 
Avail Credit - Actual credit avail for Spending  
 
Cash Advance Avail - Actual amount avail as Cash for ATM usage. 
  
Integrated Circuit (IC) Card - It is known also as chip card.  
Card equipped with one or several computer micro-chips or 
integrated microcircuits for identification and storing of data or 
their special treatment, utilized for the establishment of the 
authenticity of personal identification number (PIN), for delivery 
of permission for the purchase, account balance checking and 
storing the personal records. In certain cases, the card memory 
renewal during each use (renewed account balance).  
LE - Law Enforcement, Coppers, Piggies, The Fuzzzzzzzzzzzz 
 
Lappie-  Laptop 
 
Communication Methods 
     As in all endeavors, hackers and carders need a means or 
several means of communication.  Given the international make-up 

 
9
of most hacking groups and the fact of Cyber crime being truly 
borderless, the communication methods chosen by these groups must 
be internationally accessible, cost effective and have a high 
level of anonymity.  Listed below are several of the primary 
communications methods used by hackers and carders: 
 
IRC - Internet Relay Chat, a series of interconnected computer 
servers on various network which enable users to chat in channels 
and one to one.  The channels are also referred to as rooms and 
are controlled by the user who first established the room. 
 
ICQ - America Online (AOL) owned peer-to-peer chat application.  
Chat rooms can be established within the ICQ network but entrance 
is by invitation only. 
AIM- AOL Instant Messenger 
 
Forums - Website sponsored bulletin boards where public and 
private messages can be posted about various topics.  Examples: 
forum.carderplanet.com, eraser.hostmos.ru, www.darkprofits.com 
and www.carderclan.net 
 
Email - Electronic mail 
 
A Credit Card (VISA) Transaction 
 
     There are two parts to every transaction. First, a customer 
presents a Visa product, usually a card, to a merchant, who needs 
immediate authorization of the transaction. Second, at the end of 
the day, the merchant needs to receive the funds for the 
transaction via its financial institution and ultimately from the 
customer’s issuer. The specifics will vary depending on 
transaction type, complexity, technology, and processing services 
but the typical flow is illustrated here.  
How a Purchase is Made  
Authorization at the Point of Sale  
 
Maria presents a Visa card (credit or debit) at ABC Stores.  
ABC uses an electronic terminal or the telephone to request an 
authorization from its financial institution (DEF Merchant 
Services). 
  
DEF checks to see if the account is valid and has sufficient 
funds. It sends an authorization request message, including 

 
10
owner’s account, merchant account and transaction details, through 
VisaNet to GHI Bank, Maria’s Visa issuer. 
  
GHI reviews the request and makes a decision to approve or 
decline the request. GHI’s response message is sent back through 
VisaNet to ABC within seconds. 
 
In some cases, when an issuer is unavailable for 
authorization, VisaNet will authorize the transaction as part of a 
Stand-In Processing Service. This is done to further enhance 
payment system efficiency. The entire authorization process, when 
done electronically, takes about two seconds.  
How the Merchant Gets Paid  
Clearing and Settlement  
 
At the end of the day, ABC Stores delivers all its sales 
draft information (including Maria’s purchase) to DEF Merchant 
Services. Each draft will contain the credit card number and the 
merchant account number. DEF credits the merchant account of ABC 
Stores for the net amount of all its sales. This is how ABC Stores 
obtains its funds from Maria’s purchase. 
  
Next, DEF’s processing center creates an electronic version 
of all drafts for all the merchants it supports, including ABC 
Stores. The electronic drafts, which may include transactions from 
numerous Visa account holders in various countries, are sent 
through VisaNet to one of Visa’s data centers. 
  
Visa routes these drafts to the financial institutions of the 
Visa account holders, for instance, Maria’s transaction is sent to 
her issuing bank, GHI Bank. Visa consolidates all transactions for 
each issuer into an electronic file that includes currency 
conversions, fees, net settlement amounts, and required reporting 
information.  
 
GHI’s processing center receives the file and prepares the 
transactions for posting to its cardholders’ accounts including 
Maria’s.  
 
GHI Bank transfers all the funds owed that day by its 
cardholders, including Maria, to a settlement bank, which is 
responsible for delivering the funds to the merchant acquirers 
such as DEF Merchant Services. This is how DEF gets paid for the 
amount it paid ABC Stores in step #2. 
  

 
11
At the end of the billing period, GHI Bank produces a statement to 
Maria. This is how GHI settles with Maria.  
Statistics 
 
Visa annual worldwide sales volume exceeds US$2.4 trillion.  
There are 1.2 billion Visa, Visa Electron, Visa Cash, Interlink 
and PLUS cards worldwide.  But only 49,413 legally issued cards in 
Central Europe, the Middle East and Africa. 
 
Visa is accepted in more than 150 countries. 
 
As of March 31, 2003, MasterCard’s gross dollar volume for 
credit and debit programs was US$285.7 billion, an increase of 
7.31% over the same period in 2002. 
  
MasterCard has 32 million acceptance locations; no payment 
card is more widely accepted globally. 
 
Cardholders can obtain cash with the card at bank branches and at 
all ATMs in the global MasterCard/Maestro/Cirrus ATM Network, 
among the largest ATM networks in the world with more than 892,000 
ATM locations worldwide on all seven continents. 
 
Most Eastern European law enforcement officers do not own, 
use or understand a credit card.  This is important when 
requesting information from certain parts of the world.  All 
requests must be highly detailed and precise. 
What to Steal 
 
     Everything is worth stealing to these individuals.  These 
hackers are financially motivated and highly educated.  They are 
not the typical hackers found in the U.S.  Hacking and Carding is 
a business for them.  They hack to steal databases, which in turn 
are provided to carders.  Carders, utilizing various schemes 
convert the stolen credit cards to cash or equipment then, provide 
the cards freely online in carding related IRC chat rooms.  The 
intention of the free cards is to spread the information as widely 
as possible thus making it difficult for law-enforcement to track 
who originally committed the hack. 
 
     The hack occurs in three parts, reconnaissance, theft and 
dump.  During the reconnaissance portion, the hackers steal 
everything.  This information is used to identify the important 
parts of the network, the location of the databases and user names 
and passwords.  The reconnaissance usually occurs two to three 

 
12
months before the theft.  During the theft portion, the hacks 
begin to glean specific information, i.e., credit card numbers 
from the system as needed.  The theft phase can last for years and 
the hackers usually leave a very small footprint of their 
activities.  The dump stage occurs when the hackers steal 
everything in a very “noisy” manner.  This stage is used to burn 
all those “script-kiddies” and “lamerz” who are taking advantage 
of the original hackers backdoors.  The dump phase usually results 
in press coverage and the “red-flagging” of all the credit cards 
in the system at that point in time.  The victim company makes 
security changes and over time lets their guard down.  The hackers 
then attempt to use the old backdoors they created. If they are 
still in place, the theft stage begins again. 
 
     The hacks normally take advantage of known vulnerabilities, 
which have not been patched by the various victims.  Most hacks 
occur against Microsoft Windows platforms and utilize the Msdac 
exploit, the MSSQL exploit or the IIS exploit.  A wealth of 
information is available about these exploits on the Internet. 
   
     The truly skilled hackers have developed their own tools and 
place backdoors on systems such as, installing Telnet and secure 
shell daemons on high port numbers or creating their own user id’s 
and passwords after installing a sniffer to steal the root level 
passwords.  These are the first things System Administrators 
should look for, as well as changing all root level passwords via 
face-to-face meetings with all root level users.  Sending the 
change of passwords via email will be intercepted if a sniffer has 
been installed on the system. 
 
     Sometimes, the hack is automated through the use of a “bot” 
which makes it impossible for the System Administrators of the 
victimized networks to stop because they are physically not fast 
enough to fight the bot.  The only way to stop the bot is to take 
the network offline. 
 
     Investigations thus far indicate the following items are 
being stolen for use in various schemes detailed later in this 
paper: 
 
• Credit card databases 
• Personal information (name address telephone numbers) 
• Bank accounts 
• Bank routing numbers 
• Social Security numbers 
• Email addresses and passwords 

 
13
• Computer logon names and passwords 
• ACH transfer records  
• Merchant accounts 
• Order histories 
• Client lists 
• Partner lists 
• Company telephone directories 
• Website Source code 
• Shipment tracking numbers 
• Ebay accounts 
• Escrow accounts 
• Proprietary Software 
Getting Credit Cards  
 
Of all the data sought by hackers, credit card databases are 
the highest priority.  This is because they are the easiest to 
use. 
 
 
There are nine basic methods to obtain credit card numbers: 
 
Phishing – This is the practice of sending fraudulent e-mails that 
appear legitimate.  The email often appear to be from a bank or 
financial institution and request the recipient update their 
account information by utilizing the link included in the email.  
The link takes the recipient to a bogus web page where all the 
requested information is captured and later transmitted to a site 
controlled by the criminal for their use in cyber crime.  Amongst 
the information often requested is the recipients social security 
number, credit card number, PIN and cvv2. 
 
Buy – There are literally thousands of “Vendors” on web sites such 
as Forum.carderplanet.com, darkprofits.net and Shadowcrew.com 
willing to sell dumps of credit cards at varying rates.  If a 
carder knows how to use cards, expending $200 up front for cards 
is easily recouped. 
 
Trade – Through the different communication methods discussed 
above, hackers and carders trade credit cards online.  Many cards 
are offered free of charge.  The individual who stole the cards 
often has used these cards for fraudulent purchases.  They are 
then offered to the community as a whole with the intention of 
having multiple people use the cards.  Law enforcement will 
therefore have a harder time identifying the original hacker from 
the various carders. 

 
14
 
Generate – There are numerous software packages freely available 
on the Internet, which generate credit card numbers.  Many of the 
programs use the DESIII algorithm just like the legitimate credit 
card companies.   
 
The problem for the carder with generated cards, is that 
approximately 1% of the cards are valid.  This means the carder 
will need to have access to obtain validity and authorization 
before trying to commit fraud.  A common method would be a 
merchant account. 
 
Visa and MasterCard do not issue or generate cards, however 
they allow banks to issue cards with the respective logos/brands.  
American Express differs from Visa and MasterCard in this respect.  
American Express controls all cards and card numbers using their 
logo.  American Express actually generates card numbers in 
advance, which are stored in an active state awaiting issuance to 
a customer.  If a carder generates one of the stored American 
Express cards, any merchant receiving the card for payment will 
receive authorization for the purchase. 
   
Extrapolate – Once a Carder obtains a valid card through any of 
the different means listed herein, he can extrapolate additional 
cards based on the valid card number and the expiration date.  
Various extrapolation programs are freely available on the 
Internet. These programs utilize the valid card as a base for 
creating additional cards, particularly the first six digits.  
Extrapolation increases the likelihood of obtaining valid credit 
cards to approximately 35-40%. Once again a method to determine 
the validity via authorization is required. 
 
Fake Shops – It seems every business must now have a presence on 
the Internet in order to do business.  Couple this fact with the 
general publics’ belief that web sites are not easy to set up.  It 
is not difficult to understand why many feel if the company has a 
nice web site, the company must have money and be a reputable 
company.  Many hackers and carders will use these beliefs to their 
advantage by setting up fake online shops offering products for 
sale at cut-rate prices.  Good hackers and carders will spend the 
extra time to post fake recommendations on rating sites to help 
move their fake shop into the top ten slot on search engines.  
When customers place an order at the shop, they will be informed 
via email, their product will be shipped in 4-6 weeks.  While the 
customer is waiting for their product, the shop owners continue to 
collect credit card numbers.  At this point there are three 
possible scenarios: 

 
15
   
     The first is that the product is simply not shipped and the 
credit card is never charged.  The second is the product is not 
shipped but the credit card is charged.  In the third scenario, 
the product is shipped and the customer is happy.  The details of 
this scheme will be covered in depth later in the paper but, in 
all three scenarios it should be noted, the hackers and carders 
received legitimate credit card numbers with full information. 
 
Intrusions - The method of obtaining credit cards that has 
received the most press is Intrusion.  The hacker simply gains 
unauthorized access to a system and steals the database.  The 
systems targeted by hackers include the following: 
  
• Online shops running shopping card programs 
• E-Commerce payment solution sites which handle online orders 
for online shops 
• Credit Card processing companies such as Authorize.net, 
creditcards.com and CCBill.com 
• Online monetary exchange sites where a person can purchase 
monetary units using credit cards 
• Online Casinos 
• Pornographic websites (victim often do not notify Law 
Enforcement of intrusions) 
• Banks and Financial institutions 
 
     Each of these targets will have credit card information 
stored in some variation.  Some will include full information 
including CVV2 numbers while others will simply store the credit 
card number and expiration date. 
 
 
Identity Theft - This method is labor and time intensive but, once 
the credit card is obtained, the card is valid and often has a 
high credit limit.  Using stolen identities, the carder simply 
applies for a credit card.  How the identities are obtained range 
from simply web searches to buying access to ChoicePoint or 
Lexus/Nexus gaining data from their databases. 
 
     This scheme will also be covered more in depth later in this 
paper. 
 
Social Engineering (SE) - By far the most low-tech method of 
obtaining information, the hackers and carders will simply try to 
get the individuals to provide the information.  This is done 
through telephone calls, faxes or email.  A very common SE method 

 
16
is the email sent to particular customers stating there is some 
issue with their account.  The customer is asked to log on using 
the link contained in the email.  Once the customer logs on, all 
the information they input into the web site is collected for use 
by the hacker.  When the individual selects the submit button on 
the web page, a message stating some computer glitch appears and 
the customer is asked to select the continue button which will re-
direct the customer to the legitimate site and the customer re-
enters their information.  This time, the proper site accepts 
whichever change the individual makes, and the customer has 
unknowingly provided the hacker/carder with full account 
information.   
 
     This method has been reportedly used for gathering email, 
Paypal, bank and credit card account information. 
The Schemes 
 
     Each hacking and carding group try to develop their own 
original scheme to make money from the stolen data however, there 
are several primary schemes for converting stolen data into cash 
or product upon which all the others are based. Below, the primary 
schemes and a few widely used variations are detailed.  It is 
important to note, the variations are only limited by the 
imagination and knowledge of the subjects. 
 
Sell - The easiest and quickest method to make money from stolen 
cards is to simply sell them online.  The sale of card data is 
called a “dump” in which the hacker/carder offers the data for 
trade or sale, often track 1 and 2.  The going rate online is 
approximately $.35-$.50 for credit card numbers and expiration 
dates.  Cards with full subscriber information and CVV2 numbers 
range in price from $2.00 to $4.50.  Also cards are sold based on 
their verified credit line i.e., $100 for a card with an available 
credit line of $10,000. 
 
Auction Fraud - Also an incredibly easy scheme, auction fraud has 
been somewhat limited by the establishment of online escrow 
companies.  But note, fake online auction companies can easily be 
created as well.  In this scheme, the subject simply posts a fake 
auction item and sells it to the highest bidder.  The buyer sends 
the seller money or a credit card number but never receives the 
product. 
   
     A couple variations of this scheme are as follows: 
 

 
17
A. The hacker/carder uses the stolen credit card to make 
purchases of auction items.  This can be done on a person-to-
person sale or through the use of an escrow account.  If an 
escrow account is involved, the hacker/carder will either 
open an escrow account based on the stolen information or 
will steal an escrow account and use whatever funds are in 
the account to make purchases.  The purchases will be shipped 
to a drop and picked up later by either the subject or his 
associate to be re-packaged and shipped elsewhere, usually 
overseas.  The use of a drop and an associate is called a 
trans-shipper.  How trans-shippers are obtained is discussed 
later. 
 
B. The second variation is more sophisticated and forces the 
escrow account to serve as a money laundering conduits.  The 
hacker/carder will open several escrow accounts, one based on 
a bank account controlled by the hacker/carder and the others 
based on stolen credit card or bank account information.  
Often times neither account is in the subject’s true name.   
 
     The real account is used to post numerous online auctions.  
The auctions take place for a limited period of time and the 
hacker wins his own auctions using one of the fraudulent accounts.  
This fraudulent account is then used to pay the escrow company.  
The seller informs the escrow account the product has been sent, 
the buyer states he received the product and instructs the escrow 
company to release the funds.  The funds are transferred to the 
real escrow account from which they are immediately withdrawn and 
transferred to a bank account or withdrawn via an ATM.  At no time 
during the transaction did any product change hands.  All the 
money was transferred via the escrow company thus, in 30-days when 
the card holders whose cards were used for the fraudulent accounts 
file chargebacks, the chargeback is sent to the escrow company. 
   
Fraudulent Purchases - This scheme is also simple in that the 
hacker/carder simply makes a purchase online using the stolen 
credit card.  The difficulty for this scheme is that merchants 
often will not ship overseas therefore, the subjects need an 
address within the U.S. to which to ship the product. 
 
     On Fraudulent Purchases the hacker/carders need a drop, a 
person or location to send the packages without identifying 
themselves.  Drops can be obtained in various ways.  
 
A. The most common is to post on a hacker/carder forum the need 
of a partner and establish a working relationship with 
whoever answers the postings. 

 
18
   
B. Drops can also be obtained by posting a job offer on 
Hotjobs.com or Monster.com for an individual to work at home.  
Individuals will be paid via Western Union to accept and 
repackage items and send them overseas.  A skilled Social 
Engineer can convince people of the legality of accepting 
packages in this method and the newly hired employee is 
unaware they are facilitating a crime. 
    
When it comes to paying these employees, the hackers/carders 
vary as well.  Many will simply not pay their employees and 
leave them “holding the bag” when complaints are filed.  
Others choose to pay their employees through Western Union.  
Still others act as if they are paying the employee by 
sending them a counterfeit check.  The checks will be drawn 
for substantially higher amounts then are owed the new 
employee.  When the employee comments regarding the value of 
the check, the employer states it was an oversight and asks 
the employee to simply wire the employer the remaining funds 
after the subtraction of the monies owed the employee plus a 
bonus for being honest.  The employee sends the wire transfer 
overseas and two to three days later finds out the check is 
counterfeit.  The employee is not only out their salary but 
additionally the amount wired overseas. 
 
B. The third variation is called COB (change of billing).  Most 
credit card companies allow their customers online access to 
their account.  With this online access, the customer can 
change billing addresses; telephone numbers, passwords and so 
on.  The intriguing aspect is that most people do not 
activate their online access.  When a hacker/carder steals a 
credit card with full information, they can then go online 
and change the billing address to match that of one of the 
drops they control.  The COB is extremely useful when the 
company the items are being purchased from, will only ship to 
the billing address.  
   
C. If the drop is worried about having the packages shipped to 
their address, P.O. boxes are used and an ingenious method is 
to send the packages to vacant homes.  An individual can 
contact a local real estate agent to determine which homes 
are for sale and when the occupants plan on moving out.  
During the brief time the house is vacant, the drop can 
simply pick up the packages from the mailbox of the vacant 
house. 
 

 
19
D. A final variation involves some sophistication, but it limits 
the need for an associate.  When an item is fraudulently 
purchased, the hacker/carder has the package shipped to the 
credit card holder’s real address.  A slow shipment method is 
requested as well as a fax or email of the scanned shipping 
bar code.  When the hacker/carder receives a copy of the 
shipping bar code, they can utilize a bar code scanner to 
read the code.  They then contact the shipping company, 
provide the information contained in the bar code and a 
change of the shipping location.  The new cost for the 
shipment is billed to the defrauded company or can be charged 
to another stolen credit card. 
 
Below is a post by a carder named JediMasterC detailing how 
to card in the real world based on dumps of credit cards obtained 
online or through skimming: 
 
Mon Jul 21, 2003 11:41 am    Post subject: TUTORIAL - Carding with Dumps July 21 
2003    
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
This is dedicated to cumbajonny and other people who watch their backs closely.  
If you're that careful you will probably never be caught. The date in the topic 
will be changed whenever there is an update  
 
Disclaimer  
This document was written for informational purposes only. It was written so 
that credit card companies, banks, merchants, retail stores, and the consumer 
will have a better understanding on how these activities work and how to protect 
themselves. I have never participated in any of the described activities and am 
not suggesting that anyone else should either. All described acts, memories, 
quotes, and ideas are fictional.  
 
Intro  
So, you've heard all kinds of things about carding with dumps and you're 
interested, but you don't know where to start. Look no further than this 
tutorial. Written by JediMasterC for carderplanet.net, this tutorial will tell 
you everything you need to know from beginning to end. Feel free to distribute 
this document, so long I am given credit. I can be contacted on CarderPlanet.  
 
Newbie Warning  
If you are new to credit cards do not even think of doing anything here until 
you have more experience. It may seem easy (and it is), but you must have 
certain mindset. The key to success, at anything in life, is knowledge and the 
ability to apply your knowledge. Anything done in person takes a little more 
than that. It takes presentation. It takes charisma. It takes charm. If you're a 
pimply 16-year-old wearing cut offs and a sleeveless shirt, do you honestly 
think that someone will believe you can afford a $3000 computer system? It's 
possible, if you know how to act and what to say. As a newbie you know nothing 
about the life, how "carding" works, how cards work, etc. Learn everything you 
possibly can before you step out into the real world, and then start small.  
 

 
20
How to start  
You must have some money saved up in order to start in this business (or be 
really good at online carding). I assume you have some sort of transportation, a 
computer, and some brains. Let's take a look at a list of other things you will 
need (all costs are approximate):  
 
Card encoder - Get an MSR206. It is the standard when it comes to encoders. I 
have heard that the AMC-722 works, but it will not last as long and will break. 
There are a few online places that sell the MSR206. I bought mine new with my 
own card and money. Cost: $725 new (around $500 used) Hard to card.  
 
Laptop - You may not need this to get started, but you'll find out quickly that 
it will save a lot of time. If you don't have a laptop you will need to go home 
every time a card dies. I suggest the smallest, lightest laptop possible. Cost: 
$500-$2000, cardable.  
 
Serial to USB Adaptor - Most encoders are serial based (including the MSR206), 
and most small laptops don't have serial ports. Get a USB adaptor to make it 
easier on yourself. Cost: $10-$25, cardable.  
 
Power Inverter - You'll want to power your encoder in your car, and for that 
you'll need a power inverter. Sure, the MSR206 is 12v and you could make an 
adaptor, but where are you going to find the strange connector it uses? You'll 
probably use the power adaptor for other things anyway. For an encoder or laptop 
a small one will do, say 75-100 watts. Cost: $25-$55, cardable.  
 
Credit Card to encode onto - You'll need something to put those dumps on, and 
it's not a blank white card. You'll need to get a card from somewhere. I have 
found a great way to handle this, see below. Cost: $0-$25  
 
Dumps - Duh! You'll need these! There are a few vendors on CarderPlanet, see the 
Vendors forum for a list. Most have minimum orders, and there are different 
types you can choose. Don't worry about a minimum order; you'll make your money 
back quickly. We'll talk about types (Classic, Gold, etc) later. Cost: $200-$500 
to start, much more in the future  
 
Fake ID - While it is not necessary right now, you'll need one when making large 
purchases. I have tried going without one and was never rejected because I 
didn't have it, but it will make things much more smooth. If you have never made 
one before, don't start now. They are easy once you get enough practice, but you 
don't want to be using a really bad one for this. Buy one from a vendor on 
CarderPlanet. More later. Cost: $5 plus equipment and time to make yourself, 
$75-$150 to buy.  
 
These are the things I suggest you have when starting. While you can go without 
a laptop, power inverter, and fake ID if you are very short on funds, I suggest 
you save up and start correctly. Once you start and get the hang of it, here are 
a few things I suggest you get while out on a mission:  
 
Anon cell phone - Use to check dumps with phone merchant.  
Extra wallet - Keep the fake stuff and your real stuff separate.  
Case for laptop/encoder - I suggest using a briefcase to carry them. All you 
have to do is pop it open, hook a few cables up, and go. You won't have to dig 
in a bag to pull everything out.  
 
Where can I get a card to use?  

 
21
So, you want to know where you can get a credit card to use for encoding. Don't 
use a stolen card!! I cannot say that enough. At some time the card will get 
typed in or phoned in, and it will come back as stolen. Do not use your own 
card, or they will have your name and info. If you were thinking of using your 
own card stop reading this right now, close your web browser, and get back to a 
real job. You are not cut out for this and you WILL get caught. Now, back to 
where you CAN get a card. There are a few options. I like prepaid cards. 
Depending on where you live, you can get prepaid credit cards out of a machine, 
at a mall, or at a convenience store. Simon Malls (www.simon.com) have gift 
cards that are prepaid Visa cards. There are many banks that have them now too. 
If you can't find a place to buy one in person, you can get a drop and order 
one. Try www.mymccard.com, www.storedvalue.aaa.com, or some other similar 
product. If you have to order one that will have a name printed on it, make sure 
it's the same as your ID. Do not order one to your house; do not use your own 
card to order it, etc. If you were thinking of doing that quit now before you 
get caught. I also like to have two cards with me, in case the one I'm using 
gets declined. That way I can just say "Let me try my other card" and hand them 
that one, instead of saying, "Oh, I'll have to come back later".  
 
Kinds of dumps  
So, what kind of dump should you use? It all depends on what you will be buying. 
If you plan on buying a lot of lower priced things (less than $500), go with 
Classic. They are the cheapest, but have the lowest limits. You can eat through 
a list of classic cards very quickly. If you plan on making larger purchases go 
with gold, platinum, or signature. I stick to Visa/Mastercard. Many stores 
require the CVN of an Amex card (number printed on front), and it will look 
strange when the computer says you used an Amex and you're holding a 
Visa/Mastercard.  
 
Track 2 or 1 and 2?  
Again, this depends on where you will be using it. Most places use both tracks. 
See list below for places that use only track 2. Remember, stores are always 
updating their systems so this could change at any time. I suggest always using 
both, although sometimes you can get very good deals on dumps with only track 2.  
 
I'm ready, now what?  
So you have everything you need, or do you? How about software for your encoder? 
I use TheJerm's MSR206 program. You can download it at 
http://www.thejerm.0catch.com/. It's easy and it works great.  
 
Now, before you encode your card you have to change the name. Put the name on it 
from your fake ID. If you look at the dump you'll see something like this:  
 
B41111111111111111111^SMITH/JOHN^030710100000000000000000000  
41111111111111111111=0307101000000000000000000000  
 
It's not hard to figure out where the name goes. The numbers right after the 
name in track one and right after the = in track two is the exp date in YYMM 
format. This card would expire July 2003. The rest is the bank data, which we 
won't get into here.  
 
So, change the name and encode. Now you're physically ready. Are you mentally 
ready?  
 
Prepare your mind  
You ARE the person on your ID. This is YOUR credit card. You are buying 
something you saved for. It is YOUR money you are spending.  

 
22
 
These are things you should be thinking. The more you believe this the easier it 
will be. If anyone ever questions you react like they are crazy.  
 
What do you mean? This is my card! Do you want to see my ID? I've been saving a 
long time for this! Fine, I'll spend my money at another store!  
 
Always think about any possible situation. You will have cards declined 
frequently. I like to make the nice person at the register think it may be 
declined before I even use it. I'll say something like "Ohhh, I didn't think it 
was that much. I hope I have enough left to buy it!" They will expect it to be 
declined and think nothing of it if it is. If it goes through they will smile 
and laugh. Sometimes I won't say anything beforehand. If it gets declined I'll 
make up some excuse like "I must be over my daily limit" or "My payment must not 
have gone through." Always think about what to say before you have to say it.  
 
Another thing to remember: DON'T PANIC! DON'T PANIC! DON'T PANIC! Even when 
things seem to be going wrong keep your cool. Cashiers always think there is 
something wrong with the system, or that there is a problem with the bank, etc. 
As long as the card you have encoded the dump onto isn't stolen you won't have 
any problems. Even when the computer tells them to pick the card up cashiers 
never do it. Just say you'll take the card and call the bank and work it out. 
They will hand it right back to you. 
_________________ 
 
Posted: Fri Jul 25, 2003 12:54 am    Post subject: Continued...    
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
Shop shop shop!  
Now go shopping! Start small and work your way up. I almost always go to a 
grocery store first; just to make sure the dump is working 100%. This is really 
unnecessary, but you have to eat anyway.  Almost all grocery stores have self-
swipe card readers that will help you get comfortable. Make sure you sign the 
name on the card and not your real name! I would suggest that you don't go to 
gas stations. While it seems like an easy way to check the card and everyone 
always needs gas, there are always tons of cameras there. The chances of them 
linking the card to you and to your car are very low, but there is a chance. 
Spend the $20 and just make it back at the next store you go to! ALWAYS MAKE 
SURE TO PARK FAR AWAY FROM ANY CAMERAS! You don't want your plates caught on the 
security camera! Some people put fake plates on their car. Better to be safe 
than sorry!  
 
Where should I shop?  
This all depends on where you live what you want to buy. Always scout out a new 
store before shopping. Why? Because there is one thing that can catch you: the 
last 4 digits of the card. Some stores will swipe your card and then type in the 
last 4 digits embossed on the front of the real card. If they don't match then 
there is a problem. It's easy enough to spot. Watch the cashier swipe a card. If 
they look at it and then type stuff in, they are probably doing what I just 
described. So, which stores check and which don't? Here's a list of stores I 
have found that do and do not check. This is a brief list off of the top of my 
head, I will try to improve it frequently. Always scout them out before you go 
there, since stores change their policies frequently.  
 
Stores that DO NOT type them in:  
 

 
23
Abercrombie & Fitch  
Aeropostale  
Almost every clothing store*  
American Eagle  
Barnes and Noble  
Bose Factory Store/Showroom  
Burlington Coat Factory  
Eddie Bauer  
Every gas station (pay at pump)*  
Every grocery store I have ever been to (many self swipe)  
Foot Locker  
FYE  
Gap  
Home Depot (self swipe)  
JCPenny  
Kauffman's  
Kmart (self swipe)  
Lowe's (self swipe)  
Office Depot  
Old Navy  
Sears  
Spencer Gifts  
Staples*  
Target (self swipe, sometimes check sig)  
Toy Works  
Toys R Us  
Walden Books  
Walmart (self swipe but most check sig)  
 
Restaurants:  
Applebee's  
Olive Garden  
Pizza Hut  
Many other large chains  
 
*There is only one clothing store I have gone to that typed them in. It was an 
outlet store, but I do not remember the name. It has been reported that in some 
areas Staples types them in. Some gas stations ask for your billing zip code.  
 
Stores that DO type them in (AVOID!):  
 
Circuit City  
Best Buy  
CompUSA  
OfficeMax  
 
Remember, always scout out the store before shopping.  
 
DO NOT SH** WHERE YOU LIVE! Don't shop at home, especially if you live in a 
small town. If you're in a city it may be alright, just don't go to the places 
frequently shop with your own card or money. Some people say you should never go 
to the same place twice. I say this is BS. I have been to some places 50 times 
without any problems. The store don't really care, they get to keep the money. 
Most of the time the stores don't even find out about it. Just make sure you are 
a typical customer that doesn't stick out. Wear plain, normal clothing, Smile, 
be polite, and you should have no problems. You want to be able to go to the 

 
24
same place a few times a week without being recognized. Only then are you truly 
a successful confidence man.  
 
What now?  
So now you know how to buy things. The best way to make money is to sell items 
on Ebay that are in high demand. You can do your own research into this.  
 
Another Option  
Another option that was not covered here is buying or making fake cards. There 
are a few vendors on CarderPlanet that sell them, but making them is a whole 
other topic. This may be a safer route for you to explore. You would not need to 
buy any special equipment, but if a card goes bad before you use it you're 
usually stuck (some vendors replace them).  
 
 
 
 
Conclusion  
This should have given you an overview of how to carry out one of the most 
profitable and least dangerous methods of carding. You can easily live for free, 
have a steady income, and have fun.  
 
I am always trying to improve everything about myself, including this document. Check 
back to http://forum.carderplanet.net frequently for updates. 
 
This post was provided as a tutorial and had numerous post 
clarifying details of the scam as replies to the original post.  
This scheme should be considered when conducting a search of a 
known carder.  It is likely the credit card in his/her possession 
may be coded with the card number of a dump rather than the number 
embossed on the front of the card.  
 
Merchant Account - One of the more popular schemes is Merchant 
Account fraud.  In this scheme, the hacker steals the credit card 
database of one company and the merchant account of a second. The 
carder charges an amount on each card to the merchant account.  
Once the charges have cleared, approximately one hour later, the 
carder issues a refund from the merchant account for the total 
amount charged on the cards to the hacker controlled debit card 
account overseas.  A “drop” is then used to retrieve the stolen 
money from the ATM using the hackers’ debit card and the money is 
forwarded via Western Union, Money Gram or Webmoney to the hacker. 
  
Often times the money is bounced through several bank 
accounts before reaching the hacker/carder or the hacker/carder 
will forego the use of a drop and pick up the money themselves.  
The victim is not aware of the charges and the refund until their 
merchant account is reconciled, usually at the end of the month.  
When the card members notice the unauthorized charges on their 
cards, they request the charges be canceled.  This results in a 

 
25
charge back to the merchant for the cost of the charge as well as 
a fine for bad charges. 
 
Western Union/Money Gram/Egold - This scheme is similar to 
fraudulent purchases however, the purchase is credits, which can 
be translated into cash or traded for goods.  Basically the 
hacker/carder uses the stolen credit card as collateral for online 
monetary units such as money orders, Egold dollars or Webmoney 
dollars.  The use of these monetary mediums is expensive in terms 
of fees and percentages but, since the money is stolen in the 
first place, hackers/carders do not complain about the charges. 
   
     A hacker/carder can use these online dollars to purchase 
money orders at Western Union and have the money orders forwarded 
to companies to pay for goods and services.  A notable purchase 
through money orders is the monthly payment for maintenance of 
websites associated with hacking or carding. 
 
Bank Attacks - Bank account information can be used for opening 
escrow accounts, online brokerage accounts (i.e., E*trade, Datek 
or Ameritrade) or initiating wire transfers.  Currently, most 
banks with online presence do not allow wire transfers online for 
the regular customer.  However, brokerage accounts and corporate 
accounts issue credit cards and do allow online wire transfer 
requests.  These accounts often have a significant credit limit or 
bank balance.  These are the targets of the truly financially 
motivated hackers and their organized crime backers. 
   
     In order to cause a wire transfer to travel overseas, the 
hackers will have to compromise the SWIFT transfer system.  It has 
been reported online, several hackers have found a way to 
compromise the system but no reported cases have been found.  
 
     For wire transfers in the United States, the Automated 
Clearinghouse (ACH) network is used.  A hacker who has researched 
the ACH system could cause an ACH re-route to occur thus, having 
money deposited into a hacker controlled bank account which could 
be access online or through International ATM machines. 
   
     Most companies allow and encourage the use of direct deposit 
for paychecks and accounts receivable transactions.  
These transactions utilize the ACH network.  If the company uses 
an outside payroll company or accounting firm they very likely use 
an outside company to handle all ACH transfers.  These ACH 
transfer companies are the targets for hackers.  If a hacker can 
gain access to an ACH processing company, they can change the 
database to reflect a new bank account for a client.  This will 

 
26
cause all transfers normally sent to the victim’s bank account to 
be re-routed to the new bank account controlled by the 
hacker/carder.  If the new account is a corporate account, the 
bank has 72 hours to clear the transaction.  After 72 hours, any 
discrepancies are the responsibility of the bank.  In essence, a 
re-route of an ACH transfer for one week could bankrupt a company. 
   
Identity Theft - When a hacker/carder steals personal data from 
any location, this information can be used to create fake id’s, 
known as novelty id’s to hackers, credit cards, bank accounts, 
loans and numerous other fraudulent media.  If a hacker obtains a 
Social Security Number (SSN), they can use that information to 
apply for credit cards online in the real name of the SSN holder.  
They can also open bank accounts online at sites such as 
NetBank.com.  These bank accounts will have credit cards or debit 
charges associated with them which can be sent via a re-mailer, 
trans-shipper or U.S. based associate to the hacker/carder’s 
location. 
 
     A notable trend has been the use of stolen credit cards to 
buy access to information sites such as ConsumerInfo, ChoicePoint 
or Lexus/Nexus.  From these sites the hackers/carders can identify 
addresses and telephone numbers for cardholders whose cards were 
stolen but the full cardholder information was not obtained.  
These sites and the information provided by them have enabled 
hackers/carders to commit identity theft at will. 
 
Fake Sites - Similar to the fake store sites detailed above, 
hackers/carder will create fake auction, escrow and bank sites.  
As stated above the three possibilities for these shops are: the 
product is not shipped and the card is not charged, the product is 
not shipped and the card is charged or the product is shipped and 
the card is charged. 
 
     If the product is not shipped and the card is not charged, 
the hacker is simply collecting cards to use later.  Often times 
the customer will forget about the purchase or will not worry 
about the lack of receipt because their card was never charged. 
 
     If the product is not shipped and the card is charged, the 
hacker was just stealing the money and will have to re-establish 
the fake site under a different name after approximately 6 weeks.  
The customer will often complain in these cases resulting in a 
chargeback to the fake sites merchant account.  When the 
chargeback is not paid, the merchant account will be shut down and 
the hacker will start afresh. 
 

 
27
     If the product is sent and the card is charged, then the 
hackers have coupled their schemes.  Meaning they are using one of 
the other schemes to obtain products to then sell on their site.  
The stolen goods will be shipped to the unsuspecting customer per 
the deal, but the hacker/carder will now have the customer’s 
credit card.  If the hacker/carder is patient and waits three to 
six months before making a charge, it will be nearly impossible 
for the customer to determine from which site the card was stolen.  
The added bonus is, if the original retailer of the re-sold goods 
reported the serial numbers of the equipment as stolen, when the 
new customer tries to register the equipment, it will red-flag the 
customer.  By the time the transactions are sorted out, the 
hackers/carders and their site will be long gone with the money 
from the sale of stolen merchandise. 
 
 
Extortion – When all other methods have been exhausted, many of 
which have been successful, hackers and carders will turn to basic 
extortion to obtain money.  The most common extortion is phrased 
similar to the following: 
 
 
“Hello, I have found holes in your system, for $2000 dollars 
I will fix the holes and make sure no other hackers gain access to 
your system.  I would hate to have to tell your customers about 
you lack of security.” 
 
 
This threat usually comes in the form of an email or fax.  If 
the victim does not respond, a second email and/or will be sent 
stating if the victim does not pay, the extortionist will be 
forced to post the stolen information on the Internet. 
 
 
The interesting thing about extortion is often two or more 
members of the group responsible for the intrusion and theft will 
try to extort the same company independently. This results in 
confusion for the victim and the extortionist.  
 
DDOS – Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) attacks are not often 
considered part of profit making but recent trends show the use of 
DDOS attacks are being used in association with extortion.  Once 
hackers have created a BotNet through the use of tainted 
(files/programs containing a virus/worm payload as well as IRC 
client with instruction to call home periodically) viruses, file 
sharing downloads (warez, mp3s, etc.) or straight hacking, DDOS 
attacks will be launched knocking particular sites offline for 
days at a time.  (Those sites on the same network as the targeted 
site will suffer a loss of service as well making them collateral 
damage and future extortion victims.)  Victims will often pay 

 
28
extortionists the requested sum rather than suffer the loss of 
business.  Some enterprising individuals, known as botmasters, who 
have successfully build large botnets, will hire themselves out.  
They are in essence cyber mercenaries willing to DDOS any and all 
sites if the price is right.   
 
Collecting the Money 
 
 
Once all the fraud is committed and the profits have been 
reaped, the hackers and carders need to convert the money to cash.  
The most common request is to have the money wired via Western 
Union (WU).  For a small percent of the profit, WU clerks in 
Eastern Europe will look the other way if the recipients’ Id does 
not match the name of the individual retrieving the cash.  If a 
passphrase is used, there is no need for an Id.  Finally, WU 
transfers can be used to fund ATM cards, which then require no 
Id’s and no personal contact to obtain the funds. 
 
All of the schemes allow the hackers and carders to convert 
the money into electronic credit that must be sent to a bank 
account or e-currency repository.  These repositories can be as 
simple as an online bank account such as NetBank and INGDirect or 
normal bank accounts at banks that have less stringent banking 
requirements, i.e., off shore banks in Latvia, the Republic of 
Nauru or Cyprus. 
   
 
The problem with these methods is the paper trail associated 
with keeping money in a bank. 
 
 
With the advent of e-currency/online escrow accounts, came 
the advent of e-currency ATM cards, also known as pre-paid 
credit/debit cards.  These cards can be purchased for a small fee 
and funded using any of the e-currencies currently available 
including, EVOCash, Egold, LogixPay, eBullion, GoldMoney, Pecunix 
and NetPay.  The cards are in essence pre-paid ATM cards that are 
funded by sending money to the particular e-currency broker.  The 
cash is then withdrawn at any ATM that accepts the respective ATM 
cards. 
 
 
Providers of prepaid Debit cards or e-Currency ATM cards 
include, SwiftPay, WMcards, Ecount, Wired Plastic, Green Card, 
Citi Cash Card, Eufora, as well cards issued by the e-currency 
companies and hundreds of others.   
 
 
Many enterprising subjects have set themselves up as 
middleman for the carders.  These individuals set up online 

 
29
businesses that handle the money-laundering and stolen property 
sales (“consignment shops”) aspects of the schemes for the 
carders.  The sites will offer bank accounts, debit cards and drop 
addresses to the carders in exchange for a fee.  The carders will 
then have the profits from extortions, Paypal fraud, Auction fraud 
or any of the other schemes deposited into the account or shipped 
to the address.  However, no real bank account will be set up for 
the carders. The site owner will open one bank account and using 
an Excel type spreadsheet, assign accounts to each of his clients.  
When money is deposited into the bank account of the site owner, a 
special denotation will be required indicating into which client 
account the money is to be deposited.  This denotation will mean 
nothing to the legitimate bank at which the site owner’s account 
resides. The site owner will deduct his percentage and denote the 
remaining amount on his spreadsheet as belonging to the specified 
client.  The client can then have this money transferred to a bank 
account, a pre-paid debit card or use the money to purchase e-
currency.  Basically, the site owner has created their own bank 
without the regulations or oversight of a legitimate bank.   
Conclusion 
 
 
An organized use of the above detailed schemes could result 
in the de-stabilization of the banks and the credit card industry 
being victimized.  These schemes have already been attributed to 
the collapse of several businesses and were utilized to finance at 
least one terrorist attack (the Bali bombing).  At a minimum the 
loss, which exceeds $10 billion a year in fraud and damage to 
computer networks, can being blamed for the rise of purchase 
prices to consumers and the rise of interest rates on credit 
cards. 
 
 
 
International financially motivated hackers are talented, 
educated and willing to do anything for money.  They do not fear 
law enforcement because they think they cannot be caught.  They do 
fear the FBI but only if they come to the United States.  They are 
overseas therefore they are invincible.  However, plans are being 
made to work with the respective law enforcement agency in each of 
the countries where hackers and carders have been identified.  The 
intention of these cooperative efforts is to provide law 
enforcement with the proper training to catch the hackers and 
carders, to arrange their prosecution either in their home 
countries or in the U.S. and to obtain copies of their computer 
hard drives for use against additional targets. 
 
 
This cooperation has already worked in Belarus, England, 
Canada and has been requested by Turkey, Ukraine and Russia. 

 
30
 
 
Finally, these hackers/carders offer up information regarding 
hacking and carding freely online.  Thus far, all indications are 
the schemes are being used by loosely connected groups who join 
force for one or two jobs and then part ways.  Given the 
availability of the information and the changing climate of the 
world, in the near future, these attacks/schemes will be operated 
by highly organized groups with various political agendas.  Online 
chatter has begun regarding “big hits” such as attacking various 
countries’ central banks, shutting down systems and bilking large 
corporations for millions of dollars.  All indications are this 
type of crime will continue unfettered if law enforcement does not 
increase our knowledge base and cooperate internationally. 
   
 
Though we will never stop this type of crime, by 
understanding what they are doing and how they are profiting, we 
may be able to limit the criminal’s effectiveness while dissuading 
others from trying to hack and card in the first place. 
  

