

CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY  
& PERSONALITY PROFILING

Solving Crimes With Science:
Forensics
Computer Investigation
Criminal Psychology & Personality Profiling
DNA Analysis
Document Analysis
Entomology & Palynology
Explosives & Arson Investigation
Fingerprints, Bite Marks, Ear Prints
Forensic Anthropology
Forensics in American Culture
Mark & Trace Analysis
Pathology
Solving Crimes With Physics

CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY  
& PERSONALITY PROFILING
Joan Esherick
Mason Crest

Copyright © 2014 by Mason Crest, an imprint of National Highlights, Inc. All rights re-
served. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or any informa-
tion storage and retrieval system, without permission from the publisher.
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
First printing
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Series ISBN: 978-1-4222-2861-6
ISBN: 978-1-4222-2863-0
ebook ISBN: 978-1-4222-8949-5
 The Library of Congress has cataloged the
            hardcopy format(s) as follows:
                Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Esherick, Joan.
  Criminal psychology & personality profiling / Joan Esherick.
       p. cm. —  (Solving crimes with science, forensics)
  Audience: 012.
  Audience: Grades 7 to 8.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-4222-2863-0 (hardcover) — ISBN 978-1-4222-2861-6 (series) — ISBN 978-1-4222-8949-5 
(ebook)
 1.  Criminal psychology—Juvenile literature. 2.  Criminal behavior, Prediction of—Juvenile literature. 
3.  Criminal profilers—Juvenile literature. 4.  Forensic sciences—Juvenile literature.  I. Title. II. Title: 
Criminal psychology and personality profiling.
  HV6080.E795 2014
  614.15—dc23
                                                            2013006932
Produced by Vestal Creative Services.
www.vestalcreative.com
Mason Crest
450 Parkway Drive, Suite D
Broomall, PA  19008
www.masoncrest.com

Contents
	
Introduction	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
6
1. What Is Criminal Psychology?	
	
	
	
	
9
2. The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist	
	
	
25
3. The Profiler	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
45
4. Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History	
	
	
65
5. Crime-Specific Profiling	
	
	
	
	
	
81
6. The Dangers, Temptations, and Limitations 
   of Criminal Psychology	
	
	
	
	
	
97
Glossary	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
104
Further Reading		
	
	
	
	
	
	
105
For More Information	 	
	
	
	
	
	
107
Index	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
109
Picture Credits	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
111
Biographies	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
112

Introduction
	
By Jay A. Siegel, Ph.D.
Director, Forensic and Investigative Sciences Program
Indiana University, Purdue University, Indianapolis
It seems like every day the news brings forth another story about crime in 
the United States. Although the crime rate has been slowly decreasing over 
the past few years (due perhaps in part to the aging of the population), 
crime continues to be a very serious problem. Increasingly, the stories we 
read that involve crimes also mention the role that forensic science plays 
in solving serious crimes. Sensational crimes provide real examples of the 
power of forensic science. In recent years there has been an explosion of 
books, movies, and TV shows devoted to forensic science and crime inves-
tigation. The wondrously successful CSI TV shows have spawned a major 
increase in awareness of and interest in forensic science as a tool for solv-
ing crimes. CSI even has its own syndrome: the “CSI Effect,” wherein jurors 
in real cases expect to hear testimony about science such as fingerprints, 
DNA, and blood spatter because they saw it on TV. 
The unprecedented rise in the public’s interest in forensic science has 
fueled demands by students and parents for more educational programs 

that teach the applications of science to crime. This started in colleges and 
universities but has filtered down to high schools and middle schools. Even 
elementary school students now learn how science is used in the crimi-
nal justice system. Most educators agree that this developing interest in 
forensic science is a good thing. It has provided an excellent opportunity 
to teach students science—and they have fun learning it! Forensic science 
is an ideal vehicle for teaching science for several reasons. It is truly mul-
tidisciplinary; practically every field of science has forensic applications. 
Successful forensic scientists must be good problem solvers and critical 
thinkers. These are critical skills that all students need to develop. 
In all of this rush to implement forensic science courses in secondary 
schools throughout North America, the development of grade-appropriate 
resources that help guide students and teachers is seriously lacking. This 
new series: Solving Crimes With Science: Forensics is important and timely. 
Each book in the series contains a concise, age-appropriate discussion of 
one or more areas of forensic science. 
Students are never too young to begin to learn the principles and ap-
plications of science. Forensic science provides an interesting and informa-
tive way to introduce scientific concepts in a way that grabs and holds the 
students’ attention. Solving Crimes With Science: Forensics promises to be 
an important resource in teaching forensic science to students twelve to 
eighteen years old.


1
What Is Criminal 
Psychology?
I
n Sacramento, California, for no apparent reason, an unknown assailant 
shoots and kills a middle-aged man on the street. Less than a year later, the 
same assailant uses a knife to brutally murder a young pregnant woman in 
her bedroom. Three days later he strikes again, this time killing a thirty-six-year-
old woman, her six-year-old son, and an adult male friend of the family, all in 
the woman’s home. The murderer shoots his victims with a .22 caliber handgun 
or rifle. The killer also kidnaps the woman’s twenty-two-month-old nephew and 
steals the visiting friend’s station wagon, which is later abandoned near the 
crime scene and recovered by authorities.
Police know they have a dangerous criminal on their hands, perhaps a serial 
murderer. They seek outside help to more quickly solve the crime. They hire a 
consultant who provides these clues about the suspect:
Chapter

10
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Psychological profiles of criminals can lead investigators to an arrest.
• If the suspect owns a car, it will be a “wreck, with fast-food wrappers 
in the back, and rust throughout.’’
• He’s a white male; 25 to 27 years old; thin; undernourished in appear-
ance.
• The killer lives near the victims.
• He’s a loner, lives alone, and is unemployed.
• He has a history of mental illness.
• His home will be “slovenly and unkempt.”
• He lives within a half-mile to a mile of the abandoned station wagon.
• Before he started killing, this man probably burglarized homes near 
the murder sites.

11
What Is Criminal Psychology?
Armed with this information, police canvas the area within a half-
mile radius of the abandoned stolen car, interviewing the hundreds of 
people who live there. One woman recalls speaking to a man whose 
appearance shocked her: “disheveled, cadaverously thin, bloody sweat-
shirt, yellowed crust around his mouth, sunken eyes.” Because she knew 
the man years earlier in high school, she is able to name him: Richard 
Trenton Chase.
Just as the consultant suggested, Chase’s apartment is located less 
than a block from the abandoned stolen car. His vehicle, a truck, is 
parked nearby. Inside the beat-up old truck, again as the consultant had 
predicted, police find rags, trash, beer cans, empty milk cartons, and 
discarded newspapers. The vehicle is in poor condition. They also find 
a twelve-inch (30-centimeter) butcher knife and boots spattered with 
blood. 
Again consistent with the consultant’s information, the suspect’s apart-
ment is a complete mess. Investigators also find evidence of horrific activi-
ties there: three food blenders with blood in them, bloody clothing, news-
paper articles about the first killing, and a refrigerator containing dishes 
with human remains. 
Police arrest Richard Trenton Chase, who is later convicted of six mur-
ders and sentenced to die in California’s gas chamber. He commits suicide 
in his death-row cell before he can be executed.
These events occurred in 1980. The case required help beyond the bounds 
of typical law enforcement. Investigators used profiling, one aspect of crim-
inal psychology, to solve the case.

12
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
CASE STUDY: 
A PSYCHIC DETECTIVE
In Staunton, Virginia, a masked rapist assaults five women and is 
suspected of assaulting several more in the area. With no physi-
cal descriptions to help them identify the perpetrator, police can 
do little to solve the crimes. Without leads or any new clues, they 
aren’t sure where to turn. Then a consultant provides this informa-
tion about the rapist:
•	 He has a scar on his leg.
•	 He is skilled with mechanical things.
•	 He apologizes to his victims.
•	 People view him as a “nice guy.”
•	 He wears a green uniform.
•	 He’s been in prison before.
•	 He lives near a theater in a brick building at the bottom of a hill.
•	 He drives a truck that “goes round and round.”
The Staunton Police Department’s consultant then accurately de-
scribes how the rapist entered the crime scenes and where the 
rapist waited for his victims. She provides this information without 
the police giving her any details of the crimes.
In a later investigation of another crime, police arrest a suspect 
whose description bears an uncanny resemblance to the informa-

13
What Is Criminal Psychology?
tion earlier provided by the consultant about the serial rapist. Be-
cause of the similarities between the man they have in custody and 
the consultant’s description, police question him about the rapes. 
The man, James B. Robinson, eventually confesses to the sexual 
assaults.
The consultant’s information is amazingly on target: Robinson 
drives a cement truck for a living (a truck with a revolving mixer that 
“goes round and round”); his leg is scarred; he claims to feel badly 
about the attacks and, indeed, apologized to his victims; he lives 
across the street from the Dixie Theater in a brick apartment build-
ing at the base of a steep hill; and he has a prison record.
Under a plea-bargain agreement, Robinson pleads guilty to five 
rapes and sixteen other felonies and is sentenced to twenty-one 
concurrent twenty-year prison sentences.
Although this case might sound like the work of a profiler, it’s 
not. The consultant in this case was a psychic detective. Psychic 
detectives generally have little or no training in crime science, law 
enforcement, psychiatry, or psychology. They use what they call 
their “psychic abilities” to “sense” things about a crime victim or 
perpetrator. They rely on feelings, instincts, and visions to solve 
crimes. Psychic detectives describe their “gifts” as supernatural, 
and most law enforcement officers cannot explain how these seers 
do what they seem to do. But they are not profilers or criminal psy-
chologists, and little or no science or education is involved.

14
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminal Psychology: 
Not What You Think
When the average person hears the terms “criminal psychology” and “pro-
filing,” he imagines several things. First, he often assumes these words 
refer to the same people, jobs, or procedures. They do not. He might think 
criminal psychologists and profilers identify unknown suspects by name. 
They don’t. They can’t.
Much common understanding of the world of criminal psychology 
comes from what is portrayed in print media or on television. Shows like 
NBC’s Profiler (1996–2000), CBS’s CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2000–), 
and NBC’s Medium (2005–2011), though entertaining, blur the lines be-
tween fact and fantasy. 
Consider the late 1990s hit series Profiler, for example. The main char-
acter in this investigative crime drama was Dr. Samantha Waters, played 
by Ally Walker. Media trailers and reviews alternately described her as a 
“forensic psychologist” or a “psychic detective.” Which was she? Or was 
she both? Weekly episodes portrayed the investigator as a scientist who 
used physical evidence and laboratory methods, along with her powers of 
observation, her understanding of criminal psychology, and the graphic su-
pernatural visions that appeared in her mind throughout the show to catch 
criminals. She acted as a criminal investigator, psychologist, and psychic. 
For this television program and others like it, science and the supernatural 
went hand in hand.
Real-world criminal psychology is very different. When it comes to 
studying and solving crime, authentic criminal psychologists and profilers 
are very different entities. Here’s how they differ:

15
What Is Criminal Psychology?
Profiles outline a criminal’s general traits and how that criminal might act.
• Criminal psychologists study the minds and behaviors of criminals 
and others associated with crime in order to understand how and 
why they operate the way they do and to identify certain patterns 
of behavior. These professionals usually earn advanced degrees in 
psychology, psychiatry, criminology, or law enforcement, and they 
base much of their work on experience, interviews, and firsthand 
observance of people who commit and are affected by crime.

16
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminal psychology is a tool investigators can use to help identify a suspect. 
It can shed light on the criminal mind.
• Profilers are criminal psychologists who study hard facts and  
targeted information about specific criminals and their crime scenes 
and then summarize what they discover into general behavioral traits, 
patterns, and characteristics that fit the known facts. Based on this 
information, they develop a partial description of how the suspect 
would most likely act, what his personality would most likely be like, 
and what his past might have involved according to the behavior he 
displays in the crimes. Profilers are only one kind of criminal psy-
chologist; there are many more.
In the scenario that opened this chapter, the Sacramento Police Depart-
ment called in behavioral scientist Robert Ressler, the founder and former 

17
What Is Criminal Psychology?
Fast Fact
In the sixteenth century and for hundreds of years after, physicians 
and law enforcement officials believed that a person’s physical traits 
(forehead, mouth, eyes, teeth, nose, and hair) revealed whether he 
had a criminal nature. This practice was called physiognomy.
director of the FBI’s Violent Criminal Apprehension Program. As a highly 
educated expert on serial killers and sexual homicides, he was able to accu-
rately profile the offender based on his study of the crime scenes, the nature 
of the crimes, and his studies of the criminal mind and other criminals.
Criminal Psychology:  
Relatively New
Though recent interest in forensic sciences (any science used for the pur-
pose of law) has sparked public interest in the workings of a criminal mind, 
the field of study called criminal psychology has been around for a long 
time. In fact, one textbook still used today, Criminal Psychology: A Manual 
for Judges, Practitioners, and Students, was written by Hans Gross and 
originally published in 1911.
Even though philosophers began using the term “psychology” in the 
seventeenth century to describe how the mind influenced behavior, it wasn’t 
until the twentieth century that most people who studied crime looked 

18
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
An 1895 Listing of Criminals’ Physical Traits
Nineteenth-century Italian professor of forensic medicine Cesare 
Lombroso felt he could identify criminals by their physical charac-
teristics. After studying over 6,000 convicted criminals, he deter-
mined the following:
•	 Assassins have prominent jaws, widely separated cheek-
bones, thick dark hair, and pale skin.
•	 Assailants have rounded skulls, wide foreheads, and long 
hands.
•	 Thieves have abnormal skull sizes, thick hair, and full beards.
•	 Rapists have short hands, narrow foreheads, and abnormal 
noses.
•	 Arsonists have long arms and legs, small heads, and are un-
derweight.
•	 Pickpockets are tall with long hands, dark hair, and scanty 
beards.
Recent research doesn’t back up Lombroso’s findings!
for reasons beyond the physical or spiritual to explain criminal behavior. 
As understanding of the mind and its workings grew in the early 1900s, 
criminologists began to realize that criminal behavior finds its source not in 
physical abnormalities or spiritual influences, but rather in the mind.
As its name implies, criminal psychology examines the minds, attitudes, 
and actions of people who commit crimes, their victims, witnesses to crimes, 

19
What Is Criminal Psychology?
Criminal psychologists attempt to see beyond the mask a criminal wears.
and people in law enforcement. Criminal psychologists study people who 
commit or are impacted by crimes to understand what makes them behave 
as they do. As Gross defines it, criminal psychology is a “pragmatic ap-
plied psychology [that deals] with all states of mind that might possibly be 
involved in the determination and judgment of crime.”
To achieve this level of understanding, criminal psychologists study 
several things about people: general psychology (the study of the mind 
and behavior of individuals and how they relate to others); relationships 
and how they influence the mind and behavior; the dynamics of people’s 
pasts and their influences today; and people’s mannerisms, intellectual  
processes, intelligence, emotions, and memories. Criminal psychologists 
also study other topics and issues beyond the individual: law enforce-
ment behaviors, how interviews are handled, how suspects are questioned,  

20
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
The Mad Bomber
Between 1940 and 1956 an unknown assailant left over fifty bombs 
in public places all over New York City. Called the “Mad Bomber,” 
the offender wrote letters to newspapers describing his reasons 
for terrorizing the city, but he eluded police for sixteen years un-
til detectives consulted Dr. James A. Brussels, a psychiatrist who 
worked extensively with criminals.
 After studying the evidence, including the contents of letters the 
bomber had sent, Brussels described the criminal: “Single man be-
tween 40 and 50 years old, introvert. Unsocial, but not antisocial. 
Skilled mechanic. . . . Moral. Honest. Not interested in women. High 
school graduate. Expert in civil or military [law]. Religious. . . . Pres-
ent or former Consolidated Edison [a New York City utility company] 
worker. Probable case of progressive paranoia.”
The psychiatrist also told police the man they were looking for 
would be well built and cleanly shaved, would live with an older 
female relative, probably in Connecticut, and would wear neatly 
buttoned double-breasted suits.
When the Mad Bomber, George Metesky, was finally arrested, 
Brussels’s description matched him almost perfectly: he lived in 
Connecticut with his two elderly half-sisters; he was middle-aged 
and single; he was a solidly built, well-groomed, clean-shaven man; 
he had once worked as a skilled laborer for Consolidated Edison; 
and when police brought him in, he wore a double-breasted suit, 
neatly buttoned.

21
What Is Criminal Psychology?
courtroom dynamics, the stressors involved in witnessing or giving tes-
timony about crime, communication styles, gender influences, the art of 
persuasion, and a host of other factors that can influence how a person acts 
in a police interrogation room or courtroom either as witness or suspected 
offender.
All these topics fall under the broad category of behavioral sciences. 
These aren’t objective sciences in the way mathematics or chemistry are; 
they are subjective sciences, meaning they depend more on interpretation, 
observation, opinion, and perception than on formulas, equations, or physi-
cal laws.
No medical, mathematical, or scientific formula exists to determine that 
a person will act a certain way—not the way medical tests for diabetes can 
determine that the body will handle sugars in a certain way. But thousands 
of hours of observations about people and how they behave can help crimi-
nal psychologists hypothesize what a person will most likely do in certain 
circumstances or how an individual will most likely act as a result of certain 
experiences. Criminal psychologists cannot guarantee outcomes the way a 
mathematician can guarantee that two plus two will always equal four. But 
because human behavior is somewhat predictable, criminal psychologists 
can deal in likelihoods. Take serial killers, for example.
Serial Killers:  
An Example of How Criminal 
Psychology Works
No definitive measure exists today that will determine if someone will be-
come a serial killer. But after studying hundreds of serial killers (their his-

22
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Bed wetting during childhood is a common symptom in serial killers.
tories, their childhoods, and their responses to interview questions over 
decades of time), criminal psychologists have learned that serial killers 
have certain things in common: in the United States and Canada they 
tend to be single, Caucasian males; they usually have above-average IQs; 
despite their intelligence, most did not do well in school; most come from 
deeply troubled families; and most show signs of psychiatric problems 
from very young ages. In fact, criminal psychologists and mental health of-
ficials have come up with three key warning signs, something they call the 
psychopathological triad, that virtually all serial killers interviewed held in 
common as children: they tended to wet their beds until late in childhood, 
they liked to set fires, and they enjoyed torturing small animals.
While not every child who experiences enuresis (bedwetting), pyroma-
nia (fire-starting), and precocious sadism (childhood delight in torturing 
animals) grows up to become a serial killer, children who demonstrate 

23
What Is Criminal Psychology?
these traits are more likely than someone without those characteristics to 
do so. This psychopathological triad may not expose a serial killer the way 
X-rays reveal a broken bone, but it does give criminal psychologists and 
law enforcement officials a significant clue and a predictor about a person’s 
potential for future violence.
Much of criminal psychology and profiling works this way: the crimi-
nal psychologist compares a criminal’s or witness’s current behaviors with 
those of thousands who previously experienced similar situations and then 
makes educated predictions about how the individual is most likely to be-
have based on what others like him have done before. More often than not, 
these predictions are accurate.
The ability to make these assessments about people comes from years 
of education, training, experience, and observation. No magic or psychic 
visions are involved—just hard work, knowledge, and practical application. 
The best criminal psychologists are usually those with the most experience 
in the field.
As you might suspect, having this ability to assess and predict behavior 
can come in quite handy not only for solving crime, but also for other as-
pects of criminology and the criminal justice system: picking juries, prepar-
ing witnesses for testimony, giving testimony about a person’s likelihood to 
commit crime, interviewing suspects, and so on. As we see in the media, 
some criminal psychologists become experts in profiling to solve crime, 
as did the criminal psychologist who helped the Sacramento Police in this 
chapter’s opening case. But many more help in other areas of the legal and 
justice systems by advising police, counseling lawyers, offering input to 
judges and juries, training others, and educating the public.
Though criminal psychology may be a subjective science, criminal psy-
chologists serve in many roles, providing tangible help to police officers, 
jurists, judges, lawyers, analysts, and average citizens all over the world.


2
The Many Roles 
of a Criminal 
Psychologist
1. A woman testifies for the prosecution in a New York courtroom to establish 
whether a defendant is faking mental illness.
2. A retired professional consults with San Diego County’s deputy district attor-
ney about a series of crimes to determine if they are linked.
3. A doctor takes the stand as an expert witness in a high-profile murder trial to 
convince the jury to spare a defendant from the death penalty.
4. A U.S. law enforcement official gives counsel to Canadian prosecutors about 
how to examine an accused murderer when he takes the witness stand at his 
trial. 
5. Researchers in Vancouver use computer programs to evaluate crime locations 
to develop an idea of where the perpetrators live and where they will most 
likely strike again.
6. A former state commissioner of public safety lectures forensics students about 
his view of the evidence in a famous unsolved murder.
Chapter

26
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminal psychology has played a role in many high-profile court cases.
Who are these people, and what do they have in common? All of them 
serve in one capacity or another as criminal psychologists.
 
• First on the list is Barbara Kirwin, Ph.D., author of The Mad, the Bad, 
and the Innocent, a forensic psychologist who often provides expert 
testimony about a defendant’s sanity for courts in New York State. 
• Second is Roy Hazelwood, the former FBI profiler who provided 
analysis to San Diego County’s deputy district attorney that linked 
a series of crimes in 1992 and 1993 to the Pacific Beach Rapist. The 
links he established between the crimes ultimately resulted in the 
rapist’s conviction.

27
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
• Third is psychiatrist Helen Morrison, M.D., who testified in serial-
murderer John Wayne Gacy’s trial. Despite her testimony that he 
was insane, the jury did not accept Gacy’s insanity defense and sen-
tenced him to death. He died by lethal injection on May 10, 1994. 
• Following Morrison on the list is John Douglas, a former FBI agent 
and renowned expert in personality profiling and criminal analy-
sis. In this situation, the Crown attorney (Canada) asked Douglas 
to help Toronto prosecutors develop a strategy to agitate accused 
murderer Tien Poh Su on the witness stand, allowing the jury to see 
his extreme emotional responses. Douglas provided a strategy, the 
defendant became extremely upset when he testified, and the jury 
convicted him of murder.
• In the fifth case, Dr. Kim Rosso, a detective inspector in Vancouver, 
British Columbia, worked with colleagues to develop a “criminal 
geographic targeting” (CGT) computer system that can be used to 
indicate the probable location of a serial offender’s home base or 
“anchor point”—often the general area in which he lives.
• The last situation involved Dr. Henry Lee, founder of the University of 
New Haven’s forensic science program. He was concluding a special 
lecture series on famous crimes, and his last lecture concerned the 
plausibility of various theories about the death of Colorado child 
beauty queen JonBenet Ramsey. To date, that case remains unsolved.
In these situations, each individual served in a specific role as a crimi-
nal psychologist. Each one’s expertise helped law enforcement officials, 
court officials, or those training to become so. 
Ultimately, that is the primary role of a criminal psychologist: to support 
others in the law enforcement and criminal justice systems. The criminal 
psychologist most often serves as one tool in the varied toolboxes of crimi-

28
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Careers in Criminal Psychology: 
More Varied Than You Think!
A criminal-psychology major in college prepares students for many 
potential careers. Most careers, however, also require postcollege 
education, training, or graduate degrees:
 
counselor
therapist
psychiatrist
criminal psychologist
crime-scene analyst
crime-scene investigator
police officer
detective
investigator
federal agent (FBI, CIA, DEA,      
 Secret Service, CSIS, RCMP)
homeland security advisor
corrections officer
parole or probation officer
lawyer
social worker
court advocate
mental health worker
private consultant
author
educator (teacher, professor,     
 trainer)
public servant
nologists, law enforcement officials, lawyers, judges, and others who seek 
to address crime and criminal behavior.
Because criminal psychologists play a supporting part in the overall 
crime drama, their roles vary. Their expertise can help police, lawyers, 
courts, jury consultants, witnesses, and students in several ways.

29
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
Criminal psychologists interview criminal suspects and witnesses.
The Criminal Psychologist 
as Police Consultant
Perhaps the role most closely associated with criminal psychology is that 
of the psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor, therapist, or FBI agent who 
advises police departments about specific crimes. Television characters like 
Law & Order’s Dr. Emil Skoda and Law & Order: SVU’s Dr. George Huang 
and movie roles like Clarice Starling in The Silence of the Lambs reinforce 
the idea that criminal psychology focuses solely on predicting criminal be-
havior. While criminal psychologists do assist police departments in under-

30
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Fields That Use  
Criminal-Psychology Expertise
law enforcement
criminal justice system
corrections system
treatment settings
counseling
education
ministry 
nonprofit work
public awareness and 
 crime prevention
technology development
print media (newspapers, magazines, books, etc.)
entertainment industry (movies, TV, etc.)
legislation
standing criminals and how they behave, they also help law enforcement 
agencies in other ways.
• They analyze crime scenes. The choice of crime scene can say some-
thing about both the victim and the perpetrator. When a person is 
killed at home, for example, the home itself can say much about the 

31
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
victim. A spotless, overly tidy home suggests attention to detail, care, 
perfectionism, organizational tendencies, and perhaps a desire to 
please people or be in control. To the criminal psychologist it also 
suggests the person who lived there would not be careless about 
opening the door to strangers. A criminal psychologist could look 
at the crime scene to learn about the person who lived in the home, 
and then determine if the crime was most likely committed by a 
stranger or someone known to the victim. She might also be asked to 
make observations about the perpetrator. Was he organized or disor-
ganized? Was he in control and deliberate when he committed the 
murder, or was this a crime of passion? Crime scenes are not silent 
witnesses; they hold many clues for the trained eye.
• They analyze people involved in cases under investigation. Suppose 
a man is found dead behind the wheel of a car lying crushed at 
the bottom of a ravine next to a long stretch of isolated highway. Is 
it suicide, murder, or accidental death? Did he drive through the 
guardrail on purpose, did someone tamper with his car, or did he 
fall asleep at the wheel? The insurance company who carries the de-
ceased’s life insurance needs to know; millions of dollars are riding 
on the answer. A criminal psychologist might be asked to interview 
the man’s friends, family, coworkers, and those who saw him last to 
help determine if his death was a suicide. 
• They help investigators to more effectively interview criminal sus-
pects and witnesses. When police investigators interview witnesses 
and criminal suspects, they don’t just ask questions. They’ve been 
trained to handle certain people in specific ways. Detectives won’t 
interview a grieving widow with no record who is suspected in her 
spouse’s murder the same way they would interview a known crimi-
nal who witnesses identified as shooting the victim. Different in-

32
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
terview subjects require different interviewing techniques. Training, 
however, doesn’t cover every type of interviewee or every situation. 
Detectives might call in a criminal psychologist to help them under-
stand with whom they are dealing and how best to approach the 
interrogation to get the answers they need.
• They serve as investigative consultants. Sometimes criminal psychol-
ogists serve as experts to whom authorities can go with questions 
about a criminal’s mindset, the possible reasons or motives behind 
certain crimes, why she chose specific victims, if and where she 
might strike again, whether certain crimes are related, and a host of 
other questions that might arise during a criminal investigation. The 
criminal psychologist may be brought into the department to meet 
with those working on the case, or he may just provide brief answers 
over the telephone. In any case, he serves as an informational re-
source for the people who investigate crimes and catch criminals.
In addition to helping professionals who solve crimes and enforce laws, 
criminal psychologists also provide assistance to those who work in the 
legal system after arrests are made.
The Criminal Psychologist 
as Lawyer Consultant
Police officers and detectives aren’t the only ones who want to understand 
the criminal mind. Lawyers who prosecute and represent them want to 
know as much as they can about them, too.
Because criminal psychologists know much about how criminals 
think and act, they can help lawyers better understand those who have 

33
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
There is no single method of interviewing people. Criminal psychologists must 
determine which technique works best for the particular individual.
been charged with crimes. Defense attorneys, those who represent the 
accused criminal in court, use criminal psychologists to help explain 
why the accused did what she did (if guilty) or why she might have 
been charged (if innocent). Prosecuting attorneys, those trying to con-
vict the criminal and put her in jail, might consult with criminal psy-
chologists to develop theories or motives for a crime. Before a trial 
begins, criminal psychologists help lawyers—defense or prosecution—in 
three primary capacities.
• They evaluate the accused. Criminal psychologists can perform stan-
dardized personality and intelligence tests on those accused of a crime 
to help lawyers learn more about them. They can assess the accused 
for signs of mental illness or psychological disorders. They can also 

34
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
provide input about whether the accused understands enough of what 
is happening to him to be tried in a court of law. One key element 
criminal psychologists look for in evaluating those standing trial is the 
defendant’s mental state at the time of the crime; was he insane or 
experiencing a mental defect when he committed the act for which he 
is charged?
• They assist in preparing witnesses to testify. Criminal psychologists 
don’t just work with criminals; they help witnesses, too. A prosecut-
ing attorney in a rape case might ask a criminal psychologist to work 
with a rape victim to help her prepare mentally and emotionally for 
what she’ll go through in court. The same might be done for a bat-
tered spouse or an abused child. Criminal psychologists don’t ever 
tell witnesses what to say; they only prepare witnesses for what they 
will experience during a trial. 
• During the jury-selection process, they offer input as to who would 
and who would not make the best jurors for their lawyer’s side. Based 
on basic information that has been provided to them, criminal psy-
chologists can “read” people and make detailed observations about 
their likely opinions and actions. When dealing with jury selection, 
lawyers may consult criminal psychologists to identify jurors who 
would most likely be sympathetic to their side of the courtroom 
drama. In the United States, lawyers may also use criminal psycholo-
gists to help determine whether a prospective juror would be willing 
to impose the death penalty, should the accused be convicted in a 
potential death-penalty case.
Once the trial begins, a criminal psychologist can still be used in sev-
eral ways.

35
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
Other Areas of Competency to Which a 
Criminal Psychologist Might Testify
While criminal psychologists often testify about a person’s ability to 
stand trial, aid in representation, represent himself if he so desires, 
or testify in court, their expertise at determining competency isn’t 
limited to those areas. A criminal psychologist may also be asked 
to determine if a person was competent to:
•	 waive his legal right to be silent
•	 waive his legal right to have a lawyer present during ques-
tioning
•	 consent to a police search
•	 consent to a police seizure
•	 provide and sign a confession
•	 plead guilty
•	 refuse counsel
•	 refuse an insanity defense
•	 be criminally responsible for the act he committed

36
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
The Criminal Psychologist as 
Court Consultant
A criminal psychologist can be called by the defense or the prosecution, 
or they can be appointed by the court. In each of these capacities, she can 
do any of the following.
• She can evaluate an individual’s competency to self-represent, stand 
trial, or testify. While lawyers may have already asked a criminal 
psychologist to perform these duties, a judge can order a defendant 
or witness to be evaluated as well. In these cases, the court appoints 
an evaluator (often a psychiatrist or criminal psychologist) to meet 
with, test, or diagnose the person being evaluated. The evaluator 
then reports back to the court with her findings. 
• She can evaluate the validity of eyewitness testimony. When a per-
son witnesses a crime or identifies a suspect in a police lineup, many 
factors come into play including vision, lighting, visual memory, 
auditory memory, how open the witness is to suggestion, emotions 
at the time of the crime, emotions at the time of the identification, 
self-confidence, and social pressures and expectations. Dynamics 
occur in these situations that psychologists can help the layperson 
understand. Criminal psychologists are often called to affirm or cast 
doubt on eyewitness accounts and identifications by examining 
these dynamics. They can testify about psychological phenomena 
that occur during intensely emotional times that might color the 
witness’s ability to give accurate testimony. Take, for example, five 
people who witness a drunk-driving accident. All five people may 
give different accounts of what happened. Whose account is most 

37
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
Criminal psychologists often testify in trials. They must present evidence in a 
way that jurors will be able to understand.
accurate? Which eyewitness is most reliable? What if the driver is a 
Caucasian male in a Hispanic or other ethnic neighborhood? What 
if he is a Hispanic male in a Caucasian neighborhood? What social 
conditions could influence eyewitnesses? Criminal psychologists 
shed light on these factors. 

38
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Topics a Criminal Psychologist 
Might Be Asked to Testify About in Court
•	 Does the personality of a deceased person suggest anything 
about how he might have died?
•	 Is the defendant competent to stand trial (can he understand 
legal proceedings)?
•	 Was the defendant sane when he committed the offense?
•	 Does the defendant know the difference between right and 
wrong?
•	 How likely is it that the defendant can be rehabilitated?
•	 Is the defendant mentally ill or in need of mental-health ser-
vices?
•	 How might a defendant’s past have influenced his behavior?
•	 Did the defendant’s conduct during the commission of the 
crime suggest he might repeat the crime if released? 
•	 Is a person involved in a case competent to give testimony?
•	 What psychological consequences has the crime victim expe-
rienced as a result of the crime?
•	 Does a mentally ill person pose a threat to himself or others?
•	 How reliable is an eyewitness’s testimony?
•	 What emotional factors could have biased an eyewitness?
•	 What affect would a delay in trial procedure have on a defen-
dant, the victim, or other witnesses?

39
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
A criminal psychologist determines whether a suspect is mentally competent 
and therefore a candidate for lethal injection (or some other form of the death 
penalty).
• She can evaluate a convicted criminal’s competency to receive the 
death penalty. Canada abolished the death penalty in its criminal 
justice system, but in some states in the United States, convicted 
criminals can be sentenced to die for their crimes. Death sentences 
can only be given, however, if the convict is deemed competent: that 
is, if he is capable of understanding what is happening to him and 
why. In most states the mentally impaired and children under a cer-
tain age (usually fifteen or sixteen years) cannot be given the death 
penalty because courts assume they don’t have the reasoning ability 
to understand the finality of a death sentence and its relationship to 
their crimes.

40
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
To be an effective expert witness, a criminal psychologist must know about 
laws and courtroom procedures.
• She can assess whether mitigating circumstances are sufficient to 
spare a death-penalty candidate from the death penalty. When the 
prosecutor in a case asks for the death penalty, the defense attorney 
will ask a criminal psychologist to determine if there are any mitigat-
ing factors from the criminal’s childhood, personality, or mental abil-
ity that would lead the jury to sentence the defendant to something 

41
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
less than death. Mitigating factors are those things that would allow 
the jury or judge to treat the defendant more mercifully than the law 
might otherwise allow. Things like having no previous record, a de-
fendant’s age (very young or very old), having a limited understand-
ing of the consequences of his actions, mental illness or impairment, 
abuse or abandonment in the defendant’s childhood, extreme emo-
tions, acting under duress or the influence of another, and so on can 
affect whether a jury views a defendant as deserving of death. The 
criminal psychologist can assess and give testimony about whether 
mitigating circumstances exist and, if they do, explain them.
• She can provide expert testimony. Because criminal psychology is 
not an exact science, the criminal psychologist’s role as “expert” 
witness is often contested by opposing lawyers. It can be a difficult 
position to be in. As forensic psychologist Katherine Ramsland notes 
in her work The Criminal Mind: 
Being an expert witness means much more than simply being skilled in 
some area and being prepared. The courtroom is highly political, defen-
dants may lie, eyewitnesses may be mistaken, and even the most sincere 
confession may be false. Knowing what can happen in a case and having 
some awareness of legal precedents on psychological issues will aid ex-
perts in achieving their best presentation.
As the author suggests, criminal psychologists who offer expert testi-
mony don’t just need to know about psychology and criminals; they need 
to know about laws, courtroom procedures, admissibility of evidence, how 
their own testimony will be viewed, and how it might be contested. The 
best rules of thumb for expert witnesses in any field, as suggested by au-
thor and forensic psychology professor Lawrence S. Wrightsman in Foren-
sic Psychology, are these: never lie, never fake data or fudge results, never 

42
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
make conclusions first then fit the data to your conclusions, and don’t worry 
about the win-loss record of your court appearances. Following Wrights-
man’s advice should help expert witnesses maintain integrity, honesty, and 
credibility on the witness stand.
The Criminal Psychologist  
as Teacher, Trainer,  
and Public Educator
In addition to the roles already addressed, criminal psychologists can be 
involved in law enforcement training and public education. With the recent 
rise in interest in forensics and criminal profiling sparked by the entertain-
ment industry, most colleges now offer at least basic courses in criminal 
psychology and the science of crime. Some even offer degree programs. 
Colleges need professors with expertise in criminal psychology and are in-
creasingly recruiting them from the ranks of practicing criminal psycholo-
gists instead of from the academic world. 
Law enforcement training academies need educators, too. How else will 
police-academy students or FBI recruits learn about the processes involved 
in criminal psychology and profiling? Most police forces offer basic train-
ing in these areas as well for their existing officers. Criminal psychology 
and profiling, once sneered at by law enforcement officials as quackery and 
voodoo investigative techniques, are now embraced as important resources 
on which investigators can draw in their quest to solve crimes. While crimi-
nal psychology and profiling don’t solve crimes themselves, both can help 
detectives do so when used with solid evidence-gathering and assessment 
skills.

43
The Many Roles of a Criminal Psychologist
One last, often-overlooked, area in which criminal psychologists can 
serve is the arena of the public good. They can help people understand 
crime. Their expertise can help average citizens learn how to avoid becom-
ing crime victims. They can offer insight into how individuals become 
criminals and what can be done to prevent that from happening. They can 
help legislators understand what kinds of laws will be most effective in pro-
tecting average citizens. They can give domestic violence, abuse, and rape 
victims the courage to get help. 
The person who opts to pursue a career in criminal psychology has 
many options. Virtually all those options require years of training and edu-
cation, but perhaps the most difficult career to break into is that of the 
profiler.
A criminal psychologist may teach her profession at a university or college.


3
The Profiler
F
rom a press release issued in November 2001:
Based on . . . the “weapon” of choice . . . the offender:
• is likely an adult male.
• if employed, is likely to be in a position requiring little contact with the 
public, or other employees. He may work in a laboratory. He is apparently 
comfortable working with an extremely hazardous material. He probably 
has a scientific background to some extent, or at least a strong interest in 
science.
• has likely taken appropriate protective steps to ensure his own safety, 
which may include the use of a . . . vaccination or antibiotics.
Chapter

46
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
• has access to a source of [his weapon of choice] and possesses 
knowledge and expertise to refine it.
• possesses or has access to some laboratory equipment. 
• has exhibited an organized, rational thought process in furtherance 
of his criminal behavior.
• has a familiarity, direct or indirect, with the Trenton, NJ, metropoli-
tan area.
• did not select victims randomly. He made an effort to identify the 
correct address, including zip code, of each victim and used suf-
ficient postage to ensure proper delivery of the letters. . . . These 
targets are probably very important to the offender. They may have 
been the focus of previous expressions of contempt which may have 
been communicated to others, or observed by others.
• is a nonconfrontational person, at least in his public life. He  lacks 
the personal skills necessary to confront others. He chooses to con-
front his problems “long distance” and not face-to-face. He may hold 
grudges for a long time, vowing that he will get even with “them” 
one day. There are probably other, earlier examples of this type of 
behavior. . . . He may have chosen to anonymously harass other indi-
viduals or entities that he perceived as having wronged him. He may 
also have chosen to utilize the mail on those occasions.
• prefers being by himself more often than not. If he is involved in a 
personal relationship, it will likely be of a self-serving nature.
Pre-Offense Behavior
• Following the events of September 11, 2001, this person may have 
become mission oriented in his desire to undertake these . . . mail-
ings. He may have become more secretive and exhibited an unusual 
pattern of activity. Additionally, he may have displayed a passive 

47
The Profiler
A psychological profile can help investigators narrow down suspects. It is just 
one of many ways to help solve crimes.
disinterest in the events which otherwise captivated the Nation. He 
also may have started taking antibiotics unexpectedly. 
Post-Offense Behavior
• He may have exhibited significant behavioral changes at various 
critical periods of time throughout the course of the . . . mailings 
and related media coverage. These may include: 

48
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
1. Altered physical appearance. 
2. Pronounced anxiety.
3. Atypical media interest.
4. Noticeable mood swings.
5. More withdrawn. 
6. Unusual level of preoccupation.
7. Unusual absenteeism.
8. Altered sleeping and/or eating habits.
These post-offense behaviors would have been most noticeable during 
critical times, including but not limited to: the mailing of the letters 
(09/18/01 and 10/09/01), the death of [the] first . . . victim, media re-
ports of each . . . incident, and especially the deaths and illnesses of 
non-targeted victims.
These lists and paragraphs are part of an actual behavioral assessment in-
cluded in an FBI press briefing given in November 2001. At the time of this 
press release, the FBI was seeking help in identifying the person who sent 
seven anthrax-laced letters through the mail to five news agencies and two 
senatorial offices, killing five people and infecting seventeen more. 
Anthrax, an infectious disease caused by spore-forming bacteria that 
affects animal and human skin, lungs, or intestines, can be fatal if inhaled. 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) classifies an-
thrax as a Category A priority substance with recognized bioterrorism po-
tential. According to the CDC, Category A agents are those that:
• pose the greatest possible threat for a bad effect on public health 
• may spread across a large area or need public awareness 
• need a great deal of planning to protect the public’s health 

49
The Profiler
Press release from November 2001

50
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Again according to the CDC, most cases of anthrax limited to the skin can 
be cured if treated early with antibiotics. Even if untreated, 80 percent of 
those who become infected with skin anthrax do not die. Gastrointestinal 
anthrax, the kind you get if you ingest anthrax, is more serious: between 
one-fourth and more than half of these cases lead to death. Inhalation an-
thrax, the kind you get in your lungs—the kind the killer sent in the mail in 
2001—is much more severe: more than 50 percent of people with inhalation 
anthrax die. 
The person who mailed the letters deliberately inserted anthrax spores 
into envelopes so that whoever opened the letters would inhale the spores. 
People in the United States were under biological attack.
The anthrax attacks began just one week after the September 11, 2001, 
terrorist attack on the Twin Towers in New York City. The first set of letters 
bore postmarks dated September 18, 2001; the second batch, which con-
tained a more potent type of anthrax, were postmarked October 9, 2001. 
Both were mailed from Trenton, New Jersey.
The U.S. government and its people, nervous from the unprecedented 
targeting of innocent civilians on North American shores, expected more 
attacks. Law enforcement officials and the public felt tense and restless. 
Americans wanted the terror to end. The FBI needed to find the person 
behind these letters before public panic erupted. But investigative agen-
cies had little evidence to go on: no fingerprints, no DNA, no witnesses, 
no suspects. It would take weeks to identify the specific anthrax strains and 
grades used in the letters, the sources of the anthrax spores, and the people 
who had greatest access to these strains. But the directors of the agencies 
involved felt that to save lives they needed to move quickly. They developed 
a profile of the offender.
The letters provided clues about who wrote them. The points of origin; 
the choice of poison contained in each one; the letters’ content, writing 

51
The Profiler
A criminal’s handwriting may contain clues about his personality.
styles, and handwriting itself, all provided information with which criminal 
psychologists could develop a list of traits thought to be true of the un-
known offender. That’s all a profile is—a list of characteristics—based on cer-
tain theories, facts, and evidence—that summarize the offender’s probable 
background and personality. Once the FBI’s behavioral scientists came up 
with their profile of the anthrax mail terrorist, they asked “the American 
public to study these assessments and reflect on whether someone of their 
acquaintance might fit the profile.” When it released its profile, the agency 
stated “the safety of the American people is at stake.”
News agencies, national media, television programs, and magazines 
carried the profile. It made front-page news. The FBI circulated reward 
posters containing key parts of the profile. The same reward posters showed 
up in local post offices all over the United States. Reproductions of the pro-
file in full appeared in local and regional newspapers. 

52
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Despite the FBI’s plea for help, their detailed linguistic and behavioral 
profiles, and their offer of a $2.5 million reward, the case wasn’t closed 
until 2010. The FBI eventually focused on biologist Bruce Ivins, but he com-
mitted suicide before he could be charged.
   In the anthrax case, a team of experts from the Critical Incident Re-
sponse Group of the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime put 
together the description of the suspect listed on the FBI’s reward poster 
and in the behavioral profile contained in the press release excerpted at 
the beginning of this chapter. Some of these were highly trained criminal 
investigators and psychologists who specialize in the personality and char-
acter traits of people who have committed crimes. We call these profession-
als criminal profilers.
The Criminal Profiler
The term “profiler” generally refers to someone who studies the known 
traits, records, and tendencies of a person or entity. The profiler summa-
rizes that information into a report, the profile. Think of a drawing done in 
profile—the image captures only the outline of the side of the head; it isn’t 
a complete, detailed drawing. It’s a visual summary. A profiler’s profile is 
a summary, too, but it uses words. Profilers and profiles can be found in 
many professions.
A corporation may use an economist to develop a financial profile that 
provides concise information about the company’s net worth—a summary 
of the company’s financial status. An employer may ask job applicants to 
take personality tests to develop profiles about their potential suitability for 
a job—summaries of their strengths and weaknesses. Handwriting experts 
may be asked to examine written letters or historical documents to confirm 
authorship or to develop linguistic profiles of the writers—summaries of the 

53
The Profiler
Key Murder Elements for Profilers
•	 killing site: where the murder took place
•	 disposal site: where the body was found
•	 position of the body (degrading position indicates loathing)
•	 presence of head coverings or blindfolds (depersonalizes the 
victim)
•	 indications of bondage (suggests planning and organization)
•	 use of duct tape (indicates perpetrator spent time in prison)
•	 facial wounds (depersonalizes the victim)
•	 weapon used
•	 evidence of staging (the criminal altered the crime scene)
•	 souvenirs taken by the perpetrator (a reminder of the crime, 
often an object that belonged to the victim)
•	 trophies taken by the perpetrator (a reminder of the crime and 
a visual reward that arouses the killer)
writers’ skills, understanding, and specific use of words. Psychologists or psy-
chiatrists may work as psychological profilers, making generalizations about 
the people they examine based on interviews with the persons involved, their 
histories, and their known behaviors—summaries of personalities and people 
types. Again, these are brief, condensed character sketches of complex indi-
viduals. They are word summaries, or profiles, of their subjects.
The criminal profiler, as the term implies, develops summaries about 
people who commit crimes. Because the perpetrator isn’t known, the crimi-
nal profiler’s information comes from crime scenes and victims. According 

54
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
to John Douglas, former chief of the Investigative Support Unit of the FBI’s 
National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime, the profiler follows sev-
eral steps in completing the profile process:
• He evaluates the criminal act itself.
• He evaluates the specifics of the crime scene or scenes.
• He analyzes the victim or victims.
• He examines preliminary police reports about the crime.
• He evaluates autopsy reports and the medical examiner’s methods.
• After completing the above, he develops a profile complete with of-
fender traits.
• Finally, he makes suggestions to investigators based on his research 
and profile.
None of the above would do any good, however, if the following state-
ment weren’t true: Criminals say much about themselves in their crimes. 
In fact, this truth provides the foundation from which profilers work. How 
criminals reveal themselves in their crimes is further defined in four as-
sumptions made by every criminal profiler.
Four Assumptions  
of the Profiler
1. Crimes scenes reflect their criminals’ personalities. In other words, what 
a person does reveals something of who she is.
2. A criminal will tend to use the same or similar modus operandi—method 
of operation (MO)—in each crime. An MO consists of actions the crimi-
nal takes that are necessary to complete the crime (using a nylon cord to 

55
The Profiler
Traits of Organized,  
Disorganized, and Mixed Offenders:
organized:
average to above-average 
intelligence
socially competent
most likely skilled
sexually capable
birth order: first or second born
father had stable job
inconsistent childhood disci-
pline
controlled emotions during 
crime
alcohol used during crime
lives with a partner
drives to crime scene in 
 well-maintained car
shows interest in media atten-
tion
learns from each crime, hones 
skill
disorganized:
below-average intelligence
socially inadequate
usually unskilled
sexually incapable
birth order: youngest 
father’s work unstable
harsh childhood punishment
anxious during crime
minimal or no use of alcohol
lives alone
works/lives near crime scene
has little interest in media 
stays disorganized
Mixed offenders display traits from both columns.

56
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
strangle a victim, wearing gloves to avoid leaving fingerprints, cutting 
the victim’s telephone and electric lines before breaking in, etc.).
3. A criminal’s “signature” remains the same. A signature differs from an 
MO. While the MO includes what was necessary for the crime, the sig-
nature covers actions taken during the crime that are unnecessary for 
the successful completion of the crime, that are unique to that criminal, 
and that satisfy the criminal’s emotional needs. Signatures might include 
things like certain words the offender utters while committing the crime 
(for example, a serial rapist muttering “whore” while raping his victim), 
leaving certain items in specific places at the crime scene (for instance, 
resting victims’ driver’s licenses on their dead bodies), posing the bodies 
in specific positions, using certain distinguishing techniques (surgical 
incisions instead of careless stab wounds), or leaving markings, notes, or 
writings on the victims or at the crime scene (for example, leaving a note 
saying “I will kill again”).
4. The criminal’s personality will not change. Even though we can alter 
certain behaviors and attitudes (we can quit smoking, or stop swearing, 
or try to be more patient, for example), we can’t change the core of who 
we are. The same holds true for criminals. And that consistency will show 
up in their crimes.
	
By assuming criminals reveal themselves in their crimes via these four truths, 
the criminal profiler can then study crime scenes, MOs, signatures, victims, 
and other details about specific crimes to make generalizations about—to cre-
ate a profile of—the unknown subject, the UNSUB, who committed the act(s).
One tool that helps criminal profilers create these profiles is the FBI’s 
classification system for offenders, detailed in the Crime Classification 
Manual. Among other details and crime classifications, this resource clas-
sifies perpetrators as “organized,” “disorganized,” or a mixture of the two. 

57
The Profiler
A Sampling of Facts and 
What They Might Imply
FACT SET #1: In interviews, friends, family, and coworkers describe 
a young murder victim as quiet, submissive, and compliant. Yet 
her body and the crime scene show evidence of prolonged tor-
ture. 
IMPLICATIONS: Because the victim probably would have done 
whatever the murderer asked, the murderer tortured her for his 
own enjoyment.
FACT SET #2: A woman’s body is found on the side of a road along 
a remote, isolated stretch of highway—the only remote section 
of this road for miles.
IMPLICATIONS: The killer had access to a car or other vehicle, 
knew how to drive, was strong enough to lift a body in and out 
of a car, and was familiar with the area in which the body was 
dumped.
FACT SET #3: A man dies from thirty-seven stab wounds. The crime 
scene is sloppy, and no attempt was made to hide evidence.
IMPLICATIONS: Because the killer used more force than neces-
sary, he probably knew and was angry with the victim. His act 
was fueled by rage. Because the crime scene was sloppy, the 
killing was probably not planned, but rather done in the heat of 
the moment.

58
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminals who are organized can be especially difficult to catch. They care-
fully plot their crimes and anticipate the moves of law enforcement.
Classifying Perpetrators
Organized offenders commit planned crimes, usually against strangers. The 
planning is part of the detailed fantasy they’ve created in their minds. This 
type of offender selects victims carefully to match what they’ve imagined. 
They also want to be certain their victims won’t resist them or later identify 
them. These criminals are calculating, calm, and efficient when they com-
mit their crimes.
Disorganized offenders are careless and impulsive. They’re often nervous 
or anxious when they commit their crimes. They may have to use violence 
to obtain their victims instead of charm to get them into their grasps. They 
may commit a crime not because they planned to but simply because the 
opportunity presented itself. Or they may commit a more serious crime than 

59
The Profiler
they intended (murder, for example, in addition to rape) because they lost 
control of their emotions and actions while committing the initial crime.
 Regardless of the criminal or crime involved, each crime scene suggests 
much about its offender. Where the crime is committed, where a body is 
left, how the body is left, the way the crime was committed—these suggest 
organized or disorganized personalities. Once the profiler identifies the 
UNSUB as organized, disorganized, or mixed, she can predict his behavior 
in subsequent crimes, sometimes with uncanny accuracy.
In his book Journey into Darkness, former FBI profiler John Douglas 
describes how analyzing a crime scene provides information about a per-
petrator, in this case, a child killer:
Where you find the body, and how quickly you find it, tell us a 
lot about the killer. Organized killers tend to transport the vic-
tims (alive and dead) over distance. They dispose of bodies in 
places that take longer to find and where conditions may help 
destroy evidence—in water, for example. Or, they go for drama or 
shock value, placing the body where it will be found, in a place 
or condition that will create outrage in the community. As with 
organized perpetrators of other types of crime, these guys are of 
average or above-average intelligence and do have social skills. 
They plan their crimes, targeting strangers indiscriminately . . . , 
and kill to avoid detection, for the thrill, to fulfill sadistic urges, 
or for other reasons. Organized child killers may well be psycho-
pathic serial killers. They are more aggressive in sexual activity 
with their victims before they kill them. Disorganized offenders 
are more inadequate sexually and so are more likely to assault 
the victim after the child is unconscious or dead. Of lower intel-
ligence, they frequently don’t plan the abduction and often kill 

60
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminal psychologists study how the offender thinks and behaves.
inadvertently. . . . Socially inadequate, they tend to choose a 
victim they know. Rather than transporting the victim, they feel 
most comfortable abducting and killing close to home. They may 
not even have a means to transport a body. Their victims are usu-
ally left at the crime scene or someplace where they are found 
more quickly. They will just dump the body somewhere or bury 
it in a shallow grave. 
A criminal’s specific actions indicate definitive traits that are far 
too numerous to list here. But profilers study these behaviors and the  

61
The Profiler
personalities behind them so much that they are able to “get into” the 
UNSUB’s mind—they learn to think like the perpetrators and to understand 
their motives. They fill their minds with crime-scene details and facets of 
each crime. They imagine, based on factual evidence, how the crime oc-
curred and what the perpetrator felt. They get into the heads and emotions 
of the victims, too. And all this comes together in a criminal profile, which 
investigators use to identify possible suspects and ultimately to capture the 
criminal responsible for the crime(s).
As you can imagine, criminal profiling can be a dark and ugly business: 
studying bloody crime-scene photos; listening to cassette tapes of sadists 
torturing their victims; examining horrific, detailed eyewitness descriptions 
of what victims endured; and hearing the sounds of victims crying and 
screaming. Criminal profilers have to see and listen to these things; they 
study them for clues about the perpetrators. And because they do, profilers 
see humankind’s capacity for evil. They live with shocking, horrific images 
every day. These hardworking men and women see the worst of the worst 
criminals out there.
As Jim Wright, an investigator with the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit 
(BSU), put it, “it almost defies description what one person can do to an-
other. . . . There’s no way you can be involved in the type of work we’re 
doing or be involved as a law enforcement officer or in the investigation of 
violent crime and not be personally affected.” 
But profilers learn to handle it all the same. Part of the ability to handle 
the darkest parts of the job comes from the individual’s strength of charac-
ter. Part of it comes from being able to divorce job realities from everyday 
home life. And part of it involves training.

62
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Profilers selected to join the FBI must “think outside the box.”
Becoming a Profiler
The process of becoming a profiler isn’t easy, particularly one who works 
for the FBI. Former agent John Douglas describes the process, which is 
summarized here. First you have to be accepted into the FBI itself. Once 
you make it through FBI training, you have to demonstrate that you’re a 
solid, top-notch investigator in whatever capacity you’re assigned. If you 
show creativity in your assigned position, the FBI’s BSU may recruit you. If 
they recruit you, and the unit does not select many, you’ll be sent to the FBI 
training center in Quantico, Virginia, where you must pass two additional 
years of intensive training. Only then will you be admitted into the BSU. 

63
The Profiler
Simply becoming a member of the BSU does not automatically qualify you 
for a profiling assignment, however. Profilers are hand selected.
Beyond excellent completion of FBI training, senior profilers look for 
certain characteristics in upcoming professionals. Most hold graduate de-
grees in their fields, usually doctoral degrees. Good candidates must also, 
according to Douglas, “show imagination and creativity in investigation.” 
They need to be capable of following rules and protocols, but must also 
be willing to “think outside the box” and take risks. A potential profiler 
should demonstrate leadership and initiative, but must also be able to work 
alone or as a member of a team. And, perhaps more than anything else, the 
potential profiler has to show good judgment: a judgment not only based 
on fact, but sometimes, according to Douglas, based primarily on instinct. 
Profiling requires an indefinable talent, a sense or instinct beyond knowl-
edge, that BSU supervisors find hard to explain but are able to identify in 
candidates.
Becoming a profiler for the FBI sounds glamorous and exciting. The 
work is rewarding, especially when your profile leads to the arrest and 
conviction of a criminal. Other times it’s frustrating, as in the case of the 
anthrax terrorist, which took nine years to solve. Most profilers will tell you 
that criminal profiling is demanding, physically and mentally exhausting, 
emotionally draining, heartbreaking work—yes, it has its rewards, but it’s 
not the adrenaline-pumping,  extrasensory thrill ride portrayed in fiction. In 
addition to examining crime-scene photos, the profiler’s work can involve 
painstaking research, volumes of reading, and stacks of tedious paperwork. 
Those who become criminal profilers learn quickly that the job they imag-
ined is far different from reality. Profiling is not what we see on TV.


4
Criminal Pro-
filing in Fiction 
and History
I 
have heard you say it is difficult for a man to have any object in daily use 
without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it in such a way that a 
trained observer might read it. Now, I have here a watch which has recently 
come into my possession. Would you have the kindness to let me have an opin-
ion upon the character or habits of the late owner?”
I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my 
heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and I intended it as a 
lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he occasionally assumed. He 
balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard at the dial, opened the back, and 
examined the works, first with his naked eyes and then with a powerful convex 
lens. I could hardly keep from smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally 
snapped the case . . . and handed it back.
“
Chapter

66
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
From the ordinary, Sherlock Holmes deduced the extraordinary.
 “There are hardly any data,” he remarked. “The watch has been re-
cently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts.”
“You are right,” I answered. “It was cleaned before being sent to me.” 
In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most lame and 
impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could he expect from an 
uncleaned watch?
“Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren,” he 
observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes. “Subject 
to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged to your elder 
brother, who inherited it from your father.”

67
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
Fast Fact:
French criminologist Dr. Edmond Locard, one of the founders of modern 
forensic science, was so impressed with the deductive reasoning skills 
Doyle’s character Sherlock Holmes used in his fictional investigations 
that he recommended that those seeking to become detectives, in ad-
dition to their training, study Doyle’s works.
“That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?”
“Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is 
nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: so it was 
made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descends to the eldest son, 
and he is most likely to have the same name as the father. Your father has, 
if I remember right, been dead many years. It has, therefore, been in the 
hands of your eldest brother.”
“Right, so far,” said I. “Anything else?”
“He was a man of untidy habits—very untidy and careless. He was left 
with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived for some time 
in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity, and finally, taking 
to drink, he died. That is all I can gather.”
I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with 
considerable bitterness in my heart.
“This is unworthy of you, Holmes,” I said. “I could not have believed 
that you would have descended to this. You have made inquiries into the 
history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce this knowl-

68
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
The fictional Sherlock Holmes used his mind and such low-tech tools as a 
magnifying glass to solve crimes from his home on Baker Street.
edge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe that you have 
read all this from his old watch! It is unkind and, to speak plainly, has a 
touch of charlatanism in it.”
“My dear doctor,” said he kindly, “pray accept my apologies. Viewing 
the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how personal and pain-
ful a thing it might be to you. I assure you, however, that I never even knew 
that you had a brother until you handed me the watch.”
“Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts? 
They are absolutely correct in every particular.”
“Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of prob-
ability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.”
“But it was not mere guesswork?”
“No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit—destructive to the logical 
faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you do not follow my 

69
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
train of thought or observe the small facts upon which large inferences 
may depend. For example, I began by stating that your brother was care-
less. When you observe the lower part of that watch-case you notice that 
it is not only dinted in two places but it is cut and marked all over from 
the habit of keeping other hard objects, such as coins or keys, in the same 
pocket. Surely it is no great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-
guinea watch so cavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very 
far-fetched inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is 
pretty well provided for in other respects.” 
 I nodded to show that I followed his reasoning. 
 “It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a 
watch, to scratch the numbers of the ticket with a pin-point upon the inside 
of the case. It is more handy than a label as there is no risk of the number 
being lost or transposed. There are no less than four such numbers vis-
ible to my lens on the inside of this case. Inference—that your brother was 
often at low water. Secondary inference—that he had occasional bursts of 
prosperity, or he could not have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to 
look at the inner plate, which contains the keyhole. Look at the thousands 
of scratches all round the hole—marks where the key has slipped. What 
sober man’s key could have scored those grooves? But you will never see a 
drunkard’s watch without them. He winds it at night, and he leaves these 
traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in all this?” 
 “It is as clear as daylight,” I answered. “I regret the injustice which I 
did you. I should have had more faith in your marvelous faculty.”
This classic dialogue between fictional characters Sherlock Holmes and his 
sidekick Dr. Watson comes from chapter 1 of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s The 
Sign of the Four, first published in 1890. 

70
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Legendary Detectives in Fiction 
(and Their Authors)
Porfiry Petrovich  (Fyodor Dostoevsky)
Sherlock Holmes (Sir Arthur Conan Doyle)
Hercule Poirot (Agatha Christie)
Miss Jane Marple (Agatha Christie)
Charlie Chan (Earl Derr Biggers)
C. Auguste Dupin (Edgar Allan Poe)
Father Brown (Gilbert Keith [G. K.] Chesterton)	
 
Nero Wolfe (Rex Stout)
Ellery Queen (Ellery Queen, pseudonym for Frederic Dannay and 
 Manfred B. Lee)
This story, and others like it in The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes se-
ries, was written and published over a century ago, yet Holmes’s ability to 
“profile” the watch owner in this excerpt used techniques similar to those 
profilers use today. He studied the evidence, and that evidence provided 
clues about the person who owned the watch. Though psychology wasn’t 
part of Holmes’s skill set, the fictional detective reached conclusions about 
the previous owner of the watch by using common sense, logic, and atten-
tion to detail. 

71
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
In this case, the fictional character’s profiling technique accurately re-
flects many of the techniques used by modern profilers: a combination 
of observation, knowledge, experience, logic, and reasoning. The advan-
tage today’s profilers have is their additional knowledge of psychology, a 
tool unavailable to Sherlock Holmes in the late nineteenth century. Still, 
Holmes’s “profile” of Dr. Watson’s brother well illustrates how real profilers 
use factual, hard evidence to make assumptions about people. 
Just as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle used investigative techniques in his 
works that were popular in his time, today’s novelists, playwrights, and 
scriptwriters have their characters use current investigative procedures and 
technologies.
Profiling in Modern Fiction
Many of today’s popular novelists use profilers or profiling in their fiction: 
Thomas Harris created FBI trainee Clarice Starling in The Silence of the 
Lambs and FBI profiler Will Graham in Red Dragon; Edward X. Delaney 
used Detective Lawrence Sanders in The Third Deadly Sin; James Patterson 
calls on forensic psychologist Alex Cross in Kiss the Girls; Caleb Carr uses 
Dr. Laszlo Kriezler to get inside the head of the killer in The Alienist and 
The Angel of Darkness; and author John Sanford supplies the reader with 
Detective Lucas Davenport to develop profiles in Chosen Prey, Secret Prey, 
Certain Prey, and other works in his Prey series.
Novelists aren’t the only fiction writers who use criminal psychology 
and profiling: television and movie writers have been using these tech-
niques for decades. In addition to television shows like Law & Order (and 
its related shows), CSI (and its spin-offs), Profiler (in syndication), and 
Medium (a 2005 addition), movies like Manhunter (1986), The Silence of 
the Lambs (1991), Basic Instinct (1992), Seven (1995), Hannibal (2001), and 

72
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
The use of criminal psychology to solve crimes is often seen on television. 
In real life, it’s not as easy or as clear cut as it might seem on television and 
film.
Red Dragon (2002), and Mindhunters (2004) have popularized profiling 
and its use in law enforcement.
While most authors and screenwriters attempt to accurately reflect con-
temporary standards and protocols for true investigative profiling (and they 
often get it right), virtually all of them and their classic-literature cousins 
from decades past fall short in one regard: in fiction, the profile always 
works, and the criminal is always exposed (though not always brought to 
justice). Real-life profiling doesn’t work that way.

73
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
Real-Life Profiling in History: 
Adolf Hitler
During the 1940s, North Americans were heavily engaged in World War II, 
and Adolf Hitler became archenemy number one—the most wanted crimi-
nal in the freedom-loving world. In 1942, the U.S. government formed an 
intelligence agency called the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) to coordi-
nate with other federal agencies and to perform special operations related 
to winning the war. In 1943, the OSS hired a psychiatrist, Dr. Walter C. 
Langer, to develop an appraisal—essentially a profile—of Adolf Hilter: his 
ambitions, his reasons for invading neighboring countries, his power, his 
psychological makeup, his mental state, possible future behaviors, and pos-
sible means of his demise.
Langer’s profile included predictions and observations: Hitler would 
make progressively fewer public appearances as his power diminished; he 
would grow increasingly paranoid, even suspecting his closest associates; 
he would grow more enraged; and his mental condition would further dete-
riorate. When Langer prepared his profile, he wanted to provide military of-
ficials with information that would either help them develop a workable way 
to interrogate someone they viewed as a madman if he were captured, or that 
would help them make future decisions regarding actions taken in war.
Unlike profiles in fiction, Langer’s profile didn’t lead to the desired out-
comes of Hitler’s capture, interrogation, or even to wartime decision mak-
ing or strategizing based on the information contained within the profile. 
History, however, verifies that Langer’s profile of Hitler’s possible outcomes 
was startlingly correct. As he neared defeat, Adolf Hitler committed suicide 
in a bunker in Berlin in April 1945, and his final writings indicated that his 
mental condition was becoming increasingly fragile.

74
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Excerpts from Dr. Walter C. 
Langer’s Profile of Adolf Hitler
1. Hitler may die of natural cause.
2. Hitler might seek refuge in a neutral country.
3. Hitler might get killed in battle.
4. Hitler might be assassinated.
5. Hitler may go insane.
6. German military might revolt and seize him.
7. Hitler may fall into enemy hands.
8. Hitler might commit suicide (the most plausible outcome).
(Source: Ronald M. Holmes and Stephen T. Holmes, Profiling Vio-
lent Crimes: An Investigative Tool, 3rd edition)
A Historic Profiling Failure: 
The Boston Strangler
Langer’s profile was correct, but it didn’t lead to the successful capture or 
interrogation of the subject. In the case of the Boston Strangler, profilers 
appear to have gotten the profile wrong.

75
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
Adolf Hitler (right)

76
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Case Study: 
The Boston Strangler
Although Albert DeSalvo confessed to the Boston Strangler mur-
ders, the prosecution was unable to establish enough evidence 
that he had committed these crimes. No one was ever charged in 
the Boston Strangler killings, though many felt the true perpetrator 
was in prison.
More than thirty-five years after the last Boston Strangler murder, 
the final victim, Mary Sullivan, was exhumed from her grave. A se-
men stain on her body was tested for DNA. Although no nuclear DNA 
had survived the intervening years, scientists did find mitochondrial 
DNA. Investigators used blood from Albert DeSalvo’s brother, Rich-
ard, to get a sample of mitochondrial DNA, which would be identi-
cal to Albert DeSalvo’s since it is passed through the maternal line. 
Instead of confirming that DeSalvo was Sullivan’s killer, as many 
expected, the tests revealed that the semen did not belong to De-
Salvo, making it far less likely he had committed the crime. 
Between June of 1962 and January of 1964, women in Boston, Massa-
chusetts, fell prey to a serial murderer who sexually assaulted and strangled 
his victims. In all, the serial killer murdered thirteen women. All lived in the 
Boston metro area; most were older women; all were strangled, usually with 
a piece of their own clothing; all had been sadistically sexually assaulted; 

77
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
and in each case, the killer provided his unique “signature”—a neat bow 
tied beneath the victim’s chin.
With growing panic among Boston’s citizens, state authorities appointed 
a panel to develop a profile of the suspect. These experts included, among 
others, a psychiatrist with knowledge of sex crimes, a physician with expe-
rience in anthropology, a gynecologist, and Dr. James Brussels, the famous 
psychiatrist who’d so accurately developed the profile of New York City’s 
Mad Bomber in 1956. 
The panel was divided. Most panel members felt the thirteen murders 
under review were committed not by one but two perpetrators. Both per-
petrators were thought to be unmarried, had weak or distant fathers, were 
sexually inadequate, and hated their deceased but once-abusive mothers. 
One perpetrator lived alone and killed the older women; the other might 
have been a homosexual who knew and killed the younger women.
Brussels disagreed. He believed all thirteen murders were committed by 
the same person who changed his MO. He felt the perpetrator didn’t fit 
either profile provided by the rest of the committee. Rather, he thought the 
serial killer was probably of Spanish or Italian heritage, would be at least 
thirty years old, and that over the two-year killing spree the murderer had 
“grown psychosexually from infancy to puberty to manhood.” Evidence for 
this “growth” came from the fact that the Strangler left his fourteenth victim 
alive; he assaulted her and then apologized for his crime.
That victim was able to provide a description of her attacker to the 
police, which led to the arrest of thirty-three-year-old Albert DeSalvo. De-
salvo didn’t even remotely fit the profiles provided by the special profil-
ing committee: He was married; his wife said he had a voracious sexual 
appetite; he fathered two children; he had criminal records for child 
molestation, breaking and entering, and burglary. After his arrest, he 
claimed to have raped more than 300 women in the New England area as 

78
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
The Boston Strangler was not the loner investigators profiled him to be; he 
had a wife and family.

79
Criminal Profiling in Fiction and History
an offender known as the “Green Man.” He also confessed to the Boston 
Strangler murders, as well as two more. Police and mental health profes-
sionals found his confessions to be credible because he provided details 
that had never been made public—ones only the killer could know.
In 1965, after being diagnosed as a schizophrenic, DeSalvo was de-
tained indefinitely for observation. Then, in 1967, a jury convicted him of 
the “Green Man” break-ins and sentenced him to life in prison. DeSalvo 
was murdered by another inmate in 1973.
Unlike what is portrayed in the movies, the Boston Strangler profile 
failed to lead to an arrest and conviction. This failure gave profiling a bad 
name for the next several years. It wasn’t until the successful use of profil-
ing in another famous case in the early 1970s that profiling became a cred-
ible tool in law enforcement once again.


5
Crime-Specific 
Profiling
O
ver half (57%) of . . . child abduction murders are committed by 
a killer who is a stranger to the victim. Family involvement in this 
type of case is infrequent (9%). However, the relationship between 
the victim and the killer varies with the gender and age of the victim. The 
youngest females, 1–5 years old, tend to be killed by friends or acquaintances 
(64%), while the oldest females, 16–17 years old, tend to be killed by strangers 
(also 64%). The relationship between the killer and victim is different for the male 
victims. The youngest male victims (1–5 years old) are most likely to be killed by 
strangers (also 64%), as are the teenage males (13–15 years old, 60% and 16–17 
years old, 58%).
The average age of killers of abducted children is around 27 years old. They 
are predominantly unmarried (85%) and half of them (51%) either live alone (17%) 
Chapter

82
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminals who prey on young people take advantage of children’s innocence 
and vulnerability.

83
Crime-Specific Profiling
or with their parents (34%). Half of them are unemployed, and those that 
are employed work in unskilled or semi-skilled labor occupations. There-
fore, the killers can generally be characterized as “social marginals.”
Almost two-thirds of the killers (61%) had prior arrests for violent crimes, 
with slightly more than half of the killers’ prior crimes (53%) committed 
against children. The most frequent prior crimes against children were rape 
(31% of killers) and other sexual assault (45% of killers). Sixty-seven percent 
of the child abduction murderers’ prior crimes were similar in M.O. to the 
murder that was committed by the same killer.
Commonly, the killers are at the initial victim-killer contact site for a 
legitimate reason (66%). They either lived in the area (29%) or were engag-
ing in some normal activity. Most of the victims of child abduction murder 
are victims of opportunity (57%). Only in 14 percent of cases did the killer 
choose his victim because of some physical characteristic of the victim. The 
primary motivation for the child abduction murder is sexual assault.
The above profile of child-abductor-homicide perpetrators and victims is 
quoted from a report titled Case Management for Missing Children Homi-
cide Investigation, created jointly by Washington’s attorney general Chris-
tine O. Gregoire and the U.S. Department of Justice’s Office of Juvenile 
Justice and Delinquency Prevention. This public document illustrates how 
criminal profiling can help law enforcement officials find criminals and 
equip the public to protect themselves.
By using profiles specific to the crime of child-abduction murder, law 
enforcement officials dealing with a missing or murdered child have a 
place from which they can begin to develop theories about the perpetrator. 
Other profiles—for example, those of serial murderers, rapists, or arsonists—
won’t match the profile of a child-abductor murderer. Investigators need 
information about offenders specific to certain crimes. 

84
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
During the Atlanta Child Murders, parents would not leave their children  
unattended.
After the failure of profiling in the Boston-Strangler case in the early 
1960s, law enforcement stayed away from using profiles for many years. It 
wasn’t until the early 1970s that criminal psychologists and law enforce-
ment officials began developing profiles once again. The case that brought 

85
Crime-Specific Profiling
When Is a Murderer 
Considered a Serial Killer?
According to the FBI’s Crime Classification Manual, for someone 
to be considered a “serial killer,” he or she must have committed 
“three or more separate events (murders) in three or more sepa-
rate locations with an emotional cooling-off period in between.” By 
emphasizing the number of murders, their locations, and their dif-
ferences in timing, the FBI distinguishes serial killing from other 
types of crime. For example, an angry student kills multiple people 
at school by setting off a bomb in his locker during the time when 
classes change. While his crime meets the minimum-number-of-
victims requirement (three or more) for serial killings, it doesn’t 
meet the place and time requirements provided in the FBI’s defini-
tion. The student’s killings happened at the same time in the same 
place. This crime would be called mass murder.
crime-specific profiling back in vogue was the Atlanta child-serial-murder 
investigation.
The Atlanta Child Murders: 
Profiling Returns
When police detectives received a call about a foul odor in a wooded area 
off of Niskey Lake Road outside Atlanta, Georgia, in 1979, they had no idea 

86
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Fast Fact: 
Hit men, hired assassins, terrorists, and politically motivated mur-
derers are not classified as serial killers. 
the result of that call would throw the city and its citizens into a full-blown, 
two-year nightmare. Police investigated the site and found two decompos-
ing bodies: one of thirteen-year-old Alfred Evans and the other of fourteen-
year-old Edward Smith. Both had been missing for a week or less. These 
two teenagers were the first of what would become twenty-nine murders 
over the next two years. All the victims were black; all but two were male; 
and they ranged in age from eight to twenty-seven years, though most were 
in their early teens. The media labeled the serial killings the Atlanta Child 
Murders, and the killings kept Atlanta’s citizens in a state of high alert bor-
dering on panic.
Parents feared for their children’s safety as they walked to school or went 
out to play; many parents refused to let their children be outside without an 
adult. Law enforcement officials were frustrated as someone killed Atlanta’s 
children—seemingly without fear of being caught. Investigators knew they 
had a serial killer in their city, but they didn’t know who it was. They 
needed help. An incident halfway through the string of murders proved to 
be the break law enforcement needed. 
After ten-year-old Earl Terrell disappeared in July 1980, his parents re-
ceived several telephone calls demanding ransom from an alleged kidnap-
per who claimed to have taken their son from Georgia to Alabama. The fact 

87
Crime-Specific Profiling
The Atlanta Child Murderer’s first victims were discovered in the woods.
that the victim was supposedly taken across state lines moved the case 
(and all cases related to it) from local and state jurisdiction to federal juris-
diction. That meant the FBI could become involved. When the telephone 
calls proved to be a hoax, then–Attorney General Griffin Bell ordered the 
FBI to look into the cases of the missing children. Was it possible that they 
had been taken across state lines?
FBI agents and BSU instructors Roy Hazelwood and John Douglas 
were sent to Atlanta. The two reviewed the case files: crime-scene photos, 
details about how the victims were dressed, how the autopsies had been 
conducted, and statements from police interviews. The two seasoned de-

88
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Investigators created a profile to “uncover” specific traits of the killer.

89
Crime-Specific Profiling
Not an Exact Science
The work of the profilers in the Boston Strangler case was com-
pletely wrong. The profile compiled in the Atlanta Child Murders was 
completely right. Or were they?
DNA evidence in the Boston Strangler case casts doubt on the 
guilt of Albert DeSalvo. In 2005, the cases of five of the murdered 
Atlanta children were reopened. Wayne Williams was not convicted 
of murdering any of those children, and the DeKalb County Chief 
of Police believes that Williams murdered no one. So, although he 
might have fit the profile, it is possible Williams is innocent.
Does this mean that profiles aren’t useful? Of course not.  But 
they should be considered as just one part of an investigation.
tectives examined the victims’ backgrounds and interviewed their family 
members to see what the victims had in common. They visited where the 
bodies had been dumped. They examined the neighborhoods where each 
of the children disappeared. After careful analysis, they summarized their 
findings into what they believed was an accurate profile of the killer. What 
they came up with differed from what many people expected. John Doug-
las describes their profile in detail in his book Mindhunter: Inside the FBI’s 
Elite Serial Crime Unit. What follows is adapted from that account.
First, because all the victims were black and came from predominantly 
black areas of the city, the two profilers felt the perpetrator must be black. 
How else could he move easily in and out of the victims’ neighborhoods 

90
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Crimes Best Suited to Profiling
Not every crime is the kind in which a profile of an unknown  subject 
is beneficial. Vernon J. Geberth, retired lieutenant-commander of 
the New York City Police Department and author of the “homicide-
investigation bible” Practical Homicide Investigation: Tactics, Pro-
cedures, and Forensic Techniques, suggests that these crimes are 
most suitable for profiling:
•	 serial rapes
•	 sexual assaults that include sadistic torture
•	 murders related to sex or lust
•	 murders in which internal organs have been removed or re-
vealed
•	 murders in which the bodies were mutilated after death
•	 crimes involving the occult
•	 pedophilia and other forms of sexual abuse of children 
•	 terroristic letter writings and threats
•	 obscene letter writings and threats
•	 arsons that appear to have no motive
without drawing attention to himself? Both agents knew from experience 
that most sexual killers (the Atlanta Child Murders fit a sexual-murder pat-
tern) target their own race. 

91
Crime-Specific Profiling
The Atlanta Child murderer had to gain the trust of his victims. He used 
a police-type car to lure children.

92
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
One Way to Categorize Serial Killers
Dr. Kim Rossmo, a detective inspector in Vancouver, British Co-
lumbia, developed a way to categorize serial killers based on how 
they find their victims:
the Hunter
the Poacher
the Troller
the Trapper
the Raptor
the Stalker
the Ambusher
Second, Hazelwood and Douglas felt the perpetrator had to have a car; 
the children had all been taken from where they were abducted and trans-
ported elsewhere. The profilers also believed the car would be a police-type 
vehicle, perhaps even a car that had once been used by law enforcement. 
They offered several other details about their idea of who was commit-
ting these crimes: He would be single and in his mid- to late twenties. He 
would be a police buff and might have impersonated an officer. He would 
own a police-type dog. He would not have a girlfriend. He would have 
some kind of talent or trick he would use to lure his victims into talking 
with him—probably something to do with music. He would be following the 
case’s development in the press and would react to developments he saw 

93
Crime-Specific Profiling
Fast Fact:
Most experts agree that the number of serial murders and of serial 
murderers in North America is unknown. Estimates range from a 
low of twenty to as high as three hundred.
there. As evidence mounted, he would start dumping bodies in the river to 
destroy any possible future evidence that could be used against him.
The details of this profile prompted police officers to begin watching 
for suspicious activity around bridges and rivers. One officer on surveil-
lance saw a car drive across the Jackson Parkway Bridge, which spanned 
the Chattahoochee River, stop briefly in the middle, turn around, and come 
back across the bridge. After the car stopped but before it turned around, 
the officer heard a big splash.
The surveillance officer pulled over the suspicious car. The driver was 
a light-skinned black man named Wayne Bertram Williams. Without suf-
ficient cause to arrest him, the police let him go, but they kept their eyes 
on him. As it turned out, Wayne Williams matched the FBI profile almost 
completely: he was black; he owned a car; he owned a German Shepherd; 
he was a police buff; he’d been arrested for impersonating an officer; he 
was twenty-three years old; he was single; and he presented himself as a 
“music-biz talent scout.”
When a body was found floating in the Chattahoochee River two days 
after the surveillance officer stopped Williams, police arrested Wayne Wil-
liams and charged him with murder. Investigators found hair and fiber 

94
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
evidence in Williams’s car that directly linked him to twelve of the Atlanta 
murders. Eyewitnesses put him with one of the victims. His German Shep-
herd’s hair was found on the body of one of the victims. In January 1982, 
he was tried and found guilty of the last two murders and sentenced to life 
in prison. The murders stopped after his arrest.
Though solid investigation and fiber analysis are what provided the 
hard evidence prosecutors needed to convict the Atlanta Child Murderer, 
law enforcement officials credit the profile provided by FBI agents Hazel-
wood and Douglas as the critical tool that turned the investigation around. 
The accuracy of their profile also did much to help law enforcement offi-
cials and the judiciary to once again embrace profiling as a legitimate tool 
in the arsenal of criminal investigation and prosecution.
Profiling Since Atlanta
Since the FBI’s success in Atlanta in the early 1980s, profiling has come a 
long way. Experts in the field have developed generalized profiles for per-
petrators of different kinds. Serial arsonists, researchers have discovered, 
generally fit one profile. Serial rapists fit another. Sexual sadists fit a third. 
Occult-related crime sprees require a different profile from the rest. How 
profiles are developed and the kind of profile used depends on the type of 
crime itself, and then on the specifics of that crime.
Serial killers have their own classifications and characteristics. One clas-
sification developed by Hazelwood and Douglas divides all serial killers 
into two groups based on how they commit their crimes: organized or dis-
organized. (For more on organized and disorganized offenders, refer back 
to chapter 3.) Another way to profile serial killers is based on how they 
choose their victims. Did the murderer pick her ahead of time and stalk her 
the way a cheetah would stalk a gazelle? Did the offender pick his victim 

95
Crime-Specific Profiling
spontaneously by random selection? Or did the victim just happen to be in 
the wrong place at the wrong time?
Today, most law enforcement officials have access to standardized pro-
files of offenders for various crimes. While these profiles suggest what an 
offender might be like or how an offender will most likely behave, they are 
incomplete pictures at best. Profiling, no matter how far it has come, is still 
only one resource available to investigators among a host of forensic inves-
tigative techniques. 
Profiling alone doesn’t solve crimes; it’s only when pro-filing is used in 
conjunction with other sound investigative procedures that cases are suc-
cessfully solved. But because profiling has been so successful in a few high-
profile cases, some investigators rely too much on profiling and not enough 
on old-fashioned detective work and sound evidence-gathering techniques. 
This is only one danger inherent in the use of criminal psychology and 
profiling to combat crime. There are more.


6
The Dangers, 
Temptations, and 
Limitations of 
Criminal Psychology
C
riminal psychologists and profilers face many dangers in their profes-
sions.
 
• One agent is killed on the job.
• Another develops stress-related illnesses.
• One is assaulted by a subject during an interview.
• A fourth alienates his peers by focusing too narrowly on his profile.
• Another agent can no longer sympathize with his children’s normal, ev-
eryday hurts because of the extreme suffering he’s seen some children 
experience at the hands of criminals.
Chapter

98
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
Criminal psychologists experience many emotional stressors.
• An agent loses his marriage when his wife can no longer handle the 
stress of her husband’s job.
• Still others are seduced by their success and become overconfident, 
damaging their skills and reputations.
• Countless more burn out and find other jobs.
• Some make mistakes, and people die as a result.
These issues are just “part of the job” for criminal psychologists and 
profilers. Codes of ethics, interview protocols, peer support, vacations, 
friendships, religious faith, counseling, delegation of work, security mea-
sures, training, and education can help those in these fields navigate these 
hazards, but in the war on crime, some soldiers—especially those in law 
enforcement—experience various types of casualties or become casualties 
themselves.

99
The Dangers and Limitations of Criminal Psychology
For the criminal psychologist and profiler, the costs are often emotional 
or psychological. Though these jobs are glamorized in the media, the te-
dious hours of research and long hours of examining horrendous crimes, 
combined with the stress of knowing your input could save or cost lives, 
makes the reality of these vocations far different from the solve-it-every-
time-in-sixty-minutes ideal of television shows. 
No matter how far criminal psychology and profiling move into the law 
enforcement realm, they will never provide the clear-cut, black-and-white 
answers found in evidence analysis. The fields continue to be subjective 
sciences.
Still Inexact
In his book Journey into Darkness, profiler John Douglas reminds readers:
Life and death decisions can be made based on [our] advice, yet 
[we] don’t have the luxury of hard facts to back them up . . . [our] 
stock-in-trade is human behavior, and human behavior, the psychia-
trists are so fond of telling [us], is not an exact science.
Though criminal profiling has come a long way toward being accepted 
as a legitimate resource for investigators to use, it is still met with suspicion 
by some police departments and law enforcement agencies. This skepti-
cism occurs in part because profiling is still an inexact science based on 
observations, instincts, and general patterns of behavior rather than on de-
finitive evidence, formulas, and facts. Law enforcement officials sometimes 
still second-guess criminal psychologists. 
In one investigation in 1993, New York City detectives, working on the 
case of a missing ten-year-old girl who was held captive in Long Island by 

100
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
a pedophile for seventeen days, blamed profiling for actually preventing 
them from solving the crime more quickly. Though the girl was eventually 
rescued, police complained that the profile provided for this case “dis-
tracted” and misled them because it stated that pedophiles don’t hide their 
victims in their homes.
 Some police officers still question the value of profiles. Others question 
whether criminal psychologists and profilers can be effective when many 
of the assessment tools psychologists use to evaluate criminals have limita-
tions, and when only a handful of psychologists know how and when to 
best use them. If the people giving the tests are flawed, and the tests them-
selves are flawed, how can the results be anything but flawed?
Part of the problem is an expectation that profiling and criminal psy-
chology solve crimes. But those in the field will tell you that they don’t; they 
only add one piece to the crime-solving picture.
The mixed reception criminal psychologists and profilers receive in both 
the law enforcement world and the judicial system might be enough to 
dissuade someone from pursuing a career in either vocation. But for those 
who choose to assist crime solvers with psychology, the reward that comes 
with helping to solve a crime is well worth the criticism they may take from 
some peers. Sometimes, however, that reward is long in coming. In other 
cases, it never comes.
Not Every Crime Is Solved
• London’s Jack the Ripper (1888)
• Lizzie Borden (1892)
• San Francisco’s Zodiac killer (1966–1981)
• Canada’s “Highway of Tears” Highway 16 in British Columbia 
(1990–2002)

101
The horrors experienced in the field of criminal psychology are enough to 
force some agents to quit.
• Edmonton, Alberta’s prostitute slayings (1993–2004)
• Colorado’s JonBenet Ramsey murder (1996)
These are just a few of the high-profile crimes that remain unsolved despite 
law enforcement’s best attempts to find the perpetrators. At their best, they 
are intriguing case studies in human behavior; at their worst, they are glar-
ing reminders of the limitations of criminal-investigation techniques, even 
today. Twenty-first century technology and evidence-processing techniques 
still aren’t sufficient to solve every crime or identify every perpetrator. And 
when a person moves into law enforcement or the fields of criminal psy-
The Dangers and Limitations of Criminal Psychology

102
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY & PERSONALITY PROFILING
chology and profiling, he will have to adjust to the fact that not every crime 
can be solved.
For some investigators, that truth is tolerable. They can accept their limi-
tations and move on, though a case may haunt them for years or decades. 
For others, the stress is too much to bear.
The Toll of Criminal  
Psychology and Profiling 
In his book Journey into Darkness, twenty-five-year veteran of the FBI John 
Douglas describes what happened to him when the stress of dealing with 
horrific crime day-in and day-out finally caught up with him:
In early December of 1983, at thirty-eight years of age, I collapsed in a 
hotel room in Seattle while working on the Green River murders case. 
The two agents I’d brought with me from Quantico had to break down 
the door to get to me. For five days I hovered in a coma between life and 
death in the intensive care unit of Swedish Hospital suffering from viral 
encephalitis brought on by the acute stress of handling more than 150 
cases at a time, all of which I knew were depending on me for answers.
	I wasn’t expected to live, but miraculously I did, nurtured by first-
rate medical care, the love of my family, and the support of my fellow 
agents. I returned home, almost a month later, in a wheelchair and 
couldn’t go back to work until May. All during that time I was afraid 
the neurological damage the disease left me with would prevent me 
from shooting at FBI standards and therefore permanently end my 
career as an agent. To this day, I still have some impairment on my 
left side.

103
	Unfortunately, my situation isn’t unique in this business. Most of 
the other agents who’ve worked with me as profilers and criminal inves-
tigative analysts . . . have suffered some severe, work-related stress or 
illness which kept them off the job for some period of time. The range 
of problems runs the gamut—neurological disease like mine, chest pain 
and cardiac scares, ulcers and GI (gastro-intestinal) disorders, anxieties 
and depression.
One of the greatest dangers faced by those who pursue careers in crimi-
nal psychology and profiling is the way it can adversely affect their per-
sonal lives and health. Retired chief of the FBI BSU Roger L. Depue, in his 
book Between Good and Evil, describes the cost paid by those who fight 
crime this way: 
The task of fighting evil can take a terrible toll on the people who are 
charged with it. It can cost them their families, their equilibrium, their 
capacity for joy.
	 A relentless diet of human misery and sadistic violence can bring 
any human—even those armored by years of experience in a law enforce-
ment career—to the brink of despair. I once came to that place myself. But 
I returned from it, because, along with the evil, I have also come to know 
something about the redemptive power of good.
	
That confidence, the confidence in the redemptive power of good as Depue 
calls it, is what draws people and allows them to persevere in the fields of 
criminal psychology and profiling. 
The Dangers and Limitations of Criminal Psychology

104
Glossary
alleged: Claimed, but not yet proven.
atypical: Unusual, not typical.
auditory: Relating to hearing.
cavalierly: In a manner displaying arrogance or disregard, or with a 	
carefree attitude.
charlatanism: The practice of falsely claiming a special skill or expertise.
credibility: The ability to inspire trust.
criminology: The sociological study of crime, criminals, and the punish-
ment of criminals.
facets: Parts or aspects of something.
inferences: Conclusions drawn from evidence or reasoning.
linguistic: Relating to language or languages.
plausibility: Believability in the absence of proof.
pragmatic: Practical, concerned with facts.
precocious: More developed than is expected.
protocols: Standard procedures.
psychopathic: Possessing antisocial, aggressive, or perverted tendencies.
psychopathological: Relating to the study of the causes and development 
of psychiatric disorders.
sadists: People who achieve sexual satisfaction by causing pain in others.
schizophrenic: Having a psychotic disorder characterized by illogical 	
thinking, hallucinations, delusions, and withdrawal from reality.
tangible: Real, capable of being touched or understood.
vogue: The state of being popular at a particular time.
voracious: Ravenous, insatiable.

105
Further Reading
Depue, Roger L., with Susan Schindehette. Between Good and Evil: A Mas-
ter Profiler’s Hunt for Society’s Most Violent Predators. New York: Warner 
Books, 2005.
Douglas, John, and Mark Olshaker. Mind Hunter: Inside the FBI’s Elite Se-
rial Crime Unit. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995.
Evans, Colin. The Casebook of Forensic Detection: How Science Solved 100 
of the World’s Most Baffling Crimes. New York: Berkley Books, 2007.
Holmes, Ronald M., and Stephen T. Holmes. Profiling Violent Crimes: An 
Investigative Tool, Fourth Edition. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publica-
tions, 2008.
Innes, Brian. Profile of a Criminal Mind: How Psychological Profiling Helps 
Solve True Crimes. Pleasantville, N.Y.: Reader’s Digest Association, 2003.
McCrary, Gregg O., with Katherine Ramsland. The Unknown Darkness: 
Profiling the Predators Among Us. New York: Harper Collins, 2003.
Morrison, Helen, and Harold Goldberg. My Life Among the Serial Killers: 
Inside the Minds of the World’s Most Notorious Murders. New York: 
Harper Collins, 2004.

106
Newton, Michael. The Encyclopedia of Serial Killers: A Study of the Chill-
ing Criminal Phenomenon from the “Angels of Death” to the “Zodiac” 
Killer. New York: Checkmark Books, 2006.
Owen, David. Hidden Evidence: Forty True Crimes and How Forensic Sci-
ence Helped Solve Them. Buffalo, N.Y.: Firefly Books, 2009.
Phillips, Charles, and Alan Axelrod. Cops, Crooks, and Criminologists: An 
International Biographical Dictionary of Law Enforcement. New York: 
Checkmark Books, 2000.
Ramsland, Katherine. The Criminal Mind: A Writer’s Guide to Forensic 
Psychology. Cincinnati: Writer’s Digest Books, 2002.
Schechter, Harold. The Serial Killer Files: The Who, What, Where, How, 
and Why of the World’s Most Terrifying Murders. New York: Random 
House, 2003. 
Wrightsman, Lawrence S. Forensic Psychology. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth/
Thomas Learning, 2008.

107
For More Information
International Association of Forensic Criminologists
www.profiling.org
American Academy of Forensic Sciences
www.aafs.org
Canadian Psychological Association
www.cpa.ca
Court TV’s Crime Library
www.trutv.com/library/crime/index.html
Crime and Clues: The Art and Science of Criminal Investigation
www.crimeandclues.com
FBI Academy’s Behavioral Sciences Unit
www.fbi.gov/about-us/training/bsu
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
www.fbi.gov
Forensic Solutions
www.corpus-delicti.com
Institute of Behavioral Sciences
www.colorado.edu/ibs/

108
Society for Police and Criminal Psychology
psychweb.cisat.jmu.edu/spcp
University of Toronto’s Centre for Criminology
www.criminology.utoronto.ca
U.S. Department of Justice
www.usdoj.gov	
	
	
Publisher’s note:
The websites listed on these pages were active at the time of publication. 
The publisher is not responsible for websites that have changed their ad-
dresses or discontinued operation since the date of publication. The pub-
lisher will review and update the website list upon each reprint.

109
anthrax (description and classification) 48
anthrax case 45–52
Atlanta Child Murders 85–87, 89–94
behavioral sciences (definition) 21
Between Good and Evil 103
Boston Strangler 76–79, 84, 89
Case Management for Missing Children Ho-
micide Investigation 81–83
Category A agents 48
Chase, Richard Trenton (case study) 9–11
classification systems for criminals 55–56, 58–
61, 85, 92, 94–95
court consultants 36–42
court topics for testimony 38
Crime Classification Manual 56
crime-scene analysis 57, 59–60
crimes most suitable for profiling 90
criminal profilers (description) 11, 14–16, 52–
54, 56, 100
criminal profilers (education and training) 
62–63
criminal profilers (in modern fiction) 71–73
criminal profilers (techniques used) 71
criminal profiles (description) 50–51, 52
criminal profiles (five-step process) 54
criminal profiles (four assumptions of the pro-
filer) 54, 56
criminal profiling (how it works) 23
criminal psychology (careers) 28
criminal psychology (description) 11, 14–17, 
19, 100
criminal psychology (explanation of roles) 
25–28
criminal psychology (how it works) 23
criminal “signature” 56
death sentence 39–41
DeSalvo, Albert (case study) 76–79, 89
disorganized offenders 55, 58–59, 94
educators 42
expert witnesses 41
FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit (BSU) 61–63
FBI’s Violent Criminal Apprehension Program 
17
forensic sciences (definition) 17
Gross, Hans 17, 19
history 17–19, 20, 73–74, 76–79
Hitler, Adolf (case study) 73–74
job hazards (emotional) 97–99, 102–103
Journey into Darkness 59–60, 99, 102–103
Langer, Dr. Walter C. 73–74, 76
lawyer consultants 32–34
Locard, Dr. Edmond 67
Lombroso, Cesare 18
Mad Bomber (case study of George Metesky) 
20
Mindhunter: Inside the FBI’s Elite Serial Crime 
Unit 89–90, 92–93
modus operandi (MO) 54, 56
murder elements for profilers 53
offender traits 55
organized offenders 55, 58, 59, 94
Robinson, James B. (case study) 12–13
Index

110
physiognomy 17
police consultants 29–32
psychic detectives 12–13
psychopathological triad 22–23
serial killers (description) 21–23, 85, 94–95
Sherlock Holmes 65–69, 70, 71
standardized profiles 95
statistics 81, 83, 93
television and movies 14, 29, 63, 72, 99
unsolved crimes 100–101
Williams, Wayne Bertram (case study) 85–87, 
89–90, 92–94

111
Picture Credits
Artville: pp. 19, 47, 58, 60, 78, 88, 101
Benjamin Stewart: p. 87
Brand-X: pp. 10, 26, 91
Corbis: pp. 37, 40
Photos.com: pp. 15, 16, 22, 29, 33, 39, 42, 51, 62, 66, 68, 72, 82, 84, 98
To the best knowledge of the publisher, all other images are in the public 
domain. If any image has been inadvertently uncredited, please notify  
Vestal Creative Services, Vestal, New York 13850, so that rectification can 
be made for future printings.

112
Biographies
Author
Joan Esherick is a full-time author, freelance writer, and professional speaker who lives 
outside of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Joan has contributed dozens of articles to na-
tional print periodicals, written spiritual and educational books, and speaks nationwide.
Series Consultants
Carla Miller Noziglia is Senior Forensic Advisor for the U.S. Department of Justice, In-
ternational Criminal Investigative Training Assistant Program. A Fellow of the American 
Academy of Forensic Sciences, Ms. Noziglia served as chair of the board of Trustees 
of the Forensic Science Foundation. Her work has earned her many honors and com-
mendations, including Distinguished Fellow from the American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences (2003) and the Paul L. Kirk Award from the American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences Criminalistics Section. Ms. Noziglia’s publications include The Real Crime Lab 
(coeditor, 2005), So You Want to be a Forensic Scientist (coeditor, 2003), and contribu-
tions to Drug Facilitated Sexual Assault (2001), Convicted by Juries, Exonerated by Sci-
ence: Case Studies in the Use of DNA (1996), and the Journal of Police Science (1989). 
She is on the editorial board of the Journal for Forensic Identification. 
Jay Siegel is Director of the Forensic and Investigative Sciences Program at Indiana 
University-Purdue University, Indianapolis and Chair of the Department of Chemistry 
and Chemical Biology. He holds a Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry from George Washing-
ton University. He worked for three years at the Virginia Bureau of Forensic Sciences, 
analyzing drugs, fire residues, and trace evidence. From 1980 to 2004 he was professor 
of forensic chemistry and director of the forensic science program at Michigan State 
University in the School of Criminal Justice. Dr. Siegel has testified over 200 times as an 
expert witness in twelve states, Federal Court and Military Court. He is editor in chief of 
the Encyclopedia of Forensic Sciences, author of Forensic Science: A Beginner’s Guide 
and Fundamentals of Forensic Science, and he has more than thirty publications in 
forensic science journals. Dr. Siegel was awarded the 2005 Paul Kirk Award for lifetime 
achievement in forensic science. In February 2009, he was named Distinguished Fellow 
by the American Academy of Forensic Sciences.

