
   Criminal
Justice  
  in Action  
          THE CORE
Larry K. Gaines
California State University  
San Bernardino
roGer Leroy MiLLer
Institute for University Studies  
Arlington, Texas
Seventh Edition 
    Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© 2014, 2012 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used in any form or by
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution,
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012952536
Student Edition ISBN-13: 978-1-285-06915-9
Student Edition ISBN-10: 1-285-06915-3
Looseleaf Edition ISBN-13: 978-1-285-06917-3
Looseleaf Edition ISBN-10: 1-285-06917-X
Wadsworth Cengage Learning
20 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002-3098
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions  
with office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at 
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada  
by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Wadsworth, visit www.cengage.com/Wadsworth
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.CengageBrain.com
Criminal Justice in Action
The Core,  7th Edition 
Larry K. Gaines and Roger LeRoy Miller
Editor-in-Chief: Michelle Julet
Senior Publisher: Linda Schreiber Ganster
Senior Acquisitions Editor: 
Carolyn Henderson-Meier
Senior Developmental Editor: Bob Jucha
Assistant Editor: Rachel McDonald
Editorial Assistant: Casey Lozier
Senior Marketing Manager: 
Michelle Williams
Marketing Assistant: Jack Ward
Production Manager: Brenda Ginty
Senior Content Project Manager: 
Ann Borman
Photo Researcher: Anne Sheroff
Copyeditor: Mary Berry
Indexer: Terry Casey
Media Editor: Andy Yap
Manufacturing Planner: Judy Inouye
Art Director: Maria Epes
Interior Designer: Riezebos Holzbaur
Cover Designer: Riezebos Holzbaur/ 
Tim Heraldo 
Cover Image: Scott Olson/ 
2011 Getty Images 
Compositor: Parkwood Composition 
Service
Printed in the United States of America
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   16   15   14   13   12  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   iii
Contents in brief
PREFACE xiii
Part One: The Criminal Justice System 
ChAptEr 1: Criminal Justice today 2
ChAptEr 2 
Measuring and Explaining Crime 30
ChAptEr 3: Inside Criminal Law 64
Part Two: The Police and Law Enforcement 
ChAptEr 4: Law Enforcement today 96
ChAptEr 5:  problems and Solutions in Modern policing 126
ChAptEr 6:  police and the Constitution— 
 
the rules of Law Enforcement 158
Part Three: Criminal Courts 
ChAptEr 7:  Courts and the Quest for Justice 186
ChAptEr 8:   pretrial procedures and the Criminal trial 214
ChAptEr 9:  punishment and Sentencing 250
Part Four: Corrections 
ChAptEr 10: probation and Intermediate Sanctions 284
ChAptEr 11: prisons and Jails 308
ChAptEr 12: Behind Bars—the Life of an Inmate 334
Part Five: Special Issues 
Chapter 13: the Juvenile Justice System 364
Chapter 14: today’s Challenges in Criminal Justice 394
THE CONSTITUTION A-1
YOU BE THE __________: ACTUAL OUTCOMES AND COURT DECISIONS B-1
TABLE OF CASES C-1
GLOSSARY G-1
NAME INDEX I-1
SUBJECT INDEX I-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   v
CHapTER 2:
Measuring and  
Explaining Crime 30
types of CriMe 33
Violent Crime 33
Property Crime 33
Public Order Crime 33
White-Collar Crime 34
Organized Crime 34
High-Tech Crime 34
CriMe MeasureMent in the united states 35
The Uniform Crime Report 36
Victim Surveys 37
Self-Reported Surveys 39
CriMe trends 40
Looking Good: Crime in the 1990s and 2000s 41
Crime, Race, and Poverty 42
Women and Crime 44
Contents
CHapTER 1: 
Criminal Justice today 2
What Is CrIme? 5
Determining Criminal Behavior 5
An Integrated Definition of Crime 7
the purpose of the CriMinaL JustiCe 
systeM 7
Maintaining Justice 8
Protecting Society 8
the struCture of the CriMinaL JustiCe 
systeM 9
The Importance of Federalism  9
The Criminal Justice Process  13
disCretion and ethiCs 15
Informal Decision Making 15
The Pitfalls of Discretion 15
Ethics and Justice 16
CriMinaL JustiCe today 17
Crime and Law Enforcement: The Bottom Line 17
Homeland Security and Individual Rights 20
Inmate Populations: A New Trend 21
The Social Media Revolution 24
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
Chapter One appendix
how to read Case Citations and 
Find Court Decisions 29
Features of Special Interest xi
preface xiii
Part One: The Criminal Justice System
Lucy Nicholson/Reuters /Landov  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
What Causes CriMe? 45
Correlation and Cause 45
The Role of Theory 46
The Brain and the Body 46
Bad Neighborhoods and Other Economic 
Disadvantages 49
Life Lessons and Criminal Behavior 50
Victims of Crime 53
From Theory to Practice 55
the LinK betWeen druGs and CriMe 55
The Criminology of Drug Use 56
Drug Addiction and Dependency 56
The Drug–Crime Relationship 57
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 3:
Inside Criminal Law 64
Written sourCes of aMeriCan CriMinaL 
LaW 67
Constitutional Law 67
Statutory Law 67
Administrative Law 69
Case Law 69
the purposes of CriMinaL LaW 70
Protect and Punish: The Legal Function of the Law 70
Maintain and Teach: The Social Function of the Law 70
CLassifiCation of CriMes 71
Civil Law and Criminal Law 71
Felonies and Misdemeanors 74
Mala in Se and Mala Prohibita 75
the eLeMents of a CriMe 77
Criminal Act: Actus Reus 77
Mental State: Mens Rea 77
Concurrence 80
Causation 80
Attendant Circumstances 81
Harm 82
defenses under CriMinaL LaW 82
Criminal Responsibility and the Law 83
Justification Criminal Defenses and the Law 86
proteCtinG CiviL Liberties 88
The Bill of Rights 89
Due Process 89
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key 
Terms • Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
Part Two: The Police and Law Enforcement 
CHapTER 4:
Law Enforcement today 96
the responsibiLities of the poLiCe 99
Enforcing Laws 99
Providing Services 100
Preventing Crime 101
Preserving the Peace 101
a short history of the aMeriCan poLiCe 102
The Evolution of American Law Enforcement 102
Policing Today: Intelligence, Terrorism, and 
Technology 105
reCruitMent and traininG:  
beCoMinG a poLiCe offiCer 107
Basic Requirements 108
Training 109
WoMen and Minorities in poLiCinG today 110
Antidiscrimination Law and Affirmative Action 110
Working Women: Gender and Law Enforcement 111
Minority Report: Race and Ethnicity in Law 
Enforcement 111
pubLiC and private LaW enforCeMent 114
Municipal Law Enforcement Agencies 114
Scott Olson/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T A b L E  o f  C o N T E N T S   vii
CHapTER 7: 
Courts and the Quest for  
Justice 186
funCtions of the Courts 189
Due Process and Crime Control in the Courts 189
The Rehabilitation Function 190
Sheriffs and County Law Enforcement 114
State Police and Highway Patrols 115
Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 116
Private Security 120
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 5: 
problems and Solutions  
in Modern policing 126
poLiCe orGanization and fieLd 
operations 129
The Structure of the Police Department 129
Police on Patrol: The Backbone of the Department 131
Police Investigations 133
Aggressive Investigation Strategies 133
Clearance Rates and Cold Cases 134
Forensic Investigations and DNA 134
poLiCe strateGies: What WorKs 137
Response Time to 911 Calls 138
Patrol Strategies 139
Predictive Policing and Crime Mapping  139
Arrest Strategies 140
Community Policing and Problem Solving 141
“us versus theM”: issues in Modern 
poLiCinG 143
Police Subculture 144
The Physical Dangers of Police Work 144
Stress and the Mental Dangers of Police Work 145
Authority and the Use of Force 146
poLiCe MisConduCt and ethiCs 149
Police Corruption 149
Police Accountability 150
Ethics in Law Enforcement 151
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 6: 
police and the Constitution—the 
rules of Law Enforcement 158
the fourth aMendMent 161
Reasonableness 161
Probable Cause 161
The Exclusionary Rule 163
stops and frisKs 165
The Elusive Definition of Reasonable Suspicion 165
A Stop 167
A Frisk 167
arrests 168
Elements of an Arrest 168
Arrests with a Warrant 169
Arrests without a Warrant 170
LaWfuL searChes and seizures 170
The Role of Privacy in Searches 171
Search and Seizure Warrants 171
Searches and Seizures without a Warrant 172
Searches of Automobiles 174
The Plain View Doctrine 175
Electronic Surveillance  176
Social Media Searches 178
the interroGation proCess and 
Miranda 178
The Legal Basis for Miranda 179
When a Miranda Warning Is Required 179
When a Miranda Warning Is Not Required 180
The Future of Miranda 181
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
The Bureaucratic Function 190
the basiC prinCipLes of the  
aMeriCan JudiCiaL systeM 190
Jurisdiction 191
Trial and Appellate Courts 192
The Dual Court System 193
Part Three: Criminal Courts
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
state Court systeMs 194
Courts of Limited Jurisdiction 194
Trial Courts of General Jurisdiction 195
State Courts of Appeals 195
the federaL Court systeM 196
U.S. District Courts 196
U.S. Courts of Appeals 196
The United States Supreme Court 196
JudGes in the Court systeM 199
The Roles and Responsibilities of Trial Judges 199
Selection of Judges 201
Diversity on the Bench 202
the CourtrooM WorK Group 203
Members of the Courtroom Work Group 204
The Judge in the Courtroom Work Group 205
The Prosecution 205
The Defense Attorney 207
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 8: 
pretrial procedures  
and the Criminal trial 214
pretriaL detention 217
The Purpose of Bail 217
Gaining Pretrial Release 219
estabLishinG probabLe Cause 220
The Preliminary Hearing 220
The Grand Jury 220
the proseCutoriaL sCreeninG proCess 221
Case Attrition 221
Screening Factors 222
pLeadinG GuiLty 223
Plea Bargaining in the Criminal Justice System 224
Motivations for Plea Bargaining 225
speCiaL features of CriMinaL triaLs 227
A “Speedy” Trial 227
The Role of the Jury 228
The Privilege against Self-Incrimination 229
The Presumption of a Defendant’s Innocence  229
A Strict Standard of Proof 230
Jury seLeCtion 231
Voir Dire 231
Race and Gender Issues in Jury Selection 232
the triaL 235
Opening Statements 235
The Role of Evidence 235
The Prosecution’s Case 238
Cross-Examination 239
The Defendant’s Case 239
Rebuttal and Surrebuttal 241
Closing Arguments 241
the finaL steps of the triaL and 
postConviCtion proCedures 242
Jury Deliberation 242
The Verdict 243
Appeals 244
Wrongful Convictions 245
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 9: 
punishment and Sentencing 250
the purpose of sentenCinG 253
Retribution  253
Deterrence 254
Incapacitation 254
Rehabilitation 255
Restorative Justice 256
the struCture of sentenCinG 256
Legislative Sentencing Authority 256
Judicial Sentencing Authority 258
The Sentencing Process 259
Factors of Sentencing 260
inConsistenCies in sentenCinG 262
Sentencing Disparity 262
Sentencing Discrimination 263
sentenCinG reforM 265
Sentencing Guidelines 265
Mandatory Sentencing Guidelines 267
Victim Impact Evidence 268
CapitaL punishMent— 
the uLtiMate sentenCe 269
Methods of Execution  269
The Death Penalty and the Supreme Court 270
Still Cruel and Unusual? 273
Debating the Sentence of Death 274
The Immediate Future of the Death Penalty 277
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T A b L E  o f  C o N T E N T S   ix
CHapTER 10: 
probation and  
Intermediate Sanctions 284
the JustifiCation for  
CoMMunity CorreCtions 287
Reintegration 287
Diversion 287
The “Low-Cost Alternative” 288
probation:  
doinG tiMe in the CoMMunity  288
Sentencing Choices and Probation 289
Conditions of Probation 290
The Supervisory Role of the Probation Officer 292
Revocation of Probation 293
New Models of Probation 295
interMediate sanCtions 295
Judicially Administered Sanctions 296
Day Reporting Centers 299
Intensive Supervision Probation 299
Shock Incarceration 299
Home Confinement and Electronic Monitoring 300
Widening the Net 302
the paradox of CoMMunity CorreCtions 303
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 11: 
prisons and Jails 308
a short history of aMeriCan prisons 311
Walnut Street Prison: The First Penitentiary 311
The Great Penitentiary Rivalry:  
 
Pennsylvania versus New York 311
The Reformers and the Progressives 312
The Reassertion of Punishment 313
inMate popuLation trends 314
Factors in Prison Population Growth 314
The Costs of Incarceration 315
Decarceration 316
prison orGanization and ManaGeMent 316
Prison Administration 317
Types of Prisons 319
Photo Courtesy Bergen County Sheriff’s Office, Bergen, NJ
the eMerGenCe of private prisons 322
Why Privatize? 322
The Argument against Private Prisons 324
The Future of Privatization  
 
in the Corrections Industry 325
JaiLs 325
The Jail Population 326
Jail Administration 328
New-Generation Jails 328
the ConsequenCes of our  
hiGh rates of inCarCeration 330
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 12: 
Behind Bars— 
the Life of an Inmate 334
prison CuLture 337
Adapting to Prison Society 337
Who Is in Prison? 338
Rehabilitation and Prison Programs 339
Violence in Prison Culture 339
Issues of Race and Ethnicity 341
CorreCtionaL offiCers and disCipLine 342
Rank and Duties of Correctional Officers 342
Discipline 344
Female Correctional Officers 345
Protecting Prisoners’ Rights 346
Part Four: Corrections
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
inside a WoMen’s prison 347
Characteristics of Female Inmates 348
The Motherhood Problem 349
The Culture of Women’s Prisons 349
paroLe and reLease froM prison 350
Discretionary Release 351
Parole Guidelines 353
Parole Supervision 354
Part Five: Special Issues 
Other Types of Prison Release 355
reentry into soCiety 356
Barriers to Reentry 356
Promoting Desistance 357
The Special Case of Sex Offenders 358
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 13: 
the Juvenile Justice System 364
the evoLution of aMeriCan JuveniLe 
JustiCe 367
The Child-Saving Movement 367
The Illinois Juvenile Court 367
Juvenile Delinquency 368
Constitutional Protections and the Juvenile Court 369
deterMininG deLinquenCy today 371
The Age Question 371
The Culpability Question 372
trends in JuveniLe deLinquenCy 373
Delinquency by the Numbers 373
The Rise and Fall of Juvenile Crime 373
Girls in the Juvenile Justice System 374
School Violence and Bullying 375
faCtors in JuveniLe deLinquenCy 377
The Age-Crime Relationship 377
Substance Abuse 378
Child Abuse and Neglect 379
Gangs 379
first ContaCt: the poLiCe and pretriaL 
proCedures 381
Police Discretion and Juvenile Crime 381
Intake 382
Pretrial Diversion 383
Transfer to Adult Court 383
Detention 384
tryinG and punishinG JuveniLes 384
Adjudication 385
Disposition 386
Juvenile Corrections 386
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
CHapTER 14:
today’s Challenges  
in Criminal Justice 394
hoMeLand seCurity 397
The Global Context of Terrorism 397
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act 399
The Patriot Act 400
The Department of Homeland Security 401
Federal Agencies outside the DHS 401
Counterterrorism Challenges and Strategies 402
Security versus Civil Liberties 405
Cyber CriMe 408
Computer Crime and the Internet 408
Cyber Crimes against Persons and Property 409
Cyber Crimes in the Business World 411
Cyber Crimes against the Community 413
the CriMinaLization of iMMiGration 
LaW 414
Immigration Law Basics 414
Enforcing Immigration Law 417
White-CoLLar CriMe 418
What Is White-Collar Crime? 418
Regulating and Policing White-Collar Crime 420
White-Collar Crime in the 2000s 421
Chapter Summary • Questions for Critical Analysis • Key Terms • 
Self-Assessment Answer Key • CourseMate • Notes
THE CONSTITUTION A-1
YOU BE THE __________: ACTUAL OUTCOMES  
AND COURT DECISIONS B-1
TABLE OF CASES C-1
GLOSSARY G-1
NAME INDEX I-1
SUBJECT INDEX I-5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T A b L E  o f  C o N T E N T S   xi
Chapter OpenIng StorIES
Ch 1: neiGhborhood botCh 4 
Trayvon Martin shooting in Florida
Ch 2: tiMe for a ChanGe 32 
Justice Dept changes the definition of rape
Ch 3: deadLy heat 66 
Arizona sweat lodge deaths
Ch 4: Life on the tWeet 98 
Police officer’s indiscretion on Twitter
Ch 5: texas traGedy 128 
Officer uses deadly force on a minor 
Ch 6: What’s that sMeLL? 160 
When is warrentless entry justified?
Ch 7: a pranK or a CriMe? 188 
Invasion of privacy at Rutgers
Ch 8: no exCuses 216 
Murder v. manslaughter at Univ of VA
Ch 9: a LifetiMe for LooKinG 252 
Sentencing for child pornography
Ch 10: a triaL of faith 286 
A child’s death and probation
Ch 11: the WaKe-up CaLL 310 
Overcrowding in California’s prisons
Ch 12: tripLe fray 336 
Violent outbreaks at Folsom Prison
Ch 13: the end of innoCenCe 366 
Life without parole for juvenile offenders
Ch 14: the haCKtivist 396 
Prosecuting computer hackers
LAnDMArk Cases
Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association  
 
(EMA) Ch 2, p 52
Miranda v. Arizona Ch 6, p 180
Baze v. Rees Ch 9, p 275
In Re Gault Ch 13, p 370
CoMpArAtIvE CriMinaL JustiCe
Ch 1: trASh tALk 6
Ch 2: A rEAL WAr on DrugS 58
Ch 6: ExtEnDIng A FIrM hAnD 164
Ch 7: BACk to SChooL 202
Ch 8:  JApAn’S ALL-poWErFuL  
proSECutorS 224
Ch 9: thE norWEgIAn WAy 255
Ch 10: SWEDISh DAy-FInES 298
Ch 14: thE not-So-FrIEnDLy SkIES 405
you BE thE _______
SEnAtor  
Banning Texting While Driving Ch 1, p 10
JuDgE  
A Voluntary Act? Ch 3, p 78
poLICE CoMMISSIonEr  
Occupational Hazard Ch 4, p 100
ShErIFF’S DEputy  
Threat Level Ch 5, p 148
JuDgE  
A Valid Pretext? Ch 6, p 176
DEFEnSE AttornEy  
A Gang Murder Ch 8, p 240
proBAtIon oFFICEr  
A Judgment Call Ch 10, p 294
pAroLE BoArD MEMBEr  
Threat Level Ch 12, p 353
anti-terrorisM In ACtIon
Trapping a Lone Wolf Ch 1, p 22
Due Justice? Ch 3, p 90
Under Suspicion Ch 4, p 106
Trying Times Ch 8, p 230
prislam Ch 12, p 348 
Features of Special Interest
Badge: Rasmus Rasmusson/
iStockphoto;  
Handcuffs: Photodisc; Gavel: 
Shutterstock; Scale: James Stadl/
iStockphoto
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
CArEErS In CJ
Crime Scene Photographer Ch 1, p 12
Criminologist Ch 2, p 35
Gang Investigator Ch 3, p 72
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Agent  
Ch 4, p 119
Forensic Scientist Ch 5, p 136
Police Detective Ch 6, p 162
Bailiff Ch 7, p 204
Public Defender Ch 8, p 234
National Victim Advocate Ch 9, p 270
Lead Probation Officer Ch 10, p 296
Prison Warden Ch 11, p 323
Halfway House Program Manager Ch 12, p 358
Resident Youth Worker Ch 13, p 388
Customs and Border Protection Agent  
Ch 14, p 416
a question of Ethics
Kidney Compensation Ch 3, p 68
The “Dirty Harry” Problem Ch 5, p 152
The Right Decision? Ch 7, p 209
Canvas Incarceration Ch 11, p 328
The Million-Dollar Man Ch 12, p 340
Myth vs. REality
race stereotyping and drug Crime Ch 2, p 43
are too Many Criminals found not Guilty  
 
by reason of insanity? Ch 3, p 85
Women Make bad Cops Ch 4, p 112
does putting Criminals in prison  
 
reduce Crime? Ch 11, p 317
soft time for White-Collar Crime Ch 14, p 422
MAStErIngConCEptS
How Discretion Works, Ch 1, p 16
Civil Law versus Criminal Law, Ch 3, p 73
The Difference between a Stop and  
 
an arrest, Ch 6, p 168
The Bifurcated Death penalty process,  
 
Ch 9, p 272
The Main Differences between  
 
prisons and Jails, Ch 11, p 326
probation versus parole, Ch 12, p 351
The Juvenile Justice System versus  
 
the Criminal Justice System, Ch 13, p 385
CJ & teChnoLoGy
Mobile Offender Recognition and Identification 
System (MORIS) Ch 1, p 18
Transdermal Alcohol Testing Ch 2, p 40
Electronic Eavesdropping Ch 3, p 76
High-Tech Cop Cars Ch 4, p 104
Self-Surveillance Ch 5, p 151
Automatic License Plate Recognition Ch 6, p 177
New Fingerprinting Techniques Ch 7, p 200
Wireless Devices in the Courtroom Ch 8, p 243
Global Positioning System (GPS) Ch 10, p 301
Tracking Inmates Ch 12, p 344
Cyberbullying Ch 13, p 376
Hacking Cars Ch 14, p 412
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Justice Web site contains self-exploration and profiling 
activities for students, helping them investigate the numer-
ous career opportunities in law enforcement, the courts, the 
corrections systems, or any other aspect of American crime 
and justice. The site also offers students tips on résumé writ-
ing, interviewing techniques, and other practicalities of the 
job search.
MAJOR CHANGES TO  
THE SEVENTH EDITION
As with previous editions of Criminal Justice in Action, The 
Core, each chapter in the seventh edition begins with a new 
“ripped from the headlines” vignette that introduces the 
themes to be covered in the pages that follow. Furthermore, 
the text continues to reflect the ever-changing nature of 
our topic, with more than eighty new real-life crime 
examples and more than fifty new references to recent 
research involving crime and criminal behavior. The text 
also includes hundreds of updated statistical measures of 
crime, figures, and photographs.
 
The two most extensive changes to the seventh edition, 
however, are a new feature that puts the student “in the 
shoes” of criminal justice professionals and a new chapter 
that expands the students’ understanding of crime in the 
twenty-first century.
• 
The popular “You Be the Judge” feature has been 
expanded to include the spectrum of criminal justice 
employees. So, as part of this new You Be the _____ 
feature, students will assume a number of different 
professional positions—including a sheriff ’s deputy, a 
defense attorney, and a probation officer—and be asked 
to make a difficult decision based on the law and the 
facts of the situation in which they find themselves.
• 
An extensively revised Chapter 14 now includes new 
sections on the criminalization of immigration law 
and the challenges of white-collar crime, as well as 
updated sections on homeland security and cyber 
crime. The inclusion of these controversial subjects 
As Americans, we place great demands on our criminal jus-
tice system. We expect law enforcement agencies to prevent 
and deter crime, keeping us safe as we go about our daily 
lives. We expect the criminal courts to tackle complicated 
questions of guilt and innocence, punishing the guilty and 
ensuring that the innocent go free. We expect corrections 
officials to maintain order over a system that invites disor-
der, while at the same time rehabilitating those thought by 
many to be beyond rehabilitation. The challenge of meeting 
such demands falls to the men and women who make up the 
criminal justice workforce.
 
For more than a decade and over the course of six 
editions, Criminal Justice in Action, The Core has provided 
students with an engaging and comprehensive guide to 
understanding these challenges. In this, our seventh edi-
tion, the tradition continues. Combining a solid pedagogi-
cal foundation and numerous real-life examples, Criminal 
Justice in Action, The Core offers students insight into the 
world of crime and justice that goes well beyond the clichés 
of Hollywood or the rhetoric of politicians. With the help 
and advice of the many criminal justice professors who have 
adopted this best-selling textbook over the years, we believe 
we have created an invaluable introduction to the field.
CAREER ADVICE  
fROM CJ PRACTITIONERS
We are well aware that many students using this text are 
interested in a criminal justice career. Consequently, each 
chapter of the seventh edition of Criminal Justice in Action, 
The Core includes a Careers in CJ feature. This feature 
consists of two parts. First, the criminal justice practitioner 
presents a personal account of his or her profession. Second, 
the student is provided with “Fast Facts” about the profes-
sion, such as required training and annual salary. Careers 
covered in this edition include crime scene photographer, 
probation officer, and border patrol agent.
 
The enhanced Careers in CJ features are only one 
aspect of our commitment to helping interested students get 
their foot in the CJ door. A dedicated Careers in Criminal 
Preface   xiii
PREfACE  
to the Seventh edition 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
ConCentrated CritiCal thinking
The new You Be the _____ feature continues our commit-
ment to developing students’ abilities to think critically 
about criminal justice. Indeed, each feature and most pho-
tograph captions in the textbook end with a question that 
requires an innovative, inquisitive response. Other critical 
thinking tools in Criminal Justice in Action, The Core, Seventh 
Edition, include:
• 
Learning Objectives. At the beginning of each chap-
ter, students are introduced to eight learning objectives 
(LOs) for that chapter. For example, in Chapter 4, “Law 
Enforcement Today,” Learning Objective 3 (LO3) asks stu-
dents to “Explain how intelligence-led policing works and 
how it benefits modern police departments.” The learning 
objective is repeated in the margin near the area of text 
that provides this information, and the correct response 
is found in the chapter-ending materials. This constant 
active learning will greatly expand students’ understand-
ing of dozens of crucial criminal justice topics.
• 
Self Assessment Boxes. Students are not, how-
ever, required to wait until they have finished reading a 
chapter to engage in self-assessment. We have placed a 
self assessment box at the end of each major section of 
each chapter. Three to five sentences long, these items 
require students to fill in the blanks, thereby reinforcing 
the most important points in the section they have just 
read. (All answers are found at the end of each chapter.)
makes the seventh edition of Criminal Justice in Action, 
The Core our most comprehensive version to date.
 
Recognizing the important role that social media play 
in students’ lives, we have also added two new features 
that take advantage of the growing influence of Facebook, 
Twitter, and other Internet communication portals.
• 
Social media are crucial components of the twenty-first 
century job search. Students interested in a career in 
criminal justice will rely heavily on Web sits such as 
Facebook and LinkedIn to find potential employers, 
network, and present themselves as viable candidates 
for employment. Accordingly, each Career in CJ feature, 
mentioned above, includes a new Social Media Career 
Tip to help students succeed in today’s difficult labor 
market.
• 
Criminal justice-related organizations, from police 
departments to special interest groups to university 
departments, rely on social media to interact with their 
target audiences. We take advantage of this wealth of 
information by offering a new social media margin 
feature in each chapter. These features direct students 
to a specific Web site—the FBI’s Twitter account, for 
example, or the Electronic Privacy Information Center’s 
Facebook page—where they can access a ready stream 
of information concerning various aspects of American 
criminal justice.
CHAPTER-BY-CHAPTER ORGANIZATION Of THE TEXT
This edition’s fourteen chapters blend the principles of criminal justice with current research and high-interest examples of 
what is happening in the world of crime and crime prevention right now. What follows is a summary of each chapter, along 
with a description of some of the revisions to the Seventh Edition.
PART 1: THE CRIMINAl JuSTICE SYSTEM
Chapter 1 Criminal Justice today provides an 
introduction to the criminal justice system’s three major 
institutions: law enforcement, the courts, and corrections. 
The chapter also answers conceptual questions such as 
“what is crime?” and “what are the values of the American 
criminal justice system?”
• 
A new Comparative Criminal Justice feature (“Trash 
Talk”) highlights the different responses to two pro-
fessional athletes who used racial epithets during a 
sporting event. One, in Great Britain, was charged with 
a criminal offense, while the other, in the United States, 
was not.
• 
A new section entitled “Discretion and Ethics” intro-
duces students to both concepts while showing how 
they influence the decision-making process of criminal 
justice professionals.
Chapter 2 Measuring and explaining Crime  
furnishes students with an understanding of two areas 
fundamental to criminal justice: (1) the various modes 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xv
• 
A new section, entitled “Women and Minorities in 
Policing Today,” provides an extended discussion of 
diversity issues in policing, including antidiscrimination 
law, affirmative action, consent decrees, recruiting chal-
lenges, tokenism, and double marginality.
Chapter 5 Problems And Solutions in Modern 
Policing puts students on the streets and gives them a 
gritty look at the many challenges of being a law enforcement 
officer. It starts with a discussion of police organization and 
field services and then moves on to law enforcement strate-
gies and issues in modern policing, such as crime mapping, 
the mental dangers of police work, and use of force.
• 
A new You Be the Sheriff ’s Deputy feature (“Threat 
Level”) addresses the subject of police use of deadly force 
by placing the student in a dangerous situation where 
such force may—or may not—be called for.
• 
A new CJ and Technology feature (“Self-Surveillance”) 
describes how some law enforcement agencies are con-
sidering a drastic measure to curb employee misconduct: 
placing small cameras on the heads of police officers to 
record their every move.
Chapter 6 Police and the Constitution examines 
the sometimes uneasy relationship between law enforcement 
and the U.S. Constitution by explaining the rules of being a 
police officer. Particular emphasis is placed on the Fourth, 
Fifth, and Sixth Amendments, giving students an under-
standing of crucial concepts such as probable cause, reason-
ableness, and custodial interrogation.
• 
An updated section entitled “Video and Digital 
Surveillance” illuminates the constitutional issues sur-
rounding law enforcement use of closed-circuit tele-
vision (CCTV) cameras as crime-fighting tools. The 
discussion includes a new CJ and Technology feature 
(“Automatic License Plate Recognition”) that introduces 
students to one of the latest, and most-effective, new 
force multipliers available to American police.
• 
In the context of the Supreme Court’s recent ruling on 
Arizona’s immigration law S.B. 1070, an updated discus-
sion of racial profiling and the burden on law enforce-
ment officers to determine if a person is in the United 
States unlawfully.
PART 3: CRIMINAl COuRTS
Chapter 7 Courts and the Quest for Justice takes 
a big-picture approach in describing the American court 
system, giving students an overview of the basic principles of 
of measuring crime, including the FBI’s Uniform Crime 
Reports and the U.S. Department of Justice’s National Crime 
Victimization Survey, and (2) criminology, providing stu-
dents with insight into why crime occurs before, in the chap-
ters that follow, shifting their attention toward how society 
goes about fighting it.
• 
To give students an idea of how crime statistics shape 
our perception of crime in the United States, the chap-
ter includes a section entitled “Crime Trends Today,” 
which has been expanded to show the historical and 
contemporary links between violent crime rates and fac-
tors such as guns, gangs, illegal drugs, the economy, and 
the national birth rate.
• 
A new discussion of life course theories of crime, 
which posit that antisocial behavioral patterns estab-
lished in early childhood are useful predictors of juvenile 
delinquency and adult criminality.
Chapter 3 inside Criminal Law lays the foundation 
of criminal law. It addresses constitutional law, statutory law, 
and other sources of American criminal law before shifting 
its focus to the legal framework that allows the criminal jus-
tice system to determine and punish criminal guilt.
• 
An updated discussion of self-defense concepts and 
so-called Stand Your Ground laws in the wake of George 
Zimmerman’s controversial February 2012 fatal shooting 
of African American teenager Trayvon Martin in Sanford, 
Florida.
• 
A new Anti-Terrorism in Action feature (“Due Justice”) 
examines the due process questions raised by American 
drone strikes against terrorism suspects in foreign coun-
tries, particularly the strike that killed U.S. citizen Anwar 
al-Awlaki in Yemen.
PART 2: THE POlICE  
AND lAw ENfORCEMENT
Chapter 4 Law enforcement today acts as an 
introduction to law enforcement in the United States today. 
This chapter offers a detailed description of the country’s 
numerous local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies 
and examines the responsibilities and duties that come with 
a career in law enforcement.
• 
As part of a new discussion on the landscape of policing 
today, students will learn about the strategies that make 
up intelligence-led policing, the challenges of anti-
terrorism, and “Law Enforcement 2.0,” in which law 
enforcement agents gather information about criminal 
activity by accessing social networks on the Internet.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
• 
An updated discussion on the short-term future of capi-
tal punishment in the United States takes into account 
such factors as a nationwide reduction in death sen-
tences, the burdensome costs of execution, an evident 
juror preference for life-without-parole, and recent steps 
taken by several states to abolish the practice.
PART 4: CORRECTIONS
Chapter 10 Probation and intermediate 
Sanctions makes an important point, and one that is 
often overlooked in the larger discussion of the American 
corrections system: not all of those who are punished 
need to be placed behind bars. This chapter explores the 
community corrections options, from probation to interme-
diate sanctions such as intensive supervision and home 
confinement.
• 
A new discussion of innovative probations strategies 
focuses on Hawaii’s attempt to encourage compliance 
through “swift and certain” punishment and a California 
ballot initiative that requires certain low-level drug 
offenders in that state to receive treatment in the com-
munity rather than be incarcerated.
• 
A new You Be the Probation Officer feature (“A Judgment 
Call”) asks students whether they would revoke the 
probation of an offender who tests positive for mari-
juana use and violates his probation agreement in other 
minor ways.
Chapter 11 Prisons and Jails focuses on prisons and 
jails. After four decades of growth, high incarceration rates 
have pushed these institutions to the forefront of the crimi-
nal justice system, and this chapter explores the various 
issues—such as severe overcrowding and the emergence of 
private prisons—that have resulted from the prison popula-
tion boom.
• 
A new section entitled “Inmate Population Trends” 
describes a surprising recent decrease in the American 
prison population as well as efforts by certain states 
to reduce their inmate numbers in order to lower the  
unfeasible costs of expensive corrections systems.
• 
A new Mastering Concepts feature gives students a clear 
idea of the different roles that prisons and jails play in 
the American corrections system.
Chapter 12 Behind Bars is another example of our 
efforts to get students “into the action” of the criminal 
justice system, this time putting them in the uncomfort-
able position of being behind bars. It also answers the 
our judicial system, the state and federal court systems, and 
the role of judges, prosecutors, and defense attorneys in the 
criminal justice system.
• 
The court system’s ability to live up to societal expecta-
tions of truth and justice, a running theme of the third 
part of this textbook, is explored with a close look at the 
trial of Dharun Ravi. The chapter’s new introductory 
vignette examines why, in 2012, a New Jersey jury found 
Ravi guilty of invasion of privacy and bias intimidation 
for using a webcam to view his Rutgers University room-
mate, Tyler Clementi, embracing another man.
• 
A new discussion designed to give students an under-
standing of how the U.S. Supreme Court “makes” 
criminal justice policy through judicial review. The 
discussion focuses on a recent case in which the Court 
invalidated a federal law banning the Internet sale of 
“crush” videos, which show the brutal slaughter of small 
animals, on First Amendment grounds.
Chapter 8 Pretrial Procedures and the Criminal 
trial provides students with a rundown of pretrial 
procedures and highlights the role that these procedures 
play in America’s adversary system. Chapter materials also 
place the student in the courtroom and give her or him a 
comprehensive understanding of the steps in the criminal 
trial.
• 
Three new Figures use excerpts from actual court 
records to give students a first-hand understanding of 
three crucial aspects of the criminal trial: jury selection, 
the opening statement, and the closing statement.
• 
A new You Be the Defense Attorney feature (“A Gang 
Murder”) challenges the student to create reasonable 
doubt in the minds of jurors who will decide the fate of a 
client who is on trial for assisting in the murder of a fel-
low gang member.
Chapter 9 Punishment and Sentencing links the 
many different punishment options for those who have been 
convicted of a crime with the theoretical justifications for 
those punishments. The chapter also examines punishment 
in the policy context, weighing the costs and benefits to soci-
ety of such controversial practices as mandatory minimum 
sentences and the death penalty.
• 
A new Comparative Criminal Justice feature (“The 
Norwegian Way”) explains the philosophy behind a 
seemingly light potential punishment for Anders Bering 
Breivik, who massacred nearly eighty people in Norway 
in the summer of 2011.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xvii
ANTI-TERRORISM in ACtion This new feature 
focuses on various law enforcement strategies to promote 
homeland security.
• 
“Trapping a Lone Wolf ” (Chapter 1) details the strat-
egies favored by American law enforcement when 
confronted with the homegrown, would-be terrorists 
that have evolved into a constant threat to homeland 
security.
• 
“Trying Times” (Chapter 8) explains how the pros-
ecution’s “failure” regarding the criminal trial of Ahmed 
Khalfan Ghailani ensures that high-level terrorist sus-
pects will be tried before military tribunals for the fore-
seeable future.
CAreerS in CJ As stated before, many students 
reading this book are planning a career in criminal justice. 
We have provided them with an insight into some of these 
careers by offering first-person accounts of what it is like to 
work as a criminal justice professional.
• 
In Chapter 6, William Howe describes the thrill that 
he experiences when he solves a crime “puzzle” as a 
detective.
• 
In Chapter 10, Peggy McCarthy, a probation officer, pro-
vides an inside look at the many duties involved with 
her profession, from assisting in the arrest of hardened 
criminals to helping defendants make “a positive change 
in their lives.”
SPECIAl fEATuRES
Supplementing the main text of Criminal Justice in Action, The Core, Seventh Edition, are approximately seventy eye-catching, 
instructive, and penetrating special features. These features, described below with examples, have been designed to enhance 
the student’s understanding of a particular criminal justice issue.
increasingly important question, “What happens when the 
inmate is released back into society?”
• 
New sections on female correctional guards and 
women’s prisons provide insight into the challenges 
faced by women on both sides of prison bars.
• 
New discussions of various aspects of life behind bars, 
such as prison programs designed to prepare inmates 
for life “on the outside” and the increased use of solitary 
confinement for “problem” inmates.
PART 5: SPECIAl ISSuES
Chapter 13 the Juvenile Justice System exam-
ines the juvenile justice system, giving students a comprehen-
sive description of the path taken by delinquents from first 
contact with police to trial and punishment. The chapter 
contains a strong criminological component as well, scruti-
nizing the various theories of why certain juveniles turn to 
delinquency.
• 
A new chapter-opening vignette that uses the example 
of Omer Ninham, who was fourteen-years-old when he 
killed a playmate in Green Bay, Wisconsin, to explore 
the subject of life-without-parole prison sentences for 
juvenile violent offenders.
• 
A new section, “Bullied to Death,” that addresses the 
growing national awareness of the negative consequences 
of bullying, as well as a a new CJ and Technology feature 
(“Cyberbullying”) that describes how increased use of 
social media by juveniles has exacerbated the problem.
Chapter 14 today’s Challenges in Criminal 
Justice concludes the text by taking an expanded look at 
four crucial criminal justice topics: (1) homeland security, 
(2) cyber crime, (3) immigration law, and (4) white-collar 
crime.
• 
A new section on the criminalization of immigration 
law provides students with the basics of immigration 
law and an understanding of how the actions of federal 
immigration agents are impacting local law enforcement 
and crime prevention.
• 
Another new section on white-collar crime describes 
the myriad of wrongdoing covered by this umbrella term 
and provides an overview of recent law enforcement 
efforts to combat economic crimes. The section also 
includes a new Myth v. Reality feature (“Soft on White-
Collar Crime”) that challenges the popular notion that 
the criminal justice system is “soft” when it comes to 
punishing white-collar criminals.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xviii   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
practices in order to give students a better understanding of 
our domestic ways.
• 
“Back to School” (Chapter 7) contrasts the American 
method of electing judges with the French method of 
training judges and asks students to determine if one 
approach is superior to the other.
• 
“The Not-So Friendly-Skies” (Chapter 14) describes secu-
rity measures used to screen airplane passengers in 
Israel, including a level of racial profiling that would be 
unacceptable to many in the United States.
A QuESTION Of EThICS Ethical dilemmas occur 
in every profession, but the challenges facing criminal jus-
tice professionals often have repercussions beyond their 
own lives and careers. In this feature, students are asked to 
place themselves in the shoes of police officers, prosecutors, 
defense attorneys, and other criminal justice professionals 
facing ethical dilemmas: Will they do the right thing?
• 
In “Kidney Compensation” (Chapter 3), students con-
sider the ethical considerations behind a U.S. ban on 
selling kidneys and are asked to decide whether this 
criminal law does more harm than good.
• 
In “The ‘Dirty Harry’ Problem” (Chapter 5), a police 
detective is trying to save the life of a young girl who has 
been buried alive with only enough oxygen to survive for 
a few hours. Is he justified in torturing the one person—
the kidnapper—who knows where the girl is buried?
LAndMArk CASES Rulings by the United States 
Supreme Court have shaped every area of the criminal jus-
tice system. In this feature, students learn about and analyze 
the most influential of these cases.
• 
In Chapter 2’s Brown v. Entertainment Merchants 
Association, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that 
violent video games cause violent behavior and invalidated 
a California law banning the sale of such games to minors.
• 
In Chapter 13’s In re Gault (1967), the Supreme Court 
held that juveniles are entitled to many of the same due 
process rights granted to adult offenders—a decision 
that caused a seismic shift in America’s juvenile justice 
system.
Myth vs. REaLITY Nothing endures like a good 
myth. In this feature, we try to dispel some of the more 
enduring myths in the criminal justice system while at the 
same time asking students to think critically about their 
consequences.
MASteringConCePtS Some criminal justice 
topics require additional explanation before they become 
crystal clear in the minds of students. This feature helps 
students to master many of the essential concepts in the 
textbook.
• 
In Chapter 6, the feature helps students understand the 
legal differences between a police stop and a police frisk.
• 
In Chapter 13, the feature compares and contrasts the 
juvenile justice system with the criminal justice system.
you Be the ____ This new feature, as noted earlier 
in the Preface, puts students into the position of a criminal 
justice professional in a hypothetical case or situation that 
is based on a real-life event. The facts of the case or situa-
tion are presented with alternative possible outcomes, and 
the student is asked to “be the ______” and make a deci-
sion. Students can then consult Appendix B at the end of 
the text to learn what actually happened in the offered 
scenario.
• 
You Be the Police Commissioner, “Occupational Hazard” 
(Chapter 4) asks students what tactics they would use to 
disperse a peaceful but law-breaking group of protestors.
• 
You Be the Parole Board Member, “Cause of Compassion?” 
(Chapter 12) challenges students to decide the fate of a 
model prisoner who has been behind bars for nearly four 
decades because of her participation in a grisly murder 
spree.
CJ & TECHNOlOGY Advances in technology are con-
stantly transforming the face of criminal justice. In these fea-
tures, which appear in nearly every chapter, students learn 
of one such emergent technology and are asked to critically 
evaluate its effects.
• 
This feature in Chapter 1 describes how a biometrics 
smartphone application allows law enforcement agents 
to quickly identify a suspect simply by taking a photo of 
her or his face.
• 
This feature in Chapter 8 explores the problems caused 
when jurors make use of small wireless devices to text, 
tweet, blog, take photos, and conduct Internet research 
during a criminal trial.
COMPARATIVE CRIMINAl JuSTICE The world 
offers a dizzying array of different criminal customs and 
codes, many of which are in stark contrast to those accepted 
in the United States. This feature provides dramatic and 
sometimes perplexing examples of foreign criminal justice 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xix
• 
“Are Too Many Criminals Found Not Guilty by Reason 
of Insanity?” (Chapter 3) dispels the notion that the 
criminal justice is “soft” because it lets scores of “crazy” 
defendants go free due to insanity.
• 
“Race Stereotyping and Crime” (Chapter 2) challenges 
the perceived wisdom that members of certain minor-
ity groups, particularly African Americans, are prone to 
violence and therefore more likely to be criminals than 
other racial or ethnic groups.
EXTENSIVE STuDY AIDS
Criminal Justice in Action, The Core, Seventh Edition, includes a number of pedagogical devices designed to complete the 
student’s active learning experience. These devices include:
• 
Concise chapter outlines at the beginning of each chap-
ter. The outlines give students an idea of what to expect 
in the pages ahead, as well as a quick source of review 
when needed.
• 
Dozens of key terms and a running glossary focus 
students’ attention on major concepts and help them 
master the vocabulary of criminal justice. The chosen 
terms are boldfaced in the text, allowing students to 
notice their importance without breaking the flow of 
reading. On the same page that a key term is highlighted, 
a margin note provides a succinct definition of the term. 
For further reference, a glossary at the end of the text 
provides a full list of all the key terms and their defini-
tions. This edition includes over forty new key terms.
• 
Each chapter has at least three figures, which include 
graphs, charts, and other forms of colorful art that 
reinforce a point made in the text. This edition includes 
sixteen new figures.
• 
Hundreds of photographs add to the overall readability 
and design of the text. Each photo has a caption, and 
most of these captions include a critical-thinking ques-
tion dealing with the topic at hand. This edition includes 
nearly ninety new photos.
• 
At the end of each chapter, students will find five 
Questions for Critical analysis. These questions will 
help the student assess his or her understanding of 
the just-completed chapter, as well as develop critical-
thinking skills.
ANCIllARY MATERIAlS
Wadsworth provides a number of supplements to help instructors use Criminal Justice in Action, The Core, Seventh Edition, 
in their courses and to aid students in preparing for exams. Supplements are available to qualified adopters. Please consult 
your local Wadsworth/Cengage sales representative for details.
For the inStrUCtor
• Annotated Instructor’s Edition. This essen-
tial resource features teaching tips, discussion tips, 
and technology tips to help professors engage students 
with the course material. Prepared by Carly Hilinski of 
Governers State University.
• Instructor’s Resource Manual with Test 
Bank. The manual includes learning objectives, key 
terms, a detailed chapter outline, a chapter summary, 
discussion topics, student activities, media tools and a 
newly expanded test bank. The learning objectives are 
correlated with the discussion topics, student activities 
and media tools. Each chapter’s test bank contains ques-
tions in multiple-choice, true false, completion, and essay 
formats, with a full answer key. The test bank is coded to 
the learning objectives that appear in the main text, and 
includes the page numbers in the main text where the 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xx   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
contains electronic copies of the Instructor’s Resource 
Manual, Test Bank, and Lesson Plans; and ExamView® 
testing software, which allows you to create customized 
tests in minutes using items from the test bank in 
computerized format.
real World reSoUrCeS:  
toolS to enhanCe relevanCy
The media tools from across all the supplements are gathered 
into one location and organized by chapter and Learning 
Objective. Each item has a description of the resource and 
a directed learning activity. Available on the companion 
website, WebTutor and CourseMate, these can be used as 
resources for additional learning or as assignments.
• WebTutor™ on Blackboard® and WebCT®. 
Jump-start your course with customizable, rich, text-spe-
cific content within your Course Management System. 
Whether you want to web-enable your class or put an 
entire course online, WebTutor delivers. WebTutor offers 
a wide array of resources, including media assets, test 
banks, practice quizzes linked to chapter learning objec-
tives, and additional study aids. Visit www.cengage.com/
webtutor to learn more.
• The Wadsworth Criminal Justice Video 
Library. So many exciting new videos—so many great 
ways to enrich your lectures and spark discussion of the 
material in this text. Your Cengage Learning representa-
tive will be happy to provide details on our video policy 
by adoption size. The library includes these selections 
and many others.
• ABC® Videos. ABC videos feature short, high-interest 
clips from current news events as well as historic raw 
footage going back 40 years. Perfect for discussion starters 
or to enrich your lectures and spark interest in the mate-
rial in the text, these brief videos provide students with 
a new lens through which to view the past and present, 
one that will greatly enhance their knowledge and under-
standing of significant events and open up to them new 
dimensions in learning. Clips are drawn from such pro-
grams as World News Tonight, Good Morning America, 
This Week, PrimeTime Live, 20/20, and Nightline, as well 
as numerous ABC News specials and material from the 
Associated Press Television News and British Movietone 
News collections.
• Cengage 
Learning’s 
“Introduction 
to 
Criminal Justice Video Series” features vid-
eos supplied by the BBC Motion Gallery. These short, 
answers can be found. Finally, each question in the test 
bank has been carefully reviewed by experienced criminal 
justice instructors for quality, accuracy, and content cov-
erage.  Our Instructor Approved seal, which appears on 
the front cover, is our assurance that you are working with 
an assessment and grading resource of the highest caliber.
The manual is available for download on the 
password-protected website and can also be obtained by 
e-mailing your local Cengage Learning representative. 
Prepared by Samantha Carlo of Miami-Dade College and 
Rosemary Arway of Hodges University.
• Online Lesson Plans. The Lesson Plans bring 
accessible, masterful suggestions to every lesson. This 
supplement includes a sample syllabus, learning objec-
tives, lecture notes, discussion topics & in-class activi-
ties, a detailed lecture outline, assignments, media tools, 
and “What if . . .” scenarios. The learning objectives are 
integrated throughout the Lesson Plans and current 
events and real-life examples in the form of articles, 
websites and video links are incorporated into the class 
discussion topics, activities and assignments. The lec-
ture outlines are correlated with PowerPoint slides for 
ease of classroom use. Lesson Plans are available on 
the PowerLecture resource and the instructor Web site. 
Prepared by Bernard Zadrowski of College Of Southern 
Nevada- Cheyenne.
• Online PowerPoints. Helping you make your 
lectures more engaging while effectively reach-
ing your visually oriented students, these handy 
Microsoft PowerPoint® slides outline the chapters of 
the main text in a classroom-ready presentation. The 
PowerPoint® slides are updated to reflect the content 
and organization of the new edition of the text and 
feature some additional examples and real world cases 
for application and discussion. Available for download 
on the password-protected instructor book companion 
website, the presentations and can also be obtained by 
e-mailing your local Cengage Learning representative. 
Prepared by Jaclyn Smith of University of Maryland—
College Park.
• PowerLecture DVD with ExamView. The 
fastest, easiest way to build customized, media-rich 
lectures, PowerLecture™ provides a collection of book-
specific Microsoft® PowerPoint® lecture and class tools 
to enhance the educational experience. PowerLecture™ 
includes lesson plans, lecture outlines linked to the 
learning objectives for each chapter, art from the text, 
new videos, animations, and more. The DVD-ROM also 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xxi
high-interest clips from CBS and BBC news programs—
everything from nightly news broadcasts and specials 
to CBS News Special Reports, CBS Sunday Morning, 
60  Minutes, and more—are perfect classroom discus-
sion starters. Designed to enrich your lectures and spark 
interest in the material in the text, these brief videos 
provide students with a new lens through which to view 
the past and present, one that will greatly enhance their 
knowledge and understanding of significant events and 
open up to them new dimensions in learning. Clips are 
drawn from BBC Motion Gallery.
• Classroom Activities for Criminal Justice. 
This valuable booklet contains both tried-and-true 
favorites and exciting new projects; activities are drawn 
from across the spectrum of criminal justice subjects 
and can be customized to fit any course.
• Internet Activities for Criminal Justice. This 
useful booklet helps familiarize students with Internet 
resources and allows instructors to integrate resources 
into their course materials.
Criminal JUStiCe media library
Cengage Learning’s Criminal Justice Media Library includes 
nearly 300 media assets on the topics you cover in your 
courses. Available to stream from any Web-enabled com-
puter, the Criminal Justice Media Library’s assets include 
such valuable resources as; Career Profile Videos featuring 
interviews with criminal justice professionals from a range of 
roles and locations, simulations that allow students to step 
into various roles and practice their decision-making skills, 
video clips on current topics from ABC® and other sources, 
animations that illustrate key concepts, interactive learn-
ing modules that help students check their knowledge of 
important topics and Reality Check exercises that compare 
expectations and preconceived notions against the real-life 
thoughts and experiences of criminal justice professionals. 
The Criminal Justice Media Library can be uploaded and 
used within many popular Learning Management Systems. 
You can also customize it with your own course material. 
Please contact your Cengage Learning representative for 
ordering and pricing information.
For the StUdent
• Cengage 
Learning’s 
Criminal 
Justice 
CourseMate brings course concepts to life with 
interactive learning, study, and exam preparation 
tools that support the printed textbook. CourseMate 
includes an integrated eBook, quizzes mapped to chap-
ter Learning Objectives, flashcards, videos, and more, 
and EngagementTracker, a first-of-its-kind tool that 
monitors student engagement in the course. The accom-
panying instructor website offers access to password-
protected resources such as an electronic version of the 
instructor’s manual and PowerPoint® slides.
• Study Guide. An extensive student guide has been 
developed for this edition.  Because students learn in dif-
ferent ways, the guide includes a variety of pedagogical 
aids to help them. Each chapter is outlined and summa-
rized, major terms and figures are defined, plus media 
tools for directed learning and self-tests are provided. 
Prepared by William Head of Indiana University.
• Careers in Criminal Justice Web Site: www.
cengage.com/criminaljustice/careers. This 
unique Web site gives students information on a wide 
variety of career paths, including requirements, sala-
ries, training, contact information for key agencies, and 
employment outlooks.
Several important tools help students investigate 
the criminal justice career choices that are right for 
them.
—Career Profiles: Video testimonials from a variety of 
practicing professionals in the field as well as informa-
tion on many criminal justice careers, including job 
descriptions, requirements, training, salary and benefits, 
and the application process.
—Interest Assessment: Self-assessment tool to help stu-
dents decide which careers suit their personalities and 
interests.
—Career Planner: Résumé-writing tips and work sheets, 
interviewing techniques, and successful job search 
strategies.
—Links for Reference: Direct links to federal, state, and 
local agencies where students can get contact informa-
tion and learn more about current job opportunities.
• Handbook of Selected Supreme Court 
Cases, Third Edition. This supplementary hand-
book covers almost forty landmark cases, with a full case 
citation, an introduction, a summary from WestLaw, and 
excerpts and the decision for each case.
• Current 
Perspectives: 
Readings 
from 
InfoTrac®. These readers, designed to give you a 
deeper taste of special topics in criminal justice, include 
free access to InfoTrac® College Edition. The timely 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxii   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
articles are selected by experts in each topic from within 
InfoTrac College Edition.
—Cybercrime
—Introduction to Criminal Justice
—Forensics and Criminal Investigations
—Community Corrections
—Policy in Criminal Justice
—Technology and Criminal Justice
—Law and Courts
—Ethics in Criminal Justice
—Corrections
—Victimology
—Policy in Criminal Justice
—Terrorism and Homeland Security
—New Technologies and Criminal Justice
—Racial Profiling
—White Collar Crime
—Crisis Management and National Emergency Response
—Juvenile Justice
• CLeBook. CLeBook allows students to access Cengage 
Learning textbooks in an easy-to-use online format. 
Highlight, take notes, bookmark, search your text, and 
(in some titles) link directly into multimedia: CLeBook 
combines the best aspects of paper books and ebooks in 
one package.
• Course360—Online Learning to the Next 
Degree. Course360 from Cengage Learning is a com-
plete turn key solution that teaches course outcomes 
through student interaction in a highly customizable 
online learning environment. Course360 blends relevant 
content with rich media and builds upon your course 
design, needs, and objectives. With a wide variety of 
media elements including audio, video, interactives, 
simulations, and more, Course360 is the way today’s stu-
dents learn.
ACKNOwlEDGMENTS
Throughout the creation of the seven editions of this text, we have been aided by hundreds of experts in various criminal jus-
tice fields and by professors throughout the country, as well as by numerous students who have used the text. We list below 
the reviewers for this Seventh Edition, followed by the class-test participants and reviewers for the first six editions. We sin-
cerely thank all who participated on the revision of Criminal Justice in Action, The Core. We believe that the Seventh Edition 
is even more responsive to the needs of today’s criminal justice instructors and students alike because we have taken into 
account the constructive comments and criticisms of our reviewers and the helpful suggestions of our survey respondents.
revieWerS For the Seventh edition
We are grateful for the participation of the reviewers who read and reviewed portions of our manuscript throughout its 
development, and for those who gave us valuable insights through their responses to our survey.
Sheri Chapel
Ridley Lowell Technical College
Thomas Chuda
Bunker Hill Community College
Tomasina Cook
Eerie Community College
Gary Ebels
Grand Rapids Community College
Carl Franklin
Southern Utah University
Kelly Gould
Sacramento City College
Gerald hildebrand
Austin Community College
arthur Jipson
University of Dayton
Jon Mandrell
Sauk Valley Community College
Joe Morris
Northwestern State 
University of Louisiana
Debra Ross
Grand Valley State University
Jason Waller
Tyler Junior College
Michelle Watkins
El Paso Community College
Jesse Weins
Dakota Wesleyan University
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xxiii
angela ambers-henderson
Montgomery County 
Community College
Lorna alvarez-Rivera
Ohio University
Gaylene armstrong
Southern Illnois University
Judge James Bachman
Bowling Green State University
Tom Barclay
University of South Alabama
Julia Beeman
University of North 
Carolina at Charlotte
Lee Roy Black
California University of Pennsylvania
anita Blowers
University of North 
Carolina at Charlotte
Stefan Bosworth
Hostos Community College
Michael E. Boyko
Cuyahoga Community College
John Bower
Bethel College
Scott Brantley
Chancellor University
Steven Brandl
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee
Charles Brawner III
Heartland Community College
Timothy M. Bray
University of Texas–Dallas
Susan Brinkley
University of Tampa
Paula Broussard
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Michael Brown
Ball State College
Theodore Byrne
California State University, 
Dominguez Hills
Patrick Buckley
San Bernardino Valley College
Joseph Bunce
Montgomery College–Rockville
James T. Burnett
SUNY, Rockland Community College
Ronald Burns
Texas Christian University
Paul Campbell
Wayne State College
Dae Chang
Wichita State University
Sheri Chapel
Ridley-Lowell Business and Technical 
Institute and Keystone College
Steven Chermak
Indiana University
Charlie Chukwudolue
Northern Kentucky University
Monte Clampett
Asheville-Buncombe 
Community College
John Cochran
University of South Florida
Ellen G. Cohn
Florida International University
Mark Correia
University of Nevada–Reno
Corey Colyer
West Virginia University
Theodore Darden
College of Du Page
John del Nero
Lane Community College
Richard h. De Lung
Wayland Baptist University
John Dempsey
Suffolk County Community College
Tom Dempsey
Christopher Newport University
Joyce Dozier
Wilmington College
Frank J. Drummond
Modesto Junior College
CLASS-teSt PArtiCiPAntS
We also want to acknowledge the participation of the professors and their students who agreed to class-test portions of the 
text. Our thanks go to:
Tom arnold
College of Lake County
Paula M. Broussard
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Mike higginson
Suffolk Community College
andrew Karmen
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
Fred Kramer
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
anthony P. LaRose
Western Oregon University
anne Lawrence
Kean University
Jerry E. Loar
Walters State Community College
Phil Reichel
University of Northern Colorado
albert Sproule
Allentown College
Gregory B. Talley
Broome Community College
Karen Terry
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
angelo Tritini
Passaic County Community College
Gary Uhrin
Westmoreland County 
Community College
Robert Vodde
Fairleigh Dickinson University
revieWerS oF the FirSt, SeCond, third, Fourth, FiFth And SiXth editionS
We appreciate the assistance of the following reviewers whose guidance helped create the foundation for this best seller. We 
are grateful to all.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxiv   c r I M I N a L  J U S T I c e  I N  a c T I O N
M. G. Eichenberg
Wayne State College
Frank L. Fischer
Kankakee Community College
Linda L. Fleischer
The Community College 
of Baltimore County
aric Steven Frazier
Vincennes University
Frederick Galt
Dutchess Community College
Phyllis Gerstenfeld
California State University Stanislaus
James Gilbert
University of Nebraska–Kearney
Dean Golding
West Chester University 
of Pennsylvania
Debbie Goodman
Miami-Dade Community College
Cecil Greek
Florida State University
Donald Grubb
Northern Virginia Community College
Sharon halford
Community College of Aurora
Michael hallett
Middle Tennessee State University
Mark hansel
Moorhead State University
Pati hendrickson
Tarleton State University
Michelle heward
Weber State University
Gerald hildebrand
Austin Community College
Dennis hoffman
University of Nebraska–Omaha
Richard holden
Central Missouri State University
Ronald holmes
University of Louisville
Marilyn horace-Moore
Eastern Michigan University
Matrice hurrah
Shelby State Community College
Robert Jerin
Endicott College
Jason R. Jolicoeur
Cincinnati State Technical 
and Community College
Nicholas Irons
County College of Morris
Michael Israel
Kean University
J. D. Jamieson
Southwest Texas State University
James Jengeleski
Shippensburg University
Paul Johnson
Weber State University
Casey Jordan
Western Connecticut State University
Matthew Kanjirathinkal
Texas A & M University–Commerce
Bill Kelly
University of Texas–Austin
Paul Klenowski
Clarion University
David Kotajarvi
Lakeshore Technical College
John h. Kramer
Pennsylvania State University
Janine Kremling
California State University 
at San Bernardino
Kristen Kuehnle
Salem State University
Karl Kunkel
Southwest Missouri State
James G. Larson
National University
Barry Latzer
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
Deborah Laufersweiler-Dwyer
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Paul Lawson
Montana State University
Nella Lee
Portland State University
Walter Lewis
St. Louis Community 
College–Meramec
Larry Linville
Northern Virginia Community College
Faith Lutze
Washington State University
Richard Martin
Elgin Community College
Richard h. Martin
University of Findlay
William J. Mathias
University of South Carolina
Janet McClellan
Southwestern Oregon 
Community College
Pat Murphy
State University of New York–Geneseo
Rebecca Nathanson
Housatonic Community 
Technical College
Ellyn Ness
Mesa Community College
Kenneth O’Keefe
Prairie State College
Michael Palmiotto
Wichita State University
Rebecca D. Petersen
University of Texas, San Antonio
Gary Prawel
Monroe Community College
Mark Robarge
Mansfield University
Matt Robinson
Appalachian State University
Debra Ross
Buffalo State College
William Ruefle
University of South Carolina
Gregory Russell
Washington State University
John Scheb II
University of Tennessee–Knoxville
Melinda Schlager
University of Texas at Arlington
Ed Selby
Southwestern College
Larry Snyder
Herkimer County Community College
Ronald Sopenoff
Brookdale Community College
Domenick Stampone
Raritan Valley Community College
Katherine Steinbeck
Lakeland Community College
hallie Stephens
Southeastern Oklahoma 
State University
Kathleen M. Sweet
St. Cloud State University
Gregory Talley
Broome Community College
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface   xxv
Karen Terry
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
amy B. Thistlethwaite
Northern Kentucky University
Rebecca Titus
New Mexico Junior College
Lawrence F. Travis III
University of Cincinnati
Kimberly Vogt
University of Wisconsin–La Crosse
Robert Wadman
Weber State University
Ron Walker
Trinity Valley Community College
John Wyant
Illinois Central College
Others were instrumental in bringing this Seventh Edition 
to fruition. We continue to appreciate the extensive research 
efforts of Shawn G. Miller and the additional legal assis-
tance of William Eric Hollowell. Robert Jucha, our devel-
opmental editor, provided equal parts elbow grease and 
creative energy; it was a pleasure to work with him. Editor 
Carolyn Hendersen Meier supplied crucial guidance to the 
project through her suggestions and recommendations. At 
the production end, we once again feel fortunate to have 
enjoyed the services of our tireless production manager, 
Ann Borman, who oversaw virtually all aspects of this book. 
How she was able to make all of the schedules on time never 
ceased to amaze us. Additionally, we wish to thank the 
designer of this new edition, RHDG of San Francisco, who 
has created what we believe to be the most dazzling and stu-
dent-friendly design of any text in the field. Photo researcher 
Anne Sheroff went to great lengths to satisfy our requests, 
and we sincerely appreciate her efforts. We are also thankful 
for the services of all those at Parkwood Composition who 
worked on the Seventh Edition, particularly Debbie Mealey. 
The eagle eyes of Mary Berry, Loretta Palagi, and Sue Bradley 
who shared the duties of proofreading and copy editing, 
were invaluable.
 
A special word of thanks must also go to the team 
responsible for the extensive multimedia package included 
in this project, including media editor for Criminal Justice, 
Andy Yap, and writer Robert C. De Lucia of John Jay College 
of Criminal Justice. In addition, we appreciate the work 
of Carly Hilinkski of Governers State University, who cre-
ated annotations for the Annotated Instructor’s Edition, 
Samantha Carlo of Miami-Dade College, and Rosemary 
Arway of Hodges University, who revised the Instructor’s 
Resource Manual, Bernard Zadrowski of College of Southern 
Nevada—Cheyenne, who created the Lesson Plans, and 
Jacyln Smith of University of Maryland—College Park, who 
created the PowerPoints. We also appreciate the work of 
William Head of Indiana University for revising the Study 
Guide and for revising the web quizzing. We are also grateful 
for the aid of assistant editor Rachel McDonald and editorial 
assistant Virginette Acacio who ensured the timely publica-
tion of supplements. A final thanks to all of the great people 
in marketing and advertising who helped to get the word 
out about the book, including marketing manager Michelle 
Williams, who has been tireless in her attention to this 
project, and marketing communications manager Heather 
Baxley for keeping everything on track.
 
Any criminal justice text has to be considered a work 
in progress. We know that there are improvements that we 
can make. Therefore, write us with any suggestions that you 
may have.
L. K. G.
R. L. M.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

DEDICATION
This book is dedicated to my good friend
and colleague, Lawrence Walsh, of the
Lexington, Kentucky Police Department.
When I was a rookie, he taught me about
policing. When I became a researcher,
he taught me about the practical
applications of knowledge. He is truly an
inspiring professional in our field.
L.K.G.
To Eric,
Thanks for all of your hard work for so 
many years.
R.L.M.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   3
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Describe the two most common models of how society 
determines which acts are criminal.
2  Define crime.
3  Outline the three levels of law enforcement.
4  List the essential elements of the corrections system.
5  Explain the difference between the formal and informal 
criminal justice processes.
6  Define ethics and describe the role that they play in 
discretionary decision making.
7  Contrast the crime control and due process models.
8  List the major issues in criminal justice today.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on pages 25 and 26 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Criminal 
Justice  
Today
3
AP Photo/John Minchillo
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• What Is Crime?
• The Purpose of the Criminal 
Justice System
• The Structure of the Criminal 
Justice System
• Discretion and Ethics
• Criminal Justice Today
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
W
hen authorities initially refused to arrest George Zimmerman in connec-
tion with Trayvon Martin’s death, a national outcry ensued. Anger focused 
on two aspects of incident that seemed to indicate racial bias. First, did 
Zimmerman assume that Martin was a criminal because of the teenager’s skin color? 
Second, was Zimmerman avoiding arrest because he had killed a black man? Sanford 
police responded that they could not arrest Zimmerman, who claimed that he had been 
acting in self-defense. Under Florida law, persons in public places who reasonably believe 
that they are in imminent danger of death or severe injury can use deadly force to defend 
themselves without fear of being charged with a crime.1
Supporters of this so-called Stand Your Ground statute say that it allows people 
to confront attackers in dangerous situations. Critics say that such laws, which exist 
in nearly half the states, “create a nation where disputes are settled by guns instead of 
gavels, and where suspects are shot by civilians instead of arrested by police.”2 Some 
observers insisted that, by his actions, Zimmerman lost his right to a self-defense claim. 
“Stand your ground means stand your ground,” said former Florida governor Jeb Bush. 
“It doesn’t mean chase after somebody who’s turned their back.”3
Six weeks after the shooting incident, a special prosecutor charged Zimmerman with 
second degree murder for Martin’s death. In Chapter 3, we will take a closer look at Stand 
Your Ground laws and the role they play in self-defense claims such as Zimmerman’s. 
nEigHboRHood BoTCh
The Retreat at Twin Lakes, a small community of 
about 260 town houses in Sanford, Florida, was 
experiencing a crime wave. Dozens of attempted 
break-ins and the common sight of would-be burglars 
casing potential targets had created an atmosphere 
of fear that permeated the neighborhood. After an 
incident on August 3, 2011, in which two men tried 
to steal resident Olivia Bertalan’s television while she 
hid upstairs with her infant son, the local homeowners’ 
association decided to set up a neighborhood watch. 
The members asked George Zimmerman, a twenty-
eight-year-old insurance-fraud investigator with a good 
reputation, to head the new venture. Zimmerman, who 
legally owned a 9mm handgun, agreed.
On February 26, 2012, Zimmerman, who was 
patrolling Twin Lakes in his SUV, saw a young African 
American male walking down the street. He called 
911 and reported a “suspicious guy.” The dispatcher 
told Zimmerman to stop following the young man, a 
seventeen-year-old named Trayvon Martin, and let law 
enforcement handle the situation. Several weeks earlier, 
however, the police had failed to apprehend another 
“suspicious” suspect identified by Zimmerman, and that 
suspect was eventually arrested with a stolen laptop 
computer. “These a**holes,” Zimmerman muttered over 
the phone. “They always get away.”
What happened next is a matter of dispute. A lawyer 
for Martin’s family says that Martin, on his way to the 
home of his father’s girlfriend, was speaking to his own 
girlfriend on a cell phone when he noticed Zimmerman 
nearby on foot. Martin told his girlfriend that he was 
being followed, and she told him to run. Martin said 
that he would “walk fast.” Zimmerman claims that he 
lost track of Martin and was headed back to his car 
when Martin attacked him from behind. In any case, 
witnesses saw the two men 
scuffle, and heard one crying for 
help. Within seconds, Martin 
lay dead with a bullet from 
Zimmerman’s handgun in his 
chest.
George Zimmerman, 
charged with second 
degree murder for the 
shooting death of 
Trayvon Martin, appears 
in a Sanford, Florida, 
courthouse.
Pool/Reuters/Landov
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students 
to think about the concept of 
reasonableness. How does this 
concept apply to Florida’s “Stand 
Your Ground” law and the George 
Zimmerman case?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   5
We will examine several other issues highlighted by this controversial case in upcoming 
chapters. How do prosecutors reach the decision to charge a suspect like Zimmerman 
with a crime (Chapter 8)? Given all the publicity surrounding Martin’s death, can a high-
profile defendant such as Zimmerman possibly get a fair trial (Chapter 8)? As you proceed 
through this textbook, you will come to understand that few aspects of American criminal 
justice are simple, even if you have clear opinions about them. In this opening chapter, we 
introduce you to the criminal justice system by discussing its structure, the values it is 
designed to promote, and the important issues that define it today. 
WHAT is CRimE?
Of course, it is generally illegal for one person to kill another person. Exceptions to this 
rule are known as justifiable homicides, which are killings that occur under circum-
stances that remove criminal guilt. One example of a justifiable homicide is when a law 
enforcement officer kills a suspect in the line of duty. Another is when a person is act-
ing in self-defense, as claimed by George Zimmerman. Indeed, justifiable homicides in 
Florida increased from an average of twelve a year before the state passed its Stand Your 
Ground law in 2005 to an average of thirty-three a year afterward.4
Do such laws really provide “a license to kill,” as their critics contend? Consider the 
Miami case of Greyston Garcia, who chased down and stabbed to death a person sus-
pected of stealing his car radio. In 2012, a Florida judge dismissed murder charges against 
Garcia, stating that the bag of radios brandished by the burglary suspect amounted to a 
lethal weapon.5 In a state that does not have a Stand Your Ground law, it is unlikely that 
Garcia’s act would be deemed a justifiable homicide.6 Thus, a crime is not merely an 
act that seems illegal. It is a wrong against society that is proclaimed by law and that, if 
committed under specific circumstances, is punishable by the criminal justice system.
dETERmining CRiminAL bEHAvioR
One problem with the definition of crime just provided is that it obscures the complex 
nature of societies. A society is not static—it evolves and changes, and its concept of 
criminality changes as well. For example, due to political and cultural shifts in the United 
States, a person is much more likely to face criminal charges for lying in a business or 
immigration context today than was the case even a decade ago. 
Furthermore, different societies can have vastly different ideas of what consti-
tutes criminal behavior.  In 2011, France passed a criminal law that essentially prevents 
Muslim women from wearing garments in public that cover their faces. Because the 
First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution forbids any government action “prohibiting 
the free exercise of religion,” such a ban in this country is highly unlikely. (See the fea-
ture Comparative Criminal Justice—Trash Talk on the following page for details about 
another foreign criminal law that runs counter to American legal tradition.) To more 
fully understand the concept of crime, it will help to examine the two most common 
models of how society “decides” which acts are criminal: the consensus model and the 
conflict model.
THE ConsEnsus modEL The term consensus refers to general agreement among the 
majority of any particular group. Thus, the consensus model rests on the assumption 
that as people gather together to form a society, its members will naturally come to a basic 
agreement with regard to shared norms and values. Those individuals whose actions devi-
ate from the established norms and values are considered to pose a threat to the well-being 
Crime An act that violates 
criminal law and is punishable 
by criminal sanctions.
Consensus Model A 
criminal justice model in which 
the majority of citizens in a 
society share the same values 
and beliefs. Criminal acts are 
acts that conflict with these 
values and beliefs and that are 
deemed harmful to society.
 Describe the 
two most 
common 
models of 
how society 
determines 
which acts are 
criminal.
Learning  
objective1
Teaching Tip: In a brief written 
assignment, ask each student to 
write her or his own definition of 
“crime.” Have students share their 
definitions with the class or with 
those sitting around them.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
of society as a whole and must be sanctioned (punished). The society passes laws to control 
and prevent unacceptable behavior, thereby setting the boundaries for acceptable behavior 
within the group.7
The consensus model, to a certain extent, assumes that a diverse group of people 
can have similar morals. In other words, they share an ideal of what is “right” and 
“wrong.” Consequently, as public attitudes toward morality change, so do laws. In  
sixteenth-century America, a person found guilty of adultery (having sexual relations 
with someone other than one’s spouse) could expect to be publicly whipped, branded, 
or even executed. Furthermore, a century ago, one could walk into a pharmacy and pur-
chase heroin. Today, social attitudes have shifted to consider adultery a personal issue, 
beyond the reach of the state, and to consider the sale of heroin a criminal act. 
THE ConfLiCT modEL Some people reject the consensus model on the ground that moral 
attitudes are not constant or even consistent. In large, democratic societies such as the 
United States, different groups of citizens have widely varying opinions on controversial 
issues of morality and criminality such as abortion, the war on drugs, immigration, and 
assisted suicide. These groups and their elected representatives are constantly coming 
into conflict with one another. According to the conflict model, then, the most politi-
cally powerful segments of society—based on class, income, age, and race—have the 
most influence on criminal laws and are therefore able to impose their values on the rest 
of the community.
Consequently, what is deemed criminal activity is determined by whichever group 
happens to be holding power at any given time. Because certain groups do not have access 
to political power, their interests are not served by the criminal justice system. To give one 
Morals Principles of right and 
wrong behavior, as practiced by 
individuals or by society. 
Conflict Model A criminal 
justice model in which the 
content of criminal law is 
determined by the groups that 
hold economic, political, and 
social power in a community.
TRASh TALK  
The two incidents, occurring on two 
different continents several months apart, 
were strikingly similar. On October 23, 
2011, in London, England, Chelsea soccer player John Terry 
appeared to yell two obscenities and the word “black” at 
Anton Ferdinand of the opposing Queens Park Rangers. 
Then, on December 31, in Miami, Krys Barch of the Florida 
Panthers was ejected from a professional hockey game 
after aiming a racial slur at P. K. Subban of the Montreal 
Canadiens. 
The consequences of the actions, however, were 
quite different. The National Hockey League suspended 
Barch—who admitted that his comments might have 
been “inappropriate”—for one game. Terry, meanwhile, 
found himself charged with committing a “racially 
aggravated public order offense” for violating a section 
of England’s Crime and Disorder Act. The law, passed 
in 1998, prohibits “threatening, abusive, or insulting 
words” within the “hearing or sight” of someone “likely 
to be caused harassment, alarm, or distress which was 
racially aggravated.” Terry, who was found innocent of any 
wrongdoing in July 2012, faced a maximum fine of about 
$4,000 if he had been found guilty.
Criminal charges were never considered against Barch, 
the hockey player. As interpreted by American courts, 
the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution does not 
allow laws punishing speech unless that speech is likely 
to produce imminent violence. English criminal codes, 
in contrast, allow a maximum penalty of seven years for 
certain forms of verbal racial or religious harassment. The 
goal of these laws, according to one British legal expert, is 
to “promote justice by attempting to mould the collective 
conscience.”
For CritiCAl AnAlysis Do you think that the United 
States should criminalize “threatening, abusive, or 
insulting words” aimed at members of a minority group? 
What would be the consequences—both intended and 
unintended—of such a law?
CompARATive CRiminAL jusTiCE
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students discuss what model 
(conflict or consensus) our current 
criminal justice system best 
reflects and provide examples to 
support their position. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

example, with the exception of Oregon and Washington State, physician-assisted suicide is 
illegal in the United States. Although opinion polls show that the general public is evenly 
divided on the issue,8 several highly motivated interest groups have been able to convince 
lawmakers that the practice goes against America’s shared moral and religious values. 
An inTEgRATEd dEfiniTion of CRimE
Considering both the consensus and conflict models, we can construct a definition of 
crime that will be useful throughout this textbook. For our purposes, crime is an action 
or activity that is:
1. Punishable under criminal law, as determined by the majority or, in some 
instances, by a powerful minority. 
2. Considered an offense against society as a whole and prosecuted by public offi-
cials, not by victims and their relatives or friends. 
3. Punishable by sanctions based on laws that bring about the loss of personal free-
dom or life.
At this point, it is important to understand the difference between crime and 
deviance, or behavior that does not conform to the norms of a given community 
or society. Deviance is a subjective concept. For example, some segments of society 
may think that smoking marijuana or killing animals for clothing and food is deviant 
behavior. Deviant acts become crimes only when society as a whole, through its legis-
latures, determines that those acts should be punished—as is the situation today in the 
United States with using illegal drugs but not with eating meat. 
Furthermore, not all crimes are considered particularly deviant—little social 
disapprobation is attached to those who fail to follow the letter of parking laws. In 
essence, criminal law reflects those acts that we, as a society, agree are so unacceptable 
that steps must be taken to prevent them from occurring.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 26.
The consensus model of crime assumes that diverse members of society share similar 
____________, or ideals of right and wrong. The ____________ model, in contrast, 
focuses on dissimilarities of such attitudes within society. A criminal act is a wrong 
against ____________ and therefore is “avenged,” or prosecuted, by ____________ 
____________, not by the individual victims of a crime. A crime is not the same as an act 
of ____________, the term for behavior that is nonconformist but not necessarily criminal. 
THE PuRPosE of THE  
CRiminAL jusTiCE sysTEm
Defining which actions are to be labeled “crimes” is only 
the first step in safeguarding society from criminal behav-
ior. Institutions must be created to apprehend alleged 
wrongdoers, to determine whether these persons have 
indeed committed crimes, and to punish those who are 
found guilty according to society’s wishes. These institu-
tions combine to form the criminal justice system. As 
Deviance Behavior that is 
considered to go against the 
norms established by society.
Criminal Justice System  
The interlocking network of law 
enforcement agencies, courts, 
and corrections institutions 
designed to enforce criminal 
laws and protect society from 
criminal behavior.
several years ago, the federal 
government and several state 
governments banned the 
sale of Four Loko, here being 
enjoyed by college students 
in Fort Collins, Colorado.  The 
drink, known as “blackout in 
a can,” combines the alcohol 
content of nearly six beers with 
a strong dose of caffeine.  Why 
might society demand that the 
sale of this product be made a 
criminal offense?
Matthew Staver/Landov
Define crime.
Learning  
objective2
C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y  7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

we begin our examination of the American criminal justice system in this introductory 
chapter, it is important to have an idea of its purpose. 
mAinTAining jusTiCE
The explicit goal of the criminal justice system is to provide justice to all members of 
society. Because justice is a difficult concept to define, this goal can be challenging, if not 
impossible, to meet. Broadly stated, justice means that all individuals are equal before 
the law and that they are free from arbitrary arrest or seizure as defined by the law. In 
other words, the idea of justice is linked with the idea of fairness. Above all, we want our 
laws and the means by which they are carried out to be fair.
Justice and fairness are subjective terms, which is to say that people may have dif-
ferent concepts of what is just and fair. If a woman who has been beaten by her husband 
retaliates by killing him, what is her just punishment? Reasonable persons could dis-
agree, with some thinking that the homicide was justified and that she should be treated 
leniently. Others might insist that she should not have taken the law into her own hands. 
Police officers, judges, prosecutors, prison administrators, and other employees of the 
criminal justice system must decide what is “fair.” Sometimes, their course of action is 
obvious, but often, as we shall see, it is not. 
PRoTECTing soCiETy
Within the broad mandate of “maintaining justice,” Megan Kurlychek of the University at 
Albany, New York, has identified four specific goals of our criminal justice system:
1. To protect society from potential future crimes of the most dangerous or “risky” 
offenders.
2. To determine when an offense has been committed and provide the appropriate 
punishment for that offense.
3. To rehabilitate those offenders who have been punished so that it is safe to return 
them to the community.
4. To support crime victims and, to the extent possible, return them to their pre-
crime status.9
Again, though these goals may seem straightforward, they are fraught with difficulty. 
Take the example of James Holmes, who was charged with twenty-four counts of murder 
and 116 counts of attempted murder by law enforcement 
officials on July 30, 2012.  Ten days earlier, Holmes—armed 
with an assault rifle and three other guns—had apparently 
opened fire on the audience at a late-night screening of a 
Batman movie in Aurora, Colorado. Following the incident, 
authorities at the University of Colorado, where Holmes had 
been a graduate student, came under heavy criticism for not 
reacting more forcefully to staff concerns about his behavior. 
In the next chapter, we will study the challenges of predicting 
criminality.
In August 2012, Holmes’s defense attorneys told a dis-
trict judge that their client was mentally ill, causing many in 
Aurora and elsewhere to worry that he would never receive 
an appropriate punishment for his actions (see the photo 
alongside). In Chapter 3, you will learn how insanity can 
be used as a defense to criminal wrongdoing. Furthermore, 
Justice The quality of fairness 
that must exist in the processes 
designed to determine whether 
individuals are guilty of criminal 
wrongdoing.
review the four goals of 
the criminal justice system 
at right. Which of the goals 
would be met by rehabilitating 
James Holmes, shown here 
with his attorney in a Colorado 
court, and returning him to 
society? Which would be met 
by putting him in prison for life? 
RJ Sangosti-Pool/Getty Images
8  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
what they think the purpose of 
the criminal justice system should 
be. Write these responses on 
the board, and ask for feedback 
from other students. Is there any 
consensus among students on 
the proper function of the criminal 
justice system?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   9
regardless of his mental state, should Holmes ever be set free? In Chapters 9 and 12 we 
will discuss the concept of rehabilitation and the role that victims play in the eventual 
return of offenders to the community. Throughout this textbook, you will come to better 
understand the criminal justice system by exposure to differing opinions on these topics 
and many others.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 26.
The concept of ____________ is closely linked with ideas of fairness and equal treatment for 
all, and it is a primary goal of American police officers, judges, and prison administrators. 
Other goals include ____________ society from criminal behavior, ____________ those who 
are guilty of criminal wrongdoing, and supporting the ____________ of crime.
THE sTRuCTuRE of  
THE CRiminAL jusTiCE sysTEm
Society places the burden of maintaining justice and protecting our communities on those 
who work for the three main institutions of the criminal justice system: law enforcement, 
the courts, and corrections. In this section, we take an introductory look at these institu-
tions and their role in the criminal justice system as a whole.
THE imPoRTAnCE of fEdERALism 
To understand the structure of the criminal justice system, you must understand the 
concept of federalism, which means that government powers are shared by the national 
(federal) government and the states. The framers of the U.S. Constitution, fearful of tyranny 
and a too-powerful central government, chose the system of  federalism as a compromise. 
The appeal of federalism was that it established a strong national government 
capable of handling large-scale problems while allowing for state powers and local 
traditions. For example, earlier in the chapter we noted that physician-assisted suicide, 
though banned in most of the country, is legal in Oregon and Washington State. In 2006, 
the federal government challenged the decision made by voters in these two states to 
allow the practice. The United States Supreme Court sided with the states, ruling that 
the principle of federalism supported their freedom to differ from the majority viewpoint 
in this instance.10 
The Constitution gave the national government certain express powers, such as the 
power to coin money, raise an army, and regulate interstate commerce. All other powers 
were left to the states, including the express power to enact whatever laws are necessary 
to protect the health, morals, safety, and welfare of their citizens. As the American crimi-
nal justice system has evolved, the ideals of federalism have ebbed somewhat. In par-
ticular, the powers of the national government have expanded significantly. (For a better 
understanding of how federalism works, see the feature You Be the Senator—Banning 
Texting While Driving on the following page.)
LAW EnfoRCEmEnT The ideals of federalism can be clearly seen at the local, state, and 
federal levels of law enforcement. Although agencies from the different levels cooperate 
if the need arises, they have their own organizational structures and tend to operate 
independently of one another. We briefly introduce each level of law enforcement here 
and cover them in more detail in Chapters 4, 5, and 6.
Federalism A form of 
government in which a written 
constitution provides for a 
division of powers between a 
central government and several 
regional governments.
Teaching Tip: Ask students to 
define federalism in their own 
words. Have them provide examples 
of criminal laws that are enforced by 
the federal government and criminal 
laws that are enforced by the 
governments of their home states.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Local and County Law Enforcement On the local level, the duties of law enforcement 
agencies are split between counties and municipalities. The chief law enforcement offi-
cer of most counties is the county sheriff. The sheriff is usually elected, with a two- or 
four-year term. In some areas, where city and county governments have merged, there is 
a county police force, headed by a chief of police. As Figure 1.1 on the facing page shows, 
the bulk of all police officers in the United States are employed at the local level. The 
majority work in departments that consist of fewer than 10 officers, though a large city 
such as New York may have a police force of about 36,000.
Local police are responsible for the “nuts and bolts” of law enforcement work. 
They investigate most crimes and attempt to deter crime through patrol activities. They 
apprehend criminals and participate in trial proceedings, if necessary. Local police are 
also charged with “keeping the peace,” a broad set of duties that includes crowd and 
traffic control and the resolution of minor conflicts between citizens. In many areas, 
local police have the added obligation of providing social services such as dealing with 
domestic violence and child abuse.
State Law Enforcement Hawaii is the only state that does not have a state law enforce-
ment agency. Generally, there are two types of state law enforcement agencies: those 
designated simply as “state police” and those designated as “highway patrols.” State 
highway patrols concern themselves mainly with infractions on public highways and 
freeways. Other state law enforcers include fire marshals, who investigate suspicious 
Outline 
the three 
levels of law 
enforcement.
Learning  
objective 3
The SiTuATioN According to a recent poll, one in five American drivers—and half of those 
between the ages of sixteen and twenty-four—admits to having texted on a smartphone or 
other electronic device while driving. Texting while behind the wheel makes our roads less 
safe—one study found that such behavior is twice as risky as driving with a 0.08 blood alcohol 
level, the general standard for drunk driving. The U.S. Transportation Department estimates 
that every year nearly 6,000 people are killed and another 530,000 are injured in car crashes 
connected to “distracted driving,” which often involves cell phones or other mobile devices.
The LAW More than thirty states ban texting while driving. Punishments vary: in California, the 
offense warrants a $20 fine, while in Utah it can result in three months in jail. The effectiveness of 
these state laws is somewhat questionable, however. In Missouri, state patrol officers, finding it 
difficult to determine when a person was texting behind the wheel, cited only eight offenders in 
the first five months after that state’s prohibition went into effect. Furthermore, texting bans did 
nothing to reduce the number of auto accidents in four states surveyed recently, as most drivers 
appeared to be ignoring the laws.
YouR DeCiSioN Suppose that you are a U.S. senator representing your home state, and 
another senator introduces a bill that would give the federal government the power to force all 
states to ban texting while driving. Would you support this bill? Why or why not? What are the 
benefits and drawbacks of letting each state decide its own response to this problem?
To see how the U.S. Senate has responded to state texting bans, go to Example 1.1 in Appendix B.
You Be The SeNAToR
Banning texting While Driving
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
10  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to explore various law 
enforcement agencies in their 
communities. Which agency has 
jurisdiction in their hometown? On 
their college campus? What are 
the functions of these various law 
enforcement agencies?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

fires and educate the public on fire prevention, and fish, game, and watercraft wardens, 
who police a state’s natural resources and often oversee its firearms laws. Some states 
also have alcoholic beverage control officers, as well as agents who investigate welfare 
and food stamp fraud. 
Federal Law Enforcement The enactment of new national anti-terrorism, gun, drug, 
and violent crime laws over the past forty years has led to an expansion in the size and 
scope of the federal government’s participation in the criminal justice system. The 
Department of Homeland Security, which we will examine in detail in Chapters 4 and 14, 
combines the police powers of twenty-four federal agencies to protect the United States 
from terrorist attacks. Other federal agencies with police powers include the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the U.S. 
Secret Service, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). In 
fact, almost every federal agency, including the postal and forest services, has some kind 
of police power. 
Unlike their local and state counterparts, federal law enforcement agencies operate 
throughout the United States. In May 2012, for example, the FBI conducted a nationwide 
sweep targeting health care fraud, arresting more than one hundred doctors, nurses, 
and other medical professionals in seven cities ranging from Los Angeles to Chicago 
to Miami. Federal agencies are also able to provide support for local police depart-
ments, as happened in July 2011 when agents from the ATF joined forces with the Tulsa 
(Oklahoma) Police Department to combat a string of armed robberies that had plagued 
the city for nearly six months.
THE CouRTs The United States has a dual court system, which means that we have two 
indepen dent judicial systems, one at the federal level and one at the state level. In prac-
tice, this translates into fifty-two different court systems: one federal court system and 
fifty different state court systems, plus that of the District of Columbia. 
As allowed under the rules of federalism, the U.S. (federal) criminal code lists about 
4,500 crimes, while each state has its own criminal statutes that determine illegal acts 
under state law. In general, those defendants charged with violating federal criminal law 
will face trial in federal court, while those defendants charged with violating state law 
will appear in state court. The federal system consists of district courts, circuit courts of 
C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y  11
FiGUrE 1.1 local, state, and Federal Employees in our Criminal Justice system
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Justice Expenditure and Employment in the United States, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, September 2010), Table 2.
Law Enforcement
888,321
166,444
60,742
36,654
263,840
108,647
177,530
475,024
761,201
270,713
266,120
1,425,154
Judicial and Legal
Corrections
Total
Federal
State
Local
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
appeals, and the United States Supreme Court. The state systems include trial courts, 
intermediate courts of appeals, and state supreme courts. 
The criminal court and its work group—the judge, prosecutors, and defense attor-
neys—are charged with the weighty responsibility of determining the innocence or guilt 
of criminal suspects. We will cover these important participants, their roles in the crimi-
nal trial, and the court system as a whole in Chapters 7, 8, and 9.
CoRRECTions Once the court system convicts and sentences an offender, he or she is 
assigned to the corrections system. (Those convicted in a state court will be under the 
control of that state’s corrections system, and those convicted of a federal crime will 
find themselves under the control of the federal corrections system.) Depending on the 
seriousness of the crime and their individual needs, offenders are placed on probation, 
incarcerated, or transferred to community-based correctional facilities.
List the 
essential 
elements of 
the corrections 
system.
Learning  
objective 4
f A s T f A C T s
CRimE sCEnE PHoTogRAPHER,  
job dEsCRiPTion:
•  Photograph physical evidence 
and crime scenes related to 
criminal investigations.
•   Also must be able to compose 
reports, testify in court, and 
understand basic computer 
software and terminology. 
WHAT kind of TRAining is 
REquiREd?
•  One year in law enforcement 
or commercial photography 
OR a degree or certificate in 
photography and darkroom 
techniques OR some combination 
of the above training or experience 
totaling one year.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
•  $45,780 – $53,290
CAReeRS iN CJ
DIANA TABOR 
CRIME SCENE PHOTOGRAPHER
A crime scene photographer’s job is invaluable to those who 
are not present at the scene, yet need to be able to observe 
the scene as accurately as possible. I like the variety of my 
work. No two scenes are exactly alike, and the conditions pose 
different challenges. I have photographed scenes in cramped 
mobile homes, spacious homes, and out in the woods where 
we had to hike because there were no roads leading 
directly to the scene. I’ve been really hot and sweaty, 
fogging up the viewfinder. Then I have been so cold that 
I had to go sit in the van to let my hands and the camera 
warm up because they had stopped working. 
I do wonder what the people at the gas stations 
think when we come in there after we’re done to clean up and get something to 
drink. Fingerprint powder gets everywhere—I have found that nothing less than a 
shower really gets rid of it completely. It is sometimes difficult to accept that there 
is nothing to prevent the crime that has already happened, but I take pride in 
representing the victim when he or she cannot speak.
Social Media Career Tip  
When you are posting on Facebook, assume that it will be published in your local 
newspaper and read by a potential employer. So, if you think the post might reflect 
poorly on you as a potential employee, keep it offline.
Photo Courtesy of Diana Tabor
Vozks/Stockphoto
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• 
Probation, the most common correctional treatment, 
allows the offender to return to the community and 
remain under the supervision of an agent of the court 
known as a probation officer. While on probation, the 
offender must follow certain rules of conduct. When 
probationers fail to follow these rules, they may be 
incarcerated.
• 
If the offender’s sentence includes a period of  
incarceration, he or she will be remanded to a 
correctional facility for a certain amount of time. 
Jails hold those convicted of minor crimes with 
relatively short sentences, as well as those awaiting 
trial or involved in certain court proceedings. Prisons 
house those convicted of more serious crimes with 
longer sentences. Generally speaking, counties and 
municipalities administer jails, while prisons are the 
responsibility of federal and state governments.
• 
Community-based corrections have increased in 
popularity as jails and prisons have been plagued with problems of funding and 
overcrowding. Community-based correctional facilities include halfway houses, 
residential centers, and work-release centers. They operate on the assumption that 
all convicts do not need, and are not benefited by, incarceration in jail or prison.
The majority of those inmates released from incarceration are not finished with 
the corrections system. The most frequent type of release from a jail or prison is parole, 
in which an inmate, after serving part of his or her sentence in a correctional facility, is 
allowed to serve the rest of the term in the community. Like someone on probation, a 
parolee must conform to certain conditions of freedom, with the same consequences if 
these conditions are not followed. Issues of probation, incarceration, community-based 
corrections, and parole will be covered in Chapters 10, 11, and 12.
THE CRiminAL jusTiCE PRoCEss 
In its 1967 report, the President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration 
of Justice asserted that the criminal justice system
is not a hodgepodge of random actions. It is rather a continuum—an orderly progression of 
events—some of which, like arrest and trial, are highly visible and some of which, though of 
great importance, occur out of public view.11
The commission’s assertion that the criminal justice system is a “continuum” is 
one that many observers would challenge.12 Some liken the criminal justice system to a 
sports team, which is the sum of an indeterminable number of decisions, relationships, 
conflicts, and adjustments.13 Such a volatile mix is not what we generally associate with 
a “system.” For most, the word system indicates a certain degree of order and discipline. 
That we refer to our law enforcement agencies, courts, and correctional facilities as part 
of a “system” may reflect our hopes rather than reality. Still, it will be helpful to familiar-
ize yourself with the basic steps of the criminal justice process, or the procedures through 
which the criminal justice system meets the expectations of society. These basic steps 
are provided in Figure 1.2 on the following page.
In his classic study of the criminal justice system, Herbert Packer, a professor at 
Stanford University, compared the ideal criminal justice process to an assembly line, 
C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   13
At midyear 2011, America’s 
jails held approximately 
730,000 inmates, including 
these residents of the Orange 
County jail in Santa Ana, 
California. What are the basic 
differences between jails and 
prisons?
lucy nicholson/reuters/landov
System A set of interacting 
parts that, when functioning 
properly, achieve a desired 
result.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students brainstorm the 
concept of a criminal justice 
“system.” What do they generally 
think of when they think of a 
system? Why might the criminal 
justice processes in this country 
not be “systematic”? Have the 
groups share their responses with 
the class. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
“down which moves an endless stream of cases, never stopping.”14 In Packer’s image of 
assembly-line justice, each step of the formal criminal justice process involves a series of  
“routinized operations” with the end goal of getting the criminal defendant from point A (his 
or her arrest by law enforcement) to point B (the criminal trial) to point C (if guilty, her or  
his punishment).15 As Packer himself was wont to point out, the daily operations of crimi-
nal justice rarely operate so smoothly. In this textbook, the criminal justice process will 
Formal Criminal Justice 
Process The model of the 
criminal justice process in 
which participants follow formal 
rules to create a smoothly 
functioning disposition of cases 
from arrest to punishment.
FiGUrE 1.2 the Criminal Justice Process
This diagram provides a simplified overview of the basic steps of the criminal justice 
process, from criminal act to release from incarceration. Next to each step, you will find 
the chapter of this textbook in which the event is covered.
Step 1: Entry into the System
Criminal Act 
(Ch. 2)
Plea: Not Guilty
Arrest (Ch. 6)
Verdict: 
Guilty
Criminal Investigation 
(Chs. 4 & 5)
Step 2: Prosecution and Pretrial Services
Charge Dismissed
(Ch. 8)
Prison or Jail (Chs. 11 & 12)
Release from Incarceration (Ch. 12)
Probation (Ch. 10)
Criminal Trial (Ch. 8)
Verdict:  
Not Guilty
Arraignment (Ch. 8)
Preliminary Hearing 
or Grand Jury (Ch. 8)
Sentencing (Ch. 9)
Plea: Guilty 
(Ch. 8)
Step 3: Adjudication
Step 4: Sentencing and Sanctions
Step 5: Corrections
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   15
be examined as the end product of many different decisions made by many 
different criminal justice professionals in law enforcement, the courts, and 
corrections.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 27.
To protect against a too-powerful central government, the framers of the U.S. 
Constitution relied on the principle of ____________ to balance power between the 
national government and the states. Consequently, the United States has a ____________ 
court system—one at the federal level and one at the ____________ level. One expert 
has compared the ____________ criminal justice process to an assembly line involving a 
series of routine operations.
disCRETion And ETHiCs
Practically, the formal criminal justice process suffers from a serious drawback: it is 
unrealistic. Law enforcement agencies do not have the staff or funds to investigate every 
crime, so they must decide where to direct their limited resources. Increasing caseloads 
and a limited amount of time in which to dispose of them constrict many of our nation’s 
courts. Overcrowding in prisons and jails affects both law enforcement agencies and the 
courts—there is simply not enough room for all convicts.
The criminal justice system relies on discretion to alleviate these pressures. By dis-
cretion, we mean the authority to choose between and among alternative courses of 
action, based on individual judgment and conscience. Collectively, the discretionary deci-
sions made by criminal justice professionals are said to produce an informal criminal 
justice process that does not operate within the rigid confines of formal rules and laws.
infoRmAL dECision mAking
By their nature, many, if not most, criminal statutes require informal decision making. 
To take just one example, rule 1050(7)(J) of New York City’s transit code criminalizes the 
act of putting one’s feet on a subway seat or taking up more than one seat if it interferes 
with other passengers’ comfort.16 Each year, nearly 1.6 billion riders use New York’s sub-
way system,17 and many of them, at some point, violate rule 1050(7)(J). If each offender 
were arrested for doing so, the city’s police officers would have little time to prevent other 
crimes, and the city’s courts and jails would be overwhelmed.
In 2011, New York police officers handed out only 6,000 tickets and made only about 
1,600 arrests for violations of this particular criminal offense.18 Obviously, in the vast 
majority of cases, officers used their discretion to merely issue a warning or “look the 
other way” when confronted with inconsiderate subway riders. In Chapters 4, 5, and 6, 
we will examine many other circumstances that call for discretionary decision making by 
law enforcement officers. (See Mastering Concepts—How Discretion Works on the follow-
ing page to get a better idea of discretion’s role in the informal criminal justice process.)
THE PiTfALLs of disCRETion
Unfortunately, the informal criminal justice system does not always benefit from mea-
sured, rational decision making. Individual judgment can be tainted by personal bias, erro-
neous or irrational thinking, and plain ill will. When this occurs, discretion becomes “the 
power to get away with alternative decisions (emphasis added).”19 Indeed, many of the rules 
“it is the spirit and not  
the form of the law that 
keeps justice alive.”
— Earl Warren,  
American judge  
(1891–1974)
Discretion The ability of 
individuals in the criminal 
justice system to make 
operational decisions based 
on personal judgment instead 
of formal rules or official 
information.
Informal Criminal 
Justice Process A model 
of the criminal justice system 
that recognizes the informal 
authority exercised by 
individuals at each step of the 
criminal justice process.
 Explain the 
difference 
between 
the formal 
and informal 
criminal justice 
processes.
Learning  
objective5
Group Activity: Ask students to 
come up with areas in their own 
lives where they have to make 
decisions using discretion. In small 
groups, have students review these 
scenarios and determine what 
factors, such as morality, duty, 
or even the law, impacted their 
discretionary choices.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
of the formal criminal justice process are designed to keep its employees from substituting 
their own judgment for that of the general public, as expressed by the law. 
Regarding the New York subway statute discussed above, one judge denounced what 
he saw as a “disconnect between the code’s goals and its enforcement.”20 Problematically, 
most of the arrests seemed to take place late at night or early in the morning, when the 
subway cars were least crowded and most riders were members of minority groups on their 
way to work. Furthermore, associate Supreme Court justice Antonin Scalia has criticized 
discretion in the courts for its tendency to cause discriminatory and disparate criminal 
sentences, a subject we will discuss in Chapter 9. According to Scalia, the need for fairness 
and certainty in the criminal justice system outweighs the practical benefits of widespread 
and unpredictable discretionary decision making.21
ETHiCs And jusTiCE
How can we reconcile the need for some sort of discretion in criminal justice with the ever-
present potential for abuse? Part of the answer lies in our initial definition of discretion (see 
page 15), which mentions not only individual judgment but also conscience. Ideally, actors in 
the criminal justice system will make moral choices about what is right and wrong based on 
the norms that have been established by society. In other words, they will behave ethically.
Ethics in criminal justice are closely related to the concept of justice. Because crimi-
nal justice professionals are representatives of the state, they have the power to determine 
whether the state is treating its citizens fairly. If some New York police officers are in fact 
making the decision to arrest discourteous subway riders based on appearance, then they 
are not only acting unethically but also unjustly. 
ETHiCs And THE LAW The line between ethics and justice is often difficult to discern, as 
ethical standards are usually not written into criminal statutes. Consequently, individu-
als must often “fill in” the ethical blanks. To make this point, ethics expert John Kleinig 
Ethics The moral principles 
that govern a person’s 
perception of right and wrong.
Define ethics 
and describe 
the role that 
they play in 
discretionary 
decision 
making.
Learning  
objective 6
iStockphoto/Sean Locke
mASTeRiNGCoNCepTS
HoW DisCrEtion Works
Laura is a hypothetical fifteen-year-old living in Northport, Alabama. 
She recently decided to impress her boyfriend, Tim, also fifteen, 
by taking sexually suggestive photos of herself and sending them 
to his smartphone. One day, after Tim uses it in class, the device is 
confiscated, and a teacher discovers Laura’s racy photos. 
Alabama state law prohibits the “electronic reproduction of 
minors engaged in real or simulated sexual activity.” Technically, 
Laura has broken this law. Without discretion, a state prosecutor 
would be forced to charge her with disseminating child 
pornography. State prosecutors do have discretion in this area, 
however, and can choose from several different options, such as 
sending Laura to counseling or allowing her parents to handle the 
matter. In making this discretionary decision, an Alabama prosecutor 
might consider the following factors:
•  State law is designed to punish adult child pornographers, not 
inappropriately romantic juveniles.
•  Laura did not mean for anybody but Tim to see the photos.
•  The punishment for this crime can be quite harsh, including 
jail time, a fine, and registration as a sex offender (discussed in 
Chapter 12).
•  This behavior, sometimes known as “sexting,” is widespread 
among Northport teens, and punishing Laura for it might have a 
strong deterrent effect.
According to a recent survey, one in five American teenagers admits 
to having sexted. In most instances, law enforcement professionals 
have used their discretion to refrain from arresting and prosecuting 
teens involved in this type of behavior when no adults are involved. 
As one legal expert noted, “What are we going to do? Lock up 20 
percent of America’s teens?”
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to find examples of 
criminal justice professionals who 
have abused their discretionary 
powers. Have each student bring 
an example to class for a group 
discussion.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   17
uses the real-life example of a police officer who refused to arrest a homeless person 
for sleeping in a private parking garage. Despite a local ordinance that clearly forbids 
such behavior, the officer felt it would be unethical to make an arrest in that situation 
unless the homeless person was disturbing the peace or otherwise acting in a disorderly 
manner. The officer’s supervisors were unsympathetic to his ethical stance, and he was 
suspended from duty without pay.22
ETHiCs And CRiTiCAL THinking Did the police officer in the above example behave ethi-
cally by inserting his own beliefs into the letter of the criminal law? Would an officer who 
arrested peaceful homeless trespassers be acting unethically? In some cases, the ethical 
decision will be intuitive, reflecting an automatic response determined by a person’s 
background and experiences. In other cases, however, intuition is not enough. Critical 
thinking is needed for an ethical response.23 Throughout this textbook, we will use the 
principle of critical thinking—which involves developing analytical skills and reason-
ing—to address the many ethical challenges inherent in the criminal justice system.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 27.
At every level, the criminal justice system relies on the ____________ of its employees to 
keep it from being bogged down by formal rules. Some critics think that this freedom 
to make decisions leads to the dominance of an ____________ criminal justice system, 
which can, in some cases, result in unequal treatment and even discrimination. Ideally, 
to avoid this kind of injustice, criminal justice professionals will incorporate proper 
____________ in their decision-making process.
CRiminAL jusTiCE TodAy
In describing the general direction of the criminal justice system as a whole, many observ-
ers point to two models introduced by Herbert Packer: the crime control model and the due 
process model.24 The underlying value of the crime control model is that the most impor-
tant function of the criminal justice process is to punish and repress criminal conduct. The 
system must be quick and efficient, placing as few restrictions as possible on the ability of law 
enforcement officers to make discretionary decisions in apprehending criminals.
Although not in direct conflict with crime control, the underlying values of the due 
process model focus more on protecting the rights of the accused through formal, legal 
restraints on the police, courts, and corrections. That is, the due process model relies 
on the courts to make it more difficult to prove guilt. It rests on the belief that it is more 
desirable for society that ninety-nine guilty suspects go free than that a single innocent 
person be condemned.25 
CRimE And LAW EnfoRCEmEnT: THE boTTom LinE
It is difficult to say which of Packer’s two models has the upper hand today. As we will 
see later in the section, homeland security concerns have brought much of the criminal 
justice system in line with crime control values. At the same time, dropping arrest and 
imprisonment rates suggest that due process values are strong, as well. Indeed, in 2011, 
the number of violent crimes committed in the United States decreased for the fifth 
straight year, reaching the lowest level in four decades.26 
Property crimes also declined slightly in 2011, contradicting the conventional wisdom 
that when people are out of work and need money, they turn to crime as a last resort. Despite 
Crime Control Model A 
criminal justice model that 
places primary emphasis on the 
right of society to be protected 
from crime and violent 
criminals.
Due Process Model A 
criminal justice model that 
places primacy on the right of 
the individual to be protected 
from the power of the 
government.
 Contrast the 
crime control 
and due process 
models.
Learning  
objective7
Teaching Tip: Ask each student 
to describe what it means to be 
ethical. Where did students get 
their own ethical beliefs? How did 
they learn how to make ethical and 
moral decisions? 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
think about whether they feel that 
the criminal justice system should 
operate under the crime control 
or due process model. Would this 
view change if they were charged 
with a crime?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the economic downturn that has gripped the country for several years, the expected higher 
levels of criminality did not occur. Juvenile crime rates are also declining, a subject we will 
address in Chapter 13. Alfred Blumstein of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh has called 
all this good news “striking,” because it comes “at a time when everyone anticipated [crime 
rates] could be going up because of the recession.”27
smARTER PoLiCing Just as law enforcement inevitably gets a great deal of the blame 
when crime rates are high, American police forces have received much credit for the 
apparent decline in criminality. The consensus is that the police have become smarter 
and more disciplined over the past two decades, putting into practice strategies that allow 
them to more effectively prevent crime. For example, the widespread use of proactive 
policing promotes more rigorous enforcement of minor offenses—such as drunkenness 
and public disorder—with an eye toward preventing more serious wrongdoing.28 In addi-
tion, hot-spot policing has law enforcement officers focusing on high-crime areas rather 
than spreading their resources evenly throughout a metropolitan area.29 These and other 
policing strategies will be explored more fully in Chapter 5.
idEnTifying CRiminALs Technology has also played a significant role in improving law 
enforcement efficiency. Police investigators are reaping the benefits of perhaps the most 
effective new crime-fighting tool since fingerprint identification: DNA profiling.30 This 
technology allows law enforcement agents to identify a suspect from body fluid evidence 
(such as blood, saliva, or semen) or biological evidence (such as hair strands or fingernail 
clippings). As we will see in Chapter 5, by collecting DNA from convicts and storing the 
information in databases, investigators have been able to reach across hundreds of miles 
and back in time to catch wrongdoers. 
Law enforcement’s ability to identify criminal suspects is set to receive another 
boost with the increased use of biometrics. The term refers to the various technological 
devices that read a person’s unique physical characteristics and report his or her identity 
to authorities. The most common biometric devices record a suspect’s fingerprints, but 
hand geometry, facial features, and the minute details of the human eye can also provide 
biometric identification.31
Biometrics Methods to 
identify a person based on 
his or her unique physical 
characteristics, such as 
fingerprints or facial 
configuration.
It seems as though there is an app for everything these days—even biometrics. Recently, 
law enforcement agents in about forty counties began using the Mobile Offender 
Recognition and Identification System (MORIS). With the device, which weighs about 
twelve ounces and attaches to an iPhone, the police officer takes a photograph of a 
suspect’s face from five feet away, or of the suspect’s eyes from a distance of six inches. 
The app is then engaged to search for a facial or iris match from a national database to 
determine whether the suspect has a previous record. 
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Mobile Offender Recognition  
and Identification System (MORIS)
Barry Chin/Boston Globe via Getty Image
18   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Discussion Tip: Have students 
discuss whether they think our 
current criminal justice system 
presently is operating under the 
due process or crime control 
model. Have them provide 
examples to justify their positions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   19
ConTinuing CHALLEngEs foR LAW EnfoRCEmEnT Not every policing trend is positive. Due 
to the worsening economic conditions discussed above, according to one recent survey, 
about half of the nation’s local law enforcement agencies have been subject to budget cuts 
in recent years.32 The impact of these cuts, which include officer layoffs and resource reduc-
tions, could seriously hamper efforts to combat three of the major challenges facing today’s 
police: gangs, guns, and illegal drugs.
The Scourge of Street Gangs For many local law enforcement agencies, particularly 
those in large metropolitan areas, success is measured by their ability to control street 
gangs. These gangs are often identified as groups of offenders who band together to 
engage in violent, unlawful, or criminal activity. According to the most recent data, more 
than 33,000 gangs, with approximately 1.4 million members, are criminally active in the 
United States. The same study estimates that gangs are responsible for an average of 48 
percent of violent crime in most cities, and for up to 90 percent in the worst-hit areas.33 
The FBI’s “Safe Streets” initiative—in which the federal agency teams up with local police 
forces—has resulted in the arrest of more than 23,000 gang members over the past 
decade, but such efforts are threatened by budget cuts at the municipal and county levels.
Gun Sales and Gun Control In many cities, high levels of gang activity have led to 
high levels of gun violence.34 Even though overall weapons 
violations have decreased along with other criminal activity, 
Carnegie Mellon’s Alfred Blumstein suggests that the most 
serious threat to America’s positive crime outlook is not the 
economy but an increase in the number of guns in high-
crime neighborhoods.35 
Overall, about 30,000 people are killed by gunfire in the 
United States each year, and illegally obtained firearms are a con-
stant concern for law enforcement officials. At the same time, 
legal ownership of guns is widespread, with almost one-third of 
American households possessing at least one gun.36 In 2008, the 
United States Supreme Court further solidified the legal basis 
for this practice by ruling that the U.S. Constitution protects an 
individual’s right to “bear arms.”37 The Court’s decision has done 
little to lessen the debate over gun control, a blanket term used 
to describe the policies that the government implements to keep 
firearms out of the hands of the wrong people. 
Without MORIS, a police officer must transport the suspect back to the station 
house, take her or his fingerprints, and then wait up to a week to hear if the FBI was 
able to produce a match. With MORIS, the digital search is completed within seconds. 
“This is a game changer for law enforcement,” says Pinal County (Arizona) sheriff 
Paul Babeu, who was happy to pay the $3,000 cost of each MORIS unit. “It’s worth its 
weight in gold.”
tHinkinG ABoUt Moris: Why is MORIS a “game changer” for law 
enforcement? Should this technology be made available to ordinary citizens? Why or 
why not?
Street Gang A group of 
people, usually three or more, 
who share a common identity 
and engage in illegal activities.
Gun Control Efforts by a 
government to regulate or 
control the sale of guns.
two police officers in Salinas, 
California, question a male 
suspect about his gang 
affiliation. Why might an extra 
law enforcement presence in 
gang-ridden neighborhoods 
lead to a reduction in crime in 
those areas?
Monica Almeida/New York Times/ 
Redux Pictures
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students their 
opinions about “gun control.” What 
do they think about governmental 
limits on firearm ownership? What 
type of gun control, if any, would 
they support?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
The Illegal Drugs Problem One area in which the nation’s crime outlook has not been 
particularly encouraging involves illegal drugs. Between 1980 and 2009, while arrests for most 
criminal behavior declined, the arrest rate for illegal drug possession and use increased by  
122 percent.38 
The broadest possible definition of a drug, which includes alcohol, is any substance 
that modifies biological, psychological, or social behavior. In popular terminology, how-
ever, the word drug has a specific connotation. When people speak of the “drug problem,” 
or the “war on drugs,” or “drug abuse,” they are referring specifically to illegal psychoactive 
drugs, which alter the consciousness or perception of the user. Almost all of the drugs that 
we will be discussing in this textbook, such as marijuana, cocaine, heroin, and amphet-
amines, are illegal and psychoactive.
The main source of drug use data is the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 
conducted annually by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (see Figure 1.3 on the facing 
page). According to the survey, only about 9 percent of those questioned had used an ille-
gal drug in the past month. Even so, this means that a significant number of Americans—
nearly 23  million—are regularly using illegal drugs, and the figure mushrooms when 
users of legal substances such as alcohol (131 million users) and tobacco (70 million 
users) are included.39 Drug abuse often leads to further criminal behavior in adolescents, 
as we will see when we look at the juvenile justice system in Chapter 13. In general, the 
growing market for illegal drugs causes significant damage both in the United States and 
in countries such as Mexico that supply America with its “fix.”
HomELAnd sECuRiTy And individuAL RigHTs
“September 11 is the day that never ends,” wrote journalist Richard Cohen on the occa-
sion of the tenth anniversary of the events of that day in 2001.40 Without question, the 
attacks of September 11, 2001—when terrorists hijacked four commercial airlines and 
used them to kill nearly three thousand people in New York City, northern Virginia, and 
rural Pennsylvania—were the most significant events of the first decade of the 2000s as 
far as crime fighting is concerned. As we will see throughout this textbook, the resulting 
homeland security movement has touched nearly every aspect of criminal justice.  This 
movement has the ultimate goal of protecting America from terrorism, which can be 
broadly defined as the random use of staged violence to achieve political goals.
THE PATRioT ACT The need to respond to the terrorist threat led American politicians and 
police officials to turn sharply toward crime control principles, as discussed on page 17. In par-
ticular, the USA Patriot Act,41 passed six weeks after the 9/11 attacks, strengthened the ability 
of federal law enforcement agents to investigate and incarcerate suspects. The 342-page piece 
of legislation is difficult to summarize, but some of its key provisions include the following:
• 
An expansion of the definition of what it means to “engage in terrorist activity” 
to include providing “material support” through such activities as fund-raising or 
operating Web sites for suspected terrorist organizations.
• 
Greater leeway for law enforcement agents to track Internet use, access private 
financial records, and wiretap those suspected of terrorist activity.
• 
A reduction in the amount of evidence that law enforcement agents need to 
gather before taking a terrorist suspect into custody.
In addition to this kind of legislative action, billions of dollars have been funneled into 
America’s homeland security apparatus, with the majority of the funds going to federal 
agencies under the control of the Department of Homeland Security.  Local police depart-
ments are also crucial participants in this area of law enforcement. The worry, discussed 
Drug Any substance 
that modifies biological, 
psychological, or social 
behavior; in particular, an 
illegal substance with those 
properties.
Psychoactive Drugs  
Chemicals that affect the brain, 
causing changes in emotions, 
perceptions, and behavior.
Homeland Security  
A concerted national effort to 
prevent terrorist attacks within 
the United States and reduce 
the country’s vulnerability to 
terrorism.
Terrorism The use or threat 
of violence to achieve political 
objectives.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: The National 
Institute on Drug Abuse has found 
that about 23 million people in the 
United States are regular illegal 
drug users. Ask students whether 
they think this number seems high 
or low. Are they surprised by this 
number? Why or why not?
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Department of 
Homeland Security Web site to 
determine what kinds of strategies 
the federal government has 
undertaken to protect our country 
from terrorism.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Many criticisms of 
the Patriot Act have focused on the 
argument that the law diminishes 
our civil liberties, particularly our 
right to be free from illegal search 
and seizure. Ask students to think 
about whether they are willing 
to give up some of their Fourth 
Amendment rights in exchange for 
protection against terrorist activity.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   21
Civil Liberties The basic 
rights and freedoms for 
American citizens guaranteed 
by the U.S. Constitution, 
particularly in the Bill of Rights.
in Chapter 4, is that the homeland security burden on 
local police will become too great—especially if bud-
get cuts related to the economic downturn continue 
to stretch the departments’ already limited resources. 
A “THREAT” oR A “TooL”? In a 2011 poll, 34 percent of 
those questioned about the Patriot Act felt that the law 
“goes too far and poses a threat too civil liberties.” The 
term civil liberties refers to the personal freedom from 
government interference guaranteed to all Americans by 
the U.S. Constitution, particularly the first ten amend-
ments, known as the Bill of Rights. Another 42 percent 
polled considered the legislation “a necessary tool that 
helps the government find terrorists.”42
Concerns about balancing personal freedoms and 
personal safety permeate our criminal justice system. In 
fact, an entire chapter of this textbook—Chapter 6—is 
needed to discuss the rules that law enforcement must 
follow to protect the civil liberties of crime suspects. As 
we will discuss in more depth in Chapter 14, the topic 
is particularly important, and widely debated, when it 
comes to homeland security. Here are just a few examples:
1. The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution 
states that the government shall not interfere with 
citizens’ “freedom of speech.” Does this mean that 
individuals should be allowed to support terrorist 
causes on the Internet?
2. The Fourth Amendment protects against “unrea-
sonable searches and seizures.” Does this mean that 
law enforcement agents should be able to seize the 
computer of a terrorist subject without any actual 
proof of wrongdoing?
3. The Sixth Amendment guarantees a trial by jury to 
a person accused of a crime. Does this mean that 
the U.S. military can find a suspect guilty of terrorist actions without providing a 
jury trial?
Critics of counterterrorism measures, such as intercepting suspected terrorists’ e-mails 
and increasing security at airports, believe that the government has overstepped its 
bounds. Supporters of these and other tactics point out that as of September 2012, such 
efforts have succeeded in protecting Americans from another large-scale terrorist attack. 
The feature Anti-Terrorism in Action—Trapping a Lone Wolf on the following page pro-
vides an introduction to the tactics that law enforcement employs to fight homegrown 
terrorism, a subject we will return to in Chapters 5 and 14.
inmATE PoPuLATions: A nEW TREnd
The proposition seems logical: if more criminals spend more time behind bars, crime 
rates will decline. Rising incarceration rates cannot be credited for the recent crime 
decline, however—for the first time in four decades, incarceration rates are not rising. 
FiGUrE 1.3 Drug Use in the United states
According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, nearly 
23 million Americans, or about 9 percent of those over twelve 
years old, can be considered “illicit drug users.” As you can see, 
most of these people used marijuana exclusively. Furthermore, 
eighteen- to twenty-five-year-olds were more likely to have used 
illegal drugs than any other segment of the population.
Source: National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2011.
0
5
10
Percentage Using in Past Month
15
20
Age:
12–17
18–25
26 and older
Gender:
Male
Female
Race and Ethnicity:
White
African American
American Indian
Asian American
Hispanic
Percentage Using in Past Month 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Used a drug other
than marijuana
Used marijuana
only
Category of Users 
Habits of Illegal Drug Users
Used marijuana and
some other drug
25
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

After increasing by 500 percent from 1980 to 2008, the inmate population in the United 
States has leveled off and, as you can see in Figure 1.4 on the facing page, has even 
decreased slightly over the past several years. Certainly, these decreases have been small, 
and the American corrections system remains immense, with nearly 2.3 million offend-
ers in prison or jail and another 4.9 million under community supervision.43 Still, the new 
trend reflects a series of crucial changes in the American criminal justice system.
THE EConomiCs of inCARCERATion For many years, the growing prison population 
was fed by a number of “get tough on crime” laws passed by politicians in response to 
the crime wave of the late 1980s and early 1990s. These sentencing laws—discussed in 
Chapter 9—made it more likely that a person arrested for a crime would wind up behind 
bars and that once there, he or she would not be back in the community for a long while. 
The recent reversal of this pattern does not mean that American politicians no longer 
want to “get tough” with criminals. Rather, as Ram Cnaan, a professor at the University 
of Pennsylvania, notes, it reflects a painful truth about prison and jail inmates: “They 
simply cost too much.”44
22   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 
America’s anti-terrorism efforts initially focused on stopping 
radicalized groups of foreign enemies, such as Osama bin 
Laden’s al Qaeda. Now, authorities are increasingly focusing 
their attention closer to home, on “lone wolf” suspects such 
as Sami Osmakac. 
A twenty-five-year-old U.S. citizen living with his 
parents in Pinellas Park, Florida, Osmakac first appeared 
on the homeland security radar in September 2011, when 
he walked into a Tampa store looking for al Qaeda flags. 
The store owner alerted the FBI to the request. Two months 
later, the same store owner told the federal agency that 
Osmakac had wanted to obtain weapons and attack targets 
in Tampa. Because of their inexperience, Osmakac and 
other homegrown “wannabe” terrorists are natural targets 
for well-placed insiders. According to the Center on Law 
and Security at New York University, 62 percent of the 
federal government’s most significant terrorism prosecutions 
have relied on evidence provided by informants such as the 
store owner. 
On December 21, Osmakac met with an undercover 
FBI agent, from whom he attempted to buy an AK-47-style 
machine gun, Uzi submachine guns, high-capacity magazines, 
grenades, and an explosive belt. Osmakac then bragged that 
he wanted to bomb local nightclubs and the Hillsborough 
County sheriff’s office, while the explosive belt would help him 
to “get in somewhere where there’s lots of people” and take 
hostages.
FoilED AGAin 
Because of the potential for widespread loss of life, the goal 
in counterterrorism operations is not to solve a crime after it 
has occurred but rather to prevent the crime from happening 
in the first place. Consequently, federal authorities arrested 
Osmakac on January 7, 2012, after he purchased explosive 
devices and firearms from the FBI undercover agent. He was 
charged with one count of attempted use of a weapon of 
mass destruction. If convicted, Osmakac could spend the 
rest of his life in federal prison. According to the Heritage 
Foundation, a conservative think tank in Washington, D.C., 
Osmakac’s arrest marked the forty-fourth terrorist attack 
against the United States that has been thwarted since 
September 11, 2001.
For CritiCAl AnAlysis Federal authorities disabled 
the explosive devices and firearms before selling them to 
Osmakac. So, he never posed an imminent danger to the 
Tampa community. Why are law enforcement officers justified 
in making an arrest even if a terrorist plot, or any criminal 
enterprise, is still in the planning stages?  
AnTi-TERRoRism iN ACTioN
trAPPinG A lonE WolF
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   23
A recent survey of state corrections officials found “budget cuts” to be the most 
pressing issue in the field.45 One way of bringing corrections spending under control is 
to grant early release to nonviolent offenders. Another is to divert offenders from jail and 
prison through special courts that promote rehabilitation rather than punishment for 
certain offenders. Also, corrections officials are implementing a number of programs to 
reduce the recidivism rate of ex-convicts, which stands at about 45 percent.46 Recidivism 
refers to the act of committing another crime after a person has already been punished 
for previous criminal behavior. We will examine these policies and their ramifications for 
the nation’s prisons and jails in Chapters 10, 11, and 12.
dnA And THE dEATH PEnALTy On April 30, 2012, after spending sixteen years in prison, 
Robert Dewey was released by a Colorado judge when DNA evidence showed that he 
most likely was not responsible for the murder and rape of a woman found strangled 
with a dog collar. Dewey is part of a small but important subset of  former prisoners: 
those released after postconviction DNA testing. As of August 2012, such testing had 
freed 297 people who had been arrested by police, found guilty at trial, and placed behind 
bars.47 Earlier in this section we noted the benefits of DNA testing as a crime-fighting 
tool. Here, we see that it can also act as a corrective for law enforcement and prosecuto-
rial mistakes. 
Another interesting corrections trend involves death row inmates, who are in prison 
awaiting execution after having been found guilty of committing a capital crime. In April 
2012, the death row population in American prisons stood at 3,170, down from 3,652 in 
2000. From 2000 to 2011, the number of executions in this country dropped from 85 to 
43.48 Judges and juries, it seems, have become less willing to sentence the “worst of the 
worst” criminals to death. In 2011, the number of death sentences fell below one hundred 
for the first time since the early 1970s.49 We will further explore capital punishment, one of 
the most controversial issues concerning the criminal justice system, in Chapter 9.
inCARCERATion And RACE One troublesome aspect of capital punishment is that a 
black defendant is much more likely to be sentenced to death for killing a white victim 
than a white defendant is for killing a black victim.50 Indeed, looking at the general statis-
tics, a bleak picture of minority incarceration emerges. Even though African Americans 
Recidivism The act of 
committing a new crime after 
a person has already been 
punished for a previous crime 
by being convicted and sent to 
jail or prison.
Capital Crime A criminal act 
that makes the offender eligible 
to receive the death penalty.
FiGUrE 1.4 Prison and Jail Populations in the United states, 1985–2011
Sources: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional Populations in the United States, 1995 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Justice, June 1997), Table 1.1, page 12; and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional Population in the United States, 2011 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), 2.
1985
Year
Number of Inmates (in thousands)
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2001
2003
2005
2007
2,500
2009
2011
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

make up only 13 percent of the general population in the United States, the number of 
black men in state and federal prisons (561,000) is significantly larger than the number of 
white men (452,000).51 In federal prisons, one in every three inmates is Hispanic,52 a ratio 
that has increased dramatically over the past decade as law enforcement has focused 
on immigration law violations, a subject we will consider in Chapter 14. The question 
of whether these figures reflect purposeful bias on the part of certain members of the 
criminal justice community will be addressed at various points in this textbook. 
THE soCiAL mEdiA REvoLuTion
The 2011 trial of Casey Anthony for the murder of her two-year-old daughter, Caylee, 
was a national sensation. Half the country followed the proceedings on a regular basis, 
and one cable news station had 5 million viewers tune in to see the somewhat surprising 
announcement that a Florida jury had found Anthony not guilty. Part of the reason for 
this interest was undoubtedly the lurid, dramatic tone to the case. But, thanks to social 
media, more Americans were able to follow the trial more closely than would have been 
possible even in the recent past.
Social media are Internet-based technologies that allow users to interact with each 
other and with the larger community of users. The most popular are social networking 
sites, such as Facebook and Google+, through which users can create and share personal 
profiles, and microblogs such as Twitter, where they can post short comments for public 
consumption. The most reliable news source for the Anthony trial was not a traditional 
media outlet but rather a Twitter account set up by the Ninth Judicial Circuit Court of 
Florida.53 After the verdict, a Facebook event post asking people to turn on their porch 
lights in Caylee’s memory had 2.5 million respondents within forty-eight hours.54
TECHnoLogiCAL sTRATEgiEs The social media’s impact on the criminal justice system 
goes well beyond stimulating public interest in high-profile court cases. Criminal justice 
professionals are increasingly adapting the technology to their specific endeavors. Casey 
Anthony’s defense attorneys hired a consultant to read through the tens of thousands of 
social media comments generated by the trial. Then, the lawyers adjusted their strategy 
according to public opinion. For example, the social media community was quite criti-
cal of Anthony’s father, George, mostly due to his alleged extramarital affair. As a result, 
Anthony’s lawyers became much more aggressive in challenging her father’s testimony 
during the trial.55 Prosecutors have also begun to mine social media, scouring the sites 
for relevant information on defendants and witnesses. 
As we will discuss in Chapter 5, law enforcement agents 
are benefiting from social media as an investigative tool. 
Departmental Facebook pages have proved to be a popular 
thoroughfare for anonymous crime tips, and police officers 
can develop important leads on suspects without leaving their 
desks. Law enforcement agencies are also using social media 
to provide information. The Hillsborough (New Jersey) Police 
Department, for example, has created a Twitter feed that allows 
residents to receive instant alerts about dangerous weather 
conditions, road closures, and “hot spots” of criminal activity.
TECHnoLogiCAL offEnsEs As a rule, technology that helps 
law enforcement provides new outlets for criminals as well. 
Social media are no exception. Groups of shoplifters employ 
24   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
List the major 
issues in 
criminal justice 
today.
Learning  
objective 8
on June 15, 2011, thousands 
of Canadian hockey fans, 
including this one, went 
on a violent rampage in 
downtown Vancouver, British 
Columbia. How can law 
enforcement agencies take 
advantage of social media to 
identify offenders in these kinds 
of acts of mass violence?
Anthony Bolante/Reuters/Landov
Technology Tip: Many law 
enforcement agencies are using 
social media sites (e.g., Facebook 
and Twitter) to communicate with 
citizens. Have each student find one 
example of a criminal justice agency 
using social media. Have students 
bring these examples to class 
and share the type of information 
provided.
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
discuss whether they feel that 
it is fair for defense attorneys to 
examine social media comments to 
bolster their defense strategy.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   25
Twitter and Facebook to organize “flash-robs,” in which a certain establishment is tar-
geted and raided within minutes. Street gangs go to the Internet to recruit new members 
and organize criminal enterprises. Because of the anonymity they provide, social media 
are also natural outlets for stalking, bullying, and harassment, topics we address in 
Chapter 14’s section on cyber crime. “The fascinating thing about technology is that once 
we open the door, it’s going to move in ways that we can’t always predict and are slow 
to control,” says Scott Decker, a criminal justice professor at Arizona State University.56
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 27.
The ____________ ____________ model of criminal justice places great importance 
on high rates of apprehension and conviction of criminal suspects. In contrast, the 
____________ ____________ model emphasizes the rights of the ____________ over 
the powers of the government. Despite predictions to the contrary, crime rates in the 
United States have steadily ____________ over the past several years. At the same time, 
____________ populations are also decreasing for the first time since the early 1970s. 
Legislation known as the ____________ Act was the initial, and the most comprehensive, 
reaction to the ____________ attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001.
Social media and CJ 
Many cities and counties 
in the United States 
offer “crime stopper” 
Facebook pages to keep 
the local community 
informed on relevant 
criminal justice topics. To 
access Crime stoppers of 
Houston, visit the Criminal 
Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
ChApTeR SummARY
Describe the two most common models 
of how society determines which acts 
are criminal. The consensus model argues 
that the majority of citizens will agree on which activities 
should be outlawed and punished as crimes. It rests on the 
assumption that a diverse group of people can have similar 
morals. In contrast, the conflict model argues that in a di-
verse society, the dominant groups exercise power by codi-
fying their value systems into criminal laws.
Define crime. Crime is any action punish-
able under criminal statutes and is consid-
ered an offense against society. Therefore, 
alleged criminals are prosecuted by the state rather than 
by victims. Crimes are punishable by sanctions that bring 
about a loss of personal freedom or, in some cases, fines. 
Outline the three levels of law enforce-
ment. Because we have a federal system of 
government, law enforcement occurs at the 
(a) national, or federal, level and the (b) state level and with-
in the states at (c) local and county levels. Because crime 
is mostly a local concern, most employees in the criminal 
justice system work for local governments. Agencies at the 
federal level include the FBI, the DEA, and the U.S. Secret 
Service, among others. 
List the essential elements of the cor-
rections system. Criminal offenders are 
placed on probation, incarcerated in a jail 
or prison, transferred to community-based corrections fa-
cilities, or released on parole.
Explain the difference between the 
formal and informal criminal justice 
processes. The formal criminal justice 
process involves the somewhat mechanical steps that are 
designed to guide criminal defendants from arrest to pos-
sible punishment. For every step in the formal process, 
though, someone has discretion, and such discretion leads 
to an informal process. Even when prosecutors believe 
that a suspect is guilty, they have the discretion not to 
prosecute, for example. 
Define ethics and describe the role 
that they play in discretionary de-
cision making. Ethics are the moral 
principles that guide a person’s perception of right and 
wrong. Most criminal justice professionals have a great 
deal of discretionary leeway in their day-to-day decision 
making, and their ethical beliefs can help ensure that 
they make such decisions in keeping with society’s es-
tablished values. 
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective 2
Learning  
objective 3
Learning  
objective 4
Learning  
objective 5
Learning  
objective 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Contrast the crime control and due pro-
cess models. The crime control model 
assumes that the criminal justice system 
is designed to protect the public from criminals. Thus, its 
most important function is to punish and repress criminal 
conduct. The due process model presumes that the accused 
are innocent and provides them with the most complete 
safeguards, usually within the court  system. 
List the major issues in criminal jus-
tice today. (a) Falling violent and prop-
erty crime rates; (b) the impact of an extended recession 
on crime rates; (c) improved policing strategies; (d) street 
gangs; (e) gun sales and gun control; (f) use of illegal drugs; 
(g) homeland security; (h) the Patriot Act and civil liber-
ties; (i) America’s shrinking, though still massive, inmate 
population; (j) cost-cutting measures in the corrections 
system; (k) possible bias against minorities in the criminal 
justice system; and (l) social media in the criminal justice 
system. 
Learning  
objective 7
Learning  
objective 8
QueSTioNS FoR CRiTiCAL ANALYSiS
1. How is it possible to have a consensus about what should 
or should not be illegal in a country with several hundred 
million adults from all races, religions, and walks of life?
2. What would be some of the drawbacks of having the vic-
tims of a crime, rather than the state (through its public 
officials), prosecute criminals?
3. Several years ago, lawmakers in Arkansas and New York 
considered passing laws against “distracted walkers,” 
or pedestrians who use cell phones, iPods, and other 
electronic devices while walking on city streets. What 
would be some of the reasons for instituting these kinds 
of laws? What is your opinion of any law that prohibits 
“distracted walking” (or “jogging” or “bicycling”)?
4. Refer back to the discussion of the police officer who 
refused to arrest the nonviolent homeless person on 
pages 16 and 17. Did the officer act properly in this situ-
ation, or should he have carried out the law regardless 
of his personal ethical beliefs? Explain your answer.
5. As noted in the chapter, over the past several years 
crime rates have decreased even as the American econ-
omy has suffered through the “Great Recession.” One 
theory for this development is that as overall economic 
activity slows, more people who would otherwise be at 
work are unemployed and thus are spending more time 
at home. Consequently, their residences are no longer 
easy targets for burglaries, and because they themselves 
are at home, they are no longer victimized by street rob-
beries. What is your opinion of this theory? What other 
explanation could there be for decreasing crime rates 
during a recession?
KeY TeRmS
biometrics  18
capital crime  23
civil liberties  21
conflict model  6
consensus model  5
crime  5
crime control model  17
criminal justice system  7
deviance  7
discretion  15
drug  20
due process model  17
ethics  16
federalism  9
formal criminal justice process  14
gun control  19
homeland security  20
informal criminal justice process  15
justice  8
morals  6
psychoactive drugs  20
recidivism  23
street gang  19
system  13
terrorism  20
SeLF ASSeSSmeNT ANSWeR KeY
Page 7: i. morals; ii. conflict; iii. society;  
iv. public officials/the government; v. deviance
Page 9: i. justice; ii. protecting; iii. punishing;  
iv. victims
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   27
Page 15: i. federalism; ii. dual; iii. state; iv. formal
Page 17: i. discretion; ii. informal; iii. ethics
Page 25: i. crime control; ii. due process; iii. individual;  
iv. decreased; v. prison; vi. Patriot; vii. terrorist
CouRSemATe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTeS
 1. Florida Statutes Sections 776.012-776.013 
and 776.031-776.032.
 2. Michael Bloomberg, quoted in “A Lethal 
Right to Self-Defense,” The Week (May 4, 
2012), 13.
 3. Quoted in Lauren Ritchie, “‘Stand your 
Ground’ Shouldn’t Give Pursuers the Right 
to Kill,” Orlando Sentinel (April 8, 2012), A18.
 4. Joe Palazzolo and Rob Barry, “More Killings 
Called Self-Defense,” Wall Street Journal 
(March 31-April 1, 2012), A2.
 5. Ibid.
 6. For a list of states that have passed Stand 
Your Ground laws, see ibid.
 7. Herman Bianchi, Justice as Sanctuary: Toward 
a New System of Crime Control (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1994), 72.
 8. “Americans 
Split 
on 
Doctor-Assisted 
Suicide,” Associated Press (May 29, 2007).
 9. Megan Kurlychek, “What Is My Left Hand 
Doing? The Need for Unifying Purpose 
and Policy in the Criminal Justice System,” 
Criminology & Public Policy (November 
2011), 909.
10. Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U.S. 243 (2006). Many 
United States Supreme Court cases will 
be cited in this book, and it is important 
to understand these citations. Gonzales v. 
Oregon refers to the parties in the case that 
the Court is reviewing. “U.S.” is the abbre-
viation for United States Reports, the offi-
cial publication of United States Supreme 
Court decisions. “546” refers to the volume 
of the United States Reports in which the 
case appears, and “243” is the page number. 
The citation ends with the year the case 
was decided, in parentheses. Most, though 
not all, Supreme Court case citations in this 
book will follow this formula.
11. President’s Commission on Law Enforcement 
and Administration of Justice, The Challenge 
of Crime in a Free Society (Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office, 1967), 7.
12. John Heinz and Peter Manikas, “Networks 
among Elites in a Local Criminal Justice 
System,” Law and Society Review 26 (1992), 
831–861.
13. James Q. Wilson, “What to Do about Crime: 
Blaming Crime on Root Causes,” Vital 
Speeches (April 1, 1995), 373.
14. Herbert Packer, The Limits of the Criminal 
Sanction (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1968), 154–173. 
15. Ibid.
16. Joseph Goldstein and Christine Haughney, 
“Bad Manners Then, Cause for Arrest Today,” 
New York Times (January 7, 2012), A17.
17. “NYC Statistics,” NYC: The Official Guide, at 
www.nycgo.com/articles/nyc-statistics-
page.
18. Goldstein and Haughney.
19. George P. Fletcher, “Some Unwise Reflections 
about Discretion,” Law & Contemporary 
Problems (Autumn 1984), 279.
20. Quoted in Goldstein and Haughney.
21. Antonin Scalia, “The Rule of Law as a Law of 
Rules,” University of Chicago Law Review 56 
(1989), 1178–1180.
22. John Kleinig, Ethics and Criminal Justice: 
An Introduction (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2008), 33–35.
23. Elizabeth Banks, Criminal Justice Ethics: 
Theory and Practice (Los Angeles: Sage 
Publications, 2008), 13.
24. Packer, 154–173.
25. Ibid.
26. “FBI: U.S. Violent Crime Down in 2011, Fewer 
Murders, Rapes,” Reuters (December 19, 2011).
27. Quoted in Richard Oppel, Jr., “Steady Decline 
in Major Crime Baffles Experts,” New York 
Times (May 24, 2011), A1.
28. Charis E. Kubrin et al., “Proactive Policing 
and Robbery Rates across U.S. Cities,” 
Criminology (February 2010), 57–91.
29. James Q. Wilson, “Hard Times, Fewer 
Crimes,” Wall Street Journal (May 31, 2011), 9.
30. David B. Wilson, David Weisburd, and David 
McClure, “Use of DNA Testing in Police 
Investigative Work for Increasing Offender 
Identification, Arrest, Conviction, and Case 
Clearance,” Campbell Systematic Reviews 
(2011), 7.
31. Thomas J. Baker, “Biometrics for Intelligence-
Led Policing: The Coming Trends,” The Police 
Chief (April 2011), 38–45.
32. Police Executive Research Forum, “Is the 
Economic 
Downturn 
Fundamentally 
Changing How We Police?” Critical Issues 
in Policing, vol. 16 (Washington, D.C.: Police 
Executive Research Forum, 2010).
33. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “2011 
National Gang Threat Assessment Issued,” 
FBI National Press Office (October 21, 2011).
34. James C. Howell, Arlen Egley, Jr., George 
E. Tita, and Elizabeth Griffiths, U.S. Gang 
Problems Trends and Seriousness, 1996–2009 
(Washington, D.C.: National Gang Center, 
May 2011), 6–9.
35. Alfred Blumstein, “The Crime Drop in 
America: An Exploration of Some Recent 
Crime Trends,” Journal of Scandinavian 
Studies in Criminology and Crime Prevention 
(December 2006), 17–35.
36. James Lindgren, “Fall from Grace: Arming 
America and the Bellesiles Scandal,” Yale 
Law Journal 111 (2002), 2203.
37. District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 
(2008).
38. Howard Snyder, Arrests in the United States, 
1980–2009 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, September 2011), 12.
39. Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration, Results from the 
2010 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: 
Summary of National Findings (Washington, 
D.C.: National Institute on Drug Abuse, 
September 2011), 1, 3, 4.
40. Quoted in “9/11: Ten Years Later, How America 
Has Changed,” The Week (September 16,  
2011), 18.
41. Uniting and Strengthening America by 
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to 
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA 
PATRIOT) Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107-56, 
115 Stat. 272 (2001).
42. Pew Research Center for the People and 
the Press, “Public Remains Divided over the 
Patriot Act” (February 15, 2011), at pewre 
search.org/pubs/1893/poll-patriot-act-
renewal.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43. Lauren E. Glaze, Correctional Populations in 
the United States, 2010 (Washington, D.C.: 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, December 2011), 
Table 1, page 3.
44. Quoted in “U.S. Prison Population Rises 
Despite a Drop in 20 States,” Associated Press 
(December 9, 2009).
45. Association 
of 
State 
Correctional 
Administrators, “ASCA June 2011 Current 
Issues in Corrections,” at www.asca.net/
system/assets/attachments/3505/
ASCA%20June%202011%20Current%20
Issues%20in%20Corrections%20Survey.
pdf?1316119987.
46. Pew Center on the States, State of Recidivism: 
The Revolving Door of America’s Prisons 
(Washington, D.C.: The Pew Charitable 
Trusts, April 2011), 2.
47. See www.innocenceproject.org.
48. The Death Penalty in 2011: Year End 
Report (Washington, D.C.: Death Penalty 
Information Center, December 2011), 1.
49. Ibid.
50. Death Penalty Information Center, “National 
Statistics on Death Penalty and Race,” at www 
.deathpenaltyinfo.org/race-death-row-
inmates-executed-1976.
51. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 
2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2011), Appendix Table 12, 
page 26.
52. Federal 
Bureau 
of 
Prisons, 
“Inmate 
Breakdown,” at www.bop.gov/news/quick.
jsp#2.
53. John Cloud, “How the Casey Anthony 
Murder Case Became the Social-Media Trial 
of the Century,” Time (June 16, 2011), at 
www.time.com/time/nation/article/ 
0,8599,2077969,00.html.
54. Marisol Bello, “For Most, Anthony Verdict 
Doesn’t Sit Well,” USA Today (July 8, 2011), 3A.
55. “How Casey Anthony Used Social Media, 
Blogs,” South Florida Sun-Sentinel (July 14, 
2011), 1A.
56. Quoted in Patrik Jonsson, “ ‘Flash Robs’: How 
Twitter Is Being Twisted for Criminal Gain,” 
Christian Science Monitor (August 3, 2011), 
at www.csmonitor.com/USA/2011/0803/
Flash-robs-How-Twitter-is-being-twisted 
-for-criminal-gain-VIDEO.
28   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER onE APPEndix
HoW To REAd CAsE CiTATions  
And find CouRT dECisions
Many important court cases are discussed throughout this book. Every time a court case 
is mentioned, you will be able to check its citation using the endnotes on the final pages 
of the chapter. Court decisions are recorded and published on paper and on the Internet. 
When a court case is mentioned, the notation that is used to refer to, or to cite, the case 
denotes where the published decision can be found.
Decisions of state courts of appeals are usually published in two places, the state 
reports of that particular state and the more widely used National Reporter System pub-
lished by West Group. Some states no longer publish their own reports. The National 
Reporter System divides the states into the following geographic areas: Atlantic (A. or 
A.2d), North Eastern (N.E. or N.E.2d), North Western (N.W. or N.W.2d), Pacific (P., P.2d, or 
P.3d), Southern (So. or So.2d), and South Western (S.W., S.W.2d, or S.W.3d). The 2d and 3d 
in these abbreviations refer to the Second Series and Third Series, respectively.
Federal trial court decisions are published unofficially in West’s Federal Supplement 
(F.Supp. or F.Supp.2d), and opinions from the circuit courts of appeals are reported 
unofficially in West’s Federal Reporter (F., F.2d, or F.3d). Opinions from the United 
States Supreme Court are reported in the United States Reports (U.S.), the Lawyers’ 
Edition of the Supreme Court Reports (L.Ed.), West’s Supreme Court Reporter (S.Ct.), 
and other publications. The United States Reports is the official publication of United 
States Supreme Court decisions. It is published by the federal government. Many 
early decisions are missing from these volumes. The citations of the early volumes 
of the United States Reports include the names of the actual reporters, such as 
Dallas, Cranch, or Wheaton. McCulloch v. Maryland, for example, is cited as 17 U.S.  
(4 Wheat.) 316. Only after 1874 did the present citation system, in which cases are cited 
based solely on their volume and page numbers in the United States Reports, come into 
being. The Lawyers’ Edition of the Supreme Court Reports is an unofficial and more com-
plete edition of Supreme Court decisions. West’s Supreme Court Reporter is an unofficial 
edition of decisions dating from October 1882. These volumes contain headnotes and 
numerous brief editorial statements of the law involved in the case.
Citations to decisions of state courts of appeals give the name of the case; the 
volume, name, and page number of the state’s official report (if the state publishes its 
own reports); and the volume, unit, and page number of the National Reporter. Federal 
court citations also give the name of the case and the volume, name, and page number 
of the reports. In addition to the citation, this textbook lists the year of the decision, in 
parentheses. Consider, for example, the case Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The 
Supreme Court’s decision in this case may be found in volume 384 of the United States 
Reports on page 436. The case was decided in 1966.
C H A P T E R  1 :  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  T o d A y   29
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   31
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Identify the six main categories of crime.
2  Distinguish between Part I and Part II offenses as defined 
by the Uniform Crime Report (UCR).
3  Distinguish between the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS) and self-reported surveys.
4  Discuss the prevailing explanation for the rising number of 
women incarcerated in the United States.
5  Discuss the difference between a hypothesis and a theory 
in the context of criminology.
6  List and briefly explain two important branches of social 
process theory.
7  Explain the theory of the chronic offender and its 
importance for the criminal justice system.
8  Discuss the connection between learning theory and the 
start of an individual’s drug use.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 59 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Measuring 
and  
Explaining  
 Crime
 
31
Jason Henry/New York Times/Redux Pictures
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Types of Crime
• Crime Measurement  
in the United States
• Crime Trends
• What Causes Crime?
• The Link between  
Drugs and Crime
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
T
 he federal government’s decision regarding its official definition of rape was met 
with widespread approval. The new definition “comes much closer to reflecting 
the reality of the crime,” said Scott Berkowitz, head of the Rape, Abuse, and Incest 
National Network. “It happens to men and women, young and old, but in every case, it’s 
an incredibly violent crime and we owe it to victims to acknowledge and count every 
one.”1 The change will have a practical impact as well. National measurements of sexual 
assault, which dropped 2.5 percent in 2011 from the previous year using the old defini-
tion, will undoubtedly increase using the new, broader language. 
The measurement of crime is not simply about producing a record of what has 
happened in the past. Lawmakers and other government officials use crime statistics to 
allocate public funds and other resources for crime prevention and victim assistance.  
In the first part of this chapter, we first look closely at the different categories of crime 
and the most common methods of collecting data on criminal offenders in the United 
States. The second part of the chapter is devoted to exploring one of the most interesting 
questions in all of criminal justice: What causes criminal behavior?
TimE foR A ChangE
In 1769, English judge William Blackstone described 
rape as “the carnal knowledge of a woman forcibly 
against her will.” “Forcibly” meant that the male 
rapist had to use physical force or its threat to 
penetrate his female victim. “Against her will” meant 
that the victim had to strenuously resist the attack. To 
many, this definition may seem outdated, reflecting 
the values and prejudices of an early age. Nearly two 
and a half centuries later, however, in determining 
national rape statistics, the U.S. government was 
using almost exactly the same terminology as did 
Blackstone—“carnal knowledge of a female forcibly 
and against her will.”
For years, experts have criticized this definition 
of rape as “narrow, outmoded, steeped in gender-
based stereotypes, and seriously understat[ing] the true 
incidence of serious sex crimes.” The definition limited 
rape to actions against adult women by men, meaning 
that incidents in which the victim was a child or male 
were not counted. It did not take into consideration 
situations where the victim was rendered defenseless 
with liquor or date-rape drugs, and it required women 
to “fight back” for rape to have occurred. Finally, the 
definition did not include forcible anal or oral penetration 
or the rape of a woman by another woman.
In 2010, a federal survey using a much broader 
definition found that about 1 percent of women reported 
having been the target of actual or attempted rape. 
This suggests that as many as 1.3 million American 
women are victims of the crime annually. That same year, 
official Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) statistics 
counted 84,767 rapes. Partially as a result of this 
discrepancy, on January 6, 2012, the U.S. Department 
of Justice announced a new definition of the crime that 
is more detailed and graphic. Now, for the purposes of 
government statistics, almost any sexual act committed 
against a person—female 
or male—without her or his 
consent will meet the standard 
for rape.  
For decades, observers 
have contended that the 
outdated federal definition 
of rape reflected a lack of 
seriousness regarding the 
crime in the American 
criminal justice system.
Santos for New York Daily News
Discussion Tip: Ask students how 
they would define rape. What do 
they think of the new definition 
created by the federal government? 
Will it encompass everything 
that could be considered rape? Is 
anything missing?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   33
TyPEs of CRimE
At the same time that federal officials were debating whether to change the official definition 
of rape, the nation was absorbed by the arrest of Jerry Sandusky. In June 2012, a Pennsylvania 
jury convicted Sandusky, a former football coach at Penn State University, of forty-five sex 
abuse counts for sexually assaulting ten young male victims over the course of fifteen years. 
As more than one commentator noted, because Sandusky’s alleged victims were all male, 
none of the acts would have been counted in national rape statistics under the old definition.2
Just because rapes against males have not been counted in federal crime statistics 
does not mean that such behavior goes unpunished. The majority of actual federal and 
state crime laws are not restricted by the gender of the victim. Under Pennsylvania crimi-
nal code, Sandusky was charged with forty-eight counts of indecent assault of a person 
younger than sixteen years of age.3 In general, American criminal law focuses on six 
categories of misconduct: violent crime, property crime, public order crime, white-collar 
crime, organized crime, and high-tech crime. The following overview of these categories 
will cover most, if not all, of the criminal activity discussed in this textbook.
vioLEnT CRimE
Crimes against persons, or violent crimes, have come to dominate our perspectives on 
crime. There are four major categories of violent crime: 
• 
Murder, or the unlawful killing of a human being.
• 
Sexual assault, or rape, which refers to coerced actions of a sexual nature  
against an unwilling participant.
• 
Assault and battery, two separate acts that cover situations in which one  
person physically attacks another (battery) or, through threats, intentionally leads 
another to believe that he or she will be physically harmed (assault).
• 
Robbery, or the taking of funds, personal property, or any other article of value 
from a person by means of force or fear.
As you will see in Chapter 3, these violent crimes are further classified by degree, 
depending on the circumstances surrounding the criminal act. These circumstances 
include the intent of the person committing the crime, whether a weapon was used, and 
(in cases other than murder) the level of pain and suffering experienced by the victim. 
PRoPERTy CRimE
The most common form of criminal activity is property crime, or those crimes in which 
the goal of the offender is some form of economic gain or the damaging of property. 
Pocket picking, shoplifting, and the stealing of any property that is not accomplished 
by force are covered by laws against larceny, also known as theft. Burglary refers to the 
unlawful entry of a structure with the intention of committing a serious crime such as 
theft. Motor vehicle theft describes the theft or attempted theft of a motor vehicle, includ-
ing all cases in which automobiles are taken by persons not having lawful access to them. 
Arson is also a property crime. It involves the willful and malicious burning of a home, 
automobile, commercial building, or any other construction.
PubLiC oRdER CRimE
The concept of public order crimes is linked to the consensus model discussed in 
Chapter 1. Historically, societies have always outlawed activities that are considered  
contrary to public values and morals. Today, the most common public order crimes 
include public drunkenness, prostitution, gambling, and illicit drug use. These crimes 
Murder The unlawful killing 
of one human being by 
another.
Sexual Assault Forced or 
coerced sexual intercourse (or 
other sexual acts).
Assault A threat or an 
attempt to do violence to 
another person that causes 
that person to fear immediate 
physical harm.
Battery The act of physically 
contacting another person 
with the intent to do harm, 
even if the resulting injury is 
insubstantial.
Robbery The act of taking 
property from another person 
through force, threat of force, 
or intimidation.
Larceny The act of taking 
property from another person 
without the use of force with 
the intent of keeping that 
property.
Burglary The act of breaking 
into or entering a structure 
(such as a home or office) 
without permission for the 
purpose of committing a crime. 
Public Order Crime  
Behavior that has been labeled 
criminal because it is contrary 
to shared social values, 
customs, and norms.
 Identify the 
six main 
categories of 
crime.
Learning  
objective1
Technology Tip: Have students go 
online to explore their home state’s 
laws against sexual assault. Under 
these state statutes, what charges 
would result from Jerry Sandusky’s 
alleged behavior?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
are sometimes referred to as victimless crimes because they 
often harm only the offender. As you will see throughout this 
textbook, however, that term is rather misleading. Public 
order crimes may create an environment that gives rise to 
property and violent crimes. 
WHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE
Business-related crimes are popularly referred to as white- 
collar crimes. The term white-collar crime is broadly used to 
describe an illegal act or series of acts committed by an indi-
vidual or business entity using some nonviolent means to obtain 
a personal or business advantage. As you will see in Chapter 14, 
when we consider the topic in much greater detail, certain prop-
erty crimes fall into this category when committed in a business 
context. Although the extent of this criminal activity is difficult 
to determine with any certainty, the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimates that 
white-collar crime costs businesses worldwide as much as $2.9 trillion a year.4
oRgAnizEd CRimE
White-collar crime involves the use of legal business facilities and employees to commit illegal 
acts. For example, a bank teller can’t embezzle (steal funds placed in his or her trust) unless 
he or she is first hired as a legal employee of the bank. In contrast, organized crime describes 
illegal acts by illegal organizations, usually geared toward satisfying the public’s demand for 
unlawful goods and services. Organized crime broadly implies a conspiratorial and illegal 
relationship among any number of persons engaged in unlawful acts. More specifically, groups 
engaged in organized crime employ criminal tactics such as violence, corruption, and intimi-
dation for economic gain. 
The hierarchical structure of orga nized crime operations often mirrors that of legitimate 
businesses, and, like any corporation, these groups attempt to capture a sufficient percentage 
of any given market to make a profit. For organized crime, the traditional preferred markets are 
gambling, prostitution, illegal narcotics, and loan sharking (lending funds at higher-than-legal 
interest rates), along with more recent ventures into counterfeiting and credit-card scams.
HigH-TECH CRimE
The newest variation on crime is directly related to the increased presence of computers 
and social networking in everyday life. The Internet, with approximately 2.3 billion users 
worldwide, is the site of numerous cyber crimes, such as selling pornographic materials, 
soliciting minors, and defrauding consumers through bogus financial investments. The 
dependence of businesses on computer operations has left corporations vulnerable to 
sabotage, fraud, embezzlement, and theft of proprietary data. We will address this par-
ticular criminal activity in much greater detail in Chapter 14.
SELFaSSESSMEnT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 60.
Murder, assault, and robbery are labeled ____________ crimes because they are committed 
against persons. The category of crime that includes larceny, motor vehicle theft, and arson is 
called ____________ crime. When a criminal acts to gain an illegal business advantage, he or 
she has committed what is commonly known as a ____________-____________ crime. 
White-Collar Crime  
Nonviolent crimes committed 
by business entities or 
individuals to gain a personal 
or business  advantage.
Organized Crime Illegal 
acts carried out by illegal 
organizations engaged in the 
market for illegal goods or 
services, such as illicit drugs or 
firearms.
A heroin user injects the drug 
into his right arm. How might 
illegal drug use—considered 
a public order crime—lead 
directly or indirectly to violent 
and property crimes?
Stephen Ferry/Liaison/Getty
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
think about whether public order 
crimes are truly victimless crimes, 
as they are often called. Is there 
truly no victim as a result of these 
crimes? Many argue that there 
are no true victimless crimes, 
particularly with drug crimes. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short writing 
assignment, have students indicate 
which public order crimes they 
think should be illegal. Have them 
provide explanations for their 
choices to the class. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   35
CRimE mEAsuREmEnT  
in THE uniTEd sTATEs
Crime experts are constantly producing studies of criminal behavior. Many of these 
analyses deal with narrow topics such as the prevalence of kidnapping by nonfamily 
members, the impact of dropping out of school on juvenile delinquency, or the role of 
alcoholism in domestic violence. The best-known annual survey of criminal behavior, 
however, tries to answer the broadest of questions: How much crime is there in the 
United States?
CaREERS In CJ
Photo Courtesy of Robert Agnew
f A s T f A C T s
CRiminoLogisT, job dEsCRiPTion:
•  Work for local, state, and 
federal governments, on policy 
advisory boards, or for legislative 
committees. In some cases, he or 
she may work for privately funded 
think tanks or for a criminal 
justice or law enforcement agency. 
Most often, employment as a 
criminologist will be through a 
college or university, where both 
teaching and research will be 
conducted.
WHAT kind of TRAining  
is REquiREd?
•  An advanced degree is required.  
Specifically, some combination of 
degrees in criminology, criminal 
justice, sociology, or psychology 
is preferable. Graduate level 
education is a must for any 
research position.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
•  $40,000–$122,000
RobeRt Agnew 
CRiminologist
When I first became interested in criminology, my research led me to “strain” or 
anomie theories that said when a person stumbles in achieving financial success or 
middle-class status due to social factors beyond his or her control, he or she may 
turn to crime. While strain theory made a lot of sense to me, I felt that the theory 
was incomplete. When I looked around me, it was easy to spot other sources of 
frustration and anger, such as harassment by peers, conflict with parents or romantic 
partners, poor grades in school, or poor working conditions.  
I outlined sources of strain as the loss of “positively valued stimuli” such as 
romantic relationships, or the threat of “negatively valued stimuli” such as an 
insult or physical assault. I also pointed out that monetary success was just one 
among many “positively valued goals” that might cause strain when not achieved. 
Furthermore, I noted that people who experience strain may turn to crime for 
several reasons—crime might allow them to achieve their monetary and status goals, 
protect positively valued stimuli, escape negative stimuli, achieve revenge against 
wrongs, or simply deal with the strain (such as taking drugs to forget problems). I 
drew on these observations and my own experiences to develop a new “general 
strain theory.”
social media Career tip  
Find groups on Facebook and LinkedIn in which people are discussing the criminal 
justice career or careers that interest you. Participate in the discussions to get 
information and build contacts.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask student which 
sources, if any, they rely on to 
learn about the amount of crime 
that takes place in the United 
States. Are your students confident 
that these sources are reliable? 
Have them critically analyze 
these sources to determine their 
accuracy.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE unifoRm CRimE REPoRT
Each year, the U.S. Department of Justice releases the Uniform Crime Report (UCR). 
Since its inception in 1930, the UCR has attempted to measure the overall rate of crime in 
the United States by organizing “offenses known to the police.”5 To produce the UCR, the 
FBI relies on the voluntary participation of local law enforcement agencies. These agen-
cies—approximately 17,500 in total, covering 95 percent of the population—base their 
information on three measurements:
1. The number of persons arrested.
2. The number of crimes reported by victims, witnesses, or the police themselves.
3. The number of law enforcement officers.
Problems arise in this system when the FBI and local police departments fail to use the 
same benchmarks in measuring certain crimes. As we saw in the opening of this chapter, 
until recently the FBI employed a very narrow definition of rape. This situation would 
force employees at local police departments to sift through yearly reports of sexual 
assaults and discard those that did not “match” the FBI’s definition before sending total 
figures to the agency. Sometimes, the resulting discrepancies could be dramatic. In 2010, 
for example, the Chicago Police Department investigated nearly 1,400 sexual assaults, 
yet did not report a single one to the FBI for inclusion in the UCR because of differences 
in definitions.6
AnnuAL PubLiCATion Once the FBI has collected all the local reports for a given year, the 
agency presents the crime data in two important ways:
1. As a rate per 100,000 people. In 2011, for example, the crime rate was 3,295.  
In other words, for every 100,000 inhabitants of the United States, 3,295 Part I 
offenses (explained below) were reported to the FBI. This statistic is known as the 
crime rate and is often cited by media sources when discussing the level of crime 
in the United States.
2. As a percentage change from the previous year or other time periods. From 2010 to 
2011, there was a 3.8 percent decrease in the violent crime rate and a 0.5 percent 
decrease in the property crime rate.7
The Department of Justice publishes these data annually in Crime in the United States. 
Along with the basic statistics, this publication offers an exhaustive array of crime infor-
mation, including breakdowns of crimes committed by city, county, and other geographic 
designations and by the demographics (gender, race, age) of the individuals who have been 
arrested for crimes.
PART i offEnsEs The UCR divides the criminal offenses it measures into two major 
categories: Part I and Part II offenses. Part I offenses are those crimes that, due to their 
seriousness and frequency, are recorded by the FBI to give a general idea of the “crime pic-
ture” in the United States in any given year. For a description of the seven Part I offenses, 
see Figure 2.1 on the facing page. 
Part I offenses are those most likely to be covered by the media and, consequently, 
inspire the most fear of crime in the population. These crimes have come to dominate 
crime coverage to such an extent that, for most Americans, the first image that comes 
to mind at the mention of “crime” is one person physically attacking another person or 
a robbery taking place with the use or threat of force.8 Furthermore, in the stereotypical 
crime, the offender and the victim usually do not know each other.
Uniform Crime Report 
(UCR) An annual report 
compiled by the FBI to give an 
indication of criminal activity in 
the United States.
Part I Offenses Crimes 
reported annually by the FBI in 
its Uniform Crime Report. Part I 
offenses include murder, rape, 
robbery, aggravated assault, 
burglary, larceny, motor vehicle 
theft, and arson.
Distinguish 
between Part I  
and Part II  
offenses as 
defined by the 
Uniform Crime 
Report (UCR).
Learning  
objective 2
Group Activity: Have students 
compute the crime rate of a 
particular city, county, state, or 
other geographical location. Be 
sure to provide your students with 
the total adult population of this 
location and number of crimes 
committed there over the course 
of a year.
Teaching Tip: Ask students the first 
thing that comes to mind when 
they hear someone mention the 
word “crime.” Write these answers 
on the board and have the class 
critique each one.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   37
Given the trauma of violent crimes, this perception is understandable, but it is not 
accurate. According to UCR statistics, a relative or other acquaintance of the victim 
commits at least 44 percent of the homicides in the United States.9 Furthermore, as is 
evident from Figure 2.1, the majority of Part I offenses committed are property crimes. 
Notice that 60 percent of all reported Part I offenses are larceny/thefts, and another  
21 percent are burglaries.10 
PART ii offEnsEs Not only do violent crimes represent the minority of Part I offenses, but 
Part I offenses are far outweighed by Part II offenses, which include all crimes recorded by 
the FBI that do not fall into the category of Part I offenses. While information gathered on 
Part I offenses reflects those offenses “known,” or reported to the FBI by local agencies, Part II 
offenses are measured only by arrest data. In 2011, the FBI recorded about 2.1 million arrests 
for Part I offenses in the United States. That same year, about 10.2 million arrests for Part II 
offenses took place.11 In other words, a Part II offense was approximately five times more com-
mon than a Part I offense. (For a description of Part II offenses and their rates, see Figure 2.2 
on the following page.) Such statistics have prompted Marcus Felson, a professor at Rutgers 
University School of Criminal Justice, to comment that “most crime is very ordinary.”12
viCTim suRvEys
The UCR relies on official reports of crime. In contrast, victim surveys allow the victims 
of crime to speak directly to crime experts about their experiences. Initially, such surveys 
were usually conducted as part of face-to-face interviews or over the telephone. Today, 
researchers take advantage of technologies such as e-mail and social media for access to 
a deeper pool of potential interviewees on a broader range of possible subjects.
THE dARk figuRE of CRimE The first large-scale victim survey took place in 1966, 
when members of 10,000 households answered questionnaires as part of the President’s 
FIGURE 2.1 Part I Offenses
Every month local law enforcement agencies voluntarily provide information on serious offenses in their jurisdiction to the 
FBI. These serious offenses, known as Part I offenses, are defined here. (Arson is not included in the national crime report 
data, but it is sometimes considered a Part I offense nonetheless, so its definition is included here.) As the graph shows, 
most Part I offenses reported by local police departments in any given year are property crimes.  
Murder. The willful (nonnegligent) killing of one human being by another.
Forcible rape. The carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will.*
Robbery. The taking or attempting to take of anything of value from the care, custody,  
or control of a person or persons by force or threat of force or violence and/or by  
putting the victim in fear.
Aggravated assault. An unlawful attack by one person on another for the purpose of  
inflicting severe or aggravated bodily injury. This type of assault is usually accompanied  
by the use of a weapon or by means likely to produce death or great bodily harm.
Burglary—breaking or entering. The unlawful entry of a structure to commit a felony  
or a theft. Attempted forcible entry is included.
Larceny/theft (except motor vehicle theft). The unlawful taking, carrying, leading,  
or riding away of property from the possession or constructive possession of another.
Motor vehicle theft. The theft or attempted theft of a motor vehicle. 
Arson. Any willful or malicious burning or attempt to burn, with or without intent to  
defraud, a dwelling house, public building, motor vehicle or aircraft, personal property  
of another, and the like.
*The new definition of rape, as indicated in the opening to this chapter, had not yet gone into effect for these data.
Sources: Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ 
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/offense-definitions and www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/table-1.
Forcible 
Rape 0.8%
Robbery 3.5%
Aggravated
Assault 7.3%
Motor Vehicle
Theft 7%
Burglary 21.3%
Larceny/Theft  
60%
Murder 0.1%
Part II Offenses All crimes 
recorded by the FBI that do 
not fall into the category of 
Part I offenses. These crimes 
include both misdemeanors 
and felonies.
Victim Surveys A method 
of gathering crime data that 
directly surveys participants to 
determine their experiences as 
victims of crime.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice. The results indi-
cated a much higher victimization rate than had been previously expected, and research-
ers felt the process gave them a better understanding of the dark figure of crime, or the 
actual amount of crime that occurs in the country. 
Criminologists were so encouraged by the results of the 1966 experiment that the 
federal government decided to institute an ongoing victim survey. The result was the 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), which started in 1972. Conducted by  
the U.S. Bureau of the Census in cooperation with the Bureau of Justice Statistics of the 
Justice Department, the NCVS conducts an annual survey of about 41,000 households with 
nearly 73,500 occupants over twelve years of age. Participants are interviewed twice a year 
over the course of three years concerning their experiences with crimes in the prior six 
months. As you can see in Figure 2.3 on the facing page, the questions cover a wide array 
of possible victimization.
FIGURE 2.2 Part II Offenses
 
Offense
Estimated 
Annual Arrests
 
Offense
Estimated 
Annual Arrests
Drug abuse violations
1,531,251
Offenses against family and children
116,723
Driving under the influence
1,215,077
Stolen property
93,234
Other assaults
1,241,722
Forgery and counterfeiting
70,211
Disorderly conduct
582,158
Sex offenses (except forcible rape and 
prostitution)
69,225
Liquor law violations
500,648
Prostitution and commercialized vice
57,345
Drunkenness
534,218
Vagrancy
29,203
Fraud
168,217
Embezzlement
16,190
Vandalism
237,638
Gambling
8,596
Weapons
153,519
Suspicion
1,424
Curfew and loitering law violations
76,942
All other offenses
3,532,195
 
Curfew and loitering law violations (persons under age eighteen)—
Offenses relating to violations of local curfew or loitering  ordinances.
Disorderly conduct—Behavior that disturbs the public peace.
Driving under the influence—Driving or operating any vehicle or 
common carrier while mentally or physically impaired under the 
influence of liquor or narcotics.
Drug abuse violations—State and/or local offenses relating to 
the unlawful possession, sale, use, growing, and manufacturing 
of narcotic drugs. The following drug categories are specified: 
opium or cocaine and their derivatives (morphine, heroin, codeine); 
marijuana; synthetic narcotics—manufactured  narcotics that can 
cause true addiction (Demerol, methadone); and dangerous 
nonnarcotic drugs (barbiturates, Benzedrine).
Drunkenness—Offenses relating to drunkenness or intoxication. 
Excluded is “driving under the influence.”
Embezzlement—Misappropriation or misapplication of funds or 
property entrusted to one’s care, custody, or control.
Forgery and counterfeiting—The altering, copying, imitating, 
selling, or possessing of something, without authority or right, with 
the intent to deceive or defraud. Attempts are included.
Fraud—The intentional perversion of the truth for the purpose of 
inducing another person or other entity in reliance upon it to part with 
something of value or to surrender a legal right.
Gambling—Promoting, permitting, or engaging in illegal  gambling.
Liquor law violations—The violation of state or local laws 
or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture, sale, purchase, 
transportation, possession, or use of alcoholic beverages.
Offenses against family and children—Nonsupport,  neglect, 
desertion, or abuse of family and children.
Other assaults (simple)—Assaults and attempted assaults where no 
weapon is used and that do not result in serious or aggravated injury 
to the victim.
Prostitution and commercialized vice—The unlawful promotion 
of or participation in sexual activities for profit, including soliciting 
customers, operating an establishment for such activities, or 
otherwise promoting prostitution.
Sex offenses (except forcible rape, prostitution, and 
 commercialized vice)—Statutory rape and offenses against chastity, 
common decency, morals, and the like. Attempts are included.
Stolen property: buying, receiving, possessing—Buying,  receiving, 
and possessing stolen property, including attempts.
Suspicion—No specific offense; suspect released without formal 
charges being placed.
Vagrancy—Vagabondage, begging, loitering, and the like.
Vandalism—Willful or malicious destruction, injury,  disfigurement, 
or defacement of any public or private property, real or personal, 
without consent of the owner or persons  having custody or control.
Weapons: carrying, possessing, and the like—All violations of 
regulations or statutes controlling the carrying, using,  possessing, 
furnishing, and manufacturing of firearms, cutting instruments, 
explosives, or other deadly weapons.
All other offenses—All violations of state or local laws not specifically 
identified as Part I or Part II offenses, except traffic violations.
Sources: Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ 
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/table-29 and www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/offense-definitions.
Dark Figure of Crime A 
term used to describe the 
actual amount of crime that 
takes place. The “figure” is 
“dark,” or impossible to detect, 
because a great number of 
crimes are never reported to 
the police.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
explain, in their own words, the 
dark figure of crime. Why does 
such a large amount of crime go 
unreported? Why might people 
be reluctant to report crime to the 
police?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   39
A voiCE foR viCTims Supporters of the NCVS highlight a number of aspects in which 
the victim survey is superior to the UCR:
1. It measures both reported and unreported crime.
2. It is unaffected by police bias and distortions in reporting crime to the FBI.
3. It does not rely on victims directly reporting crime to the police.13
Most important, some supporters say, is that the NCVS gives victims a voice in the crimi-
nal justice process. This “voice” was certainly heard in the debate over rape statistics that 
we have focused on in the early part of this chapter. In 2010, the NCVS reported more 
than 188,000 sexual assaults, compared with the approximately 85,000 indicated by the 
UCR.14 These figures provided a measure of proof that the FBI was underreporting rape 
in its annual publication.
sELf-REPoRTEd suRvEys
Based on many of the same principles as victim surveys, but focusing instead on offend-
ers, self-reported surveys are a third source of data for criminologists. In this form of 
data collection, participants are asked directly—through personal interviews or ques-
tionnaires, or over the telephone—about specific criminal activity to which they may 
have been a party. Self-reported surveys are most useful in situations in which the group 
to be studied is already gathered in an institutional setting, such as a juvenile facility or a 
prison. One of the most widespread self-reported surveys in the United States, the Drug 
Use Forecasting Program, collects information on narcotics use from arrestees who have 
been brought into booking facilities. 
Because there is no penalty for admitting to criminal activity in a self-reported sur-
vey, subjects tend to be forthcoming in discussing their behavior. Researchers interview-
ing a group of male students at a state university, for example, found that a significant 
number of them admitted to committing minor crimes for which they had never been 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, National Crime Victimization Survey (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2009).
 36a. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as:
 
a.  Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, 
book—
 
b. Clothing, jewelry, or cell phone—
 
c. Bicycle or sports equipment—
 
d. Things in your home—like a TV, stereo, or tools—
 
e.  Things from outside your home, such as a garden hose or 
lawn furniture—
 
f. Things belonging to children in the household—
 
g.  Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, 
or CDs—
 
h.  Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging  
to you? 
 41a.  Has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of  
these ways:
 
a. With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife—
 
b.  With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors,  
or stick—
 
c. By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle—
 
d. Include any grabbing, punching, or choking,
 
e.  Any rape, attempted rape, or other type of sexual attack—
 
f. Any face-to-face threats—OR 
 
g.  Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please 
mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime.
 42a.  People often don’t think of incidents committed by 
someone they know. Other than the incidents already 
mentioned, did you have something stolen from you  
OR were you attacked or threatened by: 
 
a. Someone at work or school—
 
b. A neighbor or friend—
 
c. A relative or family member—
 
d. Any other person you’ve met or known? 
 43a.  Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often 
difficult to talk about. Have you been forced or coerced to 
engage in unwanted sexual activity by—
 
a. someone you didn’t know before—
 
b. a casual acquaintance—OR 
 
c. someone you know well?
 44a.  During the last 6 months (other than any incidents already 
mentioned), did you call the police to report something that 
happened to YOU which you thought was a crime?
 45a.  During the last 6 months (other than any incidents already 
mentioned), did anything which you thought was a crime 
happen to YOU, but you did NOT report to the police? 
FIGURE 2.3 Sample Questions from the NCVS (National Crime Victimization Survey)
Self-Reported Survey A  
method of gathering crime 
data that relies on participants 
to reveal and detail their own 
criminal or delinquent behavior.
Distinguish 
between the 
National Crime 
Victimization 
Survey (NCVS) 
and self-reported 
surveys.
Learning  
objective3
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short writing 
assignment, ask students why 
they think the the NCVS might 
have provided a more accurate 
estimation than the UCR of the 
number of rapes that occurred in 
the United States in 2010.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
arrested.15 This fact points to the most striking finding of self-reported surveys: the dark 
figure of crime, referred to earlier as the actual amount of crime that takes place, appears 
to be much larger than the UCR or NCVS would suggest. 
Sweat, it seems, is one source of self-reported data that never lies, at least when it 
comes to alcohol consumption. That’s the logic behind the Secure Continuous Remote 
Alcohol Monitor, otherwise known as the SCRAM bracelet or the “bling with a ping.” 
This eight-ounce bracelet, usually worn around the subject’s ankle, relies on a process 
called transdermal alcohol testing to measure the levels of alcohol vapor that show up in 
perspiration when alcohol has been consumed. The measurements are then transmitted 
and posted on a Web site via a wireless modem, allowing the subject to prove—or 
disprove—that he or she remains sober. The SCRAM bracelet gained notoriety several 
years ago when actress and socialite Lindsay Lohan voluntarily donned one to show her 
commitment to sobriety. Most wearers, however, are not celebrities but rather offenders 
who are required by a court to undergo the testing after an arrest for drunk driving, 
domestic violence, or some other alcohol-related wrongdoing.
THINkING ABOUT TRANSDERMAL ALCOHOL TESTING 
Coming soon: passive transdermal detectors in steering wheels. These devices will 
measure the sweat on the driver’s hands to determine whether she or he has been 
ingesting drugs or alcohol. How could this technology be used to keep someone from 
driving under the influence?
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Transdermal Alcohol Testing
UPI/Landov
SELFaSSESSMEnT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 60.
To produce its annual ____________ ____________ ____________  , the FBI relies on the 
cooperation of local law enforcement agencies. ____________ surveys rely on those who have 
been the subject of criminal activity to discuss the incidents with researchers. ____________-
____________ surveys ask participants to detail their own criminal behavior. Both methods 
show that the ____________ ____________ of crime, or the actual amount of crime that takes 
place in this country, is much ____________ than official crime data would suggest. 
CRimE TREnds
The UCR, NCVS, and other statistical measures we have discussed so far in this chapter, 
though important, represent only the tip of the iceberg of crime data. Thanks to the 
efforts of government law enforcement agencies, educational institutions, and private 
individuals, more information on crime is available today than at any time in the nation’s 
history. When interpreting and predicting general crime trends, experts usually focus on 
Teaching Tip: Bring in examples of 
self-reported surveys often used 
with young adults (e.g., Monitoring 
the Future, National Youth Survey) 
to illustrate the types of questions 
included. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   41
what University of California at Berkeley law professor Franklin Zimring calls the three 
“usual suspects” of rate variation:
1. Imprisonment, based on the principle that (a) an offender in prison or jail is unable 
to commit a crime on the street, and (b) a potential offender on the street will not 
commit a crime because he or she does not want to wind up behind bars.
2. Youth populations, because offenders commit fewer crimes as they grow older.
3. The economy, because when legitimate opportunities to earn income become 
scarce, some people will turn to illegitimate methods such as crime.16
Pure statistics do not always tell the whole story, however, and crime rates often fail to 
behave in the ways that the experts predict.
Looking good: CRimE in THE 1990s And 2000s
In 1995, eminent crime expert James Q. Wilson (1931–2012), noting that the number 
of young males was set to increase dramatically over the next decade, predicted that 
“30,000 more young muggers, killers, and thieves” would be on the streets by 2000. “Get 
ready,” he warned.17 Fortunately for the country, Wilson’s prediction was wrong. As is evi-
dent from Figure 2.4 below, starting in 1994 the United States experienced a steep crime 
decline that we are still enjoying, though to a somewhat lesser degree, today.
THE gREAT CRimE dECLinE The crime statistics of the 1990s are startling. Even with the 
upswing at the beginning of the decade, from 1990 to 2000 the homicide rate dropped 39 
percent, the robbery rate 44 percent, the burglary rate 41 percent, and the auto theft rate 
37 percent. By most measures, this decline was the longest and deepest of the twentieth 
century.18 In retrospect, the 1990s seem to have encompassed a “golden era” for the lead-
ing indicators of low crime rates. The economy was robust. The prison population was 
skyrocketing. Plus, despite the misgivings of James Q. Wilson, the percentage of the pop-
ulation in the high-risk age bracket in 1995 was actually lower than it had been in 1980.19
A “WELComE PuzzLE” In the early years of the 2000s, the nation’s crime rate flattened for 
a time before resuming its downward trend. By 2011, property crime rates had dropped 
for the eighth straight year, and violent crime rates had shrunk to their lowest levels 
since the early 1970s. As noted in the previous chapter, given that the economy has been 
mired in a recession, with unemployment running at unusually high levels, the positive 
FIGURE 2.4 Violent Crime in the United States, 1990–2011
According to statistics gathered each year by the FBI, American violent crime rates 
dropped steadily in the second half of the 1990s, leveled off for several years, and now 
have begun to decrease anew.
Source: Federal Bureau of Investigation.
0
200
400
600
800
Rate per 100,000 inhabitants
Year
1990 91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
10
09
11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

crime figures have come as something of a surprise. Richard Rosenfeld, president of the 
American Society of Criminology, calls the trend “one of those welcome puzzles” and 
suggests that his colleagues reconsider “under what conditions economic activity influ-
ences crime.”20
CRimE, RACE, And PovERTy
One group has noticeably failed to benefit from the positive crime trends of the past fif-
teen years: young African American males. According to data compiled by Alexia Cooper 
and Erica L. Smith of the Bureau of Justice Statistics, black males between the ages of 
fourteen and twenty-four, who represent 1 percent of the country’s total population, make 
up a quarter of its homicide offenders and 16 percent of its homicide victims.21 
Furthermore, James A. Fox of Northeastern University in Boston and Marc L. Swatt 
of the University of Nebraska at Omaha estimate that from 2002 to 2007, the number of 
murders committed by black males under the age of eighteen rose 43 percent. Over the 
same time period, the number of young black males who were victims of murder also 
increased significantly, by 31 percent. In both categories, levels for young white males 
remained the same or declined.22 
RACE And CRimE Youth homicide rates are not the only area in which there is a “wor-
risome divergence”23—to use Professor Fox’s term—in crime trends between the races. 
Official crime data seem to indicate a strong correlation between minority status and 
crime: African Americans—who make up 13 percent of the population—constitute 38 per- 
cent of those arrested for violent crimes and 30 percent of those arrested for property 
crimes.24 A black man is almost twelve times more likely than a white man to be sent to 
prison for a drug-related conviction, while black women are about five times more likely 
than white women to be incarcerated for a drug offense.25 (See the feature Myth versus 
Reality—Race Stereotyping and Drug Crime on the facing page.) Furthermore, a black juve-
nile in the United States is nearly three times more likely than a white juvenile to wind 
up in delinquency court.26
The racial differences in the crime rate are one of the most controversial areas of 
the criminal justice system. At first glance, crime statistics seem to support the idea that 
the subculture of African Americans in the United States is disposed toward criminal 
behavior. Not all of the data, however, support that assertion. A research project led by 
sociologist Robert J. Sampson of Harvard University collected extensive data on more 
than 11,000 residents living in 180 Chicago neighborhoods. Sampson and his colleagues 
found that 60 percent of the “gap” in levels of violence between whites and African 
Americans could be attributed to neighborhood and family conditions.27
In other words, regardless of race, a person would 
have a much higher risk of violent behavior if he or 
she lived in a poverty-stricken neighborhood or in a 
household run by a single parent.28 Given that African 
Americans are two times more likely than whites to live 
in poverty and hold low-wage-earning jobs, they are, as 
a group, more susceptible to the factors that contribute 
to criminal behavior.29
CLAss And CRimE Indeed, a wealth of information 
suggests that income level is more important than skin 
color when it comes to crime trends. A 2002 study of 
By some measures, black 
citizens are twice as likely as 
whites to live in poverty and 
hold low-wage jobs. What is 
your opinion of the theory that 
economic disadvantage, rather 
than skin color, accounts for 
the disproportionate number 
of African Americans in U.S. 
prisons, such as these inmates 
at Florida’s Dade County 
Correctional Facility?
Joe Sohm/Visions of America/Newscom
42   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to brainstorm possible 
reasons that a poor economy does 
not necessarily lead to higher 
violent and property crime rates.  
Ask each group to share its findings 
with the rest of the class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   43
nearly 900 African American children (400 boys and 467 girls) from neighborhoods with 
varying income levels showed that family earning power had the only significant con-
nection to violent behavior.30 More recent research conducted by William A. Pridemore 
of Indiana University found a “positive and significant association” between poverty 
and homicide.31 Lack of education, another handicap most often faced by low-income 
citizens, also seems to correspond to criminal behavior. Forty-one percent of all inmates 
in state and federal prisons failed to obtain a high school education, compared with 18 
percent of the population at large.32
It might seem logical that those without the financial means to acquire the con-
sumer goods and services that dominate our society would turn to illegal methods to 
“steal” purchasing power. But, logic aside, many experts are skeptical of such an obvious 
class-crime relationship. After all, poverty does not cause crime. The majority of resi-
dents in low-income neighborhoods are law-abiding. Furthermore, self-reported surveys 
indicate that high-income citizens are involved in all sorts of criminal activities33 and are 
   
Crack-related violence spread like wildfire through the 
nation’s inner cities in the 1980s.  In response, then 
president Ronald Reagan vowed to escalate the “war 
on drugs.” As a consequence, law enforcement efforts 
focused on arresting and incarcerating the wrongdoers in 
those communities, most of whom were African American. 
Even though this urban violence has largely subsided, 
the tactics continue: every year between 1980 and 2010, 
blacks were arrested on drug charges at rates between 
2.8 and 5.5 times higher than whites. Today, even though 
African Americans make up about 13 percent of the 
U.S. population, they represent more than 50 percent of 
sentenced drug offenders.
the myth African Americans are sent to prison for drug 
crimes in greater numbers than whites because more of 
them buy, sell, and use drugs.
the ReAlity The use of illegal drugs by blacks and whites 
in the United States is roughly equal. According to data 
gathered by the federal government, about 10.7 percent of 
African Americans and about 9.1 percent of whites admit to 
using drugs within the previous month. A recently released 
study conducted by Duke University researchers showed 
that black adolescents are only about half as likely as their 
white counterparts to become dependent on illegal drugs 
and alcohol.
These figures are not reflected in criminal justice 
trends. African Americans who use drugs are arrested 
at about three times the rate of whites who use drugs. 
Furthermore, although blacks account for only 28 percent 
of all drug arrests, they represent 49 percent of those 
convicted of drug crimes and 44 percent of all Americans 
incarcerated for drug crimes. Finally, more than four out 
of every five drug arrests are for possession of the banned 
substance, not for its sale or manufacture. Thus, the racial 
disparity in arrests cannot be due to a large class of African 
American drug dealers.
Although these statistics leave the criminal justice 
system open to charges of institutionalized racism, 
the disparities are more likely the result of practical 
considerations. “There is as much cocaine in the Stock 
Exchange as there is in the black community,” admits one 
Chicago police chief. “But those guys are harder to catch. 
Those deals are done in office buildings [and] in someone’s 
home. But the guy standing on the corner, he’s almost 
got a sign on his back. These guys are just arrestable.” 
In addition, residents of low-income neighborhoods are 
unlikely to hire expensive legal help to contest police 
action. Quite simply, the inner city is an easy place for 
police to rack up impressive arrest numbers with little fear 
for consequences if mistakes are made.
FoR CRitiCAl AnAlysis Heather Mac Donald, a crime 
expert at the Manhattan Institute in New York, suggests 
that the racial disparities in the “war on drugs” make sense 
because the urban street trade often leads to violence and 
other crimes that harm inner-city communities. Drug use 
by whites, in contrast, generally takes place in suburban 
homes, hidden from view, without the same level of 
negative side effects. What is your opinion of Mac Donald’s 
theory?
MYTh vs. REALITY
Race stereotyping  
and drug Crime
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
far more likely to commit white-collar crimes, which are 
not included in national crime statistics. These facts tend 
to support the theory that high crime rates in low-income 
communities are at least partly the result of a greater will-
ingness of police to arrest poor citizens and of the court 
system to convict them.
ETHniCiTy And CRimE Another point to remember when 
reviewing statistical studies of minority offenders and 
victims is that these studies tend to focus on race, which 
distinguishes groups based on physical characteristics 
such as skin color, rather than ethnicity, which denotes 
national or cultural background. Thus, the bulk of crimino-
logical research in this area has focused on the differences 
between European Americans and African Americans, 
both because the latter have been the largest minority 
group in the United States for most of its history and 
because the racial differences between the two groups are easily identifiable. Americans of 
Hispanic descent have either been excluded from many crime studies or been linked with 
whites or blacks based on racial characteristics.34 Other minority groups, such as Asian 
Americans, Native Americans, and immigrants from the South Pacific or Eastern Europe, 
have been similarly underreported in crime studies.
This state of affairs will more than likely change in the near future. At present rates 
of growth, the Hispanic population will triple by 2050, when it will account for approxi-
mately one-third of the total U.S. population. In addition, Hispanics are the fastest- 
growing minority group in the U.S. prison population.35 Because of an increased empha-
sis on immigration law enforcement, more than half of the people sent to federal prisons 
in this country today are Hispanic.36
In fact, crime experts have already begun to focus on issues of Hispanic criminality. 
For example, Robert Sampson’s research project, mentioned earlier on page 42, found 
lower rates of violence among Mexican Americans than among either whites or blacks 
living in Chicago. The authors theorize that strong social ties in immigrant populations 
create an environment that is incompatible with crime.37
WomEn And CRimE
To put it bluntly, crime is an overwhelmingly male activity. About 68 percent of all mur-
ders involve a male victim and a male perpetrator, and in only 2.2 percent of homicides 
are both the offender and the victim female.38 Only 12 percent of the national jail popula-
tion and 7 percent of the national prison population are female, and in 2011 only about 
a quarter of all arrests involved women.39 
These statistics fail to convey the startling rate at which the female presence in the 
criminal justice system has been increasing. Over the past thirty years, the male arrest rate 
for aggravated assault has not changed, while the female arrest rate for aggravated assault 
has doubled. In that same time period, the male arrest rate for burglary has dropped 61 
percent, while the female arrest rate for that crime has remained constant.40 In 1970, there 
were about 6,000 women in federal and state prisons, but today, there are nearly 113,000.41
There are two possible explanations for these increases. Either (1) the life circum-
stances and behavior of women have changed dramatically in the past forty years, or 
(2)  the criminal justice system’s attitude toward women has changed over that time 
A tribal officer takes a suspect 
into custody on the Oneida 
Indian Reservation in Hobart, 
Wisconsin. By some measures, 
Native Americans are the 
victims of violent crime at twice 
the national average. Why, 
then, do many crime studies 
fail to provide specific statistics 
concerning this group, instead 
focusing only on whites, African 
Americans, and Hispanics?
AP Photo/Mike Roemer
Discuss the 
prevailing 
explanation 
for the rising 
number 
of women 
incarcerated 
in the United 
States.
Learning  
objective 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   45
period.42 In the 1970s, when female crime rates started surging upward, many observ-
ers accepted the former explanation. “You can’t get involved in a bar fight if you’re not 
allowed in the bar,” said feminist theorist Freda Adler in 1975.43 It has become clear, 
however, that a significant percentage of women arrested are involved in a narrow band 
of wrongdoing, mostly drug- and alcohol-related offenses or property crimes.44 Research 
shows that as recently as the 1980s, many of the women now in prison would not have 
been arrested or would have received lighter sentences for their crimes.45 Consequently, 
more scholars are convinced that rising female criminality is the result of a criminal jus-
tice system that is “more willing to incarcerate women.”46
SELFaSSESSMEnT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 60.
According to many experts, the three factors that most strongly affect national crime 
figures are the rate at which offenders are ____________, the percentage of the population 
that is ____________ the age of twenty-four, and the economy. Despite continued declining 
crime rates in the 2000s, young ____________ ____________ males continue to experience 
high levels of offending and victimization. Also, because of ____________ law offenses, 
Hispanics are now the fastest-growing minority group in federal prisons.
WHAT CAusEs CRimE?
Jessica Wolpaw Reyes, an economist at Amherst College in Massachusetts, has put forth 
an intriguing reason for the nation’s crime decline. Numerous studies, Reyes points out, 
show that children with elevated levels of lead in their blood are more likely to act aggres-
sively as adults. In the 1970s, the federal government banned lead in gasoline and many 
types of paint. A generation of lead-free children has reached adulthood since then, and, 
Reyes believes, its nonviolent tendencies are responsible for half of the recent drop in 
violent crime rates.47
The scientific study of crime, known as criminology, is rich in different explana-
tions as to why people commit crimes, from lead in the bloodstream to violent video 
games to low self-control. In this section, we discuss the most influential of these expla-
nations put forth by criminologists, or researchers who study the causes of crime. 
CoRRELATion And CAusE
At the start, it is important to understand the difference between correlation and 
causation. Correlation between two variables means that they tend to vary together. 
Causation, in contrast, means that one variable is responsible for the change in the 
other. In her research described above, Reyes relied on the correlation between lead in 
the bloodstream and aggressive behavior to reach her conclusions about violent crime 
rates. No criminologist, however, has proved that high levels of lead cause criminal 
behavior. Rather, it is one variable that may contribute to violent behavior when com-
bined with other variables.
So, correlation does not equal cause. Sales of ice cream and crime rates both rise 
in the summer, but nobody would say that increased ice cream sales cause higher crime 
rates. Such is the quandary for criminologists. We can say that there is a correlation 
between many factors and criminal behavior, but it is quite difficult to prove that the 
factors directly cause criminal behavior. Consequently, the question that is the underpin-
ning of criminology—What causes crime?—has yet to be definitively answered.
Criminology The scientific 
study of crime and the causes 
of criminal behavior.
Criminologist A specialist 
in the field of crime and the 
causes of criminal behavior.
Correlation The relationship 
between two measurements or 
behaviors that tend to move in 
the same direction.
Causation The relationship 
in which a change in one 
measurement or behavior 
creates a recognizable change 
in another measurement or 
behavior.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to discuss why they 
think that men are more likely than 
women to be arrested for criminal 
activity.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
think about what causes crime. 
Ask them to explain their personal 
theories of the causes of crime to 
the class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE RoLE of THEoRy
Criminologists have uncovered a wealth of information 
concerning a different, and more practically applicable, 
inquiry: Given a certain set of circumstances, why do 
individuals commit criminal acts? This information has 
allowed criminologists to develop a number of theories 
concerning the causes of crime. 
Most of us tend to think of a theory as some sort of 
guess or a statement that is lacking in credibility. In the 
academic world, and therefore for our purposes, a theory 
is an explanation of a happening or circumstance that is 
based on observation, experimentation, and reasoning. 
Scientific and academic researchers observe facts and 
their consequences to develop hypotheses about what will 
occur when a similar fact pattern is present in the future. A 
hypothesis is a proposition that can be tested by research-
ers or observers to determine if it is valid. If enough 
authorities do find the hypothesis valid, it will be accepted 
as a theory. See Figure 2.5 alongside for an example of this 
process, known as the scientific method, in action.
Criminological theories are primarily concerned 
with attempting to determine the reason for criminal 
behavior, but they also provide practical guidance for 
law enforcement, the courts, and corrections officials. 
In the remainder of this section, we examine the mostly 
widely recognized of these theories, starting with one 
that relies on freedom of choice.
THE bRAin And THE body
Perhaps the most basic answer to the question of why a person commits a crime is that he 
or she makes a willful decision to do so. This is the underpinning of the rational choice 
theory of crime, summed up by criminologist James Q. Wilson as follows:
At any given moment, a person can choose between committing a crime and not commit-
ting it. The consequences of committing a crime consist of rewards (what psychologists call 
 “reinforcers”) and punishments; the consequences of not committing the crime also entail 
gains and losses. The larger the ratio of the net rewards of crime to the net rewards of [not 
committing a crime], the greater the tendency to commit a crime.48
In other words, a person, before committing a crime, acts as if she or he is weighing the 
benefits (which may be money, in the case of a robbery) against the costs (the possibility 
of being caught and going to prison or jail). If the perceived benefit is greater than the 
potential costs, the person is more likely to commit the crime.
“THRiLL offEndERs” In expanding on rational choice theory, sociologist Jack Katz has 
stated that the “rewards” of crime may be sensual as well as financial. The inherent dan-
ger of criminal activity, according to Katz, increases the “rush” a criminal experiences 
on successfully committing a crime. Katz labels the rewards of this “rush” the seduction 
of crime.49 For example, the National Coalition for the Homeless documented nearly 900 
unprovoked attacks against the homeless in the decade that ended in 2010, including 244 
fatalities.50 In most of these incidents, the assailants were “thrill offenders” who kicked, 
Discuss the 
difference 
between a 
hypothesis 
and a theory in 
the context of 
criminology.
Learning  
objective 5
FIGURE 2.5 
The Scientific Method
The scientific method is a process through which researchers test 
the accuracy of a hypothesis. This simple example should provide 
an idea of how the scientific method works.


Hypothesis: If I leave home at 7:00 every morning, then I will 
never be late for class. 
(Hypotheses are often presented in this “If . . . , then . . .” format.)  
Observation: I left my home at 7:00 this morning, and 
I was on time for class.
Test: For three straight weeks, I left home at 7:00 every morning.  
Not one time was I late for class.
Verification: Four of my neighbors have the same morning class.  
They agree that they are never late if they leave by 7:00 A.M.
Theory: As long as I leave home at 7:00 A.M., I don’t have to worry 
about being late for class.
Prediction: Tomorrow morning I’ll leave at 7:00, and I will be 
on time for my class.
Note that even a sound theory supported by the scientific method such as this 
one does not prove that the prediction will be correct. Other factors not 
accounted for in the test and verification stages, such as an unexpected traffic 
accident, may disprove the theory. Predictions based on complex theories such 
as the criminological ones we will be discussing in this chapter are often 
challenged in such a manner.




Theory An explanation of 
a happening or circumstance 
that is based on observation, 
experimentation, and reasoning.
Hypothesis A possible 
explanation for an observed 
occurrence that can be tested by 
further investigation.
Rational Choice Theory A 
school of criminology that holds 
that wrongdoers act as if they 
weigh the possible benefits of 
criminal or delinquent activity 
against the expected costs of 
being apprehended.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   47
punched, or set on fire homeless persons for the sport of it. Katz believes that such seem-
ingly “senseless” crimes can be explained by rational choice theory only if the intrinsic 
(inner) reward of the crime itself is considered. 
RATionAL CHoiCE THEoRy And PunisHmEnT The theory that wrongdoers choose to 
commit crimes is a cornerstone of the American criminal justice system. Because crime 
is seen as the end result of a series of rational choices, policymakers have reasoned 
that severe punishment can deter criminal activity by adding another variable to the 
 decision- making process. Supporters of the death penalty—carried out in thirty-three 
states and by the federal government—emphasize its deterrent effects, and legislators 
have used harsh prison sentences to control illegal drug use and trafficking.
TRAiT THEoRiEs of CRimE If society is willing to punish crimes that are the result of a 
rational decision-making process, what should be its response to criminal behavior that 
is irrational or even unintentional? What if, for example, a schoolteacher who made 
sexual advances to young girls, including his stepdaughter, could prove that his wrong-
doing was actually caused by an egg-sized tumor in his brain? 51
Somewhat in contrast to rational choice theory, trait theories suggest that certain 
biological or psychological attributes in individuals could incline them toward criminal 
behavior given a certain set of circumstances. Biology is a very broad term that refers to 
the scientific study of living organisms, while  psychology pertains more specifically to 
the study of the mind and its processes. “All behavior is biological,” pointed out geneticist 
David C. Rowe. “All behavior is represented in the brain, in its biochemistry, electrical 
activity, structure, and growth and decline.”52
Hormones and Aggression One trait theory holds that biochemistry, or the chemis-
try of living matter, can influence criminal behavior. For example, chemical messengers 
known as hormones have been the subject of much criminological study. Criminal activ-
ity in males has been linked to elevated levels of hormones—specifically, testosterone, 
which controls secondary sex characteristics and has been associated with traits of aggres-
sion. Testing of inmate populations shows that those incarcerated for violent crimes exhibit 
higher testosterone levels than other prisoners.53 Elevated testosterone levels have also been 
used to explain the age-crime relationship, as the average testosterone level of men under 
the age of twenty-eight is double that of men between thirty-one and sixty-six years old.54
A very specific form of female violent behavior is believed to stem from hormones. 
In 2010, defense attorneys for Stephanie Rochester of Superior, Colorado, claimed that 
their client was not criminally responsible for smothering her six-month-old son to death. 
Rochester was, they said, suffering from postpartum psychosis at the time of her action. This 
temporary illness, believed to be caused partly by the hormonal changes that women expe-
rience after childbirth, triggers abnormal behavior in a small percentage of new mothers.55
The Brain and Crime The study of brain activity, or neurophysiology, has also found a 
place in criminology. Cells in the brain known as neurons communicate with each other 
by releasing chemicals called neurotransmitters. Criminologists have isolated three 
neurotransmitters that seem to be particularly related to aggressive behavior:
1. Serotonin, which regulates moods, appetite, and memory.
2. Norepinephrine, which regulates sleep-wake cycles and controls how we respond 
to anxiety, fear, and stress.
3. Dopamine, which regulates perceptions of pleasure and reward.56
Biology The science of living 
organisms, including their 
structure, function, growth, and 
origin.
Psychology The scientific 
study of mental processes and 
behavior.
Hormone A chemical 
substance, produced in 
tissue and conveyed in the 
bloodstream, that controls 
certain cellular and body 
functions such as growth and 
reproduction.
Testosterone The hormone 
primarily responsible for the 
production of sperm and 
the development of male 
secondary sex characteristics 
such as the growth of facial and 
pubic hair and the change of 
voice pitch.
Neurotransmitter A 
chemical that transmits nerve 
impulses between nerve cells 
and from nerve cells to the 
brain.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Researchers have established that, under certain circum-
stances, low levels of serotonin and high levels of norepi-
nephrine are correlated with aggressive behavior.57 Dopamine 
plays a crucial role in drug addiction, a condition that will be 
described later in the chapter.
Before fatally shooting six people and wounding four-
teen others on January 8, 2011, in Tucson, Arizona, Jared 
Loughner had exhibited signs of mental illness. Specifically, 
Loughner is believed to suffer from schizophrenia, a chronic 
and severe brain disorder that can lead to erratic, uncontrol-
lable behavior. In fact, persons suffering from this disease are 
at an unusually high risk for committing suicide or harming 
others. 
Psychiatrist E. Fuller Torrey estimates that schizophren-
ics commit about a thousand homicides each year.58 Further 
research shows that even moderate use of alcohol or drugs 
increases the chances that a schizophrenic will behave violently.59 Still, it is important 
to note that about 2.4 million Americans—1 percent of the adult population—have been 
diagnosed with schizophrenia, and the vast majority of them will never commit a violent 
crime. That is, there may be a correlation between schizophrenia and violence, but the 
brain disorder cannot generally be said to cause violence.
Psychology and Crime Like biological theories of crime, psychological theories of 
crime operate under the assumption that individuals have traits that make them more or 
less predisposed to criminal activity. To a certain extent, however, psychology rests more 
heavily on abstract ideas than does biology. Even Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), perhaps 
the most influential of all psychologists, considered the operations of the mind to be, like 
an iceberg, mostly hidden.
One influential branch of psychology—social psychology—focuses on human 
behavior in the context of how human beings relate to and influence one another. Social 
psychology rests on the assumption that the way we view ourselves is shaped to a large 
degree by how we think others view us. Generally, we act in the same manner as those we 
like or admire because we want them to like or admire us. Thus, to a certain extent, social 
psychology tries to explain the influence of crowds on individual behavior.
About three decades ago, psychologist Philip Zimbardo highlighted the power 
of group behavior in dramatic fashion. Zimbardo randomly selected some Stanford 
University undergraduate students to act as “guards” and other students to act as 
“inmates” in an artificial prison environment. Before long, the students began to act as 
if these designations were real, with the “guards” physically mistreating the “inmates,” 
who rebelled with equal violence. Within six days, Zimbardo was forced to discontinue 
the experiment out of fear for its participants’ safety.60 One of the basic assumptions of 
social psychology is that people are able to justify improper or even criminal behavior 
by convincing themselves that it is actually acceptable behavior. This delusion, research-
ers have found, is much easier to accomplish with the support of others behaving in the 
same manner.61
Trait Theory and Public Policy Whereas rational choice theory justifies punishing 
wrong doers, biological and psychological views of criminality suggest that antisocial 
behavior should be identified and treated before it manifests itself in criminal activity. 
In 2011, Christopher Gribble, 
right, was convicted of 
murdering a Mount Vernon, 
New Hampshire, woman with 
a machete. Gribble’s attorneys 
claimed that he was suffering 
from mental illness at the time 
of the crime. If true, should 
this fact have any bearing on 
Gribble’s guilt or innocence? 
AP Photo/Don Himsel, Pool
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   49
Though the focus on treatment diminished somewhat in the 1990s, rehabilitation prac-
tices in corrections have made somewhat of a comeback over the past few years. The 
primary motivation for this new outlook, as we will see in Chapters 9 through 12, is  
the pressing need to divert nonviolent offenders from the nation’s overburdened prison 
and jail system. Trait theories also provide the basis for the insanity defense in criminal 
trials, which we will discuss in the next chapter.
bAd nEigHboRHoods And  
oTHER EConomiC disAdvAnTAgEs
While America’s current economic problems have not, as yet, resulted in national 
crime increases, the same cannot be said for local trouble spots. In determining the 
most dangerous cities in the United States, researchers Douglas 
McIntyre, Michael Sauter, and Charles Stockdale observe that their 
list is dominated by cities with “fortresses of crime.” These neighbor-
hoods—including Baltimore’s Front Street, Detroit’s Palmer Avenue, 
and Memphis’s Lamar Avenue—are marked by long-term financial 
hardship, unemployment, and high levels of violent criminality.62 
Indeed, for decades, criminologists focusing on sociology have argued that neigh-
borhood conditions, be they of wealth or poverty, are perhaps the most important vari-
able in predicting criminal behavior.
soCiAL disoRgAnizATion THEoRy In the early twentieth century, juvenile crime research-
ers Clifford Shaw and Henry McKay popularized sociological explanations for crime with 
their social disorganization theory. Shaw and McKay studied various high-crime 
neighborhoods in Chicago and discovered certain “zones” that exhibited high rates of 
crime. These zones were characterized by  “disorganization,” or a breakdown of the tradi-
tional institutions of social control such as family, school systems, and local businesses. 
In contrast, in the city’s “organized” communities, residents had developed certain agree-
ments about fundamental values and norms.63
Shaw and McKay found that residents in high-crime neighborhoods had to a large 
degree abandoned these fundamental values and norms. Also, a lack of social controls 
had led to increased levels of antisocial, or criminal, behavior.64 According to social 
disorganization theory, ecological factors that lead to crime in these neighborhoods 
are perpetuated by continued elevated levels of high school dropouts, unemployment, 
deteriorating infrastructures, and single-parent families. (See Figure 2.6 on the following 
page to better understand social disorganization theory.)
sTRAin THEoRy Another self-perpetuating aspect of disorganized neighbor hoods is that 
once residents gain the financial means to leave a high-crime community, they usually do 
so. This desire to escape the inner city is related to another branch of sociological crime 
theory: strain theory. Most Americans have similar life goals, which include gaining a 
certain measure of wealth and financial freedom. The means of attaining these goals, 
however, are not universally available. Many citizens do not have access to the education 
or training necessary for financial success. This often results in frustration and anger, or 
strain.
Strain theory has its roots in the works of French sociologist Emile Durkheim 
(1858–1917) and his concept of anomie (derived from the Greek word for “without 
norms”). Durkheim believed that anomie resulted when social change threw behavioral 
Sociology The study of the 
development and functioning 
of groups of people who live 
together within a society.
Social Disorganization 
Theory The theory that 
deviant behavior is more likely 
in communities where social 
institutions such as the family, 
schools, and the criminal justice 
system fail to exert control over 
the population.
Strain Theory The 
assumption that crime is the 
result of frustration felt by 
individuals who cannot reach 
their financial and personal 
goals through legitimate 
means.
Anomie A condition in which 
the individual suffers from the 
breakdown or absence of social 
norms. 
“The common argument that 
crime is caused by poverty is 
a kind of slander on the poor.”
— h.l. mencken, 
American 
journalist 
(1956)
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
reflect on the types of policies that 
the government could implement 
to prevent crime under trait theory.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

norms into a flux, leading to a weakening of social controls and an increase in deviant 
behavior.65 Another sociologist, American Robert K. Merton, expanded on Durkheim’s 
ideas in his own theory of strain. Merton believed that anomie was caused by a social 
structure in which all citizens have similar goals without equal means to achieve them.66 
One way to alleviate this strain is to gain wealth by the means that are available to the 
residents of disorganized communities: drug trafficking, burglary, and other criminal 
activities.
soCiAL ConfLiCT THEoRiEs Strain theory and the concept of anomie seem to suggest 
that the unequal structure of our society is, in part, to blame for criminal behavior. This 
argument forms the bedrock of social conflict theories of crime. These theories, which 
entered mainstream criminology in the 1960s, hold capitalism responsible for high levels 
of violence and crime because of the disparity of income that it encourages. 
According to social conflict theory, the poor commit property crimes for reasons 
of need and because, as members of a capitalist society, they desire the same financial 
rewards as everybody else. They commit violent crimes because of the frustration and 
rage they feel when those rewards seem unattainable. Laws, instead of reflecting the 
values of society as a whole, reflect only the values of the segment of society that has 
achieved power and is willing to use the criminal justice system as a tool to keep that 
power.67 Thus, the harsh penalties for “lower-class” crimes such as burglary can be seen 
as a means of protecting the privileges of the haves from the aspirations of the have-nots.
LifE LEssons And CRiminAL bEHAvioR
Some criminologists find class theories of crime overly narrow. Surveys that ask people 
directly about their criminal behavior have shown that the criminal instinct is consis-
tent throughout all income levels, even if the actual crime rate is higher in low-income 
FIGURE 2.6 The Stages of Social Disorganization Theory
Social disorganization theory holds that crime is related to the environmental pressures that exist in certain communities 
or neighborhoods. These areas are marked by the desire of many of their inhabitants to “get out” at the first possible 
opportunity. Consequently, residents tend to ignore the important institutions in the community, such as businesses and 
education, causing further erosion and an increase in the conditions that lead to crime.
Source: Adapted from Larry J. Siegel, Criminology, 10th ed. (Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2009), 180.
The Problem: 
Criminal Areas
The Consequences: 
Rise of crime in poverty-stricken 
neighborhood; delinquent behavior 
becomes socially acceptable for 
youths; outside investment and 
support shun the area. 
The Problem: 
Breakdown of Social Control
The Consequences:
Peer groups replace family and 
educators as primary inﬂuences on 
youth; formation of gangs.
Leads to
The Problem: Poverty
The Consequences:
Formation of isolated impoverished areas, 
racial and ethnic discrimination, lack of 
legitimate economic opportunities.
Leads to
 The Problem:
Social Disorganization
The Consequences:
Breakdown of institutions such as 
school and the family.
The Problem: 
Criminal Careers
The Consequences:
The majority of youths “age out” of 
crime, start families, and, if they can, 
leave the neighborhood. Those who 
remain still adhere to the values of the 
impoverished-area culture and 
become career criminals.
Leads to
The Problem: 
Cultural Transmission
The Consequences:
The younger juveniles inherit the 
values of delinquency and crime 
from their older siblings and friends, 
establishing a deep-rooted 
impoverished-area culture. 
Leads to
Leads to
Social Conflict Theories  
A school of criminology that 
views criminal behavior as the 
result of class conflict. 
50   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   51
communities. Anybody, these criminologists argue, has the potential to act out criminal 
behavior, regardless of the socioeconomic class to which they belong.
THE AbAndonEd CAR ExPERimEnT Philip Zimbardo conducted a well-known, if rather 
unscientific, experiment to make this point. Zimbardo placed an abandoned automo-
bile with its hood up on the campus of Stanford University. The car remained in place, 
untouched, for a week. Then, the psychologist smashed the car’s window with a sledge-
hammer. Within minutes, passersby had joined in the destruction of the automobile, 
eventually stripping its valuable parts.68 Social process theories function on the same 
basis as Zimbardo’s “interdependence of decisions experiment”: the potential for crimi-
nal behavior exists in everyone and will be realized depending on an individual’s inter-
action with various institutions and processes of society. Two major branches of social 
process theory are (1) learning theory and (2) control theory.
LEARning THEoRy Popularized by Edwin Sutherland in the 1940s, learning theory con-
tends that criminal activity is a learned behavior. In other words, a criminal is taught both 
the practical methods of crime (such as how to pick a lock) and the psychological aspects 
of crime (how to deal with the guilt of wrongdoing). Sutherland’s theory of differential  
association held that individuals are exposed to the values of family and peers such as 
school friends or co-workers. If the dominant values one is exposed to favor criminal 
behavior, then that person is more likely to mimic such behavior.69
More recently, learning theory has been expanded to include the growing influ-
ence of the media. In the latest in a long series of studies, psychologists at the University 
of  Michigan’s Institute for Social Research released data showing that exposure to high levels 
of televised violence erodes a natural aversion to violence and increases aggressive behavior 
among young children.70 Such findings have spurred a number of legislative attempts to 
curb violence on television.71 The controversy surrounding the violent attributes of another 
medium—video games—reached all the way to the United States Supreme Court, as shown 
in the feature Landmark Cases—Brown v. EMA on the following page.
ConTRoL THEoRy Criminologist Travis Hirschi focuses on the reasons why individuals do 
not engage in criminal acts, rather than why they do. According to Hirschi, social bonds 
promote conformity to social norms. The stronger these social bonds—which include 
Social Process Theories  
A school of criminology that 
considers criminal behavior to 
be the predictable result of a 
person’s interaction with his or 
her environment.
Learning Theory The 
hypothesis that delinquents 
and criminals must be taught 
both the practical and the 
emotional skills necessary to 
participate in illegal activity.
List and briefly 
explain two 
important 
branches of 
social process 
theory.
Learning  
objective6
On November 30, 2011, more 
than 1,400 Los Angeles police 
officers arrested two hundred 
members of Occupy LA. Part 
of a nationwide movement 
protesting perceived economic 
inequality in American society, 
the activists had been ordered 
by city officials to abandon 
their camp two days earlier. If 
you were a proponent of social 
conflict theory, how would you 
interpret police action against 
these protestors?
Lucy Nicholson/Reuters/Landov
Technology Tip: Show students 
a video clip of the “Bobo Doll” 
Experiment (found on YouTube) to 
illustrate learning theory.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
attachment to, commitment to, involvement with, and belief in societal values—the less 
likely that any individual will commit a crime.72 Control theory holds that although we 
all have the potential to commit crimes, most of us are dissuaded from doing so because 
we care about the opinions of our family and peers. 
James Q. Wilson and George Kelling described control theory in terms of the  
“broken windows” effect. Neighborhoods in poor condition are filled with cues of lack 
of social control (for example, broken windows) that invite further vandalism and other 
deviant behavior.73 If these cues are removed, according to Wilson and Kelling, so is the 
implied acceptance of crime within a community.
LifE CouRsE THEoRiEs of CRimE If crime is indeed learned behavior, some criminolo-
gists are asking, Shouldn’t we be focusing on early childhood—the time when humans do 
Reacting to studies linking violent video games to violent 
behavior in children, in 2006 former California governor 
Arnold Schwarzenegger signed a bill prohibiting the 
sale or rental of games that portray “killing, maiming, 
dismembering or sexually assaulting an image of a human 
being” to people younger than eighteen years old. The 
law imposed a $1,000 fine on violators. Immediately, video 
game sellers sued the state, saying it had violated their 
constitutional right to freedom of speech. After two lower 
courts accepted this argument and invalidated California’s 
law, the issue finally arrived before the United States 
Supreme Court.
Brown v. EMA
United States Supreme Court
559 S.Ct. 1448 (2010)
www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/10pdf/08-1448.pdf
in the woRDs oF the CoURt...
JUSTICE SCALIA, MAJORITY OPINION
* * * *
Like the protected books, plays, and movies that 
preceded them, video games communicate ideas—and 
even social messages—through many familiar literary devices 
(such as characters, dialogue, plot, and music) and through 
features distinctive to the medium (such as the player’s 
interaction with the virtual world). That suffices to confer First 
Amendment protection. Under our Constitution, “esthetic 
and moral judgments about art and literature * * * are for the 
individual to make, not for the Government to decree, even 
with the mandate or approval of a majority.”
* * * *
No doubt a State possesses legitimate power to 
protect children from harm, but that does not include a 
free-floating power to restrict the ideas to which children 
may be exposed. * * * California’s argument would fare 
better if there were a longstanding tradition in this country 
of specially restricting children’s access to depictions of 
violence, but there is none. Certainly the books we give 
children to read—or read to them when they are younger—
contain no shortage of gore. Grimm’s Fairy Tales, for 
example, are grim indeed.  
* * * *
California relies primarily on * * * psychologists whose 
studies purport to show a connection between exposure 
to violent video games and harmful effects on children. 
These studies have been rejected by every court to 
consider them, and with good reason: They do not prove 
that violent video games cause minors to act aggressively 
(which would at least be a beginning). Instead, “[n]early 
all of the research is based on correlation, not evidence 
of causation * * *” They show at best some correlation 
between exposure to violent entertainment and minuscule 
real-world effects, such as children’s feeling more 
aggressive or making louder noises in the few minutes 
after playing a violent game than after playing a nonviolent 
game.
Decision
In the absence of any provable negative effects on minors, 
from violent video games, the Court ruled that California’s 
ban was unconstitutional and therefore could not be 
enforced.
FoR CRitiCAl AnAlysis
If states have the “legitimate power” to “protect children 
from harm,” why did the Court invalidate California’s violent 
video game law? How did Justice Scalia use the concepts 
of cause and correlation to support the Court’s decision? 
(You can review those terms on page 45.) 
LanDMaRK CAsEs:  brown v. Entertainment  
merchants Association (EmA)
Control Theory A series of 
theories that assume that all 
individuals have the potential 
for criminal behavior, but are 
restrained by the damage 
that such actions would do to 
their relationships with family, 
friends, and members of the 
community.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   53
the most learning? Practitioners of life course criminology believe that lying, stealing, 
bullying, and other conduct problems that occur in childhood are the strongest predic-
tors of future criminal behavior and have been seriously undervalued in the examination 
of why crime occurs.74
Self-Control Theory Focusing on childhood behavior raises the question of whether 
conduct problems established at a young age can be changed over time. Michael 
Gottfredson and Travis Hirschi, whose 1990 publication A General Theory of Crime is 
one of the foundations of life course criminology, think not.75 Gottfredson and Hirschi 
believe that criminal behavior is linked to “low self-control,” a personality trait that 
is formed before a child reaches the age of ten and can usually be attributed to poor  
parenting.76
Someone with low self-control is generally impulsive, thrill seeking, and likely to 
solve problems with violence rather than his or her intellect. Gottfredson and Hirschi 
think that once low self-control has been established, it will persist. In other words, 
childhood behavioral problems are not “solved” by positive developments later in life, 
such as healthy personal relationships or a good job.77 Thus, these two criminologists 
ascribe to what has been called the continuity theory of crime, which essentially says that 
once negative behavior patterns have been established, they cannot be changed.
The Possibility of Change Not all of those who practice life course criminology fol-
low the continuity theory. Robert Sampson and John Laub, for example, have gathered 
a great deal of data showing, in their opinion, that offenders may experience “turning 
points” when they are able to veer off the road from a life of crime.78 A good deal of 
research in this area has concentrated on the positive impact of getting married, having 
children, and finding a job, but other turning points are also being explored. John F. Frana 
of Indiana State University and Ryan D. Schroeder of the University of Louisville argue that 
military service can act as a “rehabilitative agent.”79 Several researchers have studied the 
role that religion and spirituality can play as “hooks for change.”80
viCTims of CRimE
Since its founding days, criminology has focused almost exclusively on one-half of the 
crime equation: the offender. If you review our discussion of criminology up to this point, 
you will find little mention of the other half: the victim. Indeed, only in the past several 
decades has victimology become an essential component of criminology. The growing 
emphasis on the victim has had a profound impact on the police, the courts, and correc-
tions administrators in this country. Accordingly, Andrew Karmen, a professor of sociol-
ogy at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City, has defined victimology as 
the study of “relationships between victims and offenders [and] the interactions between 
victims and the criminal justice system.”81
THE Risks of viCTimizATion Anybody can be a victim of crime. This does not mean, 
however, that everybody is at an equal risk of being victimized. For example, because 
mental illnesses such as schizophrenia (see page 48) interfere with a person’s ability 
to make smart decisions in risky situations, those who suffer from such disabilities are 
eleven times more likely to be the victims of violent crimes than nonsufferers.82 
To better explain the circumstances surrounding victimization, in the late 1970s, 
criminologists Larry Cohen and Marcus Felson devised the routine activities theory. 
According to Cohen and Felson, most criminal acts require the following:
Life Course Criminology  
The study of crime based 
on the belief that behavioral 
patterns developed in 
childhood can predict 
delinquent and criminal 
behavior later in life.
Victimology A school of 
criminology that studies why 
certain people are the victims 
of crimes and the optimal 
role for victims in the criminal 
justice system.
Social Media and CJ 
The American Society of 
Criminology operates  
Critical Criminology as 
a forum for ideas and 
information relating to the 
causes of crime. To browse 
the wide variety of posts on 
this Facebook page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links for  
this chapter.
Discussion Tip: In small groups, 
ask students to think about any 
crimes/deviant behavior they may 
have committed in their younger 
years. Then, ask them to think 
about “turning points” in their  
lives that caused or forced them  
to discontinue this behavior.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
1. A likely offender.
2. A suitable target (a person or an object).
3. The absence of a capable guardian—that is, any person (not necessarily a law 
enforcement agent) whose presence or proximity prevents a crime from happening.83
When these three factors are present, the likelihood of crime rises. Cohen and Felson believe 
that routine activities often contribute to this “perfect storm” of criminal opportunity. So, 
for example, when a person leaves for work, her or his home becomes a suitable target for a 
likely offender because the guardian is absent.
THE viCTim–offEndER ConnECTion Early on the morning of August 14, 2010, a lone 
gunman shot eight people outside a nightclub in Buffalo, New York. Of the eight victims, 
four of whom died, seven had previously been arrested or convicted of a crime. This inci-
dent underscores an important point: criminals and victims are often the same people. 
Recently gathered data show, for example, that 92 percent of murder suspects and  
72 percent of murder victims in Chicago have previously been convicted of a crime.84 Of 
Baltimore’s 234 murder victims in 2008, 194 had criminal records. 85 
“The notion that [violent crimes] are random bolts of lightning, which is the com-
monly held image, is not the reality at all,” says David Kennedy, a professor at New York’s 
John Jay College of Criminal Justice.86 Kennedy’s point is further made by Figure 2.7 
below, which shows that the most vulnerable demographic groups—particularly young, 
low-income African American males—are also those with the highest rates of criminality. 
FIGURE 2.7 
Crime Victims in  
the United States
According to the U.S. 
Department of Justice, African 
Americans, households with 
annual incomes of less than 
$15,000, and young people 
between the ages of eighteen 
and twenty are most likely 
to be victims of crime in this 
country.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal 
Victimization, 2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, September 2011), 11, 12.
Race or Origin
White
Black
Hispanic
Age
12–14 years
15–17 years
18–20 years
21–24 years
25–34 years
35–49 years
50–64 years
65+ years
Gender
Male
Female
Number of violent crime victims per 1,000 persons, aged 12 or older
Annual Household Income
Less than $7,500
$7,500–$14,999
$15,000–$24,999
$25,000–$34,999
$35,000–$49,999
$50,000–$74,999
$75,000 or more
0
50
100
150
200
Number of property crime victims per 1,000 households
0
10
15
20
25
35
30
5
Teaching Tip: Many studies have 
indicated that college students are 
much more likely to be the victims 
of crime because of their risky 
behaviors. Ask students to think 
about their own behavior, and that 
of their friends, and how these 
behaviors may put them at a higher 
risk for victimization. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Using the example 
of a violent or property crime 
that has recently taken place in 
your community, have students 
determine whether the routine 
activities theory provides any 
insight as to why the crime 
occurred.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   55
fRom THEoRy To PRACTiCE
For the criminological theories we have studied in this chapter to be worthwhile, they 
must do more than simply offer themselves for academic debate. They must be used, 
in the field, by criminal justice professionals to prevent crime. On numerous occasions, 
this has been the case. James Q. Wilson’s and George Kelling’s “broken windows” theory, 
mentioned in conjunction with control theory on page 52, reshaped policing strategies 
in the 1990s, as we will discuss further in Chapter 5. Justice reinvestment, a relatively new 
strategy, draws on social disorganization theory (page 49) in urging the federal and state 
governments to redirect tax dollars spent on prisons to the local communities hardest 
hit by crime and cycles of incarceration.87
Perhaps the most far-reaching criminological contribution to crime fighting in the 
past half century was Delinquency in a Birth Cohort, published in 1972 by the pioneering 
trio of Marvin Wolfgang, Robert Figlio, and Thorsten Sellin. This research established 
the idea of the chronic offender, or career criminal, by showing that a small group of 
juvenile offenders—6 percent—was responsible for about 70 percent of the violent crime 
attributed to a group of nearly 10,000 young males.88 
Further research has supported the idea of a “chronic 6 percent,”89 requiring law 
enforcement agencies and district attorney’s offices to devise strategies for repeat 
offenders. Dozens of police departments, for example, operate career criminal units 
to deal with chronic criminals. Legislators have also reacted to this research: habitual 
offender laws that provide harsher sentences for repeat offenders are quite popular. We 
will discuss these statutes, including the controversial “three-strikes-and-you’re-out” 
laws, in Chapter 9.
SELFaSSESSMEnT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 60.
____________ ____________ theory holds that criminals make a deliberate decision 
to commit a crime after weighing the possible rewards and punishments of the act. 
____________ ____________ theory focuses on unfavorable neighborhood conditions, 
while ____________ ____________ theories of criminal behavior address the influence 
of friends and family. Supporters of ____________ course theories of crime believe that 
stealing, bullying, and other conduct problems that occur during ____________ can, in 
some instances, predict adult offending. ____________ is the study of the relationship 
between victims and offenders in the criminal justice system. 
THE Link bETWEEn  
dRugs And CRimE
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the difference between correlations and causes. As you 
may recall, criminologists are generally reluctant to declare that any one factor causes a 
certain result. Richard B. Felson of Penn State University and Keri B. Burchfield of Northern 
Illinois University, however, believe that alcohol consumption has a causal effect on victimiza-
tion under certain circumstances.90 Felson and Burchfield found that “frequent and heavy” 
drinkers are at a great risk of assault when they are drinking, but do not show abnormal rates 
of victimization when sober. They hypothesize that consuming alcohol leads to aggressive and 
offensive behavior, particularly in men, which in turn triggers violent reactions from others.
Chronic Offender A 
delinquent or criminal who 
commits multiple offenses and 
is considered part of a small 
group of wrongdoers who are 
responsible for a majority of the 
antisocial activity in any given 
community.
Explain the 
theory of 
the chronic 
offender and 
its importance 
for the criminal 
justice system.
Learning  
objective7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Discuss the 
connection 
between 
learning theory 
and the start of 
an individual’s 
drug use.
Learning  
objective 8
Drug Abuse The use of 
drugs that results in physical 
or psychological problems for 
the user, as well as disruption 
of personal relationships and 
employment.
In Chapter 1, we learned that nearly 23 million Americans regu-
larly use illegal drugs such as marijuana and cocaine, with another 
200 million using legal drugs such as alcohol and nicotine. Here, we 
will discuss two questions concerning these habits. First, why do 
people use drugs? Second, what are the consequences for the 
criminal justice system?
THE CRiminoLogy of dRug usE
At first glance, the reason people use drugs, including 
legal drugs such as alcohol, is obvious: such drugs 
give the user pleasure and provide a temporary escape 
for those who may feel tension or anxiety. Ultimately, 
though, such explanations are unsatisfactory because 
they fail to explain why some people use drugs while 
others do not. 
Several of the theories we discussed earlier in 
the chapter have been used by experts to explain 
drug use. Social disorganization theory (page 49) holds 
that rapid social change can cause people to become 
disaffiliated from mainstream society, causing them to 
turn to drugs. Learning theory (page 51) sees drug use as taught 
behavior. Control theory (pages 51–52) suggests that a lack of social control, as provided by 
entities such as the family or school, can lead to antisocial behavior.
Focusing on the question of why first-time drug users become habitual users, 
sociologist Howard Becker sees three factors in the “learning process.” He believes first-
time users:
1. Learn the techniques of drug use.
2. Learn to perceive the pleasurable effects of drug use.
3. Learn to enjoy the social experience of drug use.91
Becker’s assumptions are evident in the widespread belief that positive images of drug 
use in popular culture “teach” adolescents that such behavior is not only acceptable but 
also desirable. The entertainment industry, in particular, has been criticized for glamor-
izing various forms of drug use.
dRug AddiCTion And dEPEndEnCy 
Another theory rests on the assumption that some people possess overly sensitive drug recep-
tors in their brains and are therefore biologically disposed toward drug use.92 Though there 
is little conclusive evidence that biological factors can explain initial drug experimentation, 
scientific research has provided a great deal of insight into patterns of long-term drug use. 
dRug usE And dRug AbusE In particular, science has aided in understanding the dif-
ference between drug use and drug abuse. Drug abuse can be defined as the use of any 
drug—licit or illicit—that causes either psychological or bodily harm to the abuser or to 
third parties. Just as most people who drink beer or wine avoid abusing alcohol, most users 
of illegal substances are not abusers. For most drugs except nicotine, between 7 and 20 
percent of all users suffer from compulsive abuse.93
Despite their relatively small numbers, drug abusers have a disparate impact on the 
drug market. The 20 percent of Americans, for example, who drink the most frequently 
Do you feel that the behavior 
of celebrities such as socialite 
Paris Hilton, who was arrested 
for cocaine possession in Las 
Vegas, “teaches” adolescents 
that such behavior is 
acceptable or even desirable? 
Explain your answer.
AP Photo/Mark Damon
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

consume more than 80 percent of all alcoholic beverages sold in the United States. The 
data are similar for illicit substance abusers, leading to the conclusion that, to a large 
extent, abusers and addicts sustain the market for illegal drugs. 
AddiCTion bAsiCs The most extreme abusers are addicted to, or physically dependent 
on, a drug. To understand the basics of addiction and physical dependence, you must 
understand the role of dopamine in the brain. Dopamine, mentioned earlier in the chap-
ter on page 48, is the neurotransmitter responsible for delivering pleasure signals to 
brain nerve endings in response to behavior—such as eating good food or engaging in 
sex—that makes us feel good. The bloodstream delivers drugs to the area of the brain that 
produces dopamine, thereby triggering the production of a large amount of the substance 
in the brain. Over time, the continued use of drugs physically changes the nerve endings, 
called receptors. To continue operating in the presence of large amounts of dopamine, the 
receptors become less sensitive, meaning that greater amounts of any particular drug are 
required to create the amount of dopamine needed for the same levels of pleasure. When 
the supply of the drug is cut off, the brain strongly feels the lack of dopamine stimulation, 
and the abuser will suffer symptoms of withdrawal until the receptors readjust.94
THE dRug–CRimE RELATionsHiP 
Of course, because many drugs are illegal, anybody who sells, uses, or in any way pro-
motes the use of these drugs is, under most circumstances, breaking the law. The drug-
crime relationship goes beyond the language of criminal drug statutes, however. About 
37 percent of state prisoners and 33 percent of jail inmates incarcerated for a violent 
crime were under the influence of alcohol at the time of their arrest.95 Similarly, accord-
ing to one recent study, between 52 and 83 percent of all arrestees in ten major American 
cities tested positive for illicit drugs when apprehended.96 As we will see throughout this 
textbook, the prosecution of illegal drug users and suppliers has been one of the primary 
factors in the enormous growth of the American correctional industry. (To learn about a 
country where the violent crime caused by the drug trade has reached catastrophic levels, 
see the feature Comparative Criminal Justice—A Real War on Drugs on the following page.)
“LEgAL” dRug AbusE New forms of drug-related crime are appearing as well. According 
to federal data, the number of deaths related to painkillers such as OxyContin, Vicodin, 
and methadone increased from 4,000 in 1999 to almost 15,000 in 2008.97 The increased 
demand for these prescription drugs has, in the words of one Maine law enforcement 
official, led to “home invasions, robberies, assaults, homicides, thefts—all kinds of 
crime.”98 The improper use of controlled prescription drugs has increased to the point 
where these drugs are second only to marijuana in government rankings of the most-
abused drugs in the United States.99
Furthermore, legal, over-the-counter substances are the main ingredient in the 
manufacture of methamphetamine (meth), a highly addictive stimulant to the central 
nervous system. Meth is relatively easy to make in home laboratories using the ingredi-
ents of common cold medicines and farm chemicals. Consequently, the drug provides a 
“cheap high” and has become the scourge of many poor rural areas, particularly in the 
western half of the United States.
synTHETiC dRugs Numerous drug manufacturers—at least one thousand in the United 
States alone—have found an innovative way to circumvent drug laws. They produce 
synthetic drugs that simulate the effects of illicit substances but are created using legal 
C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   57
Prescription Drugs  
Medical drugs that require 
a physician’s permission for 
purchase.
Methamphetamine (meth)  
An easily produced, relatively 
inexpensive stimulant that 
creates a strong feeling of 
euphoria in the user and is 
highly addictive.
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to research the concept 
of harm reduction. Then ask the 
students what role, if any, harm 
reduction should play in our 
national drug control policies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
chemical compounds. Synthetic cannabinoids, for example, mimic the active ingredient 
in marijuana, and methadrone crystals, packaged as “bath salts,” can be snorted to pro-
duce the same “rush” as cocaine or meth. 
Even though more than thirty states have passed legislation banning these sub-
stances, it is fairly easy for manufacturers to create new variations. Spurred by Internet 
orders, the use of synthetic drugs has spread rapidly. By one estimate, synthetic can-
nibinoid sales are now approaching $5 billion annually.100 In 2010, the nation’s poison 
control centers handled 303 calls linked to “bath salt” use. In the first half of 2011, that 
number spiked to 3,470.101
SELFaSSESSMEnT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 60.
Drug ____________ is defined as the use of any drug that causes harm to the user or a 
third party. People who are ____________, meaning that they desire the drug long after 
use has stopped, need greater amounts of the drug to stimulate a neurotransmitter in 
the brain called ____________. Harms associated with the abuse of ____________ drugs, 
which require a physician’s permission, and ____________ drugs, which mimic the effects 
of substances such as marijuana and cocaine, have increased in recent years.
A soldier stands guard over fifty tons of burning marijuana 
seized from drug dealers by the Mexican army. 
Keith Dannemiller/Corbis
a REaL WaR  
on DRugS
For most of the past decade, Mexico and 
its citizens have suffered through a bloody 
and seemingly endless “war on drugs.” Each year, illegal drugs 
worth from $25 to $40 billion are smuggled over the border 
into the United States, and various cartels are willing to fight—
and kill—for their cut. From 2007 to 2012, more than 47,500 
Mexicans were murdered in drug-related slayings. “I really 
characterize this as a civil war,” says Howard Campbell of the 
University of Texas at El Paso. “We’re seeing all the casualties 
of a war, people murdered, people wounded, people fleeing 
their homes, disintegration and chaos.”
Mexico’s leaders have not stood idly by in the face of 
this carnage. Mistrustful of corrupt local police, the federal 
government has sent tens of thousands of federal troops 
to the areas where the drug trade is most active, primarily 
along the U.S.–Mexican border. Although numerous drug 
kingpins have been captured, these efforts have apparently 
only exacerbated the problem. 
FoR CRitiCAl AnAlysis
According to Tony Garza, who spent six years (2002–2008) as 
the U.S. ambassador to Mexico, the country would not “be 
experiencing this level of violence were the United States not 
the largest consumer of illicit drugs and the main supplier of 
weapons to the cartels.” The U.S. government has provided 
Mexico with $1.4 billion in aid to use in its war on drugs, and 
numerous American federal, state, and local law enforcement 
agencies are working with their Mexican counterparts to stem 
the violence. Is the United States morally obligated to provide 
this financial and tactical aid? What other steps could our 
government take to weaken the link between illegal drugs and 
crime in Mexico?
CoMpaRaTIvE CRiminAL jusTiCE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   59
ChapTER SuMMaRY
Identify the six main categories of crime. 
The six main categories of crime are (a) vio-
lent crimes—murder, rape, assault, battery, 
and robbery; (b) property crimes—pocket picking, shop-
lifting, larceny/theft, burglary, and arson; (c) public order 
crimes—public drunkenness, prostitution, gambling, and 
illicit drug use; (d) white-collar crime—fraud and embezzle-
ment; (e) organized crime—crime undertaken by a number of 
persons who operate their activities much as legal businesses 
do; and (f) high-tech crimes—sabotage, fraud, embezzle-
ment, and theft of proprietary data from computer systems, 
as well as cyber crimes, such as selling child pornography 
over the Internet.
Distinguish between Part I and Part 
II offenses as defined by the Uniform 
Crime Report (UCR). Part I offenses 
include the most violent crimes and several property 
crimes. Part II offenses include all other crimes recorded in 
the UCR. They generally cover less serious crimes and con-
stitute the majority of crimes committed.
Distinguish between the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS) and self-
reported surveys. The NCVS involves an 
annual survey of more than 40,000 households conducted 
by the Bureau of the Census along with the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. The survey queries citizens on crimes that have 
been committed against them. As such, the NCVS includes 
crimes not necessarily reported to police. Self-reported sur-
veys, in contrast, ask individuals about criminal activity to 
which they may have been a party.
Discuss the prevailing explanation for 
the rising number of women incarcer-
ated in the United States. Experts believe 
that many women are arrested and given harsh punishment 
for activity that would not have put them behind bars several 
decades ago. For the most part, this activity is nonviolent: 
the majority of female arrestees are involved in drug- and 
alcohol-related offenses and property crimes.
Discuss the difference between a hypoth-
esis and a theory in the context of crimi-
nology. A hypothesis is a proposition, usually 
presented in an “If . . . , then . . .” format, that can be tested by 
researchers. If enough different authorities are able to test 
and verify a hypothesis, it will usually be accepted as a theory.  
Because theories can offer explanations for behavior, criminolo-
gists often rely on them when trying to determine the causes of 
criminal behavior. 
List and briefly explain two impor-
tant branches of social process theory.  
(a) Learning theory, which contends that peo-
ple learn to be criminals from their family and peers. (b) Control 
theory, which holds that most of us are dissuaded from a life of 
crime because we place importance on the opinions of family 
and peers. 
Explain the theory of the chronic 
offender and its importance for the crim-
inal justice system. A chronic offender is a 
juvenile or adult who commits multiple offenses. According 
to research conducted by Marvin Wolfgang and others in 
the 1970s, chronic offenders are responsible for a dispro-
portionately large percentage of all crime. In the decades 
since, law enforcement agencies and public prosecutors 
have developed strategies to identify and convict chronic 
offenders with the goal of lessening overall crime rates. In 
addition, legislators have passed laws that provide longer 
sentences for chronic offenders in an attempt to keep them 
off the streets.
Discuss the connection between learn-
ing theory and the start of an individual’s 
drug use. One criminologist believes that 
first-time illegal drug users go through a “learning process” 
in taking up the habit. That is, more experienced users teach 
them the techniques of drug use, the pleasurable aspects of 
drug use, and the social experience of drug use.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QuESTIonS FoR CRITICaL anaLYSIS
1. Do you agree that public order crimes such as prostitu-
tion and illegal gambling are “victimless” crimes? Why or 
why not?
2. Assume that you are a criminologist who wants to deter-
mine the extent to which high school students engage 
in risky behaviors such as abusing alcohol and illegal 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
CouRSEMaTE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
SELF aSSESSMEnT anSWER KEY
Page 34: i. violent; ii. property; iii. white-collar
Page 40: i. Uniform Crime Report; ii. Victim;  
iii. Self-reported; iv. dark figure; v. larger
Page 45: i. imprisoned/incarcerated; ii. under;  
iii. African American; iv. immigration
Page 55: i. Rational choice; ii. Social disorganization;  
iii. social process; iv. life; v. childhood; vii. Victimology
Page 58: i. abuse; ii. addicted; iii. dopamine;  
iv. prescription; v. synthetic 
drugs, carrying weapons, and contemplating suicide. 
How would you go about gathering these data?
3. What are some of the problems with the assumption that 
there is a link between race and criminal behavior? What 
are some of the problems with the assumption that there 
is a link between poverty and criminal behavior?
4. Research shows that when levels of single-family mort-
gage foreclosures rise in a neighborhood, so do levels of 
violent crime. Explain the correlation between these two 
sets of statistics. Why is it incorrect to say that single-
family mortgage foreclosures cause violent crimes to 
occur?
5. Why would someone who subscribes to rational choice 
theory (see pages 46–47) believe that increasing the 
harshness of a penalty for a particular crime would nec-
essarily lead to fewer such crimes being committed?
KEY TERMS
anomie  49
assault  33
battery  33
biology  47
burglary  33
causation  45
chronic offender  55
control theory  52
correlation  45
criminologist  45
criminology  45
dark figure of crime  38
drug abuse  56
hormone  47
hypothesis  46
larceny  33
learning theory  51
life course criminology  53
methamphetamine (meth)  57
murder  33
neurotransmitter  47
organized crime  34
Part I offenses  36
Part II offenses  37
prescription drugs   57
psychology  47
public order crime  33
rational choice theory  46
robbery  33
self-reported survey  39
sexual assault  33
social conflict theories  50
social disorganization theory  49
social process theories  51
sociology  49
strain theory  49
testosterone  47
theory  46
Uniform Crime Report (UCR)  36
victimology  53
victim surveys  37
white-collar crime  34
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2 :  M E A s u R i n g  A n d  E x P l A i n i n g  C R i M E   61
noTES
  1. Quoted 
in 
“Justice 
Department 
Redefines Rape,” National Public Radio, 
January 6, 2012, transcript at www.npr.
org/2012/01/06/144801667/justice-
department-redefines-rape.
  2. Charlie Savage, “U.S. to Expand Its 
Definition of Rape in Statistics,” New York 
Times (January 7, 2012), A10.
  3. “Jerry Sandusky Case: Summary of the 
Investigation and the Charges against the 
Former Penn State University Defensive 
Coordinator,” York Daily Record/Sunday 
News (January 22, 2012), at www.ydr.com/
ci_19280635.
  4. 2010 Report to the Nations: Occupational 
Fraud and Abuse (Austin, TX: Association 
of Certified Fraud Examiners, 2010), 8.
  5. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in 
the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-
the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011.
  6. Savage.
  7. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-
the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/
tables/table-1.
  8. Jeffery Reiman, The Rich Get Richer and the 
Poor Get Prison, 4th ed. (Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 1995), 59–60.
  9. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.fbi.
gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/
expanded-homicide-data-table-10.
 10. Ibid., at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-
u.s.-2011/tables/table-1.
 11. Ibid., at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-
u.s.-2011/tables/table-29. 
 12. Marcus Felson, Crime in Everyday Life 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press, 
1994), 3.
 13. Victor E. Kappeler, Mark Blumberg, and 
Gary W. Potter, The Mythology of Crime and 
Criminal Justice, 2d ed. (Prospect Heights, 
IL: Waveland Press, 1993), 31. 
 14. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in 
the United States, 2010 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2011), at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-
the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010/
violent-crime/rapemain; and Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization, 
2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, September 11, 2011), Table 1, page 2.
 15. Peter B. Wood, Walter R. Grove, James A. 
Wilson, and John K. Cochran, “Nonsocial 
Reinforcement and Criminal Conduct: An 
Extension of Learning Theory,” Criminology 
35 (May 1997), 335–366.
 16. Franklin E. Zimring, The Great American 
Crime Decline (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2007), 45–72.
 17. James Q. Wilson, “Concluding Essay 
in Crime,” in James Q. Wilson and Joan 
Petersilia, eds., Crime (San Francisco: 
Institute for Contemporary Studies Press, 
1995), 507.
 18. Zimring, 6.
 19. Ibid., 197–198.
 20. Quoted in Pete Yost, “Violent Crime Falls 
for Third Straight Year,” San Jose Mercury 
News (September 15, 2010), 2B.
 21. Alexia Cooper and Erica L. Smith, Homicide 
Trends in the United States, 1980–2008 
(Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, November 2011), 16.
 22. James Alan Fox and Marc L. Swatt, The 
Recent Surge in Homicides Involving 
Young Black Males and Guns: Time to 
Reinvest in Prevention and Crime Control 
(December 2008), 2, available at www.
j fox.n eu.edu/Docum ents/Fox% 
20Swatt%20Homicide%20Report%20
Dec%2029%202008.pdf.
 23. Quoted in Erik Eckholm, “Murders by Black 
Teenagers Rise This Decade, Bucking a 
Trend,” New York Times (December 29, 2008), 
A12.
 24. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/
table-43.
 25. Targeting Blacks: Drug Law Enforcement 
and Race in the United States (New York: 
Human Rights Watch, May 2008), 3.
 26. Charles Puzzanchera, Benjamin Adams, 
and Melissa Sickmund, Juvenile Court 
Statistics, 2008 (Washington, D.C.: National 
Center for Juvenile Justice, July 2011), 20.
 27. Robert J. Sampson, Jeffrey Morenoff, and 
Stephen W. Raudenbush, “Social Anatomy 
of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in 
Violence,” American Journal of Public Health 
95 (2005), 224–232.
 28. John R. Hipp, “Spreading the Wealth: The 
Effect of the Distribution of Income and 
Race/Ethnicity across Households and 
Neighborhoods on City Crime Trajectories,” 
Criminology (August 2011), 633–634.
 29. Patricia 
Y. 
Warren, 
“Inequality 
by 
Design: The Connection between Race, 
Crime, Victimization, and Social Policy,” 
Criminology & Public Policy (November 
2010), 715.
 30. Eric A. Stewart, Ronald L. Simons, and 
Rand D. Donger, “Assessing Neighborhood 
and Social Psychological Influence on 
Childhood Violence in an African American 
Sample,” Criminology (November 2002), 
801–829.
 31. William Alex Pridemore, “A Methodological 
Addition to the Cross-National Empirical 
Literature on Social Structure and 
Homicide: A First Test of the Poverty-
Homicide Thesis,” Criminology (February 
2008), 133.
 32. Caroline Wolf Harlow, Education and 
Correctional Populations (Washington, 
D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics, January 
2003), 1.
 33. Charles Tittle and Robert Meier, “Specifying 
the 
SES/Delinquency 
Relationship,” 
Criminology 28 (1990), 270–301.
 34. Darrell Steffensmeier, et al., “Reassessing 
Trends in Black Violent Crime, 1980–2008: 
Sorting Out the ‘Hispanic Effect’ in Uniform 
Crime Reports Arrests, National Crime 
Victimization Survey Offender Estimates, 
and U.S. Prisoner Counts,” Criminology 
(February 2011), 201.
 35. Marguerite Moeller, America’s Tomorrow: A 
Profile of Latino Youth (New York: National 
Council of La Raza), 2010.
 36. Preliminary 
Fiscal 
Year 
2011 
Data 
(Washington, 
D.C.: 
U.S. 
Sentencing 
Commission, September 2011), Table 23, 
page 44.
 37. Sampson, Morenoff, and Raudenbush, 231.
 38. Cooper and Smith, Table 4, page 9.
 39. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates 
at 
Midyear 
2010—Statistical 
Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Justice, April 2011), Table 6, page 7; 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 
2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Justice, December 2011), Appendix table 
12, page 26; and Crime in the United States, 
2011, at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-
u.s.-2011/persons-arrested/persons-
arrested.
 40. Howard N. Snyder, Arrests in the United 
States, 1980–2009 (Washington, D.C.: 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, September 
2011), 1.
 41. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 
2010, Table 1, page 2.
 42. Jennifer Schwartz and Bryan D. Rookey, 
“The Narrowing Gender Gap in Arrests: 
Assessing Competing Explanations Using 
Self-Report, Traffic Fatality, and Official 
Data on Drunk Driving, 1980–2004,” 
Criminology (August 2008), 637–638.
 43. Quoted in Barry Yeoman, “Violent 
Tendencies: Crime by Women Has 
Skyrocketed in Recent Years,” Chicago 
Tribune (March 15, 2000), 3.
 44. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-
the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/
tables/table-42.
 45. Schwarz and Rookey, 637–671.
 46. Meda Chesney-Lind, “Patriarchy, Prisons, 
and Jails: A Critical Look at Trends in 
Women’s Incarceration,” Prison Journal 
(Spring/Summer 1991), 57.
 47. Jessica Wolpaw Reyes, Environmental Policy 
as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood 
Lead Exposure on Crime (Cambridge, MA: 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
National Bureau of Economic Research, 
May 2007), at www.nber.org/papers/
w13097.pdf.
 48. James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Hernstein, 
Crime and Human Nature: The Definitive 
Study of the Causes of Crime (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1985), 44.
 49. Jack Katz, Seductions of Crime: Moral and 
Sensual Attractions of Doing Evil (New York: 
Basic Books, 1988).
 50. National Coalition for the Homeless, 
“Hate Crimes and Violence against People 
Experiencing Homelessness,” at www.
nationalhomeless.org/factsheets/hate-
crimes.html.
 51. Jeffrey M. Burns and Russell H. Swerdlow, 
“Right Orbifrontal Tumor with Pedophilia 
Symptom and Constructional Apraxia Sign,” 
Archives of Neurology (March 2003), 437.
 52. David C. Rowe, Biology and Crime (Los 
Angeles: Roxbury, 2002), 2.
 53. L. E. Kreuz and R. M. Rose, “Assessment 
of Aggressive Behavior and Plasma 
Testosterone in Young Criminal Population,” 
Psychosomatic Medicine 34 (1972), 321–332.
 54. H. Persky, K. Smith, and G. Basu, “Relation of 
Psychological Measures of Aggression and 
Hostility to Testosterone Production in Men,” 
Psychosomatic Medicine 33 (1971), 265, 276.
 55. Benjamin J. Sadock, Harold I. Kaplan, and 
Virginia A. Sadock, Kaplan & Sadock’s 
Synopsis of Psychiatry (Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2007), 865.
 56. Robert J. Meadows and Julie Kuehnel, Evil 
Minds: Understanding and Responding to 
Violent Predators (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005), 156–157.
 57. Ibid., 157, 169.
 58. Quoted in Eileen Sullivan, “Loners Like 
Tucson Gunman ‘Fly below the Radar,’” 
Associated Press (January 17, 2011).
 59. Herman Bianchi, Justice as Sanctuary: Toward 
a New System of Crime Control (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1994), 72.
 60. Philip Zimbardo, “Pathology of Imprison-
ment,” Society (April 1972), 4–8.
 61. David Canter and Laurence Alison, “The 
Social Psychology of Crime: Groups, Teams, 
and Networks,” in The Social Psychology 
of Crime: Groups, Teams, and Networks, 
ed. David Canter and Laurence Alison 
(Hanover, NH: Dartmouth, 2000), 3–4.
 62. Douglas McIntyre, Michael Sauter, and 
Charles Stockdale, “The Most Dangerous 
Cities in America,” 24/7 Wall ST (May 25, 
2011), at finance.yahoo.com/news/pf_
article_112804.html.
 63. Clifford R. Shaw, Henry D. McKay, and 
Leonard S. Cottrell, Delinquency Areas 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1929).
 64. Clifford R. Shaw and Henry D. McKay, Report 
on the Causes of Crime, vol. 2: Social Factors 
in Juvenile Delinquency (Washington, D.C.: 
National Commission on Law Observance 
and Enforcement, 1931).
 65. Emile Durkheim, The Rules of Sociological 
Method, trans. Sarah A. Solovay and John 
H. Mueller (New York: Free Press, 1964).
 66. Robert K. Merton, Social Theory and Social 
Structure (New York: Free Press, 1957). See the 
chapter on “Social Structure and Anomie.”
 67. Robert Meier, “The New Criminology: 
Continuity in Criminology Theory,” Journal 
of Criminal Law and Criminology 67 (1977), 
461–469.
 68. Philip G. Zimbardo, “The Human Choice: 
Individuation, Reason, and Order versus 
Deindividuation, Impulse, and Chaos,” in 
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, ed. 
William J. Arnold and David Levie (Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1969), 287–293.
 69. Edwin H. Sutherland, Criminology, 4th ed. 
(Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1947).
 70. L. Rowell Huesmann, Jessica Moise-Titus, 
Cheryl-Lynn Podolski, and Leonard D. Eron, 
“Longitudinal Relations between Children’s 
Exposure to TV Violence and Their 
Aggressive and Violent Behavior in Young 
Adulthood: 1977–1992,” Developmental 
Psychology (March 2003), 201.
 71. Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. 
Section 303 (1999). 
 72. Travis Hirschi, Causes of Delinquency 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1969).
 73. James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling, 
“Broken Windows,” Atlantic Monthly 
(March 1982), 29.
 74. Francis T. Cullen and Robert Agnew, 
Criminological Theory, Past to Present: 
Essential Readings, 2d ed. (Los Angeles: 
Roxbury Publishing Co., 2003), 443.
 75. Michael R. Gottfredson and Travis Hirschi, 
A General Theory of Crime (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1990).
 76. Ibid., 90.
 77. Ibid.
 78. Robert J. Sampson and John H. Laub, Crime 
in the Making: Pathways and Turning Points 
through Life (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1993), 11.
 79. John F. Frana and Ryan D. Schroeder, 
“Alternatives to Incarceration,” Justice 
Policy Journal (Fall 2008), available at www.
cjcj.org/files/alternatives_to.pdf.
 80. Peggy C. Giordano, Monica A. Longmore, 
Ryan D. Schroeder, and Patrick M. Seffrin, 
“A Life-Course Perspective on Spirituality 
and Desistance from Crime,” Criminology 
(February 2008), 99–132.
 81. Andrew Karmen, Crime Victims: An 
Introduction to Victimology (Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth, 2003).
 82. Linda A. Teplin et al., “Crime Victimization 
in Adults with Severe Mental Illness: 
Comparison with the National Crime 
Victimization Survey,” Archives of General 
Psychiatry (August 2005), 911–921.
 83. Larry Cohen and Marcus Felson, “Social 
Change and Crime Rate Trends: A Routine 
Activity Approach,” American Sociological 
Review (1979), 588–608.
 84. Angela Rozas, “Crime Up for City in 2008,” 
Chicago Tribune (January 17, 2009), 12.
 85. Peter Hermann, “Statistics Tell a Violent 
Story That We’ve Heard Before,” Baltimore 
Sun (January 4, 2009), 6A.
 86. Quoted in Kevin Johnson, “Criminals 
Target Each Other, Trend Shows,” USA 
Today (August 31, 2007), 1A.
 87. Todd R. Clear, “A Private Sector, Incentives-
Based Model for Justice Reinvestment,” 
Criminology & Public Policy (August 2011), 
585–587.
 88. Marvin Wolfgang, Robert Figlio, and 
Thorsten Sellin, Delinquency in a Birth Cohort 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972).
 89. Lawrence W. Sherman, “Attacking Crime: 
Police and Crime Control,” in Modern 
Policing, ed. Michael Tonry and Norval 
Morris (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992), 159.
 90. Richard B. Felson and Keri B. Burchfield, 
“Alcohol and the Risk of Physical and 
Sexual Assault Victimization,” Criminology 
(November 1, 2004), 837.
 91. Howard S. Becker, Outsiders: Studies in the 
Sociology of Deviance (New York: Free Press, 
1963).
 92. David G. Myers, Psychology, 7th ed. (New 
York: Worth, 2004), 75–76.
 93. Peter B. Kraska, “The Unmentionable 
Alternative: The Need for and Argument 
against the Decriminalization of Drug Laws,” 
in Drugs, Crime, and the Criminal Justice 
System, ed. Ralph Weisheit (Cincinnati, OH: 
Anderson Publishing, 1990).
 94. Anthony A. Grace, “The Tonic/Phasal 
Model of Dopamine System Regulation,” 
Drugs and Alcohol 37 (1995), 111.
 95. Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Alcohol and 
Crime: Data from 2002 to 2008,” at bjs.ojp.
usdoj.gov/content/acf/29_prisoners_
and_alcoholuse.cfm and bjs.ojp.usdoj.
gov/content/acf/30_jails_and_alcohol-
use.cfm.
 96. ADAM II: 2010 Annual Report (Washington, 
D.C.: Office of National Drug Policy, May 
2011), xii.
 97. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
“Prescription Painkiller Overdoses in the 
US,” November 2011, at www.cdc.gov/
vitalsigns/PainkillerOverdoses/index.
html#LatestFindings.
 98. Quoted in Abby Goodnough, “A Wave of 
Addiction and Crime, with the Medicine 
Cabinet to Blame,” New York Times 
(September 24, 2010), A14.
 99. National Drug Intelligence Center, National 
Drug Threat Assessment, 2011 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, August 
2011), 1.
100. Ben Paynter, “The Money Is Huge: The 
Unlicensed, Ingenious, and Increasingly 
Scary World of Synthetic Drugs,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek (June 20–26, 2011).
101. Abby Goodnough and Katie Zezima, “An 
Alarming New Stimulant, Legal in Many 
States,” New York Times (July 17, 2011), A1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   65
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1   List the four written sources of American criminal law.
2  Explain the two basic functions of criminal law.
3  Discuss the primary goals of civil law and criminal law, and 
explain how these goals are realized.
4  Explain the differences between crimes mala in se and mala 
prohibita.
5  Delineate the elements required to establish mens rea  
(a guilty mental state).
6  List and briefly define the most important excuse defenses 
for crimes.
7  Describe the four most important justification criminal 
defenses.
8  Explain the importance of the due process clause in the 
criminal justice system.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 92 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Inside 
Criminal 
Law
65
David H. Lewis/iStockphoto
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Written Sources of American 
Criminal Law
• The Purposes of Criminal Law
• Classification of Crimes
• The Elements of a Crime
• Defenses under Criminal Law
• Protecting Civil Liberties
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
W
as James Arthur Ray treated fairly? Nobody involved with the situation 
believes that he wanted any of the Spiritual Warriors to die. The sweat lodge, 
built in 2008, had been used numerous times previously without incident. 
“This was a terrible accident,” said Luis Ri, Ray’s attorney, “but it was an accident, not a 
criminal act.”1 In this chapter, we will learn that a defendant usually must have a guilty 
state of mind, or mens rea, to have committed a crime. Ray may have acted irresponsibly, 
but he certainly had no intent to injure or kill.
At the same time, society needs to protect its citizens from harm, even if that harm 
was not intentionally inflicted. According to the criminal code of Arizona, a person is 
guilty of a form of illegal homicide if he or she “negligently” causes the death of another 
person.2 Later in the chapter, we define negligence as ignoring a foreseeable risk. Given 
the circumstances of the sweat lodge ceremony, Arizona officials felt that Ray should 
have known that he was placing others in grave danger, and therefore he had committed 
a criminal act. As this example suggests, criminal law must be flexible enough to encom-
pass behavior that is not marked by criminal intent yet still poses a threat to society and 
therefore may warrant punishment. In this chapter, we will examine how these threats 
to society are identified and focus on the guidelines that the American criminal justice 
system uses to determine and punish criminal guilt.
DEADLy Heat
As a nationally known self-help guru, financial 
wizard, and motivational speaker, James Arthur Ray 
prides himself on being right. Ray was tragically 
wrong, however, on an autumn day in 2009 when 
he told more than fifty participants in a sweat lodge 
ceremony he was leading, “You are not going to 
die. You might think you are, but you’re not going to 
die.” About halfway through the two-hour ceremony, 
the final event of Ray’s five-day “Spiritual Warrior” 
retreat near Sedona, Arizona, people began to vomit 
and pass out in the extreme heat. When it was over, 
despite Ray’s reassuring words, Kirby Brown, James 
Shore, and Liz Neuman never regained consciousness 
and died in a local hospital. Twenty other participants 
required medical treatment, suffering from burns, 
dehydration, kidney failure, and respiratory arrest.
“I did everything I could to help,” Ray told an 
interviewer following the incident. “I held people’s 
hands, I stroked their hair, I talked to them, I held the 
IV for paramedics.” According to some witnesses, 
Ray was not quite so helpful during the ceremony. 
Beverly Bunn, who was inside the sweat lodge, 
said that people were gasping for air, collapsing, 
and crying out for water while Ray, positioned near 
the entrance, “did nothing. He just stood there.” 
Megan Frederickson, an employee at the Angel 
Valley Retreat (the site of the sweat lodge), admitted 
that before the ceremony, Ray told her not to worry 
if participants vomited or fainted, because such 
responses were to be expected.
After a four-month investigation, law enforcement 
officials decided that the sweat lodge was, in fact, a 
crime scene. On February 3, 2010, Yavapai County 
sheriff’s deputies arrested Ray and charged him with 
three counts of manslaughter for the deaths of Brown, 
Shore, and Neuman. In June 2011, a Campe Verde jury 
found Ray guilty of three counts 
of the lesser crime of negligent 
homicide. Several months 
later, Judge Warren Darrow 
sentenced him to two years 
in prison.
James Arthur Ray—shown 
here in a Campe Verde, 
Arizona, courtroom—was 
convicted of three charges 
of negligent homicide for 
his actions during a sweat 
lodge ceremony over 
which he presided. 
AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin, Pool
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   67
WRiTTEn souRCEs of  
AmERiCAn CRiminAL LAW
Originally, American criminal law was uncodified. That is, it relied primarily on judges 
following previous judicial decisions, and the body of the law was not written down in 
any single place. Uncodified law, however, presents a number of drawbacks. For one, if 
the law is not recorded in a manner or a place in which the citizenry has access to it, then 
it is difficult, if not impossible, for people to know exactly which acts are legal and which 
acts are illegal. Furthermore, citizens have no way of determining or understanding the 
procedures that must be followed to establish innocence or guilt. Consequently, U.S. his-
tory has seen the development of several written sources of American criminal law, also 
known as “substantive” criminal law. These sources include the following:
1.  The U.S. Constitution and the constitutions of the various states.
2.  Statutes, or laws, passed by Congress and by state legislatures, plus local  ordinances. 
3. Regulations, created by regulatory agencies such as the federal Food and Drug 
Administration.
4. Case law (court decisions).
We describe each of these important written sources of law in the following pages. 
ConsTiTuTionAL LAW
The federal government and the states have separate written constitutions that set forth 
the general organization and powers of, and the limits on, their respective governments. 
Constitutional law is the law as expressed in these constitutions.
The U.S. Constitution is the supreme law of the land. As such, it is the basis of all 
law in the United States. Any law that violates the Constitution, as ultimately determined 
by the United States Supreme Court, will be declared unconstitutional and will not be 
enforced. The Tenth Amendment, which defines the powers and limitations of the federal 
government, reserves to the states all powers not granted to the federal government. 
Under our system of federalism (see Chapter 1), each state also has its own constitution. 
Unless they conflict with the U.S. Constitution or a federal law, state constitutions are 
supreme within their respective borders. (You will learn more about how constitutional 
law applies to our criminal justice system in later chapters.)
sTATuToRy LAW
Statutes enacted by legislative bodies at any level of government make 
up another source of law, which is generally referred to as statutory law. 
Federal statutes are laws that are enacted by the U.S. Congress. State statutes 
are laws enacted by state legislatures, and statutory law also includes the 
ordinances passed by cities and counties. A federal statute, of course, applies 
to all states. A state statute, in contrast, applies only within that state’s bor-
ders. City or county ordinances (statutes) apply only to those jurisdictions where they are 
enacted. 
LEgAL suPREmACy It is important to keep in mind that there are essentially fifty-two 
different criminal codes in this country—one for each state, the District of Columbia, 
and the federal government. Originally, the federal criminal code was quite small. The 
U.S. Constitution mentions only three federal crimes: treason, piracy, and counterfeiting. 
Constitutional Law Law 
based on the U.S. Constitution 
and the constitutions of the 
various states.
Statutory Law The body 
of law enacted by legislative 
bodies.
 List the four 
written sources 
of American 
criminal law.
Learning  
objective1
“Justice?—You get justice 
in the next world. In this 
world you have the law.”
— William Gaddis,  
American novelist
Technology Tip: Ask students 
to explore their home state’s 
constitution and criminal statutes 
online. Have them jot down any 
particular laws or constitutional 
rights they find surprising and/or 
interesting. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Today, according to a recent study, federal law includes about 4,500 offenses that carry 
criminal penalties.3 Inevitably, these federal criminal statutes are bound to overlap or 
even contradict state statutes. In such cases, thanks to the supremacy clause of the 
Constitution, federal law will almost always prevail. Simply put, the supremacy clause 
holds that federal law is the “supreme law of the land.”
So, in January 2012, U.S. district judge Donald Molloy ruled that federal law enforce-
ment agents were justified in arresting Montana residents for possessing medical 
marijuana, even though use of the drug for medicinal purposes is legal under the law 
of that state. Federal drug law does not allow for medical marijuana use, and as Judge 
Molloy stated, “we are all bound by federal law, like it or not.”4 Along the same lines, any 
statutory law—federal or state—that violates the Constitution will be overturned. In 
the late 1980s, for example, the United States Supreme Court ruled that any state laws 
banning the burning of the American flag were unconstitutional because they impinged 
on the individual’s right to freedom of expression.5 (To learn how one federal statute 
regulates a particular type of medical crime, see the feature A Question of Ethics—Kidney 
Compensation below.)
bALLoT iniTiATivEs On a state and local level, voters can write or rewrite criminal stat-
utes through a form of direct democracy known as the ballot initiative. In this process, 
a group of citizens draft a proposed law and then gather a certain number of signatures to 
get the proposal on that year’s ballot. If a majority of the voters approve the measure, it is 
enacted into law. Currently, twenty-four states and the District of Columbia accept ballot 
initiatives, and these special elections have played a crucial role in shaping criminal law in 
those jurisdictions.
Supremacy Clause A 
clause in the U.S. Constitution 
establishing that federal law 
is the “supreme law of the 
land” and shall prevail when in 
conflict with state constitutions 
or statutes.
Ballot Initiative A 
procedure in which citizens, by 
collecting enough signatures, 
can force a public vote on a 
proposed change to state or 
local law.
tHe SItuatIon Located on each side of the spine, just 
above the waist, kidneys are small, bean-shaped organs that 
perform crucial functions such as keeping blood healthy 
and excreting urine. At any given time, more than 80,000 
Americans with faulty kidneys need a new kidney to be 
transplanted into their bodies. Until this happens, they 
must rely on an expensive, painful process called dialysis to 
survive. Each year, about 4,500 people in the United States 
die while waiting for a healthy kidney.
tHe etHICaL DILemma Each person has two kidneys 
but can manage with just one, meaning that, at least 
theoretically, there is a huge supply of the organs for 
transplant. In reality, however, the supply of available healthy 
kidneys is severely limited. Sometimes, an organ donor who 
has died can provide the necessary transplant, or a living 
person may choose to donate a kidney to a person in need. 
Even so, as a lengthy waiting list suggests, the supply of 
available kidneys does not come close to meeting demand. 
There is a way to alleviate this shortage: allow people to 
sell one of their kidneys for transplantation. In the United 
States, however, as in most of the world, the exchange of 
any bodily organ for money or other kinds of payment is 
a crime. Under the 1984 National Organ Transplant Act, 
anybody who sells a kidney faces a $50,000 fine and five 
years in prison. This law is based on the idea that it is 
immoral to sell one’s organs. As George Anas, a professor of 
health, law, bioethics, and human rights at Boston University, 
puts it, “We do not want to live in a society in which the rich 
live off the bodies of the poor.”
WHat IS tHe SoLutIon? Iran is the only country in the 
world that has a government-regulated, open market for 
kidneys. Donors receive between $2,000 and $4,000 for 
each organ, and Iran has no waiting list for those needing 
transplants. Do you think that we should adopt this system 
in the United States? Why or why not? What ethical 
concerns do you have about the sale of kidneys? (Keep in 
mind that Americans are allowed to sell their blood, sperm, 
and, to infertile women, ovarian eggs.) 
A QuEsTion of ETHICS: Kidney Compensation
68  C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Teaching Tip: Choose a recent 
ballot initiative (from any state) that 
involves a change in that state’s 
criminal law. Use this example 
to clarify the process for your 
students.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   69
In the mid-1990s, for example, California voters 
approved a “three-strikes” measure (discussed in Chapter 9) 
that increased penalties for third-time felons, transforming 
the state’s criminal justice system in the process. In 2010, 
Arizona residents voted in favor of a ballot initiative to require 
that their state join fifteen other states and Washington, D.C., 
in allowing the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes.6 As 
we just noted, however, ballot initiatives do not supercede 
federal law, and medical marijuana sellers and users in these 
states are subject to arrest under federal drug laws.
ADminisTRATivE LAW
A third source of American criminal law consists of 
administrative law—the rules, orders, and decisions of 
regulatory agencies. A regulatory agency is a federal, state, 
or local government agency established to perform a spe-
cific function. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, for example, over-
sees the safety and health of American workers. The Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) is concerned with protecting the natural environment, and the Food and Drug 
Administration regulates food and drugs produced in the United States. 
Disregarding certain laws created by regulatory agencies can be a criminal viola-
tion. Federal statutes, such as the Clean Water Act, authorize a specific regulatory agency, 
such as the EPA, to enforce regulations to which criminal sanctions are attached.7 So, in 
February 2012, following a criminal investigation led by the EPA, a North Carolina hog 
farm was found guilty of discharging waste into the Waccamaw River watershed. As 
punishment, a federal judge sentenced the company to pay $1.5 million in fines and sent 
its president to prison for six months. 
CAsE LAW
Another basic source of American law consists of the rules of law announced in court 
decisions, or precedents. These rules of law include interpretations of constitutional pro-
visions, of statutes enacted by legislatures, and of regulations created by administrative 
agencies. Today, this body of law is referred to variously as the common law, judge-made 
law, or case law.
Case law relies to a certain extent on how courts interpret a particular statute. 
If you wanted to learn about the coverage and applicability of a particular statute, for 
example, you would need to locate the statute and study it. You would also need to see 
how the courts in your jurisdiction have interpreted the statute—in other words, what 
precedents have been established in regard to that statute. The use of precedent means 
that judge-made law varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
The U.S. ____________ is the supreme law of this country. Any law that violates this 
document will be declared ____________ by the United States Supreme Court. Laws 
enacted by legislative bodies are known as ____________ , while the body of law created 
by judicial decisions is known as ____________ law. 
Administrative Law The 
body of law created by 
regulatory (administrative) 
agencies (in the form of rules, 
regulations, orders, and 
decisions) in order to carry out 
their duties and responsibilities.
Precedent A court decision 
that furnishes an example 
or authority for deciding 
subsequent cases involving 
similar facts.
Case Law The rules of law 
announced in court decisions.
Al and Leslie Wilcox, shown 
here in San Francisco’s Golden 
Gate Park, are permitted by the 
state to smoke marijuana. More 
than a decade ago, a majority 
of Californians approved 
medical marijuana for those 
with debilitating illnesses. What 
are the benefits and drawbacks 
to allowing voters to create or 
amend their state’s criminal laws?
Jim Wilson/New York Times/Redux
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE PuRPosEs of CRiminAL LAW
Why do societies need laws? Many criminologists believe that criminal law has two basic 
functions: one relates to the legal requirements of a society, and the other pertains to the 
society’s need to maintain and promote social values.
PRoTECT AnD PunisH:  
THE LEgAL funCTion of THE LAW
The primary legal function of the law is to maintain social order by protecting citizens 
from criminal harm. This term refers to a variety of harms that can be generalized to fit 
into two categories:
1. Harms to individual citizens’ physical safety and property, such as the harm 
caused by murder, theft, or arson. 
2. Harms to society’s interests collectively, such as the harm caused by unsafe foods 
or consumer products, a polluted environment, or poorly constructed buildings.8
The first category is self-evident, although even murder has different degrees, or 
grades, of offense to which different punishments are assigned. The second category, 
however, has proved more problematic, for it is difficult to measure society’s “collective” 
interests. 
mAinTAin AnD TEACH:  
THE soCiAL funCTion of THE LAW
If criminal laws against acts that cause harm or injury to others are almost universally 
accepted, the same cannot be said for laws that criminalize “morally” wrongful activi-
ties that may do no obvious, physical harm outside the families of those involved. Why 
criminalize gambling or prostitution if the participants are consenting? 
ExPREssing PubLiC moRALiTy  The answer lies in the social function of criminal law. 
Many observers believe that the main purpose of criminal law is to reflect the values and 
norms of society, or at least of those segments of society that hold power. Legal scholar 
Henry Hart has stated that the only justification for criminal law and punishment is “the 
judgment of community condemnation.”9
Take, for example, the misdemeanor of bigamy, which occurs when someone know-
ingly marries a second person without terminating her or his marriage to an original 
husband or wife. Apart from moral considerations, there would appear to be no victims 
in a bigamous relationship, and indeed many foreign societies have allowed and continue 
to allow bigamy to exist. In the American social tradition, however, as John L. Diamond of 
the University of California’s Hastings College of the Law points out:
Marriage is an institution encouraged and supported by society. The structural importance of 
the integrity of the family and a monogamous marriage requires unflinching enforcement of 
the criminal laws against bigamy. The immorality is not in choosing to do wrong, but in trans-
gressing, even innocently, a fundamental social boundary that lies at the core of social order.10
Of course, public morals are not uniform across the entire nation, and a state’s criminal 
code often reflects the values of its residents. Alaska, Arizona, and Vermont, for example, are 
the only states that do not require citizens to obtain a permit to carry a concealed firearm. 
Sometimes, local values and federal law will conflict with one another. In South Carolina, 
operating a cockfighting operation is a misdemeanor, and violators are often let off with 
Explain the two 
basic functions 
of criminal law.
Learning  
objective 2
Discussion Tip: Ask your students 
to answer the question, “Why does 
a society need laws?”
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to brainstorm 
examples of the second category 
of criminal harm: harms to society’s 
collective interests. Ask the groups 
to then share these examples with 
the class. 
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
research the various laws in their 
home states that regulate public 
morals. Do they agree that such 
behavior should be controlled by 
criminal law? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   71
a fine. Under federal animal welfare laws, how-
ever, the same activity carries a potential five-
year prison term.11 In 2012, five South Carolinians 
arrested by federal agents for cockfighting argued 
before a federal judge that their convictions were 
illegitimate because the federal government has 
no authority to regulate the “sport” within state 
borders (see photo alongside).12
TEACHing soCiETAL bounDARiEs Some schol-
ars believe that criminal laws not only 
express the expectations of society but 
“teach” them as well. Professor Lawrence 
M. Friedman of Stanford University 
thinks that just as parents teach chil-
dren behavioral norms through pun-
ishment, criminal justice “ ‘teaches a 
lesson’ to the people it punishes, and to 
society at large.” Making burglary a crime, arrest-
ing burglars, putting them in jail—each step in the criminal justice process reinforces the 
idea that burglary is unacceptable and is deserving of punishment.13
This teaching function can also be seen in traffic laws. There is nothing “natural” 
about most traffic laws: Americans drive on the right side of the street, the British on the 
left side, with no obvious difference in the results. These laws, such as stopping at inter-
sections, using headlights at night, and following speed limits, do lead to a more orderly 
flow of traffic and fewer accidents—certainly socially desirable goals. The laws can also 
be updated when needed. Over the past few years, several states have banned the use of 
handheld cell phones while driving because of the safety hazards associated with that 
behavior. Various forms of punishment for breaking traffic laws teach drivers the social 
order of the road.
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
The ____________ function of the law is to protect citizens from ____________ harm by 
ensuring their physical safety. The ____________ function of the law is to teach citizens 
proper behavior and express public ____________ by codifying the norms and values of 
the community. 
CLAssifiCATion of CRimEs
The huge body of the law can be broken down according to various classifications. Three 
of the most important distinctions are those between (1) civil law and criminal law,  
(2) felonies and misdemeanors, and (3) crimes mala in se and mala prohibita. 
CiviL LAW AnD CRiminAL LAW
All law can be divided into two categories: civil law and criminal law. As U.S. criminal law 
has evolved, it has diverged from U.S. civil law. These two categories of law are distin-
guished by their primary goals. The criminal justice system is concerned with protecting 
Why does the supremacy 
clause make it unlikely that 
residents of states with lenient 
cockfighting laws will be 
able to escape the harsher 
punishments of federal animal 
welfare legislation that prohibits 
the practice?
Al Bello/Getty Images
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
complete “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 1 on page 92, 
which asks them to think about laws 
that teach social boundaries.
Teaching Tip: Discuss the recent 
move towards banning texting 
while driving in many states, 
as well as media campaigns to 
illustrate the dangers of texting 
and driving. Ask students whether 
they think these bans are/will be 
effective, and if such laws would 
deter them from texting and 
driving.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
society from harm by preventing and prosecuting crimes. A crime is an act so repre-
hensible that it is considered a wrong against society as a whole, as well as against the 
individual victim. Therefore, the state prosecutes a person who commits a criminal act. 
If the state is able to prove that a person is guilty of a crime, the government will punish 
her or him with imprisonment or fines, or both.
Civil law, which includes all types of law other than criminal law, is concerned 
with disputes between private individuals and between entities. Proceedings in civil 
lawsuits are normally initiated by an individual or a corporation (in contrast to criminal 
proceedings, which are initiated by public prosecutors). Such disputes may involve, for 
example, the terms of a contract, the ownership of property, or an automobile accident. 
Under civil law, the government provides a forum for the resolution of torts—or private 
wrongs—in which the injured party, called the plaintiff, tries to prove that a wrong has 
Civil Law The branch of law 
dealing with the definition and 
enforcement of all private or 
public rights, as opposed to 
criminal matters.
Plaintiff The person or 
institution that initiates a lawsuit 
in civil court proceedings by 
filing a complaint.
Discuss the 
primary goals 
of civil law and 
criminal law, 
and explain 
how these goals 
are realized.
Learning  
objective 3
f A s T f A C T s
youTH inTERvEnTion sPECiALisT/
gAng invEsTigAToR, 
job DEsCRiPTion:
• Conducts assessments and refers 
at-risk youth to appropriate 
activities, programs, or agencies.
• Serves as a liaison between the 
police department, schools, other 
agencies, and the community.
WHAT kinD of TRAining  
is REQuiRED?
• A bachelor’s degree in counseling, 
criminal justice, or other social 
science–related field. Bilingual 
(English/Spanish) skills are desired.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
• $40,000–$49,000
CaReeRS In CJ
F. W. Gill
GanG investiGator
The problem, for most of these kids, is that nobody cares. Their parents don’t, or 
can’t, get involved in their children’s lives. Teachers are in the business of teaching 
and don’t, or can’t, take the time to get to know their most troubled students. So, 
when I’m dealing with gang members, the first thing I do is listen. I don’t lecture 
them, I don’t tell them that they are throwing away their lives. I just listen. You’d be 
amazed how effective this can be— these kids, who look so tough on the outside, 
just want an adult to care.
Not that there is any magic formula for convincing a gang member to go 
straight. It is very difficult to get someone to change his or her lifestyle. If they don’t 
want to change—really want to change—then nothing I can say or do is going to 
make much of a difference. Unfortunately, there are many lost causes. I’ve even 
had a couple of cases in which a juvenile was afraid to leave the gang because his 
father was a gang member, and he insisted that the boy stay in the gang. I have had 
some success in convincing gang members to turn their lives around by joining the 
military. The military provides discipline and a new outlook on life, things that these 
kids badly need. 
social Media Career tip 
Think about your online presence as your online personal brand. You create your 
personal brand online through the sum of all the posts you make on different Web 
sites and social media tools.
Photo Courtesy of F. W. Gill
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   73
been committed by the accused party, or the  defendant. (Note that the accused party in 
both criminal and civil cases is known as the defendant.) 
guiLT AnD REsPonsibiLiTy A criminal court is convened to determine whether the 
defendant is guilty—that is, whether the defendant has, in fact, committed the offense 
charged. In contrast, civil law is concerned with responsibility, a much more flexible 
concept. For example, after Kevin Black was killed while cycling in Ballard, Washington, 
a civil court blamed the driver of the van that struck him for the death. The driver had 
attempted to make an illegal U-turn by crossing into the bicycle lane where Black was 
riding, causing the fatal accident. Even though the driver was never charged with any 
crime, the court decided that he and his employer, Ambient Control Company, should 
be held liable, or legally responsible, for Black’s death because of the improper U-turn. 
Most civil cases involve a request for monetary damages to compensate for the 
wrong that has been committed. Thus, in 2011, the civil court ordered Ambient Control 
Company to pay $1.5 million to Kevin Black’s family as compensation for the financial 
and emotional consequences of his death. (See Mastering Concepts—Civil Law versus 
Criminal Law below for a comparison of civil and criminal law.)
THE buRDEn of PRoof Although criminal law proceedings are completely separate from 
civil law proceedings in the modern legal system, the two systems do have some simi-
larities. Both attempt to control behavior by imposing sanctions on those who violate 
society’s definition of acceptable behavior. Furthermore, criminal and civil law often 
supplement each other. In certain instances, a victim may file a civil suit against an indi-
vidual who is also the target of a criminal prosecution by the government. 
Because the burden of proof is much greater in criminal trials than civil ones, it is 
almost always easier to win monetary damages than a criminal conviction. In September 
2011, for example, store manager Richard Moore was found not guilty of sexually abus-
ing an employee in O’Fallon, Illinois, because investigators could not match his DNA to a 
semen stain found near the alleged incident. Three months earlier, however, a civil court 
ruled that Moore had indeed sexually abused the woman and ordered his employer, the 
furniture chain Aaron’s, to pay her $41 million in damages. During the later trial, the crimi-
nal court did not find enough evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt (the burden 
of proof in criminal cases) that Moore was guilty of any crime. Nevertheless, the civil trial 
established by a preponderance of the evidence (the burden of proof in civil cases) that 
Moore had thrown the employee to the floor and sexually abused her.
Defendant In a civil court,  
the person or institution  
against whom an action is 
brought. In a criminal court,  
the person or entity who has 
been formally accused of 
violating a criminal law.
Liability In a civil court, legal 
responsibility for one’s own or 
another’s actions.
Beyond a Reasonable 
Doubt  The degree of proof 
required to find the defendant 
in a criminal trial guilty of 
committing the crime. The 
defendant’s guilt must be the 
only reasonable explanation 
for the criminal act before the 
court.
Preponderance of the 
Evidence The degree of 
proof required to decide in 
favor of one side or the other 
in a civil case. In general, this 
requirement is met when a 
plaintiff proves that a fact more 
likely than not is true.
maSteRInGConCePtS
CiviL LAW veRsus CRiminAL LAW
issue
CiviL LAW
CRiminAL LAW
Area of concern
Rights and duties between individuals
Offenses against society as a whole
Wrongful act
Harm to a person or business entity
Violation of a statute that prohibits some type of 
activity
Party who brings suit
Person who suffered harm (plaintiff)
The state (prosecutor)
Party who responds
Person who supposedly caused harm (defendant)
Person who allegedly committed a crime  
(defendant)
standard of proof
Preponderance of the evidence
Beyond a reasonable doubt
Remedy
Damages to compensate for the harm
Punishment (fine or incarceration)
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
think about why the standards 
of proof are different in criminal 
and civil courts. It may be helpful 
to remind them of the different 
types of cases the two courts have 
jurisdiction over.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
fELoniEs AnD misDEmEAnoRs
Depending on their degree of seriousness, crimes are classified as felonies or misdemeanors. 
Felonies are serious crimes punishable by death or by imprisonment in a federal or state 
penitentiary for one year or longer (though some states, such as North Carolina, consider 
felonies to be punishable by at least two years’ incarceration). The Model Penal Code, a 
general guide for criminal law, provides for four degrees of felony:
1. Capital offenses, for which the maximum penalty is death.
2. First degree felonies, punishable by a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
3. Second degree felonies, punishable by a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment.
4. Third degree felonies, punishable by a maximum of five years’ imprisonment.14
DEgREEs of CRimE Though specifics vary from state to state, some general rules apply 
when grading crimes. For example, most jurisdictions punish a burglary that involves a 
nighttime forced entry into a home more seriously than one that takes place during the 
day and involves a nonresidential building or structure. Furthermore, the seriousness of 
any crime is, to a large extent, determined by the mental state of the offender. That is, 
the law punishes those who plan and intend to do harm more harshly than it does those 
who act wrongfully because of strong emotions or other extreme circumstances. We will 
address the importance of mental state in crime more extensively later in this chapter, 
but here we can see how it affects the degrees of murder. 
Murder in the first degree occurs under two  circumstances:
1. When the crime is premeditated, or considered (contemplated) beforehand by the 
offender, instead of being a spontaneous act of violence.
2. When the crime is deliberate, meaning that it was planned and decided on after a 
process of decision making. Deliberation does not require a lengthy planning pro-
cess. A person can be found guilty of first degree murder even if she or he made 
the decision to murder only seconds before committing the crime.
Second degree murder, generally punishable by fifteen years to life in prison, occurs 
when no premeditation or deliberation was present, but the offender did have  malice  
aforethought toward the victim. In other words, the offender acted with wanton dis-
regard for the consequences of his or her actions. (In general, malice means “wrongful 
intention” or “the desire to do evil.”)
The difference between first and second degree murder is clearly illustrated in a case 
involving a California man who beat a neighbor to death with a partially full brandy bottle. 
The crime took place after Ricky McDonald, the victim, complained to Kazi Cooksey, the 
offender, about the noise coming from a late-night barbecue Cooksey and his friends were 
holding. The jury could not find sufficient evidence that Cooksey’s actions were premedi-
tated, but he certainly acted with wanton disregard for his victim’s safety. Therefore, the 
jury convicted Cooksey of second degree murder rather than first degree murder.
TyPEs of mAnsLAugHTER A homicide committed without malice toward the victim 
is known as  manslaughter and is usually punishable by up to fifteen years in prison. 
Voluntary manslaughter occurs when the intent to kill may be present, but malice was 
lacking. Voluntary manslaughter covers crimes of passion, in which the emotion of an 
argument between two friends may lead to a homicide. Voluntary manslaughter can also 
occur when the victim provoked the offender to act violently. 
Involuntary manslaughter covers incidents in which the offender’s acts may 
have been careless, but he or she had no intent to kill. In 2011, for example, Dr. Conrad 
Felony A serious crime, 
usually punishable by death 
or imprisonment for a year or 
longer.
Malice Aforethought  
A depraved state of mind in 
which the offender’s behavior 
reflected a wanton disregard 
for the well-being of his or her 
victim.
Voluntary Manslaughter  
A homicide in which the intent 
to kill was present in the mind 
of the offender, but malice was 
lacking. 
Involuntary Manslaughter  
A negligent homicide, in which 
the offender had no intent to 
kill her or his victim.
Social media and CJ 
nBCnews.com provides 
a constant stream of 
tweets concerning criminal 
law topics and other 
crime news and stories 
of interest. To access its 
Twitter Web page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links for this 
chapter.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
explain, in their own words, the 
general differences between murder 
and manslaughter. Have them come 
up with an example of each crime.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   75
Murray (see photo alongside) was convicted of involuntary 
manslaughter for his role in the death of pop star Michael 
Jackson. Murray had provided Jackson with a powerful 
anesthetic to help Jackson sleep, and the dosage proved 
fatal. Although Murray had certainly not intended for 
Jackson to die, he was held criminally responsible for the 
singer’s death and sentenced to four years in prison.
DEgREEs of misDEmEAnoR Under federal law and in 
most states, any crime that is not a felony is considered a  
misdemeanor. Misdemeanors are crimes punishable by a 
fine or by confinement for up to a year. If imprisoned, the 
guilty party goes to a local jail instead of a penitentiary. 
Disorderly conduct and trespassing are common misde-
meanors. Like felonies, misdemeanors are graded by level 
of seriousness. In Illinois, for example, misdemeanors are 
either Class A (confinement for up to a year), Class B (not more than six months), or Class 
C (not more than thirty days).
Most states similarly distinguish between gross misdemeanors, which are offenses 
punishable by thirty days to a year in jail, and petty misdemeanors, or offenses punishable 
by fewer than thirty days in jail. Whether a crime is a felony or a misdemeanor can also 
determine whether the case is tried in a magistrate’s court (for example, by a justice of the 
peace) or in a general trial court (for example, a superior court). Probation and commu-
nity service are often imposed on those who commit misdemeanors, especially juveniles.
infRACTions The least serious form of wrongdoing is often called an infraction and is 
punishable only by a small fine. Even though infractions such as parking or traffic violations 
technically represent illegal activity, they generally are not considered “crimes.” Therefore, 
infractions rarely lead to jury trials and are deemed to be so minor that they do not appear on 
the offender’s criminal record. In some jurisdictions, the terms infraction and petty offense are 
interchangeable. In others, however, they are different. Under federal guidelines, for example, 
an infraction can be punished by up to five days of prison time, while a petty offender is only 
liable for a fine.15 Finally, those who string together a series of infractions (or fail to pay the 
fines that come with such offenses) are in danger of being criminally charged. In Illinois, hav-
ing three or more speeding violations in one year is considered criminal behavior.16
mALA in sE AnD mALA PRoHibiTA
Criminologists often express the social function of criminal law in terms of mala in se or 
mala prohibita crimes. A criminal act is referred to as mala in se if it would be considered 
wrong even if there were no law prohibiting it. Mala in se crimes are said to go against  
“natural laws”—that is, against the “natural, moral, and public” principles of a society. 
Murder, rape, and theft are examples of mala in se crimes. These crimes are generally the 
same from country to country or culture to culture. 
In contrast, the term mala prohibita refers to acts that are considered crimes only 
because they have been codified as such through statute—“human-made” laws. A mala 
prohibita crime is considered wrong only because it has been prohibited. It is not inher-
ently a wrong, though it may reflect the moral standards of a society at a given time. 
Thus, the definition of a mala prohibita crime can vary from country to country and even 
from state to state. Bigamy, or the offense of having two legal spouses, could be consid-
ered a mala prohibita crime.
Misdemeanor A criminal 
offense that is not a felony; 
usually punishable by a fine 
and/or a jail term of less than 
one year.
Infraction In most 
jurisdictions, a noncriminal 
offense for which the penalty is 
a fine rather than incarceration.
Mala in Se A descriptive 
term for acts that are inherently 
wrong, regardless of whether 
they are prohibited by law.
Mala Prohibita A 
descriptive term for acts that 
are made illegal by criminal 
statute and are not necessarily 
wrong in and of themselves.
Why was Dr. Conrad murray, 
right, convicted of involuntary 
manslaughter rather than murder 
or voluntary manslaughter for 
his role in the death of pop star 
Michael Jackson?
Mario Anzuoni/Pool/EPA/Newscom
Explain the 
differences 
between crimes 
mala in se and 
mala prohibita.
Learning  
objective4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Some observers question the distinction between mala in se and mala prohibita. In 
many instances, it is difficult to define a “pure” mala in se crime. That is, it is difficult to 
separate a crime from the culture that has deemed it a crime.17 Even murder, under certain 
cultural circumstances, is not considered a criminal act. In a number of poor, traditional 
areas of the Middle East and Asia, the law excuses “honor killings” in which men kill female 
family members suspected of sexual indiscretion. As we discussed in Chapter 1, our own legal 
system excuses homicide in extreme situations, such as self-defense or when a law enforce-
ment agent kills in the line of duty. Therefore, “natural” laws can be seen as culturally specific. 
Similar difficulties occur in trying to define a “pure” mala prohibita crime. More than 150 
countries, including most members of the European Union, have legalized prostitution. With 
the exception of seven rural counties of Nevada, prostitution is illegal in the United States.
“Our society is going through a technological transformation,” notes Adam Schwartz, a 
civil liberties lawyer. “We are at a time where tens of millions of Americans carry around 
a telephone or other device in their pocket that has an audio-video capacity. Ten years 
ago, [we] weren’t walking around with all these devices.” This widespread ability to 
record interactions with others has increased the possibility that Americans are breaking 
the law, often without their knowledge. The criminal codes of twelve states require the 
consent of all parties involved before any conversation can be recorded.
In some cases, the penalties for breaking these laws can be quite harsh. Under the 
Illinois Eavesdropping Act, audio-recording a civilian without consent is a Class 4 felony, 
punishable by up to three years in prison. Audio-recording an Illinois law enforcement 
official who is performing her or his duties without consent is a Class 1 felony, punishable 
by up to fifteen years in prison.
thinkinG aBout eleCtroniC eavesdroppinG: Are these 
eavesdropping statutes mala in se laws or mala prohibita laws? While explaining your 
answer, remember that smartphones and other easily portable devices with one-touch 
recording capabilities did not exist when most eavesdropping statutes were initially passed.
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Electronic Eavesdropping
Andrea Zanchi/iStockphoto
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
____________ law is concerned with disputes between private individuals and other entities, 
whereas criminal law involves the ____________’s duty to protect society by preventing and 
prosecuting crimes. A ____________ is a serious crime punishable by more than a year in 
prison or the death penalty, while a person found guilty of a ____________ will usually spend 
less than a year in jail or pay a fine. ____________ ____________ ____________ occurs when 
a homicide is premeditated and deliberate. If there is no premeditation or malice on the 
part of the offender toward the victim, the homicide is classified as ____________. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
reflect on whether they believe 
that mala prohibita crimes should 
be illegal. Do they believe that 
the government should regulate 
so-called victimless crimes (e.g., 
drug use, prostitution)? 
Teaching Tip: Have students 
refer to the “CJ and Technology” 
box on electronic eavesdropping. 
Presently, only twelve states 
require that all parties consent 
before a conversation can be legally 
recorded. Ask students whether 
they believe that it should be legal 
to record someone without that 
person’s permission. Would their 
view change depending on what 
was done with the recording? With 
the proliferation of smartphones, 
many audio and visual recordings 
end up on Web sites like YouTube. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   77
THE ELEmEnTs of A CRimE
In fictional accounts of police work, the admission of guilt is often portrayed as the 
crucial element of a criminal investigation. Although an admission is certainly useful 
to police and prosecutors, it alone cannot establish the innocence or guilt of a suspect. 
Criminal law normally requires that the corpus delicti, a Latin phrase for “the body of 
the crime,” be proved before a person can be convicted of wrongdoing. Corpus delicti can 
be defined as “proof that a specific crime has actually been committed by someone.”18 It 
consists of the basic elements of any crime, which include (1) actus reus, or a guilty act, 
(2) mens rea, or a guilty intent, (3) concurrence, or the coming together of the criminal 
act and the guilty mind, (4) a link between the act and the legal definition of the crime,  
(5) any attendant circumstances, and (6) the harm done, or the result of the criminal act. 
CRiminAL ACT: ACTus REus
Suppose Mr. Smith walks into a police department and announces that he just killed 
his wife. In and of itself, the confession is insufficient for conviction unless the police 
find Mrs. Smith’s corpse, for example, with a bullet in her brain and establish through 
evidence that Mr. Smith fired the gun. (This does not mean that an actual dead body 
has to be found in every homicide case. Rather, it is the fact of the death that must be 
established in such cases.) 
Most crimes require an act of commission, meaning that a person must do some-
thing in order to be accused of a crime. The prohibited act is referred to as the actus reus, 
or guilty act. Furthermore, the act of commission must be voluntary. For example, if Mr. 
Smith had an epileptic seizure while holding a hunting rifle and accidentally shot his 
wife, he normally would not be held criminally liable for her death. (To better understand 
this principle, see the feature You Be the Judge—A Voluntary Act? on the following page.)
A LEgAL DuTy In some cases, an act of omission can be a crime, but only when a person 
has a legal duty to perform the omitted act. One such legal duty is assumed to exist based 
on a “special relationship” between two parties, such as a parent and child, adult children 
and their aged parents, and spouses.19 Those persons involved in contractual relation-
ships with others, such as physicians and lifeguards, must also perform legal duties to 
avoid criminal penalty. Hawaii, Minnesota, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Wisconsin have 
even passed “duty to aid” statutes requiring their citizens to report criminal conduct and 
help victims of such conduct if possible.20 Another example of a criminal act of omission 
is failure to file a federal income tax return when required by law to do so.
A PLAn oR ATTEmPT The guilty act requirement is based on one of the premises of crimi-
nal law—that a person is punished for harm done to society. Planning to kill someone 
or to steal a car may be wrong, but just the thoughts themselves do no harm and are 
therefore not criminal until they are translated into action. Of course, a person can be 
punished for attempting murder or robbery, but normally only if he or she took substan-
tial steps toward the criminal objective and the government can prove that the desire to 
commit the crime was present. Furthermore, the punishment for an attempt normally 
is less severe than if the act had succeeded. 
mEnTAL sTATE: mEns REA
A wrongful mental state—mens rea—is usually as necessary as a wrongful act in deter-
mining guilt. The mental state, or requisite intent, required to establish guilt of a crime 
is indicated in the applicable statute or law. For theft, the wrongful act is the taking of 
Corpus Delicti The body 
of circumstances that must 
exist for a criminal act to have 
occurred.
Actus Reus (pronounced 
ak-tus ray-uhs). A guilty 
(prohibited) act. 
Attempt The act of taking 
substantial steps toward 
committing a crime while 
having the ability and the intent 
to commit the crime, even if 
the crime never takes place.
Mens Rea (pronounced 
mehns ray-uh). Mental state, 
or intent. A wrongful mental 
state is usually as necessary 
as a wrongful act to establish 
criminal liability.
Teaching Tip: Ask students to 
brainstorm crimes that are crimes 
of “omission” and share their 
examples with the class. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

another person’s property, and the required mental state involves both the awareness 
that the property belongs to another and the desire to deprive the owner of it. 
THE CATEgoRiEs of mEns REA A guilty mental state includes elements of purpose, 
knowledge, negligence, and recklessness. A defendant is said to have purposefully com-
mitted a criminal act when she or he desires to engage in certain criminal conduct or 
to cause a certain criminal result. For a defendant to have knowingly committed an 
illegal act, he or she must be aware of the illegality, must believe that the illegality exists, 
or must correctly suspect that the illegality exists but fail to do anything to dispel (or 
confirm) his or her belief. Criminal negligence involves the mental state in which the 
defendant grossly deviates from the standard of care that a reasonable person would 
use under the same circumstances. The defendant is accused of taking an unjustified, 
substantial, and foreseeable risk that resulted in harm. In Texas, for example, a parent 
commits a felony if she or he fails to secure a loaded firearm or leaves it in such a manner 
that it could easily be accessed by a child.21
A defendant who commits an act recklessly is more blameworthy than one 
who is criminally negligent. Criminal recklessness can be defined as “consciously 
disregard[ing] a substantial and unjustifiable risk.”22 During the trial of James Arthur Ray 
discussed at the beginning of this chapter, prosecutors presented a witness who testified 
that Ray did nothing to help those who became ill or lost consciousness in the sweat 
lodge. This testimony, if true, would have helped establish that the defendant was aware 
of the dangers faced by the ceremony participants and that, therefore, his actions were 
reckless rather than simply negligent. 
tHe FaCtS On a bright, sunny afternoon, Emil was driving on Delaware Avenue in Buffalo, 
New York. As he was making a turn, Emil suffered an epileptic seizure and lost control of his 
automobile. The car careened onto the sidewalk and struck a group of six schoolgirls, killing 
four of them. Emil knew that he was subject to epileptic attacks that rendered him likely to 
lose consciousness. 
tHe LaW An “act” committed while one is unconscious is in reality not an act at all. It is 
merely a physical event or occurrence over which the defendant has no control—that is, 
such an act is involuntary. If the defendant voluntarily causes the loss of consciousness by, 
for example, using drugs or alcohol, however, then he or she will usually be held criminally 
responsible for any consequences.
YouR DeCISIon Emil was charged in the deaths of the four girls. He asked the court to 
dismiss the charges, as he was unconscious at the time of the accident and therefore had not 
committed a voluntary act. In your opinion, is there an actus reus in this situation, or should 
the charges against Emil be dismissed? 
To see how the appellate court in New York ruled in this case, go to Example 3.1 in Appendix B.
You Be tHe JuDGe
A voluntary Act?
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
Negligence A failure to 
exercise the standard of care 
that a reasonable person 
would exercise in similar 
circumstances.
Recklessness The state of 
being aware that a risk does 
or will exist and nevertheless 
acting in a way that consciously 
disregards this risk.
Delineate 
the elements 
required to 
establish mens 
rea (a guilty 
mental state).
Learning  
objective 5
78   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   79
CRiminAL LiAbiLiTy Intent plays an important part in allowing the law to differentiate 
among varying degrees of criminal liability for similar, though not identical, guilty acts. 
The role of intent is clearly seen in the different classifications of homicide, defined 
generally as the willful killing of one human being by another. It is important to empha-
size the word willful, as it precludes deaths caused by accident or negligence and those 
deemed justifiable. A death that results from negligence or accident generally is con-
sidered a private wrong and a matter for civil law. Nevertheless, some statutes allow for 
certain negligent homicides to be criminalized. 
As we saw earlier in the chapter, when the act of killing is willful, deliberate, and 
premeditated (planned beforehand), it is considered first degree murder. When premedi-
tation does not exist but intent does, the act is usually considered second degree murder. 
When intent is absent, the act is generally considered involuntary manslaughter. As 
Figure 3.1 below shows, the distinction between involuntary manslaughter and second 
degree murder is not always clear. Often, prosecutors must rely on discretion in deciding 
what level of intent exists on the part of the defendant.
sTRiCT LiAbiLiTy For certain crimes, criminal law holds the defendant to be guilty even if 
intent to commit the offense is lacking. These acts are known as strict liability crimes 
and generally involve endangering the public welfare in some way. Drug-control statutes, 
health and safety regulations, and traffic laws are all strict liability laws. 
Protecting the Public To a certain extent, the concept of strict liability is inconsistent 
with the traditional principles of criminal law, which hold that mens rea is required for an 
act to be criminal. The goal of strict liability laws is to protect the public by eliminating 
the possibility that wrongdoers could claim ignorance or mistake to absolve themselves 
of criminal responsibility.23 Thus, a person caught dumping waste in a protected pond or 
driving 70 miles per hour in a 55 miles-per-hour zone cannot plead a lack of intent in his or 
her defense. 
Given the importance of the mens rea requirement in our tradition of criminal 
law, American courts are often wary of overreaching strict liability statutes. In 2002, for 
example, the Florida legislature removed the “guilty mind” requirement from its illegal 
drug laws.24 Theoretically, then, a U.S. Postal Service employee could be arrested by state 
FiGuRe 3.1 intent and Homicide
Six-week-old Michael Wortmon died after being found unresponsive at his home in Loleta, 
California. The boy had significant levels of methamphetamine in his system, and his mother, 
Maggie Jean Wortmon, admitted to having ingested large amounts of the drug before 
breastfeeding her son. Doctors believe that the toxic breast milk killed Michael.
  Humboldt County prosecutors have several options with regard to Maggie Jean Wortmon:
    •   Accept Michael’s death as a tragic accident and file no criminal charges against Wortmon.
    •   Charge Wortmon with involuntary manslaughter, defined under state law as an unintended 
killing that takes place during the commission of a lawful act involving a high risk of death and 
is committed without due caution. The punishment for involuntary manslaughter in California 
is two, three, or four years in prison.
    •   Charge Wortmon with second degree murder, defined under state law as a willful killing but 
one that is not deliberate and premeditated. The punishment for second degree murder in 
California is fifteen years to life in prison.
Even though Wortmon did not intend to kill Michael, prosecutors charged her with second degree 
murder. “I think that her conduct [was] so intentionally reckless that it rises to the level of implied 
malice,” explained deputy district attorney Ben McLaughlin.
Source: Jesse McKinley, “Woman Is Accused of Murder after Breast-Fed Son Is Found to Have Meth in His System,” New York 
Times (August 5, 2011), A12.
Strict Liability Crimes  
Certain crimes, such as 
traffic violations, in which the 
defendant is guilty regardless 
of her or his state of mind at 
the time of the act.
Teaching Tip: Have students refer 
to the factual scenario described 
in Figure 3.1. Do they agree with 
the prosecutor’s decision to charge 
Maggie Jean Wortmon with second 
degree murder? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
law enforcement agents for unknowingly delivering a 
package of marijuana or illegal prescription drugs. In 
2011, a federal judge declared these laws unconstitu-
tional, calling Florida’s attempt to remove intent from 
the criminal equation “repugnant.”25
Protecting Minors One of the most controversial 
strict liability crimes is  statutory rape, in which an 
adult engages in a sexual relationship with a minor. 
In most states, even if the minor consents to the sex-
ual act, the crime still exists because, being under-
age, she or he is considered incapable of making a 
rational decision on the matter.26 Therefore, statu-
tory rape has been committed even if the adult was 
unaware of the minor’s age or was misled to believe 
that the minor was older.
ACComPLiCE LiAbiLiTy Under certain circumstances, a person can be charged with and 
convicted of a crime that he or she did not actually commit. This occurs when the sus-
pect has acted as an accomplice, helping another person commit the crime. Generally, to 
be found guilty as an accomplice, a person must have the “dual intent” (1) to aid the per-
son who committed the crime and (2) that such aid would lead to the commission of the 
crime.27 As for the actus reus, the accomplice must have helped the primary defendant 
in either a physical sense (for example, by providing the getaway car) or a psychological 
sense (for example, by encouraging her or him to commit the crime).28
In some states, a person can be convicted as an accomplice even without intent if 
the crime was a “natural and probable consequence” of his or her actions.29 This prin-
ciple has led to a proliferation of felony-murder legislation. Felony-murder is a form 
of first degree murder that applies when a person participates in any of a list of serious 
felonies that results in the unlawful killing of a human being. Under felony-murder law, a 
person can be convicted as an accomplice to an intentional killing, even when there is no 
intent. So, for example, if a person intentionally burns down a building, unintentionally 
killing an inhabitant, he or she will be charged with first degree murder because, in most 
jurisdictions, arson is a felony. 
ConCuRREnCE
According to criminal law, there must be  concurrence between the guilty act and the 
guilty intent. In other words, the guilty act and the guilty intent must occur together. 
Suppose, for example, that a woman intends to murder her husband with poison in order 
to collect his life insurance. Every evening, this woman drives her husband home from 
work. On the night she plans to poison him, however, she swerves to avoid a cat crossing 
the road and runs into a tree. She survives the accident, but her husband is killed. Even 
though her intent was realized, the incident would be considered an accidental death 
because she had not planned to kill him by driving the car into a tree.
CAusATion
Criminal law also requires that the criminal act cause the harm suffered. In 1989, 
nineteen-year-old Mike Wells shook his two-year-old daughter, Christina, so violently 
that she suffered brain damage. Soon after the incident, Wells served prison time for 
James menard’s mother, right, 
reaches to hug him at the 
end of his 2011 trial in Collier 
County, Florida, for the murder 
of Jake Couture. Among other 
charges, Menard was found 
guilty of felony armed trespass 
before he shot Couture. Why 
did this make him subject to a 
felony-murder charge? 
Lexey Swall/Naples Daily News
Statutory Rape A strict 
liability crime in which an adult 
engages in a sexual act with a 
minor.  
Felony-Murder An unlawful 
homicide that occurs during 
the attempted commission of 
a felony. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
think about felony-murder laws, 
which remove the requirement of 
intent from a crime. Do students 
think it is appropriate to charge a 
person with felony-murder even if 
they never intended for anyone to 
die as a result of their actions? Why 
or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   81
aggravated child abuse. Seventeen years later, in 2006, Christina died. When a coroner 
ruled that the cause of death was the earlier brain injury, Pasco County (Florida) authori-
ties decided that, despite the passage of time, Wells was criminally responsible for his 
daughter’s death. In 2010, Wells pleaded guilty to second degree murder and received a 
fifteen-year prison sentence. 
ATTEnDAnT CiRCumsTAnCEs
In certain crimes, attendant circumstances—also known as accompanying cir-
cumstances—are relevant to the corpus delicti. Most states, for example, differentiate 
between simple assault and the more serious offense of aggravated assault depending 
on the attendant circumstance of whether the defendant used a weapon such as a gun 
or a knife while committing the crime. Criminal law also classifies degrees of property 
crimes based on the attendant circumstance of the amount stolen. According to federal 
statutes, the theft of less than $1,000 from a bank is a misdemeanor, while the theft of any 
amount over $1,000 is a felony.30 (To get a better understanding of the role of attendant 
circumstances in criminal statutes, see Figure 3.2 below.)
REQuiREmEnTs of PRoof AnD inTEnT Attendant circumstances must be proved beyond a 
reasonable doubt, just like any other element of a crime. Furthermore, the mens rea of the 
defendant regarding each attendant circumstance must be proved as well. Consider the 
case of Christopher Jones, who was recently convicted of third degree rape in a South 
Dakota criminal court. Under state law, third degree rape occurs when the victim is 
incapable of giving consent to the sex act due to severe intoxication. 
A South Dakota appeals court overturned Jones’s conviction, ruling that prosecu-
tors did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant knew of his victim’s 
drunken state and, thus, her inability to give consent. The court added that if the state 
legislature wanted to remove such knowledge from the definition of the crime, it must 
say so in the statute, thus making awareness of the victim’s intoxication a strict liability 
(see the previous discussion) attendant circumstance.31
HATE CRimE LAWs In most cases, a person’s motive for committing a crime is irrele-
vant—a court will not try to read the accused’s mind. Over the past few decades, how-
ever, nearly every state and the federal government have passed hate crime laws that 
make the suspect’s motive an important attendant circumstance to his or her criminal 
act. In general, hate crime laws provide for greater sanctions against those who com-
mit crimes motivated by bias against a person based on race, ethnicity, religion, gender, 
sexual orientation, disability, or age. 
In 2011, for example, Paul Beebe pleaded guilty to federal and state criminal charges 
stemming from an incident in which he branded a swastika onto the arm of a disabled 
FiGuRe 3.2 Attendant Circumstances in Criminal Law
Most criminal statutes incorporate three of the elements we have discussed in this section: the act (actus reus), 
the intent (mens rea), and attendant circumstances. This diagram of Wisconsin’s false imprisonment statute should 
give you an idea of how these elements combine to create the totality of a crime.
 
Source: Wisconsin Statutes Section 940.30 (2001).
Intent
Whoever intentionally confines or restrains another without the person’s consent is guilty of false imprisonment.
Act
Attendant Circumstances
Attendant Circumstances  
The facts surrounding a criminal 
event that must be proved to 
convict the defendant of the 
underlying crime.
Hate Crime Law A statute 
that provides for greater 
sanctions against those who 
commit crimes motivated by 
bias against an individual or a 
group based on race, ethnicity, 
religion, gender, sexual 
orientation, disability, or age.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
consider a hate crime scenario in 
which a murderer is given a harsher 
sentence because his or her victim 
was a member of a minority group. 
Is it fair that the offender would 
have received a lesser sentence if 
the victim had been white? Why or 
why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Native American man in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Because the victim was a member of 
two protected classes and the act was obviously motivated by bias, Beebe was sentenced 
to eight and a half years in prison, a tougher punishment than he would have received if 
he had committed the aggravated battery without the element of hate. According to the 
National Crime Victimization Survey, nearly 200,000 hate crimes take place in the United 
States each year.32
HARm
For most crimes to occur, some harm must have been done to a person or to property. 
A certain number of crimes are actually categorized depending on the harm done to 
the victim, regardless of the intent behind the criminal act. Take two offenses, both of 
which involve one person hitting another in the back of the head with a tire iron. In 
the first instance, the victim dies, and the offender is charged with murder. In the sec-
ond, the victim is only knocked unconscious, and the offender is charged with battery. 
Because the harm in the second instance was less severe, so was the crime with which 
the offender was charged, even though the act was exactly the same. Furthermore, most 
states have different degrees of battery depending on the extent of the injuries suffered 
by the victim. 
Many acts are deemed criminal if they could do harm that the laws try to pre-
vent. Such acts are called inchoate offenses. They exist when only an attempt at 
a criminal act was made. If Jenkins solicits Peterson to murder Jenkins’s business 
partner, this is an inchoate offense on the part of Jenkins, even though Peterson fails 
to carry out the act. Conspiracies also fall into the category of inchoate offenses. In 
2003, the United States Supreme Court ruled that a person could be convicted of 
criminal conspiracy even though police intervention made the completion of the 
illegal plan impossible.33
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
Proof that a crime has been committed is established through the elements of the crime, 
which include the ____________ , or the physical act of the crime; the ____________ 
____________ , or the intent to commit the crime; and the ____________ of the guilty act 
and the guilty intent. With ____________ ____________ crimes, the law determines that a 
defendant is guilty even if he or she lacked the ____________ to perform a criminal act. 
____________ circumstances are those circumstances that accompany the main criminal 
act in a criminal code, and they must be proved ____________ ____________ ____________ 
____________ , just like any other elements of a crime. 
DEfEnsEs unDER CRiminAL LAW
When Tammy Gibson of Tacoma, Washington, saw a convicted sex offender named 
William A. Baldwin talking to her ten-year-old daughter, she leaped into action. Grabbing 
a baseball bat, she went after Baldwin, striking him repeatedly on the arm. A local judge 
rejected Gibson’s excuse that her victim “got what was coming to him” and sentenced the 
overly protective mother to three months behind bars for committing assault. A number 
of other defenses for wrongdoing, however, can be raised in the course of a criminal trial. 
These defenses generally rely on one of two arguments: (1) the defendant is not respon-
sible for the crime, or (2) the defendant was justified in committing the crime.
Inchoate Offenses Conduct 
deemed criminal without actual 
harm being done, provided 
that the harm that would have 
occurred is one the law tries to 
prevent. 
Conspiracy A secret plot by 
two or more people to carry 
out an illegal or harmful act.
Teaching Tip: Ask students to 
brainstorm examples of inchoate 
offenses. Ask them to share these 
examples with the class.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to discuss whether 
Tammy Gibson was right to attack 
the convicted sex offender who 
was speaking to her daughter. 
Was the judge reasonable in his 
sentence? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CRiminAL REsPonsibiLiTy AnD THE LAW
The idea of responsibility plays a significant role in criminal law. In certain circum-
stances, the law recognizes that even though an act is inherently criminal, society will 
not punish the actor because he or she does not have the requisite mental condition. In 
other words, the law “excuses” the person for his or her behavior. Insanity, intoxication, 
and mistake are the most important excuse defenses today, but we start our discussion 
of the subject with one of the first such defenses recognized by American law: infancy.
infAnCy Under the earliest state criminal codes of the United States, children younger 
than seven years of age could never be held legally accountable for crimes. Those between 
seven and fourteen years old were presumed to lack the capacity for criminal behavior, 
while anyone over the age of fourteen was tried as an adult. Thus, early American crimi-
nal law recognized infancy as a defense in which the accused’s wrongdoing is excused 
because he or she is too young to fully understand the consequences of his or her actions. 
With the creation of the juvenile justice system in the early 1900s, the infancy 
defense became redundant, as youthful delinquents were automatically treated dif-
ferently from adult offenders. Today, most states either designate an age (eighteen or 
below) under which wrongdoers are sent to juvenile court or allow prosecutors to decide 
whether a minor will be charged as an adult on a case-by-case basis. We will explore the 
concept of infancy as it applies to the modern American juvenile justice system in much 
greater detail in Chapter 13.
insAniTy For nearly two years, Stephen Morgan stalked and harassed Johanna Justin-
Jinich, a student at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut. Finally, Morgan 
fatally shot Justin-Jinich seven times at the bookstore café where she worked. In 2011, a 
three-judge panel ruled that Morgan’s paranoid schizophrenia kept him from knowing 
that his actions were wrong, and he was sent to a maximum-security psychiatric hospi-
tal rather than prison. Thus, insanity may be a defense to a criminal charge when the 
defendant’s state of mind is such that she or he cannot claim legal responsibility for her 
or his actions. 
Measuring Sanity The general principle of the insanity defense is that a person is 
excused for his or her criminal wrongdoing if, as a result of a mental disease or defect, 
he or she 
• 
Does not perceive the physical nature or consequences of his or her conduct;
• 
Does not know that his or her conduct is wrong or criminal; or
• 
Is not sufficiently able to control his or her conduct so as to be held accountable for it.34
Although criminal law has traditionally accepted the idea that an insane 
person cannot be held responsible for criminal acts, society has long debated 
what standards should be used to measure sanity for the purposes of a crimi-
nal trial. This lack of consensus is reflected in the diverse tests employed by 
different American jurisdictions to determine insanity. The tests include 
the following: 
1. The M’Naghten rule. Derived from an 1843 British murder 
case, the M’Naghten rule states that a person is legally 
insane and therefore not criminally responsible if, at the 
time of the offense, she or he was not able to distinguish 
List and briefly 
define the 
most important 
excuse defenses 
for crimes.
Learning  
objective6
in march 2011, a New Jersey 
judge found Jenny Erazo-
Rodriguez not guilty by reason 
of insanity for fatally strangling 
her four-year-old daughter. 
Erazo-Rodriguez claimed that 
God had ordered the death 
of her child. Why is someone 
like Erazo-Rodriguez “not 
responsible” for behavior that 
would otherwise be considered 
criminal? 
Robert Sciarrino/Star-Ledger
C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   83
Infancy A condition that, 
under early American law, 
excused young wrongdoers 
of criminal behavior because 
presumably they could not 
understand the consequences 
of their actions.
Insanity A defense for 
criminal liability that asserts a 
lack of criminal responsibility 
due to mental instability. 
M’Naghten Rule A common 
law test of criminal responsibility, 
derived from M’Naghten’s 
Case in 1843, that relies on 
the defendant’s inability to 
distinguish right from wrong.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
between right and wrong.35 As Figure 3.3 below shows, half of the states still use a 
version of the M’Naghten rule.
2. The ALI/MPC test. In the early 1960s, the American Law Institute (ALI) included an 
insanity standard in its exhaustive criminal law guidebook, the Model Penal Code 
(MPC). Also known as the substantial-capacity test, the ALI/MPC test requires 
that the defendant lack “substantial capacity” to either “appreciate the wrongful-
ness” of his or her conduct or to conform that conduct “to the requirements of the 
law.”36 
3. The irresistible-impulse test. Under the irresistible-impulse test, a person may be 
found insane even if he or she was aware that a criminal act was “wrong,” provided 
that some “irresistible impulse” resulting from a mental deficiency drove him or 
her to commit the crime.37
Public backlash against the insanity defense has caused seven state legislatures to pass 
“guilty but mentally ill” statutes. Under these laws, a jury can determine that a defendant 
is “mentally ill” rather than insane, and therefore responsible for her or his actions.38 
Defendants who are found guilty but mentally ill generally spend the early part of their 
sentences in a psychiatric hospital and the rest of the time in prison, or they receive 
treatment while in prison.
Determining Competency Whatever the standard, the insanity defense is rarely 
entered and is even less likely to result in an acquittal, as it is difficult to prove. (See 
the feature Myth versus Reality—Are Too Many Criminals Found Not Guilty by Reason of 
Insanity? on the facing page.) Psychiatry is far more commonly used in the courtroom 
Substantial-Capacity Test 
(ALI/MPC Test) A test for 
the insanity defense that states 
that a person is not responsible 
for criminal behavior when 
he or she “lacks substantial 
capacity” to understand that 
the behavior is wrong or know 
how to behave properly.
Irresistible-Impulse Test  
A test for the insanity defense 
under which a defendant who 
knew her or his action was 
wrong may still be found insane 
if she or he was unable, as a 
result of a mental deficiency, to 
control the urge to complete 
the act.
No insanity defense established by state legislature.
M’Naghten: “Didn’t know what he was doing 
or didn’t know it was wrong.”
Texas
N.M.
Ariz.
Nev.
Calif.
Ore.
Wash.
Idaho
Utah
S.D.
Minn.
Wis.
Mo.
Ill.
Ind. Ohio
Pa.
N.Y.
Mont.
Kan.
Okla.
La.
Ark.
Miss. Ala.
Ga.
Tenn.
S.C.
N.C.
Va. 
Ky. 
Fla.
Colo.
Wyo.
Neb.
W.Va.
Maine 
Mass. 
Hawaii
Alaska
Iowa
R.I. 
Conn. 
N.J. 
Del. 
Md. 
D.C. 
Vt. N.H. 
Mich.
N.D.
ALI/MPC:  “Lacks substantial capacity to appreciate 
the wrongfulness of his conduct or to control it.”
M’Naghten plus Irresistible Impulse:  
“Could not control his conduct.”
FiGuRe 3.3 insanity Defenses
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, The Defense of Insanity: Standards and Procedures, State Court Organization, 1998 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, June 2000), Table 38.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to discuss the James 
Holmes case. Holmes is charged 
with murdering twelve people 
and injuring fifty-eight more in an 
Aurora, Colorado, movie theater on 
July 20, 2012. Many legal experts 
have suggested that his defense 
attorneys will mount an insanity 
defense if the case goes to trial. 
Have students debate whether any 
of the insanity defenses discussed 
in the text are applicable to 
Holmes’s defense. You may want to 
provide students with news reports 
regarding the incident to give them 
more background on  
the case.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   85
to determine the “competency” of a defendant to stand trial. If a judge believes that the 
defendant is unable to understand the nature of the proceedings or to assist in his or her 
own defense, the trial will not take place. 
When competency hearings (which may also take place after the initial arrest and 
before sentencing) reveal that the defendant is in fact incompetent, the court may decide 
to place the defendant under treatment. For example, nearly eighteen months after his 
shooting rampage in Tucson, Arizona (discussed in Chapter 2), Jared Loughner was still 
being forcibly medicated at a federal prison facility in preparation for his criminal trial. 
Once competency has been restored to the defendant, the proceedings may recommence.39
inToxiCATion The law recognizes two types of intoxication, whether from drugs or 
from alcohol: voluntary and involuntary. Involuntary intoxication occurs when a person 
is physically forced to ingest or is injected with an intoxicating substance, or is unaware 
that a substance contains drugs or alcohol. Involuntary intoxication is a viable defense 
to a crime if the substance leaves the person unable to form the mental state necessary 
to understand that the act committed while under the influence was wrong.40 
In Colorado, for example, the murder conviction of a man who shot a neighbor 
was overturned on the basis that the jury in the initial trial was not informed of the pos-
sibility of involuntary intoxication. At the time of the crime, the man had been taking a 
prescription decongestant that contained phenylpropanolamine, which has been known 
to cause psychotic episodes.
Voluntary drug or alcohol intoxication is also used to excuse a defendant’s actions, 
though it is not a defense in itself. Rather, it is used when the defense attorney wants to 
show that the defendant was so intoxicated that mens rea was negated. In other words, 
Competency Hearing A 
court proceeding to determine 
whether the defendant is 
mentally well enough to 
understand the charges 
filed against her or him and 
cooperate with a lawyer in 
presenting a defense. 
Intoxication A defense 
for criminal liability in which 
the defendant claims that the 
taking of intoxicants rendered 
him or her unable to form the 
requisite intent to commit a 
criminal act.
   
To many Americans, it seems likely that any person who 
commits a gruesome murder or any other sort of violent 
crime has psychological problems. The question, then, is, 
How do we balance the need to punish such a person with 
the possibility that he or she may be seriously ill?
the Myth The American system of criminal justice 
answers this question by stating that a person may not be 
tried for an offense if that person cannot be held legally 
responsible for her or his actions. Because of the publicity 
surrounding the insanity defense, many people are under 
the impression that it is a major loophole in our system, 
allowing criminals to be “let off” no matter how heinous 
their crimes.
the reality In fact, the insanity defense is raised in 
only about 1 percent of felony trials, and it is successful 
only one out of every four times it is raised. The reason: 
it is extremely difficult to prove insanity under the law. 
For example, Andre Thomas cut out the hearts of his 
wife, their young son, and his wife’s thirteen-month-old 
daughter. Before his murder trial, Thomas pulled his right 
eye out of its socket. (Several years later, while on death 
row, he ripped out the other eye and apparently ate it.) 
Nonetheless, prosecutors were able to convince a Texas 
jury that Thomas understood the difference between right 
and wrong at the time of the murders, and an appeals court 
upheld the conviction. Thomas is “clearly ‘crazy,’” said one 
of the appellate judges who heard his case, “but he is also 
‘sane’ under Texas law.” 
Even if Thomas had succeeded with the insanity 
defense, he would not have been “let off” in the sense 
that he would have been set free. Many defendants found 
not guilty by reason of insanity spend more time in mental 
hospitals than criminals who are convicted of similar acts 
spend in prison.
For CritiCal analysis What is your opinion of the 
insanity defense?  Does it protect the interests of society? 
Why or why not?
mYtH vs. REALITY
Are Too many Criminals found  
not guilty by Reason of insanity?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
the defendant could not possibly have had the state of mind that 
a crime requires. Many courts are reluctant to allow voluntary 
intoxication arguments to be presented to juries, however. After 
all, the defendant, by definition, voluntarily chose to enter an 
intoxicated state. Twelve states have eliminated voluntary intoxi-
cation as a possible defense, a step that has been criticized by 
many legal scholars but was upheld by the United States Supreme 
Court in Montana v. Egelhoff (1996).41
misTAkE Everyone has heard the saying, “Ignorance of the law is no 
excuse.” Ordinarily, ignorance of the law or a mistaken idea about what 
the law requires is not a valid defense.42 For example, several years ago 
retired science teacher Eddie Leroy Anderson and his son dug for arrowheads near their 
favorite campground site in Idaho, unaware that the land was a federally protected 
archaeological site. Facing two years in prison for this mistake, they pleaded guilty and 
were given a year’s probation and a $1,500 fine each. “Folks need to pay attention to 
where they are,” said U.S. attorney Wendy Olson.43
Mistake of Law As the above example suggests, strict liability crimes specifically pre-
clude the mistake of law defense, because the offender’s intent is irrelevant. For practi-
cal reasons, the mistake of law defense is rarely allowed. If “I didn’t know” was a valid 
defense, the courts would be clogged with defendants claiming ignorance of all aspects 
of criminal law. In some rare instances, however, people who claim that they honestly 
did not know that they were breaking a law may have a valid defense if (1) the law was 
not published or reasonably known to the public or (2) the person relied on an official 
statement of the law that was erroneous.44
Mistake of Fact A mistake of fact, as opposed to a mistake of law, operates as a defense 
if it negates the mental state necessary to commit a crime. If, for example, Oliver mis-
takenly walks off with Julie’s briefcase because he thinks it is his, there is no theft. Theft 
requires knowledge that the property belongs to another. In some instances, mistake 
of fact is not an excuse but does allow for a lighter sentence. Several years ago, a Skagit 
County (Washington) judge sentenced teenage hunter Tyler Kales to thirty days in juve-
nile detention and 120 hours of community service for shooting and killing a hiker he 
mistook for a bear. Normally, of course, homicide with a firearm brings a much harsher 
punishment.
jusTifiCATion CRiminAL DEfEnsEs AnD THE LAW
In certain instances, a defendant will accept responsibility for committing an illegal act, 
but contend that—given the circumstances—the act was justified. In other words, even 
though the guilty act and the guilty intent are present, the particulars of the case relieve 
the defendant of criminal liability. In 2011, for example, there were 653  “justified” killings of 
those who were in the process of committing a felony: 393 were killed by law enforcement 
officers and 260 by private citizens.45 Four of the most important justification defenses are 
duress, self-defense, necessity, and entrapment.
DuREss Duress exists when the wrongful threat of one person induces another person 
to perform an act that she or he would otherwise not perform. In such a situation, duress 
is said to negate the mens rea necessary to commit a crime. For duress to qualify as a 
defense, the following requirements must be met:
“You know how it is,  
Dr. ellsworth. You go to a party, 
have a few drinks, somebody 
gets killed.”
— Letter from a death row 
inmate to professor phoebe 
ellsworth, University of 
Michigan
Describe the 
four most 
important 
justification 
criminal 
defenses.
Learning  
objective 7
Duress Unlawful pressure 
brought to bear on a person, 
causing the person to perform 
an act that he or she would not 
otherwise perform.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1. The threat must be of serious bodily harm or death.
2. The harm threatened must be greater than the harm caused by the crime.
3. The threat must be immediate and inescapable.
4. The defendant must have become involved in the situation through no fault of his 
or her own.46
Note that some scholars consider duress to be an excuse defense, because the threat of 
bodily harm negates any guilty intent on the part of the defendant.47 
When ruling on the duress defense, courts often examine whether the defendant 
had the opportunity to avoid the threat in question. Two narcotics cases illustrate this 
point. In the first, the defendant claimed that an associate threatened to kill him and his 
wife unless he participated in a marijuana deal. Although this contention was proved true 
during the course of the trial, the court rejected the duress defense because the defendant 
made no apparent effort to escape, nor did he report his dilemma to the police. In sum, 
the drug deal was avoidable—the defendant could have made an effort to extricate him-
self, but he did not, thereby surrendering the protection of the duress defense.48
In the second case, a taxi driver in Bogotá, Colombia, was ordered by a passenger to 
swallow cocaine-filled balloons and take them to the United States. The taxi driver was 
warned that if he refused, his wife and three-year-old daughter would be killed. After a 
series of similar threats, the taxi driver agreed to transport the drugs. On arriving at cus-
toms at the Los Angeles airport, the defendant consented to have his stomach X-rayed, 
which led to discovery of the contraband and his arrest. During his trial, the defendant 
told the court that he was afraid to notify the police in Colombia because he believed 
them to be  corrupt. The court accepted his duress defense, on the grounds that it met 
the four requirements listed above and the defendant had notified American authorities 
when given the opportunity to do so.49
jusTifiAbLE usE of foRCE—sELf-DEfEnsE A person who believes she or he is in danger 
of being harmed by another is justified in defending herself or himself with the use of 
force, and any criminal act committed in such circumstances can be justified as self-
defense. Other situations that also justify the use of force include the defense of one’s 
dwelling, the defense of other property, and the prevention of a crime. In all these situa-
tions, it is important to distinguish between deadly and nondeadly force. Deadly force is 
likely to result in death or serious bodily harm.
The Amount of Force Generally speaking, people can use the amount of 
nondeadly force that seems necessary to protect themselves, their dwell-
ings, or other property or to prevent the commission of a crime. Deadly 
force can be used in self-defense if there is a  reasonable belief that immi-
nent death or bodily harm will otherwise result, if the attacker is using 
unlawful force (an example of lawful force is that exerted by a police 
officer), if the defender has not initiated or provoked the attack, 
and if there is no other possible response or alternative way out 
of the life-threatening situation.50 Deadly force normally can be 
used to defend a dwelling only if the unlawful entry is violent 
and the person believes deadly force is necessary to prevent 
imminent death or great bodily harm. In some jurisdictions, 
it is also a viable defense if the person believes deadly force 
is necessary to prevent the commission of a felony (such as 
arson) in the dwelling. 
Self-Defense The legally 
recognized privilege to protect 
one’s self or property from 
injury by another. 
Confronted by two holdup 
men at his pharmacy in 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
Jerome Ersland shot one in 
the head and chased the other 
away. He then walked out from 
behind the counter and shot 
the wounded robber—who 
was unarmed—five more 
times, killing him. In May 2011, 
Ersland, right, was convicted 
of first degree murder for his 
actions. What is your opinion 
of this verdict? How can you 
argue that Ersland was acting 
in self-defense?
AP Photo/Sue Ogrocki, File
C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   87
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
The Duty to Retreat When a person is outside the home or in a public space, the rules for 
self-defense change somewhat. Until relatively recently, almost all jurisdictions required 
someone who is attacked under these circumstances to “retreat to the wall” before fight-
ing back. In other words, under this duty to retreat, one who is being assaulted may not 
resort to deadly force if he or she has a reasonable opportunity to “run away” and thus 
avoid the conflict. Only when this person has run into a “wall,” literally or otherwise, may 
deadly force be used in self-defense. 
Recently, sixteen states have adopted “stand your ground” laws that eliminate this 
duty to retreat. George Zimmerman’s claim of self-defense for his killing of Trayvon Martin, 
discussed in Chapter 1, relied on one such law, a Florida statute stating that citizens have 
“the right to stand [their] ground and meet force with force, including deadly force,” if they  
“reasonably” fear for their safety.51 Zimmerman’s attorneys presented evidence, such as 
photos of their client’s bloodied head taken by police after the incident, to show that he 
had been attacked by Martin and thus “reasonably” used deadly force to defend himself.52
nECEssiTy The necessity defense requires courts to weigh the harm caused by the crime 
actually committed against the harm that would have been caused by the criminal act 
avoided. If the avoided harm is greater than the committed harm, then the defense has 
a chance of succeeding. In 2011, for example, a San Francisco jury acquitted a defendant 
of carrying a concealed weapon because he was avoiding the “greater evil” of getting 
shot himself. The defendant had testified that he needed the gun for protection while 
entering a high-crime neighborhood to buy baby food and diapers for his crying niece.53 
Murder is the one crime for which the necessity defense is not applicable under any 
circumstances.54 
EnTRAPmEnT Entrapment is a justification defense that criminal law allows when a 
police officer or government agent deceives a defendant into wrongdoing. Although law 
enforcement agents can legitimately use various forms of subterfuge—such as infor-
mants or undercover agents—to gain information or apprehend a suspect in a criminal 
act, the law places limits on these strategies. Police cannot persuade an innocent person 
to commit a crime, nor can they coerce a suspect into doing so, even if they are certain 
he or she is a criminal. 
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
Criminal law recognizes that a defendant may not be ____________ for a criminal act if her or 
his mental state was impaired, by either ____________—the psychological inability to separate 
right from wrong—or ____________ due to drugs or alcohol. Defendants may also claim that 
they were ____________ in committing an act either because they were under ____________ 
to perform an act that they would not otherwise have performed or because they were acting 
in ____________-____________ to protect themselves from deadly harm. ____________ occurs 
when a government agent deceives a defendant into committing a crime. 
PRoTECTing CiviL LibERTiEs
To this point, we have focused on substantive criminal law, which defines the acts that 
the government will punish. We will now turn our attention to  procedural criminal 
law. (The section that follows will provide only a short overview of criminal procedure. 
In later chapters, many other constitutional issues will be examined in more detail.) 
Duty to Retreat The 
requirement that a person 
claiming self-defense prove 
that she or he first took 
reasonable steps to avoid the 
conflict that resulted in the use 
of deadly force. 
Necessity A defense against 
criminal liability in which 
the defendant asserts that 
circumstances required him or 
her to commit an illegal act.
Entrapment A defense in 
which the defendant claims 
that he or she was induced by 
a public official—usually an 
undercover agent or police 
 officer—to commit a crime that 
he or she would otherwise not 
have committed.
Substantive Criminal Law  
Law that defines the rights 
and duties of individuals with 
respect to one another.
Procedural Criminal Law  
Rules that define the manner in 
which the rights and duties of 
individuals may be enforced.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask each of your 
students either to defend or 
criticize “Stand Your Ground” laws, 
depending on her or his opinion 
of these statutes. Have them 
explain how the Trayvon Martin 
case supports their positions. (For 
more information on this case, 
students can refer to the beginning 
of Chapter 1.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Criminal law brings the force of the state, with all its resources, to bear against the 
individual. Criminal procedures, drawn from the ideals stated in the Bill of Rights, are 
designed to protect the constitutional rights of individuals and to prevent the arbitrary 
use of power by the government.
THE biLL of RigHTs
For various reasons, proposals related to the rights of individuals were rejected during the 
framing of the U.S. Constitution in 1787. The need for a written declaration of civil liber-
ties of individuals eventually caused the first Congress to draft twelve amendments to 
the Constitution and submit them for approval by the states. Ten of these amendments, 
commonly known as the Bill of Rights, were adopted in 1791. Since then, seventeen 
more amendments have been added.
The Bill of Rights, as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court, has served 
as the basis for procedural safeguards of the accused in this country. These safeguards 
include the following: 
1. The Fourth Amendment protection from unreasonable searches and seizures.
2. The Fourth Amendment requirement that no warrants for a search or an arrest 
can be issued without probable cause.
3. The Fifth Amendment requirement that no one can be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without “due process” of law.
4. The Fifth Amendment prohibition against double jeopardy (trying someone twice 
for the same criminal offense).
5. The Fifth Amendment guarantee that no person can be required to be a witness 
against (incriminate) himself or herself.
6. The Sixth Amendment guarantees of a speedy trial, a trial by jury, a public trial, 
the right to confront witnesses, and the right to a lawyer at various stages of crim-
inal proceedings.
7. The Eighth Amendment prohibitions against excessive bails and fines and cruel 
and unusual punishments. (For the full text of the Bill of Rights, see Appendix A.)
The Bill of Rights initially offered citizens protection only against the federal government.  
Over the years, however, the procedural safeguards of most of the provisions of 
the Bill of Rights have been applied to the actions of state governments through the 
Fourteenth Amendment. Furthermore, the states, under certain circumstances, have the 
option to grant even more protections than are required by the federal Constitution.  
As these protections are crucial to criminal justice procedures in 
the United States, they will be afforded much more attention 
in Chapter 6, with regard to police action, and in Chapter 8, 
with regard to the criminal trial.
DuE PRoCEss
Both the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments 
provide that no person should be deprived 
of “life, liberty, or property without due 
process of law.” This due  process clause 
basically requires that the government not 
act unfairly or arbitrarily. In other words, 
the government cannot rely on individ-
ual judgment and impulse when making  
Bill of Rights The first 
ten amendments to the U.S. 
Constitution.
Due Process Clause The 
provisions of the Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendments 
to the Constitution that 
guarantee that no person shall 
be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without due process 
of law. 
Why do most citizens accept 
certain steps taken by the 
federal government that restrict 
our individual freedoms—such 
as limiting the amount of 
liquids and gels passengers can 
carry on airplanes to prevent 
such substances from being 
used in terrorist attacks?
AP Photo/Gene Blyth
C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   89
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
decisions, but must stay within the boundaries of reason and the law. Of course, disagree-
ments as to the meaning of these provisions have plagued courts, politicians, and citizens 
since this nation was founded, and will undoubtedly continue to do so.
To understand due process, it is important to consider its two types: procedural due 
process and substantive due process.
PRoCEDuRAL DuE PRoCEss According to procedural due process, the law must be car-
ried out by a method that is fair and orderly. It requires that certain procedures be followed 
in administering and executing a law so that an individual’s basic freedoms are not violated. 
The American criminal justice system’s adherence to due process principles is evi-
dent in its treatment of the death penalty. To ensure that the process is fair, as we will 
see in Chapter 9, a number of procedural safeguards have been built into capital punish-
ment. Much to the dismay of many victims’ groups, these procedures make the process 
expensive and lengthy. In California, for example, the average time between conviction 
for a capital crime and execution is twenty-five years. Furthermore, each execution costs 
state taxpayers an average of about $308 million.55 (The controversy surrounding a gov-
ernment killing that did not follow accepted due process procedures is explored in the 
feature Anti-Terrorism in Action—Due Justice? below.)
subsTAnTivE DuE PRoCEss Fair procedures would obviously be of little use if they were 
used to administer unfair laws. For example, suppose a law requires everyone to wear a 
red shirt on Mondays. You wear a blue shirt on Monday, and you are arrested, convicted, 
and sentenced to one year in prison. The fact that all proper procedures were followed 
and your rights were given their proper protections would mean very little, because the 
law that you broke was unfair and arbitrary.
Procedural Due Process  
The constitutional requirement 
that the law must be carried 
out in a fair and orderly manner.
Explain the 
importance 
of the due 
process clause 
in the criminal 
justice system.
Learning  
objective 8
After Islamist cleric Anwar al-Awlaki was killed by an 
American drone strike in the Middle Eastern country of 
Yemen on September 30, 2011, President Barack Obama 
did not hesitate to show his pleasure. The president called 
Awlaki’s death a “milestone in the broader effort to defeat” 
international terrorism. Through his online sermons in 
English, Awlaki had been linked to more than a dozen 
terrorist operations, including a 2010 plot to blow up cargo 
airplanes bound for the United States.
There was a legal problem with the killing, however. 
Awlaki was born in New Mexico and was therefore a 
citizen of the United States. Consequently, critics argued 
that the drone attack that killed him was illegal, given that 
the U.S. Constitution forbids the execution of American 
citizens without due process of law. Legal expert Glenn 
Greenwald noted that there had been no effort to charge 
Awlaki with committing any crime, and he had not been 
afforded a trial to prove his innocence. “[Awlaki] was 
simply ordered killed by the president: his judge, jury and 
executioner,” Greenwald said.
FoR CRitiCAL AnALysis In a secret legal memorandum, 
the Obama administration justified the killing of Anwar 
al-Awlaki without a trial on several grounds. Primarily, the 
memo asserts that Awlaki was no ordinary American citizen. 
Rather, he was a member of terrorist organizations that 
were, essentially, at war with the United States. Furthermore, 
federal attorneys claim that the execution, without trial, of 
a man who is plotting to kill Americans is a legitimate act 
of self-defense, particularly given that Yemeni officials were 
making no effort to apprehend Awlaki. Do you agree that 
the Obama administration was justified in this action? Or, 
do you think that the assassination of U.S. citizens without 
charges is never acceptable? Explain your answer.
Due JustiCe?
AnTi-TERRoRism In aCtIon
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   91
Thus, substantive due process requires that the laws themselves be reasonable. 
The idea is that if a law is unfair or arbitrary, even if properly passed by a legislature, it 
must be declared unconstitutional. In the 1930s, for example, Oklahoma instituted the 
Habitual Criminal Sterilization Act. Under this statute, a person who had been convicted 
of three felonies could be “rendered sexually sterile” by the state (that is, the person 
would no longer be able to produce children). The United States Supreme Court held 
that the law was unconstitutional, as there are “limits to the extent which a legislatively 
represented majority may conduct biological experiments at the expense of the dignity 
and personality and natural powers of a minority.”56
THE suPREmE CouRT’s RoLE in DuE PRoCEss As the last example suggests, the United 
States Supreme Court often plays the important role of ultimately deciding when due 
process has been violated and when it has not. (See Figure 3.4 below for a list of impor-
tant Supreme Court due process cases.) As we will see throughout this textbook, the 
Court has recently had to make a number of important decisions regarding the due 
process rights that should be afforded to terrorist suspects by the American government. 
In particular, in Chapters 8 and 14, we will look at the due process ramifications of the 
federal government’s efforts to bring terrorist suspects to justice.
SeLFaSSeSSment
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 93.
The basis for procedural safeguards for the accused is found in the ____________ 
____________ ____________ of the U.S. Constitution. According to these safeguards, no 
person shall be deprived of life or liberty without ____________ ____________ of law. This 
means that the ____________ by which the law is carried out must be fair and orderly and 
the laws themselves must be ____________. The ____________ ____________ ____________ 
____________ ultimately decides whether these rights have been violated. 
Substantive Due Process  
The constitutional requirement 
that laws used to accuse and 
convict persons of crimes must 
be fair.
FiGuRe 3.4 important united states supreme Court Due Process Decisions
 
yeAR
 
issue
AmenDment 
invoLveD
 
CouRt CAse 
1948
Right to a public trial
VI
In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257
1952
 Police searches cannot be so invasive as to “shock the 
conscience”
IV
Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165
1961
Exclusionary rule
IV
Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643
1963
Right to a lawyer in all criminal felony cases
VI
Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335
1964
No compulsory self-incrimination
V
Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1
1964
 Right to have counsel when taken into police custody 
and subjected to questioning
VI
Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478
1965
Right to confront and cross-examine witnesses
VI
Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400
1966
Right to an impartial jury
VI
Parker v. Gladden, 385 U.S. 363
1966
 Confessions of suspects not notified of due process 
rights ruled invalid
V
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436
1967
Right to a speedy trial
VI
Klopfer v. North Carolina, 386 U.S. 21
1967
Juveniles have due process rights, too
V
In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1 
1968
Right to a jury trial ruled a fundamental right
VI
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145
1969
No double jeopardy
V
Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784
Teaching Tip: Have each student 
pick one of the United States 
Supreme Court due process cases 
listed in Figure 3.4. Then, have 
the student read the case to get a 
better understanding of the Court’s 
reliance on due process principles 
to support its decision.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
CHaPteR SummaRY
List the four written sources of Ameri-
can criminal law. (a) The U.S. Constitution 
and state constitutions; (b) statutes passed 
by Congress and state legislatures (plus local ordinances); 
(c) administrative agency regulations; and (d) case law. 
Explain the two basic functions of crimi-
nal law. The primary function is to protect 
citizens from harms to their safety and 
property and from harms to society’s interest collectively. 
The second function is to maintain and teach social values 
as well as social boundaries—for example, speed limits and 
laws against bigamy. 
Discuss the primary goals of civil law 
and criminal law, and explain how these 
goals are realized. Civil law is designed 
to resolve disputes between private individuals and other 
entities, such as corporations. In these disputes, one party, 
called the plaintiff, tries to gain monetary damages by prov-
ing that the accused party, or the defendant, is to blame for 
a tort, or wrongful act. In contrast, criminal law exists to 
protect society from criminal behavior. To that end, the gov-
ernment prosecutes defendants, or persons who have been 
charged with committing a crime.
Explain the differences between crimes 
mala in se and mala prohibita. A criminal 
act is mala in se if it is inherently wrong, 
while a criminal act mala prohibita is illegal only because it 
is prohibited by the laws of a particular society. It is some-
times difficult to distinguish between these two sorts of 
crimes because it is difficult to define a “pure” mala in se 
crime; that is, it is difficult to separate a crime from the cul-
ture that has deemed it a crime.
Delineate the elements required to es-
tablish mens rea (a guilty mental state).  
(a) Purpose, (b) knowledge, (c) negligence, or 
(d) recklessness.
List and briefly define the most important 
excuse defenses for crimes. Insanity—dif-
ferent tests of insanity can be used, including 
(a) the M’Naghten rule (right-wrong test); (b) the ALI/MPC test, 
also known as the substantial-capacity test; and (c) the irresist-
ible-impulse test. Intoxication—voluntary and involuntary, 
the latter being a possible criminal defense. Mistake—some-
times valid if the law was not published or reasonably known 
or if the alleged offender relied on an official statement of the 
law that was erroneous. Also, a mistake of fact may negate the 
mental state necessary to commit a crime. 
Describe the four most important justi-
fication criminal defenses. Duress—re-
quires that (a) the threat is of serious bodily 
harm or death, (b) the harm is greater than that caused by 
the crime; (c) the threat is immediate and inescapable; and 
(d) the defendant became involved in the situation through 
no fault of his or her own. Justifiable use of force—the de-
fense of one’s person, dwelling, or property, or the preven-
tion of a crime. Necessity—justifiable if the harm sought 
to be avoided is greater than that sought to be prevented 
by the law defining the offense charged. Entrapment—the 
criminal action was induced by certain governmental per-
suasion or trickery. 
Explain the importance of the due pro-
cess clause in the criminal justice sys-
tem. The due process clause acts to limit 
the power of government. In the criminal justice system, 
the due process clause requires that certain procedures be 
followed to ensure the fairness of criminal proceedings and 
that all criminal laws be reasonable and in the interest of the 
public good.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QueStIonS FoR CRItICaL anaLYSIS
1. Give an example of a criminal law whose main pur-
pose seems to be teaching societal boundaries rather 
than protecting citizens from harm. By searching the 
Internet, can you find examples of other countries 
where this behavior is not considered criminal? How is 
the behavior perceived in those countries?
2. Give an example of how one person could be involved in 
a civil lawsuit and a criminal lawsuit for the same action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3 :  I n s I d E  C R I m I n A l  l A w   93
3. Two fathers, John and Phil, get in a heated argument 
following a dispute between their sons in a Little League 
baseball game. They come to blows, and John strikes 
Phil in the temple, killing him. Will John be charged with 
voluntary manslaughter or involuntary manslaughter? 
What other details might you need to be sure of your 
answer?
4. Why does the absence of a mens rea provision make it 
easier for prosecutors to convict defendants charged 
with strict liability crimes?
5. Critics have derogatorily labeled the “stand your ground 
laws” passed by Florida and many other states (see page 88) 
“license to kill” laws. Why would they do so? What is your 
opinion of these laws?
KeY teRmS
actus reus  77
administrative law  69
attempt  77
attendant circumstances  81
ballot initiative  68
beyond a reasonable doubt  73
Bill of Rights  89
case law  69
civil law  72
competency hearing  85
conspiracy  82
constitutional law  67
corpus delicti  77
defendant  73
due process clause  89
duress  86
duty to retreat  88
entrapment  88
felony  74
felony-murder  80
hate crime law  81
inchoate offenses  82
infancy  83
infraction  75
insanity  83
intoxication  85
involuntary manslaughter  74
irresistible-impulse test  84
liability  73
mala in se  75
mala prohibita  75
malice aforethought  74
mens rea  77
misdemeanor  75
M’Naghten rule  83
necessity  88
negligence  78
plaintiff  72
precedent  69
preponderance of the evidence  73
procedural criminal law  88
procedural due process  90
recklessness  78
self-defense  87
statutory law  67
statutory rape  80
strict liability crimes  79
substantial-capacity test  
(ALI/MPC test)  84
substantive criminal law  88
substantive due process  91
supremacy clause  68
voluntary manslaughter  74
SeLF aSSeSSment anSWeR KeY
Page 69: i. Constitution; ii. unconstitutional; iii. statutes; 
iv. case/judge-made/common 
Page 71: i. legal; ii. criminal; iii. social; iv. morality 
Page 76: i. Civil; ii. state/government; iii. felony;  
iv. misdemeanor; v. First degree murder; vi. manslaughter
Page 82: i. actus reus; ii. mens rea; iii. concurrence;  
iv. strict liability; v. intent/mens rea/mental state;  
vi. Attendant; vii. beyond a reasonable doubt
Page 88: i. responsible; ii. insanity; iii. intoxication;  
iv. justified; v. duress; vi. self-defense; vii. Entrapment 
Page 91: i. Bill of Rights; ii. due process; iii. procedures;  
iv. reasonable/fair; v. United States Supreme Court 
CouRSemate
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94   C R I m I n A l  J U s T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
noteS
 1. Quoted in DeeDee Correll, “Sweat Lodge 
Guru Is Held in Three Deaths,” Los Angeles 
Times (February 4, 2010), 1.
 2. Arizona Revised Statutes Section 31– 
1102(A).
 3.  John S. Baker, Jr., Measuring the Explosive 
Growth 
of 
Federal 
Crime 
Legislation 
(Washington, D.C.: The Federalist Society for 
Law and Public Policy Studies, 2008), 1.
 4. Quoted in “Judge: Federal Law Trumps 
Montana’s Medical Pot Law,” Associated Press 
(January 23, 2012). 
 5. Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397 (1989).
 6. “Arizona Voters OK Medical-Marijuana Bill,” 
Boston Globe (November 15, 2010), 2.
 7. Clean Water Act Section 309, 33 U.S.C.A. 
Section 1319 (1987).
 8. Joel Feinberg, The Moral Limits of the 
Criminal Law: Harm to Others (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1984), 221–232.
 9. Henry M. Hart, Jr., “The Aims of the Criminal 
Law,” Law & Contemporary Problems 23 
(1958), 405–406.
10. John L. Diamond, “The Myth of Morality and 
Fault in Criminal Law Doctrine,” American 
Criminal Law Review 34 (Fall 1996), 111.
11. The Humane Society of the United States, 
“Ranking of State Cockfighting Laws,” 
June 2010, at www.humanesociety.org/
assets/pdfs/animal_fighting/cockfight-
ing_statelaws.pdf; and Animal Welfare Act 
Amendments of 2007, Pub. L. 110-246, 122 
Statute 223 (2007).
12. John Monk, “Cockfighters Take Fight to 
Federal Appeals Court,” Columbia (SC) State 
(December 4, 2011), A1.
13. Lawrence 
M. 
Friedman, 
Crime 
and 
Punishments in American History (New York: 
Basic Books, 1993), 10.
14. Model Penal Code Section 1.04 (2).
15. Federal Criminal Rules Handbook, Section 2.1 
(St. Paul, MN: West, 2008). 
16. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes Annotated 
Section 5/16-104 (St. Paul, MN: West, 2002).
17. Johannes Andenaes, “The Moral or Educative 
Influence of Criminal Law,” Journal of Social 
Issues 27 (Spring 1971), 17, 26.
18. Hawkins v. State, 219 Ind. 116, 129, 37 N.E.2d 
79 (1941).
19. David C. Biggs, “‘The Good Samaritan Is 
Packing’: An Overview of the Broadened 
Duty to Aid Your Fellowman, with the 
Modern Desire to Possess Concealed 
Weapons,” University of Dayton Law Review 
22 (Winter 1997), 225.
20. Terry Halbert and Elaine Ingulli, Law and 
Ethics in the Business Environment, 6th 
ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage 
Learning, 2009), 8.
21. Texas Penal Code Section 46.13 (1995).
22. Model Penal Code Section 2.02(c).
23. United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277 
(1943).
24. Florida Statutes Section 893.101 (2002).
25. John Schwartz, “Florida: Drug Laws Ruled 
Unconstitutional,” New York Times (July 28, 
2011), A20.
26. State v. Stiffler, 763 P.2d 308, 311 (Idaho 
Ct.App. 1988).
27. State v. Harrison, 425 A.2d 111 (1979).
28. Richard G. Singer and John Q. LaFond, 
Criminal Law: Examples and Explanations 
(New York: Aspen Law & Business, 1997), 
322.
29. State v. Linscott, 520 A.2d 1067 (1987).
30. Federal Bank Robbery Act, 18 U.S.C.A. 
Section 2113.
31. State v. Jones, 2011 S.D. 60 (2011).
32. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Hate Crime, 2003–
2009 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, June 2011), 1.
33. United States v. Jiminez Recio, 537 U.S. 270 
(2003).
34. Paul H. Robinson, Criminal Law Defenses (St. 
Paul, MN: West, 2008), Section 173, Ch. 5Bl.
35. M’Naghten’s Case, 10 Cl.&F. 200, Eng.Rep. 718 
(1843). Note that the name is also spelled 
M’Naughten and McNaughten.
36. Model Penal Code Section 401 (1952).
37. Joshua Dressler, Cases and Materials on 
Criminal Law, 2d ed. (St. Paul, MN: West 
Group, 1999), 599.
38. South Carolina Code Annotated Section 
17-24-20(A) (Law. Co-op. Supp., 1997).
39. Bruce J. Winick, “Presumptions and Burdens 
of Proof in Determining Competency to Stand 
Trial: An Analysis of Medina v. California 
and the Supreme Court’s New Due Process 
Methodology in Criminal Cases,” University of 
Miami Law Review 47 (1993), 817.
40. Lawrence P. Tiffany and Mary Tiffany, 
“Nosologic Objections to the Criminal 
Defense of Pathological Intoxication: What 
Do the Doubters Doubt?” International 
Journal of Law and Psychiatry 13 (1990), 49.
41. 518 U.S. 37 (1996).
42. Kenneth 
W. 
Simons, 
“Mistake 
and 
Impossibility, Law and Fact, and Culpability: 
A Speculative Essay,” Journal of Criminal Law 
and Criminology 81 (1990), 447.
43. Quoted in Gary Fields and John R. 
Emshwiller, “As Criminal Laws Proliferate, 
More Are Ensnared,” Wall Street Journal (July 
23, 2011), at online.wsj.com/article/SB100
01424052748703749504576172714184601
654.html.
44. Lambert v. California, 335 U.S. 225 (1957).
45. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in 
the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/
expanded-homicide-data-table-14; and 
www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr/ 
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.- 
2011/tables/expanded-homicide-data-
table-15.
46. Craig L. Carr, “Duress and Criminal 
Responsibility,” Law and Philosophy 10 
(1990), 161.
47. Arnold N. Enker, “In Supporting the 
Distinction between Justification and 
Excuse,” Texas Tech Law Review 42 (2009), 
277.
48. United States v. May, 727 F.2d 764 (1984).
49. United States v. Contento-Pachon, 723 F.2d 
691 (1984).
50. People v. Murillo, 587 N.E.2d 1199, 1204 (Ill.
App.Ct. 1992).
51. Florida Statutes Section 776.03 (2005).
52. Kyle Hightower and Mike Schneider, “Evidence 
Shows Violent Fight Preceded Fla. Shooting 
Death,” Associated Press (May 19, 2012).
53. “Man Acquitted of Concealed Weapon 
Charge on ‘Necessity’ Defense,” San 
Francisco Examiner (July 10, 2011), at www.
sfexaminer.com/local/crime/2011/07/
man-acquitted-conceealed-weapon-
charge-necessity-defense.
54. People v. Petro, 56 P.2d 984 (Cal.Ct.App. 1936); 
and Regina v. Dudley and Stephens, 14 Q.B.D. 
173 (1884).
55. Arthur L. Alarcon and Paula M. Mitchell, 
“Executing the Will of the Voters? A 
Roadmap to Mend or End the California 
Legislature’s Multi-Billion Dollar Death 
Penalty Debacle,” Loyola of Los Angeles Law 
Review 44 (2011), S109.
56. Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535, 546–547 
(1942).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   97
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  List the four basic responsibilities of the police.
2  Tell how the patronage system affected policing.
3  Explain how intelligence-led policing works and how it 
benefits modern police departments.
4  Identify the differences between the police academy and 
field training as learning tools for recruits.
5  Describe the challenges facing women who choose law 
enforcement as a career.
6  Indicate some of the most important law enforcement 
agencies under the control of the Department of Homeland 
Security.
7  Identify the duties of the FBI.
8  Analyze the importance of private security today.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary on 
pages 121 and 122 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Law  
Enforcement 
Today
97
TLC/Walling McGarity
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• The Responsibilities of the 
Police
• A Short History of the  
American Police
• Recruitment and Training: 
Becoming a Police Officer
• Women and Minorities in 
Policing Today
• Public and Private Law 
Enforcement
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
N
ot all of Pete Dwyer’s colleagues felt that he should have been fired for his indis-
cretions. Joey Sigala, president of the Albuquerque Police Officer’s Association, 
says that while department officials can dictate an officer’s on-the-job behav-
ior, “I don’t believe they have the right to tell us what to do outside of that.”1 Nevertheless, 
many police departments across the country have instituted policies to regulate their 
employees’ social media etiquette. These protocols recognize that police officers are 
“by far the most visible of all criminal justice institutions”2 and must be held to a high 
standard of behavior. 
Indeed, the men and women in blue symbolize the criminal justice system for many 
Americans who may never see the inside of a courtroom or a prison cell. The police 
are entrusted with immense power to serve and protect the public good: the power to 
use weapons and the power to arrest. But that same power alarms many citizens, who 
fear that it may be turned arbitrarily against them. The role of the police is constantly 
debated as well. Is their primary mission to fight crime, or should they also be concerned 
with the social conditions that presumably lead to crime?
This chapter will lay the foundation for our study of law enforcement agents and 
the work that they do. It includes a short history of policing, followed by a discussion 
of police recruitment and an examination of the many different agencies that make up 
LifE on THE TwEET
Sergeant Cynthia Schumann, a twenty-six-year 
police veteran, has been jotting down notes about 
her on-the-job experiences for most of her career. 
“People would not believe—you can’t make it up—
what we’ve seen,” she said at a writing workshop 
sponsored by the Chicago Police Department for its 
officers in February 2012. “Every policeman has said 
more than once, ‘We have got to write a book.’” 
Thanks to social media technology, law 
enforcement agents no longer have to write a book 
to share their opinions and exploits with the public. 
Every day, thousands of police officers express 
themselves in 140-character bursts of insight via 
Twitter, providing a panorama of the policing life 
that goes beyond what any single novel or true-
crime best seller has to offer. A random fifteen-
minute visit to “Cops on the Tweet,” a public list of 
U.S. law enforcement personnel tweets, reveals the 
personalities of a sheriff from Big Bend, Texas, who 
is fascinated by the Old West; a Youngstown, Ohio, 
patrolman telling Valentine’s Day jokes; and a Los 
Angeles homicide detective weighing in on the death 
of pop singer Whitney Houston. 
The freedom of expression provided by Twitter 
can be a double-edged sword. In 2011, Detective 
Pete Dwyer lost his job at the Albuquerque (New 
Mexico) Police Department thanks to a series of 
unfortunate tweets. One of the messages made an 
insensitive joke about Muslims, and another offered 
a link to a Web site that compared the administration 
of President Barack Obama to the Nazis. “We respect 
and value the right to free speech,” said Albuquerque 
police chief Ray Schultz, “but 
comments that impair our 
officers’ ability to perform 
their duties and bring 
discredit to the [department] 
will not be tolerated.”
An Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, law enforcement 
official updates the city’s 
public safety Twitter site. 
AP Photo/Tim Korte
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
to read “Life on the Tweet” and 
discuss whether they think that 
Pete Dwyer should have lost his 
job over the tweets that he wrote. 
You can frame this question as part 
of a larger discussion of whether 
government officials should be able 
to control the off-duty behavior of 
law enforcement agents.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   99
the law enforcement system. We will also look at the issues facing members of minority 
groups and women who choose to follow careers in policing, as well as the subject of 
private security. We start, however, by answering a basic—though hardly simple—ques-
tion: What do police do?
THE REsPonsibiLiTiEs of THE PoLiCE
As we begin our examination of police and policing, you should understand that the 
realities of law enforcement rarely match the depiction of the profession in the popular 
media. For the most part, the incidents that make up a police officer’s daily 
routine would not make it on to television dramas such as the NCIS series or 
Hawaii Five-O. Besides catching criminals, police spend a great deal of time 
on such mundane tasks as responding to noise complaints, confiscating 
firecrackers, and poring over paperwork. Sociologist Egon Bittner warned 
against the tendency to see the police primarily as agents of law enforce-
ment and crime control. A more inclusive accounting of “what the police 
do,” Bittner believed, would recognize that they provide “situationally  justified force 
in society.”3 In other words, the function of the police is to solve any problem that may  
possibly, though not necessarily, require the use of force. 
Within Bittner’s rather broad definition of “what the police do,” we can pinpoint 
four basic responsibilities of the police:
1. To enforce laws.
2. To provide services.
3. To prevent crime.
4. To preserve the peace.
As will become evident over the next two chapters, there is a great deal of debate 
among legal and other scholars and law enforcement officers over which responsibilities 
deserve the most police attention and what methods should be employed by the police 
in meeting those responsibilities.
EnfoRCing LAws
In the public mind, the primary role of the police is to enforce society’s laws—hence, the 
term law enforcement officer. In their role as “crime fighters,” police officers have a clear 
mandate to seek out and apprehend those who have violated the law. The crime-fighting 
responsibility is so dominant that all police activity—from the purchase of new automo-
biles to a plan to hire more minority officers—must often be justified in terms of its law 
enforcement value.4
Police officers also see themselves primarily as crime fighters, a perception that 
often leads people into what they believe will be an exciting career in law enforce-
ment. Although the job certainly offers challenges unlike any other, police officers 
normally do not spend most of their time on law enforcement duties. After surveying 
a year’s worth of dispatch data from the Wilmington (Delaware) Police Department, 
researchers Jack Greene and Carl Klockars found that officers spent only about half 
of their working hours enforcing the law or dealing with crimes. The rest of their 
time was spent on order maintenance, service provision, traffic patrol, and medical 
assistance.5 
Furthermore, information provided by the Uniform Crime Report shows that most 
arrests are made for “crimes of disorder” or public annoyances rather than violent or 
List the 
four basic 
responsibilities 
of the police.
Learning  
objective1
“Every community 
gets the kind of law 
enforcement it insists on.”
— Robert 
Kennedy,  
U.S. attorney 
general (1964)
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students 
what they believe to be the 
most important functions and 
responsibilities of the police. At this 
point in the chapter, ask students 
to describe what they imagine a 
police officer’s typical day to be 
like.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

property crimes.6 In 2011, for example, police made 10.2 million arrests for drunkenness, 
liquor law violations, disorderly conduct, vagrancy, loitering, and other minor offenses, 
but only about 535,000 arrests for violent crimes.7 (Sometimes, as the feature You Be the 
Police Commissioner—Occupational Hazard below shows, the decision to enforce crimi-
nal law is not easily made.)
PRoviding sERviCEs
The popular emphasis on crime fighting and law enforcement tends to overshadow the 
fact that a great deal of a police officer’s time is spent providing services for the com-
munity. The motto “To Serve and Protect” has been adopted by thousands of local police 
departments, and the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics recognizes the duty “to serve the 
community” in its first sentence.8 The services that police provide are numerous—a 
partial list would include directing traffic, performing emergency medical procedures, 
counseling those involved in domestic disputes, providing directions to tourists, and 
finding lost children. 
Along with firefighters, police officers are among the first public servants called 
to conduct search and rescue operations. This particular duty adds considerably to the 
ThE SiTuaTioN Starting in September 2011, demonstrators protesting economic inequality 
“occupied” dozens of American cities, sometimes in numbers reaching the thousands. Some 
of these protests resulted in violent clashes with police, but the Occupy Boston movement has 
been, for the most part, peaceful. The Boston protesters agreed to limit their activities to a 
“safe area” in downtown’s Dewey Square, thus avoiding confrontation with law enforcement.  
One day in October, however, a group of protestors sought to block traffic on the North 
Washington Street Bridge. Then, that evening, about two hundred members of Occupy Boston 
moved into the Greenway—a city park that had been specifically forbidden to them by city officials. 
At about 1:20 a.m., Boston police officers surrounded the Greenway, and a police official, using a 
bullhorn, asked the demonstrators to disperse. They responded with chants of defiance. The police 
official gave what he promised was a final warning. The protestors refused to budge.
ThE Law A Boston ordinance gives police the legal authority to arrest anyone in the 
Greenway after 11 p.m. and charge him or her with trespassing and unlawful assembly. 
Your DEciSioN Suppose you are the Boston police commissioner watching the events at the 
Greenway. Do you give the order for your officers to move in and arrest the protestors? What 
are the pros and cons of taking such an action? Although the demonstrators are technically 
breaking the law, they do not appear to be threatening any violence against persons or property. 
Furthermore, you are well aware of the public relations risks of a confrontation. The protestors 
are well armed with video-recording devices, and negative media coverage of seemingly heavy-
handed police tactics would create a backlash against you and your department.
[To see how the Boston police commissioner reacted in this situation, go to Example 4.1 in Appendix B.]
You BE ThE  
PoLicE commiSSioNEr 
Occupational Hazard
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
100   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Group Activity: Have students 
form groups and refer to the 
scenario presented in “You Be the 
Police Commissioner.” Have each 
group share its response to the 
dilemma presented in the feature  
with the class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   101
dangers faced by law enforcement agents (discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 5). As we will also see in the next 
section, a majority of police departments have adopted a 
strategy called community policing that requires officers 
to provide assistance in areas that are not, at first glance, 
directly related to law enforcement.9 
PREvEnTing CRimE
Perhaps the most controversial responsibility of the police 
is to prevent crime. According to Jerome Skolnick, co-
director of the Center for Research in Crime and Justice 
at the New York University School of Law, there are two 
predictable public responses when crime rates begin to rise 
in a community. The first is to punish convicted criminals 
with stricter laws and more severe penalties. The second is 
to demand that the police keep crimes from occurring in the first place. Is it, in fact, pos-
sible for the police to “prevent” crimes? The strongest response that Professor Skolnick is 
willing to give to this question is “maybe.”10
On a limited basis, police can certainly prevent some crimes. If a rapist is dis-
suaded from attacking a solitary woman because a patrol car is cruising the area, then 
the police officer behind the wheel has prevented a crime. Furthermore, exemplary 
police work can have a measurable effect. “Quite simply, cops count,” says William 
Bratton, who has directed police departments in Boston, Los Angeles, and New York. 
“[T]he quickest way to impact crime is with a well-led, managed, and appropriately 
resourced police force.”11 In general, however, the deterrent effects of police presence 
are unclear. Carl Klockars has written that the “war on crime” is a war that the police 
cannot win because they cannot control the factors—such as unemployment, poverty, 
immorality, inequality, political change, and lack of educational opportunities—that 
contribute to criminal behavior in the first place.12
PREsERving THE PEACE
To a certain extent, the fourth responsibility of the police, 
that of preserving the peace, is related to preventing crime. 
Police have the legal authority to use the power of arrest, or 
even force, in situations in which no crime has yet occurred, 
but might occur in the immediate future. 
In the words of James Q. Wilson, the police’s peacekeeping role (which Wilson 
believed to be the most important role of law enforcement officers) often takes on a pat-
tern of simply “handling the situation.”13 For example, when police officers arrive on the 
scene of a loud late-night house party, they may feel the need to disperse the party and 
even arrest some of the partygoers for disorderly conduct. By their actions, the officers 
have lessened the chances of serious and violent crimes taking place later in the eve-
ning. The same principle is often used when dealing with domestic disputes, which, if 
escalated, can lead to homicide. Such situations are in need of, to use Wilson’s terminol-
ogy again, “fixing up,” and police can use the power of arrest, or threat, or coercion, or 
sympathy, to do just that. 
The basis of Wilson and fellow criminologist George Kelling’s zero-tolerance theory 
is similar: street disorder—such as public drunkenness, urination, and loitering—signals 
“That’s the only thing that made 
me feel safe last night when i  
came home from work.”
— Penny Baily, resident of 
Indianapolis, commenting  
on the police car patrolling 
her neighborhood
A Los Angeles police officer 
oversees community efforts to 
clean up trash and graffiti. What 
are the benefits and drawbacks 
of having law enforcement 
agents provide services that do 
not directly involve preventing 
and solving crimes? 
Monica Almeida/New York Times/Redux 
Pictures
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
to both law-abiding citizens and criminals that the law is not being enforced and there-
fore leads to more violent crime. Hence, if police preserve the peace and “crack down” 
on the minor crimes that make up street disorder, they will in fact be preventing serious 
crimes that would otherwise occur in the future.14
SELFaSSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 123.
Both the public and law enforcement officers themselves believe that the police’s 
primary job is to ____________ laws. A large and crucial part of policing, however, 
involves providing ____________ such as directing traffic. The ability of the police to 
actually ____________ crime is a matter of great debate, and some experts believe that 
the most important role of a police officer is to ____________ the peace. 
A sHoRT HisToRy of  
THE AmERiCAn PoLiCE
Although modern society relies on law enforcement officers to control and prevent 
crime, in the early days of this country, police services had little to do with crime con-
trol. The policing efforts in the first American cities were directed toward controlling 
certain groups of people (mostly slaves and Native Americans), delivering goods, regu-
lating activities such as buying and selling in the town market, maintaining health and 
sanitation, controlling gambling and vice, and managing livestock and other animals.15 
Furthermore, these police services were for the most part performed by volunteers, as 
a police force was an expensive proposition. Often, the volunteers were organized using 
the night watch system, brought over from England by colonists in the seventeenth 
century. Under this system, all physically fit males were required to offer their services to 
protect the community on a rotating nightly basis.16
THE EvoLuTion of AmERiCAn LAw EnfoRCEmEnT
The night watch system did not ask much of its volunteers, who were often required 
to do little more than loudly announce the time and the state of the weather. 
Furthermore, many citizens avoided their duties by hiring others to “go on watch” in 
their place, and those who did serve frequently spent their time on watch sleeping and 
drinking alcohol.17 Eventually, as the populations of American cities grew in the late 
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, so did the need for public order and the 
willingness to devote public resources to the establishment of formal police forces. 
The night watch system was insufficient to meet these new demands, and its demise 
was inevitable.
EARLy PoLiCE dEPARTmEnTs In 1833, Philadelphia became the first American city to 
employ both day and night watchmen. Five years later, working from a model established 
by British home secretary Sir Robert “Bobbie” Peel in London, Boston officials formed 
the first American organized police department, consisting of six full-time officers. In 
1844, New York City laid the foundation for the modern police department by combining 
its day and night watches under the control of a single police chief. By the onset of the 
Civil War in 1861, a number of American cities, including Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, 
Cincinnati, New Orleans, and Philadelphia, had similarly consolidated police depart-
ments, modeled on the Metropolitan Police of London.18
Night Watch System An 
early form of American 
law enforcement in which 
volunteers patrolled their 
community from dusk to dawn 
to keep the peace.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE PoLiTiCAL ERA Like their modern counterparts, many early police officers were hard 
working, honest, and devoted to serving and protecting the public. On the whole, how-
ever, in the words of historian Samuel Walker, “The quality of American police service in 
the nineteenth century could hardly have been worse.”19 This poor quality can be attrib-
uted to the fact that the recruitment and promotion of police officers were intricately 
tied to the politics of the day. Police officers received their jobs as a result of political 
connections, not because of any particular skills or knowledge. Whichever political party 
was in power in a given city would hire its own cronies to run the police department. 
Consequently, the police were often more concerned with serving the interests of the 
political bosses than with protecting the citizens.20
Corruption was rampant during this political era of policing, which lasted 
roughly from 1840 to 1930. Police salaries were relatively low, and many police offi-
cers saw their positions as opportunities to make extra income through any number 
of illegal activities. Bribery was common, as police would use their close proximity 
to the people to request “favors,” which went into the police officers’ own pockets 
or into the coffers of the local political party as “contributions.”21 This was known as 
the  patronage system, or the “spoils system,” because to the political victors went  
the spoils. 
THE REfoRm ERA The abuses of the political era of policing did not go unnoticed. Led by 
August Vollmer, the police chief of Berkeley, California, from 1905 to 1932, advocates of 
dramatic changes in American law enforcement initiated the reform era in American 
policing.22 Along with his protégé O. W. Wilson, Vollmer promoted a style of policing 
known as the professional model. Under the professional model, police chiefs, who 
had been little more than figureheads during the political era, took more control over 
their departments. A key to these efforts was the reorganization of police departments 
in many major cities. To improve their control over operations, police chiefs began to add 
midlevel positions to the force. These new officers, known as majors or assistant chiefs, 
could develop and implement crime-fighting strategies and more closely supervise indi-
vidual officers. Police chiefs also tried to consolidate their power by bringing large areas 
of a city under their control so that no local ward, neighborhood, or politician could eas-
ily influence a single police department.
The professionalism trend benefited law enforcement agents in a number of ways. 
Salaries and working conditions improved, and for the first time, women and members 
of minority groups were given opportunities—albeit limited—to serve.23 At the same 
time, police administrators controlled officers to a much greater extent than in the past, 
expecting them to meet targets for arrests and other numerical indicators that were 
seen as barometers of effectiveness. 
Any contact with citizens that did not explicitly relate to law enforcement was 
considered “social work” and was discouraged.24 As police expert Chris Braiden puts it, 
American police officers were expected to “park their brains at the door of the station-
house” and simply “follow orders like a robot.”25 The isolation of officers from the public 
was made complete by an overreliance on the patrol 
car, a relatively new technological innovation at the 
time. In the political era, officers walked their beats, 
interacting with citizens. In the reform era, they 
were expected to stay inside their “rolling fortresses,” 
driving from one call to the next without wasting 
time or resources on public relations.26 
Patronage System A form 
of corruption in which the 
political party in power hires 
and promotes police officers, 
receiving job-related “favors” 
in return.
Professional Model A style 
of policing advocated by August 
Vollmer and O. W. Wilson that 
emphasizes centralized police 
organizations, increased use 
of technology, and a limitation 
of police discretion through 
regulations and guidelines.
Tell how the 
patronage 
system affected 
policing.
Learning  
objective2
A horse-drawn police wagon 
used by the New York City 
Police Department, circa 
1886. Why might this new 
form of transportation have 
represented a “revolution” for 
early American police forces?
Corbis/Bettmann
C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   103
Discussion Tip: What lessons do 
your students take from this short 
discussion of the political era of 
policing? Does it surprise them to 
learn that most present-day sheriffs 
in the United States are elected to 
their positions?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE CommuniTy ERA The drawbacks of the professional model became evident in the 
1960s, one of the most turbulent decades in American history. Unrest associated with 
the civil rights movement and protests against the Vietnam War (1964–1975) led to a 
series of clashes—often violent—between police and certain segments of society. By the 
early 1970s, many observers believed that poor policing was contributing to the national 
turmoil. The National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders stated bluntly that poor 
relations between the police and African American communities were partly to blame for 
the violence that plagued many of those communities.27 In striving for professionalism, 
the police appeared to have lost touch with the citizens they were supposed to be serving. 
To repair their damaged relations with a large segment of the population, police would 
have to rediscover their community roots.
The result of this rediscovery was the community era of American policing. Starting 
in the 1970s, most large-city police departments established entire units devoted to com-
munity relations, implementing programs that ranged from summer recreation activities 
for inner-city youths to “officer-friendly” referral operations that encouraged citizens to 
come to the police with their crime concerns. 
At the same time, the country was hit by a crime wave. Thus, police administrators 
were forced to combine efforts to improve community relations with aggressive and inno-
When patrol cars came into common use by police departments in the 1930s, they 
changed the face of American policing. Eight decades later, the technology associated 
with patrol cars continues to evolve. Project 54, a voice-recognition system developed at 
the University of New Hampshire, allows police officers to “multitask” without having to 
divert their attention from the road or take a hand off the wheel. The officer simply presses 
a button, and all the technological equipment in the car becomes voice activated. Four 
Andrea digital array microphones positioned in the cab of the automobile cancel all noise 
except the sound of the officer’s voice. So, for example, if the officer witnesses a hit-and-
run accident, he or she simply says the word “pursuit” to activate the automobile’s siren 
and flashing lights. Then the officer can call for an ambulance and run a check on the 
suspect’s license plate—all by voice command. 
Other recent innovations include Automatic License Plate Recognition, a three-camera 
computer-operated system that performs a “20-millisecond” background check on every 
license plate it sees, and the StarChase launcher, a small, laser-guided cannon that shoots a 
small, sticky radio transmitter at a fleeing vehicle. Once the offending car has been “tagged” 
with this device, police can track the fugitive at a safe distance without the need for a 
dangerous, high-speed pursuit.
ThinKing aBouT Police auTomoBile Technology: 
Approximately 75 percent of all patrol cars in the United States are equipped with 
on-board computers. How might these computers pose a danger to the police officer 
driving the car and to other drivers or pedestrians? How does the University of New 
Hampshire’s Project 54 help alleviate this danger?
CJ&TECHnoLogy
High-Tech Cop Cars
Project 54: Dura Tech, USA Inc.
Technology Tip:  Have students 
access the Web site of their local 
police department or sheriff’s 
department. Can they find any 
evidence that the agency is 
engaging in community policing?  
If so, what kinds of strategies 
are being employed? Do these 
strategies seem useful or effective?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   105
vative crime- fighting strategies. As we will see in Chapter 5 when we discuss these strate-
gies in more depth, the police began to focus on stopping crimes before they occur, rather 
than concentrating only on solving crimes that have already been committed. A dedication 
to such proactive strategies led to widespread acceptance of  community policing in the 
1980s and 1990s. Community policing is based on the notion that meaningful interaction 
between officers and citizens will lead to a partnership in preventing and fighting crime. 
(See Figure 4.1 below for an overview of the three eras of policing described in this section.)
PoLiCing TodAy: inTELLigEnCE,  
TERRoRism, And TECHnoLogy
To effectively prevent crime using the community policing model, police administrators 
needed to better understand crime patterns. To better understand crime patterns, police 
administrators needed more information about those patterns. As a result, the process 
of collecting, analyzing, and mapping such crime data has become a hallmark of policing 
in the twenty-first century.
inTELLigEnCE-LEd PoLiCing “Humans are not nearly as random as we think,” says Jeff 
Brantingham, an anthropologist at the University of California, Los Angeles. “In a sense, 
crime is just a physical process, and if you can explain how offenders move and how 
they mix with their victims, you can understand an incredible amount.”28 Brantingham 
and his colleagues are working on computer programs that will be able to predict when 
and where crimes are likely to occur. This approach is known as predictive policing, or 
intelligence-led policing, because it relies on data—or intelligence—concerning past 
crime patterns to predict future crime patterns.
Time Period
Primary Function of Police
Organization
Police-Community Relationship
Tactics
Strategic Goal
Strategic Weakness
1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
The Political Era
1840 to 1930
Provide range of social services 
to citizenry
Decentralized
Intimate
Patrolling neighborhoods on foot
Satisfy the needs of citizens and 
political bosses
Widespread police corruption 
and brutality
The Reform Era
1930 to 1980
Control crime
Centralized
Professional and distant
Patrolling neighborhoods in cars, 
rapid response to emergency 
calls for service (911 calls)
Control crime
Lack of communication with 
citizens fostered mistrust and 
community violence (riots)
1980 to 2000
Continue to control crime while 
providing a broader range of 
social services
Decentralized, with specialized 
units and task forces
Return to intimate
Foot patrolling, problem solving, 
and public relations
Improve the quality of life of 
citizens
An overreliance on police officers 
to solve all of society’s problems
The Community Era
FIGURE 4.1 The Three Eras of American Policing
George L. Kelling and Mark H. Moore have separated the history of policing in the United States from 1840 to 2000 into three 
distinct periods. Below is a brief summarization of these three eras.
Sources: Adapted from George L. Kelling and Mark H. Moore, “From Political to Reform to Community: The Evolving Strategy of Police,” in Community Policing: Rhetoric or Reality, ed. 
Jack R. Greene and Stephen D. Mastrofski (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1991), 14–15, 22–23; plus authors’ updates. Reproduced with permission of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc., 
Westport, Connecticut.
Intelligence-Led Policing  
An approach that measures 
the risk of criminal behavior 
associated with certain 
individuals or locations so as to 
predict when and where such 
criminal behavior is most likely 
to occur in the future.
Explain how 
intelligence-
led policing 
works and 
how it benefits 
modern police 
departments.
Learning  
objective3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For example, suppose that a city has been plagued by random gunfire each New 
Year’s Eve. In any given year, police administrators could determine where such incidents 
had occurred in previous years and send more police officers to those areas. In theory, 
the police would then be better able to deter random gunfire and respond more quickly 
when shots were fired.29 This kind of intelligence-led policing should also help police 
administrators do “more with less,” an important consideration as police budgets shrink 
around the country.30 Thus, in this example, instead of blanketing the city with officers 
on New Year’s Eve, police administrators would only need to deploy a small force in the 
areas most likely to experience gunfire.
THE CHALLEngEs of AnTi-TERRoRism If the importance of intelligence-based policing was 
not evident before September 11, 2001, the tragic events of that day made it clear that the 
nation’s law enforcement agencies could not simply react to the crime of terrorism. With 
such a high toll in human lives, such attacks needed to be prevented. Within two years 
of September 11, about 90 percent of the nation’s local police departments and sheriffs’ 
offices serving large cities (250,000 residents or more) had written plans to deal with ter-
rorist attacks.31 Today, a similar percentage of these agencies are also gathering intelligence 
related to terrorism,32 a task that represents a significant shift for the local law enforcement 
community. All police officers in the country are now expected to prepare for a terrorist 
attack in their communities, and counterterrorism has become part of the day-to-day law 
enforcement routine. (See the feature Anti-Terrorism in Action—Under Suspicion below to 
learn about a particular aspect of these daily responsibilities.)
This transition has not always been smooth. Many local police departments have 
had to shift personnel from traditional crime units, such as antigang or white-collar 
crime, to counterterrorism. Limited funds are also an issue. Raymond Kelly, police com-
First, the unidentified male walking around the harbor in 
Newport Beach, California, took several photographs of 
the Orange County Sheriff’s Department’s fireboat and the 
Balboa Ferry with his cell phone camera. Then he made 
a phone call, walked to his car, and returned five minutes 
later to take more pictures. Next, he met another person, 
with whom he watched boat traffic. Finally, another adult 
with two children joined the pair, and the group boarded 
the ferry.
Was this behavior suspicious? Apparently, it was 
suspicious enough to be noted by a local law enforcement 
officer and filed as Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) 
NO3821, to be passed along to the federal government. 
The goal of the SAR program is to have officers from every 
local police and sheriff’s department provide tips about 
potential terrorism activity to one of seventy-two fusion 
centers across the United States. At these fusion centers, 
federal terrorism experts examine the reports to determine 
if any actual threat exists. Such examinations rarely lead 
to further legal action. The first 161,000 recorded SARs 
resulted in only five arrests, none of which had to do with 
terrorism. “Ninety-nine percent don’t pan out or lead to 
anything,” said one Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
special agent of the information from local police officers. 
“But we’re happy to wade through these things.”
For CritiCal analysis The federal government’s 
definition of suspicious activity is “observed behavior 
reasonably indicative of pre-operational planning related 
to terrorism or other criminal activity.” What is your opinion 
of this definition? Is it too broad? Why do you think the 
actions of the Newport Beach suspect described above 
resulted in an SAR? What potential for abuse, if any, do you 
see in the SAR program?  
AnTi-TERRoRism iN acTioN
UndER SUSPIcIOn 
106   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Teaching Tip: Explain to students 
that areas with high concentrations 
of gang members often see higher-
than-normal crime rates. Discuss 
how intelligence-led policing might 
help combat gang violence.
Technology Tip: Have students 
access the Department of 
Homeland Security’s Web site to 
learn more about fusion centers. 
Which fusion center is located 
closest to their home towns? Is 
there any evidence online of this 
fusion center aiding the nation’s 
antiterrorism efforts? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   107
missioner of New York, has testified to the “huge expenses” of counterterrorism and 
intelligence actitivies.33 Although the federal government provided $31 billion in grants 
to state and local governments for homeland security between 2003 and 2010, many law 
enforcement agencies continue to rely on already-stretched-thin city budgets to cover 
the extra costs of anti-terrorism activities.34
LAw EnfoRCEmEnT 2.0 Fortunately, just as more intelligence has become crucial to 
police work, the means available to gather such intelligence have also increased greatly. 
As you will see in Chapter 14, nearly every successful anti-terrorism investigation has 
relied on information gathered from the Internet. Furthermore, traditional criminals are 
now frequently getting caught on the Web. Police in South Charleston, West Virginia, 
arrested six young men who photographed themselves destroying a local hotel room and 
posted the incriminating pictures on various Twitter accounts. Utah police discovered 
material on a convicted sex offender’s MySpace account that proved forbidden contact 
with two youths. Memphis detectives were able to apprehend two burglars who had 
stolen alcohol from a restaurant when one of them wrote on Facebook, “I’d like to collect 
some of the booty we liberated Sunday, if there’s any left.”
According to a recent poll, more than 60 percent of American law enforcement 
agencies use social networking sites during crime investigations. In addition, 40 percent 
employ social media such as Twitter for community outreach and to notify the public of 
crime problems.35
Some law enforcement veterans are concerned that the “art” of policing is being lost 
in an era of intelligence-led policing and increased reliance on social media technology. 
“If it becomes all about the science,” says Los Angeles Police Department deputy chief 
Michael Downing, “I worry we’ll lose the important nuances.”36 As the remainder of this 
chapter and the two that follow show, however, the human element continues to domi-
nate all aspects of policing in America.
SELFaSSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 123.
During the ____________ era of American policing, which lasted roughly from 1840 to 1930, 
police officers used the ____________ system to enrich themselves. The ____________ era, 
which followed, saw the modernization of our nation’s law enforcement system through 
innovations like Vollmer and Wilson’s ____________ model of policing. Following the national 
turmoil of the 1960s and early 1970s, ____________ era strategies encouraged a partnership 
between citizens and the police. Today, ____________-led policing efforts attempt to make law 
enforcement agencies more efficient and better able to prevent future ____________ attacks.
RECRuiTmEnT And TRAining:  
bEComing A PoLiCE offiCER
In 1961, police expert James H. Chenoweth commented that the methods used to hire 
police officers had changed little since the days of the first American police forces.37 The 
past half-century, however, has seen a number of improvements in the way that police 
administrators handle the task of recruitment, or the development of a pool of quali-
fied applicants from which to select new officers. Efforts have been made to diversify 
police rolls, and recruits in most police departments undergo a substantial array of tests 
and screens—discussed on the next page—to determine their aptitude. Furthermore, 
Recruitment The process 
by which law enforcement 
agencies develop a pool of 
qualified applicants from which 
to select new members. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students refer 
to the Michael Downing quote 
in the text. What do they think 
Downing means by “important 
nuances”? Do they share his 
concerns?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
annual starting salaries that can exceed $70,000, along with the opportunities offered 
by an interesting profession in the public service field, have attracted a wide variety of 
applicants to police work. (To learn what a police officer can expect to earn in his or her 
first year on the job, see Figure 4.2 below.)
bAsiC REquiREmEnTs
The selection process involves a number of steps, and each police department has a differ-
ent method of choosing candidates. Most agencies, however, require at a minimum that a 
police officer:
• 
Be a U.S. citizen.
• 
Not have been convicted of a felony.
• 
Have or be eligible to have a driver’s license in the state where the department is 
located.
• 
Be at least twenty-one years of age.
• 
Meet weight and eyesight requirements.
In addition, few departments will accept candidates older than forty-five years of age.
bACkgRound CHECks And TEsTs Beyond these minimum requirements, police depart-
ments usually engage in extensive background checks, including (a) drug tests, (b) a 
review of the applicant’s educational, military, and driving records, (c) credit checks, (d) 
interviews with spouses, acquaintances, and previous employers, (e) and a background 
search to determine whether the applicant has been convicted of any criminal acts.38 
Police agencies generally require certain physical attributes in applicants: normally, they 
must be able to pass a physical agility or fitness test. (For an example of one such test, 
see Figure 4.3 on the facing page.)
1,000,000 or more
500,000 to 999,999 
250,000 to 499,999
100,000 to 249,999
50,000 to 99,999
25,000 to 49,999
10,000 to 24,999
2,500 to 9,999
Under 2,500
Population Served
0
$10,000
$20,000 $30,000 $40,000 $50,000 $60,000
Minimum/Maximum
Starting Salary 
$70,000
$80,000
FIGURE 4.2 Average Annual Salary for Entry-Level  
Officers by Size of Population Served
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2010), Table 7, page 12.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EduCATionAL REquiREmEnTs One of the most dramatic differences between today’s 
police recruits and those of several generations ago is their level of education. In the 
1920s, when August Vollmer began promoting the need for higher education in police 
officers, few had attended college. Today, 82 percent of all local police departments 
require at least a high school diploma, and 9 percent require a degree from a two-year 
college.39 Recruits with college or university experience are generally thought to have an 
advantage in hiring and promotion.
Not all police observers believe that education is a necessity for police officers, 
however. In the words of one police officer, “effective street cops learn their skills on the 
job, not in a classroom.”40 By emphasizing a college degree, say some, police departments 
discourage those who would make solid officers but lack the education necessary to 
apply for positions in law enforcement. 
TRAining
If an applicant successfully navigates the application process, he or she will be hired 
on a probationary basis. During this probationary period, which can last from six to 
eighteen months depending on the department, the recruit is in jeopardy of being fired 
without cause if he or she proves inadequate to the challenges of police work. Almost 
every state requires that police recruits pass through a training period while on proba-
tion. During this time, they are taught the basics of police work and are under constant 
supervision by superiors. The training period usually has two components: the police 
academy and field training. On average, local police departments serving populations 
of 250,000 or more require 1,648 hours of training—972 hours in the classroom and 676 
hours in the field.41
ACAdEmy TRAining The police academy, run by either the state or a police agency, provides 
recruits with a controlled, militarized environment in which they receive their introduction 
to the world of the police officer. They are taught the laws of search, seizure, arrest, and 
interrogation; how and when to use weapons; the procedures of securing a crime scene and 
interviewing witnesses; first aid; self-defense; and other essentials of police work. Nine in ten 
police academies also provide terrorism-related training to teach recruits how to respond 
to terrorist incidents, including those involving weapons of mass destruction.42 Academy 
instructors evaluate the recruits’ performance and send intermittent progress reports to 
police administrators. 
FIGURE 4.3 Physical Agility Exam for the Henrico county (Virginia) division of Police
Those applying for the position of police officer must finish this physical agility exam within 3 minutes, 30 seconds. During the 
test, applicants are required to wear the equipment (with a total weight of between 9 and 13 pounds) worn by patrol officers, 
which includes the police uniform, leather gun belt, firearm, baton, portable radio, and ballistics vest. 
1. Applicant begins test seated in a police vehicle, door closed, seat belt 
fastened. 
2. Applicant must exit vehicle and jump or climb a six-foot barrier. 
3. Applicant then completes a one-quarter-mile run or walk, making various 
turns along the way, to simulate a pursuit run. 
4. Applicant must jump a simulated five-foot culvert/ditch. 
5. Applicant must drag a “human simulator” (dummy) weighing 175 pounds 
a distance of 50 feet (to simulate a situation in which an officer is required 
to pull or carry an injured person to safety). 
6. Applicant must draw his or her weapon and fire five rounds with the 
strong hand and five rounds with the weak hand. 
Getty Images
Getty Images
Probationary Period A 
period of time at the beginning 
of a police officer’s career 
during which she or he may be 
fired without cause. 
C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   109
Identify the 
differences 
between the 
police academy 
and field training 
as learning tools 
for recruits.
Learning  
objective4
Discussion Tip: Ask students their 
opinions on the importance of 
college or university degrees for 
potential police officers. To what 
extent should law enforcement 
agencies consider educational 
achievement when hiring new 
officers?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
in THE fiELd Field training takes place outside the 
confines of the police academy. A recruit is paired 
with an experienced police officer known as a field 
training officer (FTO). The goal of field training is to 
help rookies apply the concepts they have learned in 
the academy “to the streets,” with the FTO playing 
a supervisory role to make sure that nothing goes 
awry. While the academy introduces recruits to 
the formal rules of police work, field training gives 
the rookies their first taste of the informal rules. 
In fact, the initial advice to recruits from some 
FTOs is often along the lines of “O.K., kid. Forget 
everything you learned in the classroom. You’re in 
the real world now.” Nonetheless, the academy is 
a critical component in the learning process, as it 
provides rookies with a road map to the job.
SELFaSSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 123.
Most police agencies require that recruits be at least ____________-____________ years of 
age and have no prior ____________ convictions. During the ____________ period, which 
can last as long as eighteen months, a recruit will attend a ____________ ____________ 
to learn the rules of police work in an institutional setting. Then, she or he will leave the 
classroom and partner with an experienced officer for ____________ ____________.
womEn And minoRiTiEs  
in PoLiCing TodAy
For many years, the typical American police officer was white and male. As recently as 1968, 
African Americans represented only 5 percent of all sworn officers in the United States, and 
the percentage of “women in blue” was even lower.43 Only within the past thirty years has this 
situation been addressed, and only within the past twenty years have many police depart-
ments actively tried to recruit women, African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, and 
members of other minority groups. The result, as you will see, has been a steady though not 
spectacular increase in the diversity of the nation’s police forces. When it comes to issues of 
gender, race, and ethnicity, however, mere statistics rarely tell the entire story.
AnTidisCRiminATion LAw And AffiRmATivE ACTion
In large measure, external forces have driven law enforcement agencies to increase the 
number of female and minority recruits. The 1964 Civil Rights Act and its 1972 amend-
ments guaranteed members of minority groups and women equal access to jobs in law 
enforcement. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), established in 
1965, ensures fairness in police hiring practices. The United States Supreme Court has also 
ruled on several occasions that discrimination by law enforcement agencies violates fed-
eral law.44 In legal terms, discrimination occurs when hiring and promotion decisions are 
based on individual characteristics such as gender or race, and not on job-related factors.
Since the early 1970s, numerous law enforcement agencies have instituted affirmative 
action programs to increase the diversity of their employees. These programs are designed 
Field Training The segment 
of a police recruit’s training in 
which he or she is removed 
from the classroom and 
placed on the beat, under the 
supervision of a senior officer.
Discrimination The illegal 
use of characteristics such as 
gender or race by employers 
when making hiring or 
promotion decisions.
Affirmative Action A 
hiring or promotion policy 
favoring those groups, such as 
women, African Americans, or 
Hispanics, who have suffered 
from discrimination in the 
past or continue to suffer from 
discrimination.
A recruit performs pushups 
under duress at the Cleveland 
Police Academy. Why are 
police academies an important 
part of the learning process for 
a potential police officer? 
Marvin Fong/Cleveland Plain Dealer/Landov
Teaching Tip: Have a field training 
officer or instructor from a local 
police academy come to class to 
speak to the students about police 
hiring and training.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   111
to give women and members of minority groups certain advantages in hiring and promotion 
to remedy the effects of past discrimination and prevent future discrimination. Often, affir-
mative action programs are established voluntarily. Sometimes, however, they are the result 
of lawsuits brought by employees or potential employees who believe that the employer has 
discriminated against them. In such instances, if the court finds that discrimination did 
occur, it will implement a consent decree to remedy the situation. Under a consent decree, 
the law enforcement agency often agrees to meet certain numerical goals in hiring women 
and members of minority groups.  If it fails to meet these goals, it is punished with a fine or 
some other sanction.45
woRking womEn: gEndER And LAw EnfoRCEmEnT
In 1987, about 7.6 percent of all local police officers were women. Twenty years later, 
that percentage had risen to almost 12 percent.46 That increase seems less impressive, 
however, when one considers that women make up more than half of the population of 
the United States, meaning that they are severely underrepresented in law enforcement. 
AddEd sCRuTiny There are several reasons for the low levels of women serving as police 
officers. First, relatively few women hold leadership positions in American policing. More 
than half of this country’s large police departments have no women in their highest 
ranks,47 and fewer than 1 percent of the police chiefs in the United States are women.48 
Consequently, female police officers have few superiors who might be able to mentor them 
in what can be a hostile work environment. In addition to the dangers and pressures facing 
all law enforcement agents, which we will discuss in the next chapter, women must deal 
with an added layer of scrutiny. Many male police officers feel that their female counter-
parts are mentally soft, physically weak, and generally unsuited for the rigors of the job. 
At the same time, male officers often try to protect female officers by keeping them out of 
hazardous situations, thereby denying the women the opportunity to prove themselves.49
TokEnism Women in law enforcement also face the problem of tokenism, or the belief 
that they have been hired or promoted to fulfill diversity requirements and have not 
earned their positions. Tokenism creates pressure to prove the stereotypes wrong. As one 
female officer told researcher Teresa Lynn Wertsch:
The guys can view you as a sex object instead of a professional. It makes me try harder to put 
up more fronts and play more of the macho, boy role rather than accept that I am a female. 
. . . You can’t be meek or mild, too quiet. You can’t be too loud or boisterous because then 
you would be a dike, too masculine. I wish it didn’t have to be this way, but you’re either a 
bitch, a dike, or a slut.50
In fact, most of the negative attitudes toward women police officers are based on prejudice 
rather than actual experience. A number of studies have shown that there is very little 
difference between the performances of men and women in uniform.51 (For more on this 
topic, see the feature Myth versus Reality—Women Make Bad Cops on the following page.)
minoRiTy REPoRT: RACE And  
ETHniCiTy in LAw EnfoRCEmEnT
As Figure 4.4 on page 113 shows, like women, members of minority groups have been slowly 
increasing their presence in local police departments since the late 1980s. Specifically, African 
American officers make up about 12 percent of the nation’s police officers; Hispanic officers, 
about 10 percent; and other minority groups such as Asians, American Indians, and Pacific 
Islanders, about 3 percent.52 By some measures, members of minority groups are better  
Describe the 
challenges 
facing women 
who choose law 
enforcement as 
a career.
Learning  
objective5
Group Activity: Have students 
form small groups to discuss the 
unique qualities that women bring 
to the law enforcement profession.  
Have the groups share their 
findings with the class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
represented than women in policing. Cities such as Detroit and Washington have local police 
departments that closely match their civilian populations in terms of diversity, and in recent 
years, a majority of police recruits in New York City have been members of minority groups. 
In other areas, such as promotion, minorities in law enforcement continue to seek parity.53
doubLE mARginALiTy According to Peter C. Moskos, a professor at the John Jay College 
of Criminal Justice in New York, “black and white police officers remain two distinct 
shades of blue, with distinct attitudes toward each other and the communities they 
serve.”54 While that may be true, minority officers generally report that they have good 
relationships with their white fellow officers.55 Often, though, members of minority 
groups in law enforcement—particularly African Americans and Hispanics—do face the 
problem of double marginality. This term refers to a situation in which minority offi-
cers are viewed with suspicion under two sets of circumstances:
1. White police officers believe that minority officers will give members of their own 
race or ethnicity better treatment on the streets.
2. Those same minority officers face hostility from members of their own commu-
nity who are under the impression that black and Hispanic officers are traitors to 
their race or ethnicity.
   
Since the formation of the earliest police departments in 
the nineteenth century, policing has been seen as “man’s 
work.” Only men were considered to have the physical 
strength necessary to deal with the dangers of the street.
The myTh The perception that women are not physically 
strong enough to be effective law enforcement officers prevails 
both in the public mind and within police forces themselves. 
Criminologist Susan Martin has found that policewomen are 
under “constant pressure to demonstrate their competence 
and effectiveness vis-à-vis their male counterparts.” One 
female police officer describes her experience:
I got a call. They send another male officer and then 
another male officer. The attitude is—get a guy. I’m 
there with the one male officer and when the other 
guy shows up, the first male officer says to the second, 
this is right in front of me—“I’m glad you came.”
The RealiTy In fact, a number of studies have shown that 
policewomen can be as effective as men in most situations, 
and often more so. Citizens appear to prefer dealing with 
a female police officer rather than a male during service 
calls—especially those that involve domestic violence. In 
general, policewomen are less aggressive and more likely 
to reduce the potential for a violent situation by relying on 
verbal skills rather than their authority as law enforcement 
agents. According to a study conducted by the National 
Center for Women and Policing, payouts in lawsuits for 
claims of brutality and misconduct involving male officers 
exceed those involving females by a ratio of 43 to 1. 
Furthermore, female police officers are certainly capable 
of acts of bravery and physical prowess—the names of 
more than 250 women are included on the National Law 
Enforcement Memorial in Washington, D.C.
FoR cRiTical analysis Do you believe that female 
police officers can be just as effective as men in protecting 
citizens from criminal behavior? Why or why not?
mYTh vs. REALITY
women make bad Cops
A female member of the Los Angeles Police Department 
stands guard outside the county courthouse during a high-
profile trial.
Kim Kulish/Corbis
Double Marginality The 
double suspicion that minority 
law enforcement officers face 
from their white colleagues and 
from members of the minority 
community to which they 
belong.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   113
In response, minority officers may feel the need to act more harshly toward minority 
offenders to prove that they are not biased in favor of their own racial or ethnic group.56
THE bEnEfiTs of A divERsE PoLiCE foRCE In 1986, Supreme Court justice John Paul 
Stevens spoke for many in the criminal justice system when he observed that “an 
integrated police force could develop a better relationship [with a racially diverse citi-
zenry] and therefore do a more effective job of maintaining law and order than a force 
composed of white officers.”57 Indeed, despite the effects of double marginality, African 
American officers may have more credibility in a predominantly black neighborhood 
than white police officers, leading to better community-police relations and a greater 
ability to solve and prevent crimes. 
Certainly, in the Mexican American communities typical of border states such as 
Arizona, California, and Texas, many Hispanic officers are able to gather information 
that would be very difficult for non-Spanish-speaking officers to collect. Finally, however, 
the best argument for a diverse police force is that members of minority groups represent 
a broad source of talent in this country, and such talent can only enhance the overall 
effectiveness of American law enforcement.
SELFaSSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 123.
In the past, women and members of minority groups in law enforcement have suffered 
from ____________, or hiring practices that exclude potential employees based on their 
gender, race, or ethnicity. To remedy this situation, many law enforcement agencies have 
instituted ____________ ____________ programs to diversify their workforces. In some 
instances, a court will issue a ____________ ____________ , under which an agency agrees 
to reach certain numerical hiring goals or be penalized.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Percentage of Full-Time Sworn Personnel
1987
1990
1993
1997
2000
2003
2007
FIGURE 4.4 Members of Minority Groups in Local Law Enforcement, 1987–2007
note: Includes blacks or African Americans, Hispanics or Latinos, Asians, Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders, American Indians, 
Alaska Natives, and persons identifying two or more races.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, December 2010), 
Figure 9, page 14.
Teaching Tip: Ask students to 
consider John Paul Stevens’s quote 
in the text concerning integrated 
police forces. Do they agree with 
Stevens’s assessment? Why or 
why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
PubLiC And PRivATE LAw EnfoRCEmEnT
On July 21, 2011, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) announced the resolution 
of Project Delirium, which had targeted operations of Mexico’s La Familia Michoacana 
drug cartel in the United States. The twenty-month investigation resulted in nearly 20,000 
arrests and the seizure of $62 million and more than twelve tons of illegal drugs. Along 
with the DEA, Project Delirium relied on the efforts of federal agencies such as the FBI 
and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), as well as around three hundred state and local 
law enforcement agencies, including the Texas Department of Public Safety, the Santa Fe 
(New Mexico) Police Department, and the El Paso County (Texas) Sheriff’s Department.
As Project Delirium shows, Americans are served by a multitude of police organiza-
tions. Overall, there are about 18,000 public (government) law enforcement agencies in 
the United States, employing more than 1.1 million people.58 For the most part, these 
agencies operate on three different levels: local, state, and federal. Each level has its own 
set of responsibilities, which we shall discuss starting with local police departments.
muniCiPAL LAw EnfoRCEmEnT AgEnCiEs
According to the FBI, there are 2.9 state and local law enforcement employees for every 
1,000 citizens in the United States.59 This average somewhat masks the discrepancies 
between the police forces in urban and rural America. The majority of all police officers 
work in small and medium-sized police departments (see Figure 4.5 on the left). While 
the New York City Police Department employs about 36,000 police personnel, 50 percent 
of all local police departments have ten or fewer law enforcement officers.60 
Of the three levels of law enforcement, municipal agencies have the broadest 
authority to apprehend criminal suspects, maintain order, and provide services to the 
community. Whether the local officer is part of a large force or the only law enforcement 
officer in the community, he or she is usually responsible for a wide spectrum of duties, 
from responding to noise complaints to investigating homicides. 
sHERiffs And CounTy LAw EnfoRCEmEnT
The sheriff is a very important figure in American law enforcement. Almost every one of 
the more than 3,000 counties in the United States (except those in Alaska) has a sheriff. 
In every state except Rhode Island and Hawaii, sheriffs are elected by members of the 
community for two- or four-year terms and are paid a salary set by the state legislature 
or county board. As elected officials who do not necessarily need a background in law 
enforcement, modern sheriffs resemble their counterparts from the political era of polic-
ing in many ways. Simply stated, the sheriff is also a politician. 
sizE And REsPonsibiLiTy of sHERiffs’ dEPARTmEnTs Like municipal police forces, 
sheriffs’ departments vary in size. The largest is the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s 
Department, with more than 9,400 deputies. Of the 3,063 sheriffs’ departments in the 
country, thirteen employ more than 1,000 officers, while forty-five have only one.61
Most sheriffs’ departments are assigned their duties by state law. These duties 
encompass a wide variety of criminal and civil matters. About 80 percent of all sher-
iffs’ departments have the primary responsibility for investigating violent crimes in 
their jurisdictions. Other common responsibilities of a sheriff ’s department include 
the following:
• 
 Investigating drug crimes.
• 
 Maintaining the county jail.
Sheriff The primary law 
enforcement officer in a county, 
usually elected to the post by a 
popular vote.
1,000,000 or more
500,000 to 999,999 
10,000 to 99,999
Under 9,999
66,191
14%
51,973
11%
161,168
35%
Population Served
95,053
21%
100,000 to 499,999 
88,763
19%
FIGURE 4.5 Full-Time 
Police Personnel, by Size of 
Population Served
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, December 2010),  
Table 3, page 9.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   115
• 
 Carrying out civil and criminal processes within county lines, such as serving  
eviction notices and court summonses. 
• 
 Keeping order in the county courthouse.
• 
 Collecting taxes.
• 
 Enforcing orders of the court, such as overseeing the isolation of a jury during  
a trial.62
It is easy to confuse sheriffs’ departments and local police departments. Both 
law enforcement agencies are responsible for many of the same tasks, including crime 
investigation and routine patrol. There are differences, however. Sheriffs’ departments 
are more likely to be involved in county court and jail operations and to perform certain 
services such as search and rescue. Local police departments, for their part, are more 
likely to perform traffic-related functions than are sheriffs’ departments.63
THE CounTy CoRonER Another elected official on the county level is the coroner, or 
medical examiner. Duties vary from county to county, but the coroner has a general 
mandate to investigate “all sudden, unexplained, unnatural, or suspicious deaths” 
reported to the office. The coroner is ultimately responsible for determining the cause 
of death in these cases. Coroners also perform autopsies and assist other law enforce-
ment agencies in homicide investigations.64 For example, after singer Whitney Houston 
died in February 2012, the Los Angeles County coroner needed to determine the cause of 
death.  After a two-month investigation, the coroner confirmed that Houston drowned 
in her bathroom, with heart disease and cocaine use listed as contributing factors.
sTATE PoLiCE And HigHwAy PATRoLs
The most visible state law enforcement agency is the state police or highway patrol 
agency. Historically, state police agencies were created for three reasons:
1. To assist local police agencies, which often did not have adequate resources or 
training to handle their law enforcement tasks.
2. To investigate criminal activities that crossed jurisdictional boundaries (such as 
when bank robbers committed a crime in one county and then fled to another 
part of the state).
3. To provide law enforcement in rural and other areas 
that did not have local or county police agencies.
Today, there are twenty-three state police agencies and 
twenty-six highway patrols in the United States. State 
police agencies have statewide jurisdiction and are 
authorized to perform a wide variety of law enforce-
ment tasks. Thus, they provide the same services as city 
or county police departments and are restricted only by 
the boundaries of the state. In contrast, highway patrols 
have limited authority. Their duties are generally defined 
either by their jurisdiction or by the specific types of 
offenses they have the authority to control. As their name 
suggests, most highway patrols concentrate primarily 
on regulating traffic. Specifically, they enforce traffic 
laws and investigate traffic accidents. Furthermore, they 
usually limit their activity to patrolling state and federal 
highways. 
Coroner The medical 
examiner of a county, usually 
elected by popular vote. 
A connecticut State Police 
officer provides advice for a 
motorist stuck in a snowstorm 
on Interstate 84 in East 
Hartford. In what ways do 
state law enforcement officers 
supplement the efforts of local 
police officers?
AP Photo/Jessica Hill
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students explore the function 
of sheriffs’ departments and local 
police departments in your area. 
What responsibilities does each 
have? What crimes/areas do they 
have jurisdiction over?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
fEdERAL LAw EnfoRCEmEnT AgEnCiEs
Statistically, employees of federal agencies do not make up a large part of the nation’s law 
enforcement force. In fact, the New York City Police Department has about one-third as 
many employees as all of the federal law enforcement agencies combined. Nevertheless, 
the influence of these federal agencies is substantial. 
Unlike local police departments, which must deal with all forms of crime, federal agen-
cies have been authorized, usually by Congress, to enforce specific laws or attend to specific 
situations. The U.S. Coast Guard, for example, patrols the nation’s coasts, while U.S. Postal 
Inspectors investigate and prosecute crimes perpetrated through the use of the U.S. mails. 
Here, you will learn the basic elements of the most important federal law enforcement agen-
cies, which are grouped according to the federal department or bureau to which they report. 
(See Figure 4.6 below for the current federal law enforcement “lineup.”)
THE dEPARTmEnT of HomELAnd sECuRiTy About thirteen months after the September 
11, 2001, terrorist attacks, President George W. Bush signed the Homeland Security Act.65 
This legislation created the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), a new cabinet-
level department designed to coordinate federal efforts to protect the United States 
against international and domestic terrorism. The department has no new agencies. 
FIGURE 4.6 Federal Law Enforcement Agencies
A number of federal agencies employ law enforcement officers who are authorized to carry firearms and make arrests. The 
most prominent ones are under the control of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
or the U.S. Department of the Treasury. 
department of Homeland Security
 
DePARTMenT nAMe
APPROxIMATe nUMbeR 
Of OffIceRS
 
MAIn ReSPOnSIbILITIeS
u.s. customs and Border Protection (cBP)
21,000
•   (1) Prevent the illegal flow of people and goods across 
America’s international borders; (2) facilitate legal trade 
and travel
u.s. immigration and customs 
enforcement (ice)
11,000
•   Uphold public safety and homeland security by enforcing the 
nation’s immigration and customs laws
u.s. secret service
7,000
•   (1) Protect the president, the president’s family, and other 
high-ranking politicians; (2) combat currency counterfeiters
department of Justice
 
DePARTMenT nAMe
APPROxIMATe nUMbeR 
Of OffIceRS
 
MAIn ReSPOnSIbILITIeS
Federal Bureau of investigation (FBi) 
14,000
•   (1) Protect national security by fighting international and 
domestic terrorism; (2) enforce federal criminal laws such as 
those dealing with cyber crime, public corruption, and civil 
rights violations
Drug enforcement administration (Dea)
5,000
•   Enforce the nation’s laws regulating the sale and use of drugs
Bureau of alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
explosives (aTF)
3,000
•   (1) Combat the illegal use and trafficking of firearms and 
explosives; (2) investigate the illegal diversion of alcohol 
and tobacco products
u.s. marshals service
4,000
•   (1) Provide security at federal courts; (2) protect 
government witnesses; (3) apprehend fugitives from the 
federal court or corrections system
department of the Treasury
 
DePARTMenT nAMe
APPROxIMATe nUMbeR 
Of OffIceRS
 
MAIn ReSPOnSIbILITIeS
internal Revenue service (iRs)
4,100
•   Investigate potential criminal violations of the nation’s tax code
Sources: U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Department of Justice, and U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Indicate some 
of the most 
important law 
enforcement 
agencies 
under the 
control of the 
Department 
of Homeland 
Security.
Learning  
objective 6
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the U.S. Department of 
Justice’s Web site. Then, ask them 
to describe what they believe to be 
the department’s priorities.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   117
Instead, twenty-two existing agencies were shifted under 
the control of the secretary of homeland security, a post 
now held by Janet Napolitano. U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
and the U.S. Secret Service are the three most visible agen-
cies under the direction of the DHS.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) One of the 
most important effects of the Homeland Security Act was 
the termination of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service (INS), which had monitored and policed the flow of 
immigrants into the United States since 1933. Many of the 
INS’s duties have been transferred to U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP), which polices the flow of goods 
and people across the United States’ international borders. 
In general terms, this means that the agency has two pri-
mary goals: (1) to keep illegal immigrants, drugs, and drug traffickers from crossing our 
borders, and (2) to facilitate the smooth flow of legal trade and travel. Consequently, CBP 
officers are stationed at every port of entry and exit to the United States. The officers have 
widespread authority to investigate and search all international passengers, whether they 
arrive on airplanes, ships, or other forms of transportation.
The U.S. Border Patrol, a branch of the CBP, has the burden of policing both the 
Mexican and Canadian borders between official ports of entry. In 2011, Border Patrol 
agents caught about 340,000 people entering the country illegally and confiscated nearly 
five million pounds of narcotics.66 Today, more than 21,000 Border Patrol agents guard 
19,000 miles of land and sea borders, about double the number of ten years earlier.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) The CBP shares responsibility for 
locating and apprehending those persons illegally in the United States with special agents 
from U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). While the CBP focuses 
almost exclusively on the nation’s borders, ICE has a broader mandate to investigate and 
to enforce our country’s immigration and customs laws. Simply stated, the CBP covers the 
borders, and ICE covers everything else. The latter agency’s duties include detaining ille-
gal aliens and deporting (removing) them from the United States, ensuring that individu-
als without permission do not work or gain other benefits in this country, and disrupting 
human trafficking operations. 
Recently, ICE has become more aggressive in its efforts to apprehend and remove 
illegal immigrants with criminal records. During a single week in September 2011, ICE 
agents arrested 2,900 criminal aliens, more than half of whom had been convicted of felo-
nies. Overall, in 2011, ICE removed nearly 400,000 illegal immigrants from this country, 
the highest number ever recorded.67
The U.S. Secret Service When it was created in 1865, the U.S. Secret Service was pri-
marily responsible for combating currency counterfeiters. In 1901, the agency was given 
the added responsibility of protecting the president of the United States, the president’s 
family, the vice president, the president-elect, and former presidents. These duties have 
remained the cornerstone of the agency, with several expansions. After a number of 
threats against presidential candidates in the 1960s and early 1970s, including the shoot-
ings of Robert Kennedy of New York and Governor George Wallace of Alabama, in 1976 
Secret Service agents became responsible for protecting those political figures as well. 
U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) The 
federal agency responsible for 
protecting U.S. borders and 
facilitating legal trade and 
travel across those borders.
U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement 
(ICE)  The federal agency 
that enforces the nation’s 
immigration and customs laws.
U.S. Secret Service A 
federal law enforcement 
organization with the primary 
responsibility of protecting 
the president, the president’s 
family, the vice president, 
and other important political 
figures.
In douglas, Arizona, Border 
Patrol agents detain a man 
suspected of smuggling 
marijuana across the U.S. 
border from Mexico. What 
is the difference between 
U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection, which oversees 
the Border Patrol, and U.S. 
Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement? 
Joshua Lott/New York Times/Redux Pictures
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
In addition to its special plainclothes agents, the agency also directs two uniformed 
groups of law enforcement officers. The Secret Service Uniformed Division protects the 
grounds of the White House and its inhabitants, and the Treasury Police Force polices 
the Treasury Building in Washington, D.C. This responsibility includes investigating 
threats against presidents and those running for presidential office. To aid its battle 
against counterfeiters and forgers of government bonds, the agency has the use of a 
laboratory at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing in the nation’s capital.
THE dEPARTmEnT of jusTiCE The U.S. Department of Justice, created in 1870, is still 
the primary federal law enforcement agency in the country. With the responsibility 
of enforcing criminal law and supervising the federal prisons, the Justice Department 
plays a leading role in the American criminal justice system. To carry out its responsi-
bilities to prevent and control crime, the department has a number of law enforcement 
agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation; the federal Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; and the U.S. 
Marshals Service.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Initially created in 1908 as the Bureau of 
Investigation, this agency was renamed the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 
1935. The primary investigative agency of the federal government, the FBI has jurisdic-
tion over nearly two hundred federal crimes, including white-collar crimes, espionage 
(spying), kidnapping, extortion, interstate transportation of stolen property, bank rob-
bery, interstate gambling, and civil rights violations. With its network of agents across 
the country and the globe, the FBI is uniquely positioned to combat worldwide criminal 
activity such as terrorism and drug trafficking. The agency also provides valuable sup-
port to local and state law enforcement agencies. 
The FBI’s Identification Division maintains a large database of fingerprint informa-
tion and offers assistance in finding missing persons and identifying the victims of fires, 
airplane crashes, and other disfiguring disasters. The services of the FBI Laboratory, 
the largest crime laboratory in the world, are available at no cost to other police agen-
cies. Finally, the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) provides lists of stolen 
vehicles and firearms, missing license plates, vehicles used to commit crimes, and other 
information to local and state law enforcement officers who may access the NCIC data-
base. The FBI employs about 35,500 people and has a budget of approximately $8 billion.
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) With a $2 billion budget and about 
five thousand special agents, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is one of 
the most important law enforcement agencies in the country. The mission of the DEA 
is to enforce domestic drug laws and regulations and to assist other federal and foreign 
agencies in combating illegal drug manufacture and trade on an international level. The 
agency also enforces the provisions of the Controlled Substances Act, which governs 
the manufacture, distribution, and dispensing of legal drugs, such as prescription drugs.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) As its name sug-
gests, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) is primarily con-
cerned with the illegal sale, possession, and use of firearms and the control of untaxed 
tobacco and liquor products. The Firearms Division of the agency has the responsibility 
of enforcing the Gun Control Act of 1968, which sets the circumstances under which 
firearms may be sold and used in this country. The bureau also regulates all gun trade 
Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) The 
branch of the Department 
of Justice responsible for 
investigating violations of 
federal law.
Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) The 
federal agency responsible 
for enforcing the nation’s laws 
and regulations regarding 
narcotics and other controlled 
substances.
Social media and cJ 
The FBI Press Office 
operates a Twitter page 
that doubles as a newsroom 
for the federal crime-
fighting agency. For 
more information on this 
account, visit the Criminal 
Justice CourseMate at 
cengagebrain.com and  
select the Web Links for  
this chapter.
Identify the 
duties of  
the FBI.
Learning  
objective 7
Teaching Tip: Bring an agent from 
one of the federal law enforcement 
agencies (FBI, U.S. Marshals, 
ATF, DEA, etc.) to class to talk 
to students about the agency, 
the agent’s educational and 
professional background, and her or 
his job responsibilities.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   119
between the United States and foreign nations and collects taxes on all firearm import-
ers, manufacturers, and dealers. In keeping with these duties, the ATF is also responsible 
for policing the illegal use and possession of explosives. Furthermore, the ATF is charged 
with enforcing federal gambling laws.
The U.S. Marshals Service The oldest federal law enforcement agency is the U.S. Marshals 
Service. In 1789, President George Washington assigned thirteen U.S. marshals to protect 
his attorney general. That same year, Congress created the office of the U.S. Marshals and 
Deputy Marshals. Originally, the U.S. marshals acted as the main law enforcement officers in 
the western territories. Following the Civil War (1861–1865), when most of these territories 
had become states, these agents were assigned to work for the U.S. district courts, where 
federal crimes are tried. The relationship between the U.S. Marshals Service and the federal 
f A s T f A C T s
fbi AgEnT, job dEsCRiPTion:
• Primary role is to oversee 
intelligence and investigate 
crimes. 
• Special agent careers are 
divided into five career paths: 
intelligence, counterintelligence, 
counterterrorism, criminal, and 
cyber.
wHAT kind of TRAining is 
REquiREd?
• Bachelor’s and/or master’s 
degree, plus three years of work 
experience. U.S. citizen, 23–36 
years old.
• A written and oral examination, 
medical and physical 
examinations, a psychological 
assessment, and an exhaustive 
background investigation.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
• $61,100–$69,900
carEErS iN cJ
aRnolD e. Bell
FeDeRal BuReau oF invesTigaTion (FBi) agenT
I came to the FBI from the U.S. Army, where I worked as a crewman on a UH-1 
helicopter and subsequently as a special agent with the U.S. Army Criminal 
Investigation Command. My work experience in the U.S. Army and degree from St. 
Leo College (now University) provided the educational foundation that allowed entry 
into the FBI. After graduating from the FBI Academy in Quantico, Virginia, I was 
assigned to our Los Angeles division, where I spent the next twelve years. It was a 
particularly interesting time to be working in Los Angeles, which was experiencing 
a boom in bank robberies. During the most intense stretches, we were averaging 
between five and seven bank robberies a day! When I wasn’t chasing down a bank 
robber, I had my hands full with hunting down fugitives, working against organized 
crime, and dealing with public corruption. 
I am currently assigned to the FBI’s cyber division as an assistant section chief. 
The primary mission of my division is to combat cyber-based terrorism 
and hostile-intelligence operations conducted via the Internet, and to 
address general cyber crime. Since September 11, 2001, our primary 
focus has shifted from criminal work to counterterrorism. This has 
been a difficult transformation for many of us “old-timers” because 
we grew up in the Bureau doing criminal work. We all recognize, 
however, the importance of this new challenge, and, despite the 
difficulties, I believe we have been successful in fulfilling both missions.
social media career Tip  
Be aware of your e-mail address/screen name/login name and what it represents. 
Stay away from nicknames. Use a professional and unique name to represent yourself 
consistently across social media platforms.
.
Photo Courtesy of FBI.gov
fbi.gov
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

courts continues today and forms the basis for the officers’ main duties, which include the 
following:
1. Providing security at federal courts for judges, jurors, and other courtroom  
participants.
2. Controlling property that has been ordered seized by federal courts.
3. Protecting government witnesses who put themselves in danger by testifying against 
the targets of federal criminal investigations. This protection is sometimes accom-
plished by relocating the witnesses and providing them with different identities.
4. Transporting federal prisoners to detention institutions. 
5. Investigating violations of federal fugitive laws.68
THE dEPARTmEnT of THE TREAsuRy The Department of the Treasury, formed in 1789, 
is mainly responsible for all financial matters of the federal government. It pays all the 
federal government’s bills, borrows funds, collects taxes, mints coins, and prints paper 
currency. The largest bureau of the Treasury Department, the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS), is concerned with violations of tax laws and regulations. The bureau has three divi-
sions, only one of which is involved in criminal investigations. The examination branch 
of the IRS audits the tax returns of corporations and individuals. The collection division 
attempts to collect taxes from corporations or citizens who have failed to pay the taxes 
they owe. Finally, the criminal investigation division investigates cases of tax evasion and 
tax fraud. Criminal investigation agents can make arrests. 
The IRS has long played a role in policing criminal activities such as gambling and 
selling drugs for one simple reason: those who engage in such activities almost never 
report any illegally gained income on their tax returns. Therefore, the IRS is able to 
apprehend them for tax evasion. The most famous example took place in the early 1930s, 
when the IRS finally arrested famed crime boss Al Capone—responsible for numerous 
violent crimes—for not paying his taxes. 
PRivATE sECuRiTy
Even with hundreds of thousands of local, state, and federal law enforcement officers, the 
police do not have the ability to prevent every crime. Recognizing this, many businesses 
and citizens have decided to hire private guards for their properties and homes. In fact, 
according to the Freedonia Group, an industry-research firm, demand for private security 
generates revenues of nearly $50 billion a year.69 More than 10,000 firms employing around 
1.1 million people provide private security services in this country, compared with about 
700,000 public law enforcement agents.
PRivATizing LAw EnfoRCEmEnT As there are no federal regulations regarding private 
security, each state has its own rules for employment as a security guard. In several 
states, including California and Florida, prospective guards must have at least forty 
hours of training. Ideally, a security guard—lacking the extensive training of a law 
enforcement agent—should only observe and report criminal activity unless use of force 
is needed to prevent a felony.70
As a rule, private security is not designed to replace law enforcement. It is intended 
to deter crime rather than stop it.71 A uniformed security guard patrolling a shopping mall 
parking lot or a bank lobby has one primary function—to convince a potential criminal to 
search out a shopping mall or bank that does not have private security. For the same reason, 
many citizens hire security personnel to drive marked cars through their neighborhoods, 
making them a less attractive target for burglaries, robberies, vandalism, and other crimes.
Private Security The 
practice of private corporations 
or individuals offering ser vices 
traditionally performed by 
police officers.
120   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Analyze the 
importance of 
private security 
today.
Learning  
objective 8
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students how 
they feel about the fact that private 
security guards are responsible for 
protecting many potential terrorist 
targets such as power plants and 
malls.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ConTinuEd gRowTH in THE indusTRy Indicators point to 
continued higher rates of growth for the private security 
industry. The Hallcrest Report II, a far-reaching overview of 
private security trends funded by the National Institute of 
Justice, identifies four factors driving this growth:
1. An increase in fear on the part of the public, trig-
gered by media coverage of crime.
2. The problem of crime in the  workplace. According 
to the University of Florida’s National Retail Security 
Survey, American retailers lose about $34 billion a 
year because of shoplifting and employee theft.72
3. Budget cuts in states and municipalities that have 
forced reductions in the number of public police, 
thereby raising the demand for private ones.
4. A rising awareness of private security products (such 
as home burglar alarms) and services as cost-effective 
protective measures.73
Another reason for the industry’s continued health is terrorism. Private security is respon-
sible for protecting more than three-fourths of the nation’s likely terrorist targets, such as 
power plants, financial centers, dams, malls, oil refineries, and transportation hubs. 
SELFaSSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 123.
Municipal police departments and ____________ departments are both considered 
“local” organizations and have many of the same responsibilities. On the state level, 
the authority of the ____________ ____________ is usually limited to enforcing traffic 
laws. Nationally, the ____________ has jurisdiction over all federal crimes, while the 
____________ focuses on federal drug laws and the ____________ regulates the illegal 
sale and possession of guns. Private security is designed to ____________ crime rather 
than to stop it.
A private security guard 
makes the rounds near the 
Food Court at Landmark Mall 
in Alexandria, Virginia. Why is 
being visible such an important 
aspect of many private security 
jobs? 
Newhouse News Service/Landov
C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   121
chaPTEr SummarY
List the four basic responsibilities of the 
police. (a) To enforce laws, (b) to provide 
services, (c) to prevent crime, and (d) to pre-
serve the peace. 
Tell how the patronage system affected 
policing. During the political era of polic-
ing (1840–1930), bribes paid by citizens and 
business owners often went into the coffers of the local po-
litical party. This became known as the patronage system. 
Explain how intelligence-led policing 
works and how it benefits modern po-
lice departments. Intelligence-led polic-
ing uses past crime patterns to predict when and where 
crime will occur in the future. In theory, intelligence-led 
policing allows police administrators to use fewer resources 
because it removes costly and time-consuming “guesswork” 
from the law enforcement equation.
Identify the differences between the po-
lice academy and field training as learn-
ing tools for recruits. The police academy 
is a controlled environment where police recruits learn the 
basics of policing from instructors in classrooms. In con-
trast, field training takes place in the “real world”: the re-
cruit goes on patrol with an experienced police officer.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective 2
Learning  
objective 3
Learning  
objective 4
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 122, 
which asks them to think about 
the amount of training that private 
security officers should be required 
to complete.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Describe the challenges facing women 
who choose law enforcement as a ca-
reer. Many male officers believe that their 
female counterparts are not physically or mentally strong 
enough for police work, which puts pressure on women of-
ficers to continually prove themselves. Female officers must 
also deal with tokenism, or the stigma that they were hired 
only to fulfill diversity requirements.
Indicate some of the most important 
law enforcement agencies under the 
control of the Department of Homeland 
Security. (a) U.S. Customs and Border Protection, which 
polices the flow of goods and people across the United 
States’ international borders and oversees the U.S. Border 
Patrol; (b) U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
which investigates and enforces our nation’s immigration 
and customs laws; and (c) the U.S. Secret Service, which pro-
tects high-ranking federal government officials and federal  
property.
Identify the duties of the FBI. The FBI has 
jurisdiction to investigate hundreds of federal 
crimes, including white-collar crime, kidnap-
ping, bank robbery, and civil rights violations. The FBI is also 
heavily involved in combating terrorism and drug-trafficking 
operations in the United States and around the world. Finally, 
the agency provides support to state and local law enforcement 
agencies through its crime laboratories and databases.
Analyze the importance of private secu-
rity today. In the United States, businesses 
and citizens spend billions of dollars each 
year on private security. Heightened fear of crime and in-
creased crime in the workplace have fueled the growth in 
spending on private security.
Learning  
objective 7
Learning  
objective 8
QuESTioNS For criTicaL aNaLYSiS
1. Which of the four basic responsibilities of the police do 
you think is most important? Why?
2. Some law enforcement agencies have the same physical 
agility and fitness requirements for male and female appli-
cants, while others do not hold women to the same physical 
standards as men.  Which approach do you favor, and why?
3. Review the discussion of double marginality on pages 
112–113. Why would members of a minority community 
think that police officers of the same race or ethnicity 
were “traitors”? What can police departments do to dis-
pel this misperception?
4. One of the major differences between a local police chief 
and a sheriff is that the sheriff is elected, while the police 
chief is appointed. What are some of the possible prob-
lems with having a law enforcement official who, like any 
other politician, is responsible to voters? What are some 
of the possible benefits of this situation?
5. Twenty-nine states do not require any specific training for 
private security personnel. What are the arguments for 
and against requiring at least forty hours of training, as is 
the case in California and Florida?
KEY TErmS
affirmative action  110
coroner  115
discrimination  110
double marginality  112
Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA)  118
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI)  118
field training  110
intelligence-led policing  105
night watch system  102
patronage system  103
private security  120
probationary period  109
professional model  103
recruitment  107
sheriff  114
U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
(CBP)  117
U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE)  117
U.S. Secret Service  117
Learning  
objective 5
Learning  
objective 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  4 :  L A w  E n f o R C E m E n T  T o d A y   123
courSEmaTE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTES
 1. Quoted in Erica Goode, “Police Lesson: 
Network Tools Have 2 Edges,” New York Times 
(April 7, 2011), A1.
 2. Steven Chermak and Alexander Weiss, 
“Maintaining Legitimacy Using External 
Communication Strategies: An Analysis of 
Police-Media Relations,” Journal of Criminal 
Justice 33 (2005), 501.
 3. Egon Bittner, The Functions of Police in a Modern 
Society, Public Health Service Publication  
No. 2059 (Chevy Chase, MD: National Institute 
of Mental Health, 1970), 38–44.
 4. Carl Klockars, “The Rhetoric of Community 
Policing,” in Community Policing: Rhetoric 
or Reality, ed. Jack Greene and Stephen 
Mastrofski (New York: Praeger Publishers, 
1990), 244.
 5. Jack R. Greene and Carl B. Klockars, “What 
Do Police Do?” in Thinking about Police, 
2d ed., ed. Carl B. Klockars and Stephen 
D. Mastrofski (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1991), 273–284.
 6. John S. Dempsey and Linda S. Forst, An 
Introduction to Policing, 6th ed. (Clifton Park, 
NY: Delmar Cengage Learning, 2012), 380–381.
 7. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in 
the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in 
-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011 
/tables/table-29.
 8. Reprinted in The Police Chief (January  
1990), 18.
 9. Jeffrey M. Wilson, Community Policing in 
America (New York: Routledge, 2006), 7–16.
10. Jerome H. Skolnick, “Police: The New 
Professionals,” New Society (September 5, 
1986), 9–11.
11. Quoted in Nancy Ritter, ed., “LAPD Chief 
Bratton Speaks Out: What’s Wrong with 
Criminal Justice Research—and How to 
Make It Right,” National Institute of Justice 
Journal 257 (2007), 29.
12. Klockars, 250.
13. James Q. Wilson, Varieties of Police Behavior: 
The Management of Law and Order in Eight 
Communities (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1968).
14. James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling, “Broken 
Windows,” Atlantic Monthly (March 1982), 29.
15. M. K. Nalla and G. R. Newman, “Is White-
Collar Crime Policing, Policing?” Policing 
and Society 3 (1994), 304.
16. Mitchell P. Roth, Crime and Punishment: A 
History of the Criminal Justice System, 2d 
ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage 
Learning, 2011), 65.
17. Ibid.
18. Mark H. Moore and George L. Kelling, “‘To 
Serve and Protect’: Learning from Police 
History,” Public Interest 70 (1983), 53.
19. Samuel Walker, The Police in America: 
An Introduction (New York: McGraw-Hill,  
1983), 7.
20. Moore and Kelling, 54.
21. Mark H. Haller, “Chicago Cops, 1890–1925,” 
in Thinking about Police, ed. Carl Klockars 
and Stephen Mastrofski (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1991), 90.
22. Roger G. Dunham and Geoffrey P. Alpert, 
Critical Issues in Policing: Contemporary 
Issues (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 
1989).
23. Ken Peak and Emmanuel P. Barthe, 
“Community 
Policing 
and 
CompStat: 
Merged, or Mutually Exclusive?” The Police 
Chief (December 2009), 73.
24. Ibid., 74.
25. Quoted in ibid.
26. Peter K. Manning, “The Police: Mandate, 
Strategies, and Appearances,” in Crime 
and Justice in American Society, ed. Jack D. 
Douglas (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 
1971), 149–163.
27. National Advisory Commission on Civil 
Disorder, Report (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1968), 157–160.
28. Quoted in Joel Rubin, “Stopping Crime 
before It Starts,” Los Angeles Times (August 
21, 2010), A17.
29. Colleen McCue, Andre Parker, Paul J. McNulty, 
and David McCoy, “Doing More with Less: 
Data Mining in Police Deployment Decisions,” 
Violent Crime Newsletter (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, Spring 2004), 4–5.
30. Office of Community Oriented Policing 
Services, The Impact of the Economic 
Downturn on American Police Agencies 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, October 2011), 26.
SELF aSSESSmENT aNSwEr KEY
Page 102: i. enforce; ii. services; iii. prevent;  
iv. preserve 
Page 107: i. political; ii. patronage; iii. reform; iv. professional; 
v. community; vi. intelligence; vii. terrorist
Page 110: i. twenty-one; ii. felony; iii. probationary;  
iv. police academy; v. field training
Page 113: i. discrimination; ii. affirmative action;  
iii. consent decree
Page 121: i. sheriffs’; ii. highway patrol; iii. Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI); iv. Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA); v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms and Explosives (ATF); vi. deter 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2003 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, May 2006), i; and 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 
2003 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, May 2006), i.
32. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, December 2010), Text 
table 4, page 32.
33. Raymond W. Kelly, “Homeland Security 
Preparedness in New York City,” pre-
pared statement before the U.S. House of 
Representatives, 2005.
34. Dana Priest and William M. Arkin, 
“Monitoring America,” Washington Post 
(December 20, 2010), A1; and Lois M. Davis, 
et al., Law Enforcement’s Post-9/11 Focus on 
Counterterrorism and Homeland Security 
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 
2010), 8.
35. David J. Robert, “Technology’s Impact on Law 
Enforcement—Community Interaction,” The 
Police Chief (February 2011), 78.
36. Quoted in Rubin, A17.
37. James H. Chenoweth, “Situational Tests: A 
New Attempt at Assessing Police Candidates,” 
Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology and 
Police Science 52 (1961), 232.
38. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, 11.
39. Ibid, Table 5, page 11.
40. D. P. Hinkle, “College Degree: An Impractical 
Prerequisite for Police Work,” Law and Order 
(July 1991), 105.
41. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, 12.
42. Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local 
Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2006 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, February 2009), 7.
43. National Advisory Commission on Civil 
Disorder, Report, Chapter 11.
44. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971); 
and Abermarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 
405 (1975).
45. Gene L. Scaramella, Steven M. Cox, and 
William P. McCamey, Introduction to Policing 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 
2011), 30–31.
46. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, 14.
47. National Center for Women and Policing, 
Equality Denied: The Status of Women in 
Policing: 2001 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 2002), 4.
48. Jacqueline Mroz, “Female Police Chiefs: A 
Novelty No More,” New York Times (April 6, 
2008), 3.
49. Scaramella, Cox, and McCamey, 318.
50. Quoted in Teresa Lynn Wertsch, “Walking 
the Thin Blue Line: Policewomen and 
Tokenism Today,” Women and Criminal 
Justice (1998), 35–36.
51. Katherine Stuart van Wormer and Clemens 
Bartollas, Women and the Criminal Justice 
System, 3d ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education, 2011), 318–319.
52. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, 14.
53. David Alan Sklansky, “Not Your Father’s 
Police Department: Making Sense of the New 
Demographics of Law Enforcement,” Journal 
of Criminal Law and Criminology (Spring 
2006), 1209–1243.
54. Peter C. Moskos, “Two Shades of Blue: Black 
and White in the Blue Brotherhood,” Law 
Enforcement Executive Forum (2008), 57.
55. Scaramella, Cox, and McCamey, 324.
56. Dempsey and Forst, 183.
57. Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education, 476 
U.S. 314 (1986).
58. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State 
and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, 2008 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, July 2011), 2.
59. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the 
-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/
table_70_full-time_law_enforcement_
employees_by_region_and_geographic_
division_by_population_group_number_
and_rate_per_1000_inhabitants_2011.xls.
60. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, Table 3, page 9.
61. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State 
and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, 2008, 
Table 4, page 5.
62. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 
2003, 15–18.
63. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ 
Departments, 1997 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, February 2000), 14.
64. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Medical 
Examiners and Coroners’ Offices, 2004 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, June 2007), 1.
65. Pub. L. No. 107-296, 116 Stat. 2135.
66. “CBP’s 2011 Fiscal Year in Review,” at www.cbp.
gov/xp/cgov/newsroom/news_releases/
national/2011_news_archive/12122011 
.xml.
67. Laura Wides-Munoz, “ICE Deports Record 
Number of Immigrants in Year,” Associated 
Press (October 18, 2011).
68. United States Marshals Service, “Fact Sheet,” 
at 
www.justice.gov/marshals/duties/
factsheets/general-1209.html.
69. Private Security Services to 2014 (Cleveland, 
OH: Freedonia Group, November 2010), 15.
70. John B. Owens, “Westec Story: Gated 
Communities and the Fourth Amendment,” 
American Criminal Law Review (Spring 
1997), 1138.
71. Bruce L. Benson, “Guns, Crime, and Safety,” 
Journal of Law and Economics (October 
2001), 725.
72. National 
Retail 
Federation, 
“Retail 
Fraud, 
Shoplifting 
Rates 
Decrease, 
According to National Retail Security 
Survey,” 
at 
www.nrf.com/modules.
php?name=News&op=viewlive&sp_
id=945.
73. William C. Cunningham, John J. Strauchs, 
and Clifford W. Van Meter, The Hallcrest 
Report II: Private Security Trends, 1970 to 
2000 (Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 
1990), 236.
124   C R I m I n A L  J U S T I C E  I n  A C T I o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   127
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  List the three primary purposes of police patrol.
2  Indicate some investigation strategies that are considered 
aggressive.
3  Describe how forensic experts use DNA fingerprinting to 
solve crimes.
4  Explain why differential response strategies enable police 
departments to respond efficiently to 911 calls.
5  Explain community policing and its contribution to the 
concept of problem-oriented policing.
6  Determine when police officers are justified in using deadly 
force.
7  Identify the three traditional forms of police corruption.
8  Explain what an ethical dilemma is and name four 
categories of ethical dilemmas that a police officer typically 
may face.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary on 
pages 153 and 154 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Problems
and Solutions
in Modern
 Policing
127
Joshua Lott/Reuters/Landov
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Police Organization and Field 
Operations
• Police Strategies: What  
Works
• “Us versus Them”: Issues in 
Modern Policing
• Police Misconduct and  
Ethics
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
J
aime Gonzalez’s death was hardly an isolated incident.  In recent years, law enforce-
ment agents in a number of states, including California, Florida, and Maryland, 
have shot dozens of children and adults armed with BB guns or other types of air 
pistols that appeared to be deadly weapons.1 Following these episodes, the police officers 
involved often are blamed for not waiting to determine the full extent of the threat posed 
by the shooter. As you will see later in the chapter, however, police officers have the right 
to use force—including deadly force—when it is reasonable to do so.2 In the Brownsville 
case, was it reasonable of the officers to assume that Gonzalez’s gun was real?
Judging by the facts, the answer to the question is yes, though this may be cold com-
fort to Gonzalez’s parents and, indeed, to the officers who shot him.  Many law enforce-
ment agents suffer symptoms of postshooting trauma, such as nightmares and social 
withdrawal, following the use of lethal force, particularly when the victim is a minor.3 
Indeed, most Americans cannot imagine the on-the-job situations that the average law 
enforcement agent faces, or the pressures involved in dealing with these situations.  
For the topic of this chapter, we turn to the many challenges of law enforcement. 
As one-time police officer and later professor James Fyfe has explained, by telling police 
officers that we expect them to eradicate crime, we are putting them in a “no win war.”4 
In the pages that follow, we will examine the strategies employed by law enforcement 
TExAs Tragedy
On January 4, 2012, thirteen-year-old Jaime Gonzalez 
walked into a first-period class at Cummings Middle 
School in Brownsville, Texas, and, for no apparent 
reason, punched another student in the face. As 
school administrators tried to calm an agitated 
Gonzalez in the hallway, their puzzlement turned to 
alarm—the eighth grader had a gun tucked into his 
pants. Within minutes, the school was in lockdown 
and two local police officers had arrived on the scene.  
They shouted at Gonzalez to “Put the gun down! Put 
it on the floor!” Disregarding these orders, Gonzalez 
raised his weapon. The officers fired three times and 
hit the teenager twice, once in the chest and once in 
the abdomen. “Subject shot,” one of the officers said 
as he called for emergency medical aid.
After Gonzalez died from his wounds in a local 
hospital, an already-shaken community learned one 
more piece of disturbing news. Although the weapon 
Gonzalez had been brandishing looked like a black 
Glock semiautomatic pistol, it was actually a relatively 
harmless .177-caliber BB gun, available on the Internet 
for $60. As might be expected, this development 
opened the Brownsville police to a great deal of 
criticism. “Why was so much excess force used on 
a minor?” asked Gonzalez’s father, Jaime Sr. “What 
happened was an injustice,” insisted Noralva, the boy’s 
mother.
Brownsville interim police chief Orlando Rodriguez 
defended his officers’ decision making. He stressed that, 
as far as the two men knew, they were dealing with an 
armed suspect roaming the halls of a school with more 
than seven hundred students and about seventy-five 
staff. “When I looked at that gun, there is no doubt 
[that] from a distance it’s absolutely real,”  agreed Carl A. 
Montoya, a school official.  
“I think the officers responded, 
obviously, from their training. 
From that perspective, it was a 
real gun.”
Jaime and Noralva 
Gonzalez embrace at the 
funeral of their son, Jaime, 
who was fatally shot by 
Brownsville, Texas, police 
after brandishing what 
appeared to be a 
handgun at his school.
AP Photo/Brownsville Herald, Yvette Vela
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
read “Texas Tragedy” and then 
respond to the question presented 
in the text: was it reasonable for 
the Brownsville police officers to 
assume that Jaime Gonzalez’s gun 
was real?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   129
agencies to gain victories, both large and small, in the struggle against crime. We will also 
scrutinize what Fyfe described as the inevitable atrocities of his “no win war,” including 
police misconduct such as brutality and corruption. Our look inside the world of the law 
enforcement agent begins with an overview of how police departments are organized 
and operated.
PoLiCE oRgAnizATion  
And FiELd oPERATions
Brownsville police administrators placed the two officers involved in Jamie Gonzalez’s 
death on administrative leave pending an investigation into the incident.  In other words, 
the officers were temporarily relieved of their duties, with pay.  This step does not imply 
that they were suspected of wrongdoing.  Most law enforcement agencies react similarly 
when a firearm is fired in the line of duty, both to allow for a full investigation of the event 
and to give the officer a chance to recover from what can be a traumatic experience. 
Administrative leave is a bureaucratic response to an officer-involved shooting. In 
a bureaucracy, formal rules govern an individual’s actions and relationships with co-
employees. The ultimate goal of any bureaucracy is to reach its maximum efficiency—in 
the case of a police department, to provide the best service for the community within 
the confines of limited resources such as staff and budget. Although some police depart-
ments are experimenting with alternative structures based on a partnership between 
management and the officers in the field,5 most continue to rely on the hierarchical 
structure described below.
THE sTRuCTuRE oF THE PoLiCE dEPARTmEnT
Each police department is organized according to its environment: the size of its jurisdic-
tion, the type of crimes it must deal with, and the demographics of the population under 
its protection. A police department in a racially diverse city often faces different chal-
lenges than a department in a homogeneous one. Geographic location also influences 
police organization. The makeup of the police department in Miami, Florida, for example, 
is partially determined by the fact that the city is a gateway for illegal drugs smuggled 
from Central and South America. Consequently, the department directs a high percentage 
of its resources to special drug-fighting units. It has also formed cooperative partnerships 
with federal agencies such as the FBI and U.S. Customs and Border Protection in an effort 
to stop the flow of narcotics and weapons into the South Florida area.
CHAin oF CommAnd Whatever the size or location of a police department, it needs a 
clear rank structure and strict accountability to function properly. One of the goals of the 
police reformers, especially beginning in the 1950s, was to lessen the corrupting influ-
ence of politicians. The result was a move toward a militaristic organization of police.6 As 
you can see in Figure 5.1 on the following page, a typical police department is based on 
a chain of command that leads from the police chief down through the various levels of 
the department. In this formalized structure, all persons are aware of their place in the 
chain and of their duties and responsibilities within the organization. 
Delegation of authority is a critical component of the chain of command, espe-
cially in larger departments. The chief of police delegates authority to assistant or division 
chiefs, who delegate authority to commanders, and on down through the organization. 
This structure creates a situation in which nearly every member of a police department 
Bureaucracy A hierarchically 
structured administrative 
organization that carries out 
specific functions.
Delegation of Authority  
The principles of command on 
which most police departments 
are based, in which personnel 
take orders from and are 
responsible to those in 
positions of power directly 
above them.
Technology Tip: Have students 
visit the Web site of their local 
police department. Have them 
describe the delegation of 
authority within the department’s 
organizational structure.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
is directly accountable to a superior. As was the original goal of police reformers, these 
links encourage discipline and control and lessen the possibility that any individual police 
employee will have the unsupervised freedom to abuse her or his position.7
oRgAnizing by AREA And TimE In most metropolitan areas, police responsibilities are 
divided according to zones known as beats and precincts. A beat is the smallest stretch 
that a police officer or a group of police officers regularly patrol. A precinct—also known 
as a district or a station—is a collection of beats. A precinct commander, or captain, is 
held responsible by his or her superiors at police headquarters for the performance of the 
officers in that particular precinct.8
Police administrators must also organize their personnel by time. Most depart-
ments separate each twenty-four-hour day into three eight-hour shifts, also called tours or 
platoons. The night shift generally lasts from midnight to 8 a.m., the day shift from 8 a.m. 
to 4 p.m., and the evening shift from 4 p.m. to midnight. Officers either vary their hours by, 
say, working days one month and nights the next, or they have fixed tours in which they 
consistently take day, night, or evening shifts.9
LAw EnFoRCEmEnT in THE FiELd To a large extent, the main goal of any police depart-
ment is the most efficient organization of its field services. Also known as “operations” or 
“line services,” field services include patrol activities, investigations, and special opera-
tions. According to Henry M. Wrobleski and Karen M. Hess, most police departments 
are “generalists.” Thus, police officers are assigned to general areas and perform all field 
service functions within the boundaries of their beats. Larger departments may be more 
specialized, with personnel assigned to specific types of crime, such as homicide, vice 
(dealing with illegal drugs, prostitution, and gambling), or white- collar crime, rather 
FIGURE 5.1 The Command Chain of the Cincinnati (Ohio) Police Department
The Cincinnati Police Department is made up of more than 1,000 sworn law enforcement officers and about 120 civilians. 
As this figure shows, the chain of command runs from the chief of police through four main bureau chiefs down to a wide 
variety of sections, squads, and units.
Source: Cincinnati Police Department.
• Street patrol
• Marine patrol
• Mounted patrol
• Traffic
• Community-oriented 
   policing
• Evidence/property
   management
• Personnel/finance
   management
• Training
• Internal investigations
• Planning and resources
• Inspections
• Central vice control
• Criminal investigations
   Intelligence
Patrol Bureau
Assistant Chief
James L. Whalen
Resource Bureau
Assistant Chief
Cindy M. Combs
Investigations Bureau
Assistant Chief
Vincent Demasi
Administration Bureau
Assistant Chief
Richard Janke
Police Chief
James E. Craig
Teaching Tip: To help students 
understand the different types 
of field services, show them the 
various divisions that operate 
out of a police department that 
serves a large city. If possible, 
have a local police officer visit 
the class to speak about the field 
service organization of her or his 
department.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

than geographic locations. Smaller departments, which make up the bulk of local law 
enforcement agencies, rely almost exclusively on general patrol.10
PoLiCE on PATRoL:  
THE bACkbonE oF THE dEPARTmEnT
Every police department has a patrol unit, and patrol is usually the largest division in the 
department. More than two-thirds of the sworn officers, or those officers authorized to 
make arrests and use force, in local police departments in the United States have patrol 
duties.11
“Life on the street” is not easy. Patrol officers must be able to handle any number of 
difficult situations, and experience is often the best and, despite training programs, the 
only teacher. As one patrol officer commented:
You never stop learning. You never get your street degree. The person who says . . . they’ve 
learned it all is the person that’s going to wind up dead or in a very compromising position. 
They’ve closed their minds.12
It may take a patrol officer years to learn when a gang is “false flagging” (trying to trick 
rival gang members into the open) or what to look for in a suspect’s eyes to sense if he or 
she is concealing a weapon. This learning process is the backdrop to a number of differ-
ent general functions that a patrol officer performs on a daily basis. 
THE PuRPosE oF PATRoL In general, patrol officers do not spend most of their shifts 
chasing, catching, and handcuffing suspected criminals. The vast majority of patrol 
shifts are completed without a single arrest.13 Officers spend a great deal of time meeting 
with other officers, completing paperwork, and patrolling with the goal of preventing 
crime in general rather than focusing on any specific crime or criminal activity. 
As police accountability expert Samuel Walker has noted, the basic purposes of 
police patrol have changed very little since 1829, when Sir Robert Peel founded the mod-
ern police department. These purposes include the following:
1. The deterrence of crime by maintaining a visible police presence.
2. The maintenance of public order and a sense of security in the community.
3. The twenty-four-hour provision of services that are not crime related.14
The first two goals—deterring crime and keeping order—are generally accepted 
as legitimate police functions. The third, however, has been more controversial. As 
noted in Chapter 4, the community era saw a resurgence of the patrol officer as 
a provider of community services, many of which have little to do with crime. 
The extent to which noncrime incidents dominate patrol officers’ time is 
evident in the Police Services Study, a survey of 26,000 calls to police 
in sixty different neighborhoods. The study found that only one out 
of every five calls involved the report of criminal activity.15 (See 
Figure 5.2 on the following page for the results of another survey 
of crime calls.)
PATRoL ACTiviTiEs To recap, the purposes of police patrols are to 
prevent and deter crime and also to provide social services. How 
can the police best accomplish these goals? Of course, each depart-
ment has its own methods and strategies, but William Gay, Theodore 
Schell, and Stephen Schack are able to divide routine patrol activity into 
four general categories:
List the three 
primary 
purposes of 
police patrol.
Learning  
objective1
Sworn Officer A law 
enforcement agent who has 
been authorized to make 
arrests and use force, including 
deadly force, against civilians.
Given that most patrol shifts 
end without an officer making 
a single arrest, what activities 
take up most of a patrol 
officer’s time? 
David Turnley/Corbis
C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   131
Discussion Tip: Before they read 
this section, ask your students 
what they believe to be the primary 
purpose of police patrol. Write 
these answers on the board and 
compare them to the information 
in the text.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
1. Preventive patrol. By maintaining a presence in a community, either in a car or on 
foot, patrol officers attempt to prevent crime from occurring. This strategy, which 
O. W. Wilson called “omnipresence,” was a cornerstone of early policing philosophy 
and still takes up roughly 40 percent of patrol time.
2. Calls for service. Patrol officers spend nearly a quarter of their time responding to 
911 calls for emergency service or other citizen problems and complaints.
3. Administrative duties. Paperwork takes up nearly 20 percent of patrol time.
4. Officer-initiated activities. Incidents in which the patrol officer initiates contact 
with citizens, such as stopping motorists and pedestrians and questioning them, 
account for 15 percent of patrol time.16 
The category estimates made by Gay, Schell, and Schack are not universally 
accepted. Professor of law enforcement Gary W. Cordner argues that administrative 
duties account for the largest percentage of patrol officers’ time. According to Cordner, 
when officers are not consumed with paperwork and meetings, they are either answer-
ing calls for service (which takes up 67 percent of the officers’ time on the street) or 
initiating activities themselves (the remaining 33 percent).17
“noisE, boozE, And vioLEnCE” There are dozens of academic studies that purport to 
answer the question of how patrol officers spend their days and nights. Perhaps it is 
only fair, then, to give a police officer the chance to describe the duties patrol officers 
perform. In the words of Anthony Bouza, a former police chief:
[Patrol officers] hurry from call to call, bound to their crackling radios, which offer no 
relief—especially on summer weekend nights. . . . The cops jump from crisis to crisis, rarely 
having time to do more than tamp one down sufficiently and leave for the next. Gaps of 
boredom and inactivity fill the interims, although there aren’t many of these in the hot 
months. Periods of boredom get increasingly longer as the nights wear on and the weather 
gets colder.18
Bouza paints a picture of a routine beat as filled with “noise, booze, violence, drugs, 
illness, blaring TVs, and human misery.” This may describe the situation in high-crime 
FIGURE 5.2 Calls for Service
Over a period of two years, the Project on Policing Neighborhoods gathered information on calls for service in Indianapolis, 
Indiana, and St. Petersburg, Florida. As you can see, the largest portion of these calls involved disputes in which no 
violence or threat of violence existed. (Be aware also that nearly two-thirds of the nonviolent dispute calls and nearly half of 
the assault calls answered by police dealt with domestic confrontations.) 
Description of Violation 
Percentage of Total Calls
NONSERIOUS CRIME CALLS
Nonviolent disputes
42
Public disorder (examples: drunk, disorderly, begging, prostitution) 
11
Assistance (examples: missing persons, traffic accident, damaged property)
10
Minor violations (examples: shoplifting, trespassing, traffic/parking offense,  
refusal to pay)
4
SERIOUS CRIME CALLS
Assaults (examples: using violence against a person, kidnapping, child abuse)
26
Serious theft (examples: motor vehicle theft, burglary, purse snatching)
5
General disorder (examples: illicit drugs, fleeing police, leaving the scene of  
an accident)
2
Source: Adapted from: Stephen D. Mastrofski, Jeffrey B. Snipes, Roger B. Parks, and Christopher D. Maxwell, “The Helping Hand of the Law: Police Control of Citizens on Request,” 
Criminology 38 (May 2000), Table 5, page 328.
Eldad Carin/iStockphoto
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   133
neighborhoods, but it certainly does not rep-
resent the reality for the majority of patrol 
officers in the United States. Duties that all 
patrol officers have in common, whether 
they work in Bouza’s rather nightmarish city 
streets or in the quieter environment of rural 
America, include controlling traffic, con-
ducting preliminary investigations, making 
arrests, and patrolling public events.
PoLiCE invEsTigATions
Investigation is the second main function of 
police, along with patrol. Whereas patrol is 
primarily preventive, investigation is reac-
tive. After a crime has been committed and 
the patrol officer has gathered the prelimi-
nary information from the crime scene, the responsibility of finding “who dunnit” is 
delegated to the investigator, generally known as the detective. The most common way 
for someone to become a detective is to be promoted from patrol officer. Detectives have 
not been the focus of nearly as much reform attention as their patrol counterparts, mainly 
because the scope of the detective’s job is limited to law enforcement, with less emphasis 
given to social services or order maintenance.
The detective’s job is not quite as glamorous as it is sometimes portrayed by the 
media. Detectives spend much of their time investigating common crimes such as burglar-
ies and are more likely to be tracking down stolen property than a murderer. They must 
also prepare cases for trial, which involves a great deal of time-consuming paperwork. 
Furthermore, a landmark Rand Corporation study estimated that more than 97 percent of 
cases that are “solved” can be attributed to a patrol officer making an arrest at the scene, 
witnesses or victims identifying the perpetrator, or detectives undertaking routine investi-
gative procedures that could easily be performed by clerical personnel.19 
For example, even though a task force of up to thirty-five Los Angeles detectives 
worked around the clock for a week on the January 2012 murder of seventeen-year-old 
Francisco Rodriguez, it was an informant’s tip that finally directed police to two suspects in 
the killing. “There is no Sherlock Holmes,” said one investigator. “The good detective on the 
street is the one who knows all the weasels and one of the weasels will tell him who did it.”20
AggREssivE invEsTigATion sTRATEgiEs
Detective bureaus also have the option of implementing more aggressive strategies. 
Perhaps the most dangerous and controversial operation a law enforcement agent can 
undertake is to go undercover, or to assume a false identity in order to obtain information 
concerning illegal activities. Though each department has its own guidelines on when 
undercover operations are necessary, all that is generally required is the suspicion that 
illegal activity is taking place. (As you may recall from the discussion of entrapment in 
Chapter 3, police officers are limited in what they can do to convince the target of an 
undercover operation to participate in the illegal activity.) Today, undercover officers 
are most commonly used to infiltrate large-scale narcotics operations or those run by 
organized crime. 
In some situations, a detective bureau may not want to take the risk of exposing 
an officer to undercover work or may believe that an outsider cannot infiltrate a crime 
Indicate some 
investigation 
strategies that 
are considered 
aggressive.
Learning  
objective2
Detective The primary police 
investigator of crimes.
Two undercover U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service agents pose as 
hunters to combat the illegal 
poaching of protected animals 
in Louisiana. What sort of 
training might be required for 
this dangerous work?
Gary Moore/realworldimage.com
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
network. When the police need access and information, they have the option of turning 
to a confidential informant (CI). A CI is a person who is involved in criminal activity 
and gives information about that activity and those who engage in it to the police. The 
United States Supreme Court, in Rovario v. United States (1957),21 held that the state has a 
confidential informant privilege. This means that government agents are not required to 
disclose the identity of an informant unless a court finds that such information is needed 
to determine the guilt or innocence of a suspect. 
CLEARAnCE RATEs And CoLd CAsEs
The ultimate goal of all law enforcement activity is to clear a crime, or secure the arrest 
and prosecution of the offender. Even a cursory glance at clearance rates, which show 
the percentage of reported crimes that have been cleared, reveals that investigations suc-
ceed only part of the time. In 2011, just 65 percent of homicides and 48 percent of total 
violent crimes were solved, while police cleared only 19 percent of property crimes.22 For 
the most part, the different clearance rates for different crimes reflect the resources that 
a law enforcement agency expends on each type of crime. The police generally investi-
gate a murder or a rape more vigorously than the theft of an automobile or an iPad.
As a result of low clearance rates, police departments are often saddled with a 
number of cold cases, or criminal investigations that are not cleared after a certain 
amount of time. More than 80 percent of large-city police departments have cold case 
squads dedicated to unsolved crimes.23 (The length of time before a case becomes 
“cold” varies from department to department. In general, a cold case must be “some-
what old” but not “so old that there can be no hope of ever solving it.” 24)
FoREnsiC invEsTigATions And dnA
Although the crime scene typically offers a wealth of evidence, some of it is incompre-
hensible to a patrol officer or detective without assistance. For that aid, law enforcement 
officers rely on experts in  forensics, or the practice of using science and technology to 
investigate crimes. Forensic experts apply their knowledge to items found at the crime 
scene to determine crucial facts such as the following:
• 
The cause of death or injury.
• 
The time of death or injury.
• 
The type of weapon or weapons used.
• 
The identity of the crime victim, if that information is unavailable.
• 
The identity of the offender (in the best-case scenario).25
To assist forensic experts, many police departments operate or are affiliated with crime 
laboratories. As noted in the previous chapter, the FBI also offers the services of its crime 
lab, the largest in the world, to agencies with limited resources. These services can be 
crucial, as recent research shows that forensic evidence greatly increases the chances of 
case clearances, particularly with regard to sexual assaults, robberies, and burglaries.26
CRimE sCEnE FoREnsiCs The first law enforcement agent to reach a crime scene has the 
important task of protecting any trace evidence from contamination. Trace evidence is 
generally very small—often invisible to the naked human eye—and often requires techno-
logical aid for detection. Hairs, fibers, blood, fingerprints, broken glass, and footprints are 
all examples of trace evidence. A study released by the National Institute of Justice in 2010 
confirmed that when police are able to link such evidence to a suspect, the likelihood of a 
conviction rises dramatically.27 Police will also search a crime scene for bullets and spent 
Confidential Informant 
(CI) A human source 
for police who provides 
information concerning illegal 
activity in which he or she is 
involved.
Clearance Rate A 
comparison of the number of 
crimes cleared by arrest and 
prosecution with the number 
of crimes reported during any 
given time period.
Cold Case A criminal 
investigation that has not been 
solved after a certain amount 
of time.
Forensics The application 
of science to establish facts 
and evidence during the 
investigation of crimes.
Trace Evidence Evidence 
such as a fingerprint, blood, or 
hair found in small amounts at 
a crime scene.
Technology Tip: Have your 
students go online to find an 
example of a cold case that was 
solved in the past year. What were 
the facts of the case? How was it 
eventually solved? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   135
cartridge casings. These items can provide clues as to how far the shooter was from the tar-
get. They can also be compared with information stored in national firearms databases to 
determine, under some circumstances, the gun used and its most recent owner. The study 
of firearms and its application to solving crimes goes under the general term ballistics.
THE HumAn FingERPRinT For more than a century, the most important piece of trace 
evidence has been the human fingerprint. Because no two fingerprints are alike, they are 
considered reliable sources of identification. Forensic scientists compare a fingerprint 
lifted from a crime scene with that of a suspect and declare a match if there are between 
eight and sixteen “points of similarity.” This method of identification is not infallible, 
however. It is often difficult to lift a suitable print from a crime scene, and researchers 
have uncovered numerous cases in which innocent persons were convicted based on 
evidence obtained through faulty fingerprinting procedures.28
THE dnA REvoLuTion The technique of DNA fingerprinting, or using a suspect’s DNA 
to match the suspect to a crime, emerged in the mid-1990s and has now all but replaced 
fingerprint evidence in many types of criminal investigations. The shift has been a boon 
to crime fighters: one law enforcement agent likened DNA fingerprinting to “the finger 
of God pointing down” at a guilty suspect.29
DNA, which is the same in each cell of a person’s body, provides a “genetic blueprint” 
or “code” for every living organism. DNA fingerprinting is useful in criminal investigations 
because no two people, save for identical twins, have the same genetic code. Therefore, 
lab technicians can compare certain characteristics of a DNA sample from a suspect to 
the evidence found at the crime scene. If the match is negative, it is certain that the two 
samples did not come from the same source. If enough characteristics of the DNA sample 
have a positive match, the lab will determine the odds that the DNA sample could have 
come from someone other than the suspect. Those odds are so low—sometimes reaching 
30 billion to one—that a match is practically conclusive.30
The process begins when forensic technicians gather blood, semen, skin, saliva, or hair 
from the scene of a crime. Blood cells and sperm are rich in DNA, making them particularly 
useful in murder and rape cases, but DNA has also been extracted from sweat on dirty laundry, 
skin cells on eyeglasses, and saliva on used envelope seals. Once a suspect is identified, her 
or his DNA can be used to determine whether she or he can be placed at the crime scene. In 
2011, for example, investigators connected Aaron Thomas, the “East Coast Rapist,” to a series 
of sexual assaults that took place from Rhode Island to Virginia by obtaining Thomas’s DNA 
sample from a discarded cigarette.
dnA in ACTion The ability to “dust” for genetic information on such a wide variety of evi-
dence, as well as that evidence’s longevity and accuracy, greatly increases the chances that a 
crime will be solved. Indeed, police no longer need a witness or even a suspect in custody to 
solve crimes. What they do need is a piece of evidence and a database.  In 2012, for example, 
William Payne was arrested for murdering Nikolaus Crumbley in San Francisco’s McLaren 
Park on November 16, 1983.  Semen found on Crumbley’s corpse had been collected at the 
time of the crime, but police could not identify a suspect.  Three decades later, this evidence 
was matched to a sample of Payne’s DNA, taken when he was arrested for an unrelated 
felony and his DNA pattern stored in a California Department of Justice database.
Databases and Cold Hits The identification of William Payne is an example of what 
police call a cold hit. Such “hits” occur when law enforcement finds a suspect “out of 
nowhere” by comparing DNA evidence from a crime scene against the contents of a 
Ballistics The study of 
firearms, including the firing of 
the weapon and the flight of 
the bullet. 
DNA Fingerprinting The 
identification of a person based 
on a sample of her or his DNA, 
the genetic material found in 
the cells of all living things.
Cold Hit The establishment 
of a connection between a 
suspect and a crime, often 
through the use of DNA 
evidence, in the absence of an 
ongoing criminal investigation.
Describe how 
forensic experts 
use DNA 
fingerprinting to 
solve crimes.
Learning  
objective3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
database. The largest and most important database is the National Combined DNA Index 
System (CODIS). Operated by the FBI since 1998, CODIS gives local and state law enforce-
ment agencies access to the DNA profiles of those who have been convicted of various 
crimes. CODIS contains DNA records of 9.7 million people, and as of June 2012, the data-
base had produced 182,200 cold hits nationwide.31
New Developments The investigative uses of DNA fingerprinting are expanding rapidly. 
Taking advantage of a new technique known as “touch DNA,” investigators can collect 
evidence from surfaces that are not marked by obvious clues such as bloodstains or 
well-preserved fingerprints. With this technique, forensic scientists can gather enough 
microscopic cells to test for the presence of DNA by scraping a piece of food or an article 
of clothing. In addition, although CODIS was designed to help police solve murders and 
rapes, it is becoming increasingly useful in identifying suspects in burglaries and other 
property crimes. A recent study funded by the National Institute of Justice found that twice 
F A s T F A C T s
FoREnsiC sCiEnTisT, job 
dEsCRiPTion:
•  Examine, test, and analyze tissue 
samples, chemical substances, 
physical materials, and ballistics 
evidence collected at a crime 
scene.
wHAT kind oF TRAining  
is REquiREd?
•  Bachelor’s degree in science, 
particularly chemistry, biology, 
biochemistry, or physics.
• Certification programs (usually 2 
years’ additional study) can help 
prospective applicants specialize 
as forensic consultants, fingerprint 
technicians, forensic investigators, 
laboratory technicians, and 
fingerprint examiners.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
•  $25,100 – $65,000
CareerS IN CJ
Martha Blake 
Forensic scientist
In high school, I was interested in science, but didn’t want to end up being a 
technician doing the same thing every day. I was looking in college catalogues and 
came across criminalistics at U.C. Berkeley. The coursework included such courses 
as microscopy, instrumental analysis, trace evidence, criminal law, and statistics, 
and it sounded fascinating. I decided in my senior year of high school to become a 
forensic scientist.
As quality assurance manager at the San Francisco Police Department’s crime 
lab, I am often called to criminal court to testify about evidence that has passed 
through our lab. I am always nervous when I testify, and I think it is healthy to be a 
little nervous. As an expert witness, the most challenging part of my testimony is 
describing my findings to a jury of primarily nonscientists in a way that will make my 
testimony understandable and credible. I’ve found that juries tend to understand 
evidence that is part of their lives. Everyone can identify the writing of a family 
member or spouse, so describing how handwriting is identified is not too hard. 
Explaining how DNA analysis works is more difficult. 
social Media career tip  
When people Google you, they won’t click past the first page. Check to see where 
your material appears on a regular basis.
Photo Courtesy of Martha Blake
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: On the following 
page, the authors describe the 
possibility that DNA might be 
used as a “genetic witness.” Have 
students critique this potential 
strategy. What are its benefits?  
What are its drawbacks? What 
might be some of its unintended 
consequences?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   137
as many suspects were arrested when DNA fingerprint-
ing was added to property crime investigations.32
Because relatives have similar DNA, law enforce-
ment agents are now conducting “familial searches” 
of parents, siblings, and other relatives to gain more 
information about suspects. One such search led to 
the 2010 arrest of Los Angeles’s “Grim Sleeper”—so 
called because there was a fourteen-year gap between 
the murders he committed in the 1980s and those 
in the first decade of the 2000s. Investigators were 
able to narrow their focus to Lonnie Franklin, Jr., 
after DNA evidence from various Grim Sleeper crime 
scenes exhibited similarities to the DNA of Lonnie’s 
son Christopher, who had recently been convicted on 
a weapons charge (see the photo alongside). 
Forensic experts are also raising the possibility 
that DNA will be able to act as a “genetic witness.” That is, a DNA sample taken from a 
crime scene soon may be able to provide law enforcement with a physical description of 
a suspect, including her or his eye, skin, and hair color and age.33
SeLFaSSeSSMeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 154.
____________ officers make up the backbone of a police department. One of their primary 
functions is to ____________ crime by maintaining a visible ____________ in the community. 
____________, in contrast, investigate crimes that have already occurred. In the past two 
decades, ____________, or the science of crime investigation, has been revolutionized by 
the technique of ____________ ____________, in which crime labs use samples of a person’s 
genetic material to match suspects to crimes. 
PoLiCE sTRATEgiEs: wHAT woRks
No matter how “miraculous” DNA fingerprinting may appear, the technology does have its 
limitations. Forensic evidence, including DNA fingerprinting, is the primary factor in only 
about 30 percent of solved cold cases.34 Furthermore, any evidence, forensic or otherwise, 
can only help police solve a crime that has already taken place. It does little to prevent crime 
that has yet to occur. Finally, law enforcement’s ability to take advantage of DNA fingerprint-
ing is being hampered by extensive budget cuts. The state crime lab in Kansas, for example, 
is facing a backlog of nearly one thousand cases, while the state has reduced the number of 
technicians who work there by one-fifth.35
Police departments are facing the same financial pressures. Across the nation, many 
are being forced to reduce staff to levels not seen since the 1980s. The results can be 
disheartening: two months after Camden, New Jersey, laid off more than 160 officers in 
January 2011, violent crime in the city rose 19 percent, and aggravated assaults with firearms 
increased by 259 percent.36 Some departments have taken drastic steps in the face of budget 
cuts. After losing three hundred officers, the Fresno (California) Police Department began 
utilizing volunteers to perform duties such as collecting evidence and interviewing wit-
nesses.37 For the most part, however, police administrators are refocusing on two bulwarks 
of police crime prevention—responding to calls for service and providing effective patrols.
How did “familial DNA” lead 
investigators to Lonnie Franklin, 
Jr., left, shown here in a Los 
Angeles courtroom? Why might 
privacy advocates criticize 
this method of using DNA to 
identify criminal suspects? 
AP Photo/Irfan Khan, Pool
Teaching Tip: Make sure your 
students understand that 
identifying suspects using DNA 
fingerprinting is not as simple as 
portrayed on television. Often, 
there is no DNA to be found at 
a crime scene. Also, because of 
resource limitations, forensic teams 
are not sent to every crime scene.  
Furthermore, many local police 
departments do not have their own 
DNA testing facilities and must 
rely on assistance from state law 
enforcement agencies or the FBI.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REsPonsE TimE To 911 CALLs
Even though law enforcement officers do not like to think of themselves as being at the 
“beck and call” of citizens, that is the operational basis of much police work. All police 
departments practice incident-driven policing, in which calls for service are the pri-
mary instigators of action. Between 40 and 60 percent of police activity is the result of 
911 calls or other citizen requests, which means that police officers in the field initiate 
only about half of such activity.38
REsPonsE TimE And EFFiCiEnCy The speed with which the police respond to calls for 
service has traditionally been seen as a crucial aspect of crime fighting and crime preven-
tion. In incident-driven policing, the ideal scenario is as follows: a citizen sees a person 
committing a crime and calls 911, and the police arrive quickly and catch the perpetrator 
in the act. Alternatively, a citizen who is the victim of a crime, such as a mugging, calls 
911 as soon as possible, and the police arrive to catch the mugger before she or he can 
flee the immediate area of the crime. Although such scenarios are quite rare in real life, 
response time, or the time elapsed between the instant a call for service is received and 
the instant the police arrive on the scene, has become a benchmark for police efficiency.
imPRoving REsPonsE TimE EFFiCiEnCy Many police departments have come to realize 
that overall response time is not as critical as response time for the most important calls. 
For this reason, since the mid-1990s, a number of metropolitan areas have introduced 
311 nonemergency call systems to reduce the strain on 911 operations.39 Another popular 
method of improving performance in this area is a differential response strategy, in 
which the police distinguish among different calls for service so that they can respond 
more quickly to the most serious incidents. 
Suppose, for example, that a police department receives two calls for service at the 
same time. The first caller reports that a burglar is in her house, and the second says 
that he has returned home from work to find his automobile missing. If the department 
employs differential response, the burglary in progress—a “hot” crime—will receive 
immediate attention. The missing automobile—a “cold” crime that could have been com-
mitted several hours earlier—will receive attention “as time permits,” and the caller may 
even be asked to make an appointment to come to the police station to formally report 
the theft.
An ouTdATEd sysTEm The most pressing shortcomings of America’s 911 services are 
not organizational, but rather technological. These systems were developed more than 
forty years ago, when copper-wire landlines ran between telephones and a central 
switch. Today, more than 70 percent of emergency calls for service come from mobile 
phones, and increasing numbers of consumers are taking advantage of VoIP (voice-over-
Internet protocol) technology to turn their computers into telephones. By 2011, a quar-
ter of American households were wireless only—a percentage that is certain to increase 
in the near future.40
This situation presents a problem for law enforcement. Standard 911 systems cannot 
pinpoint the exact location of a mobile phone or a computer. If a caller is unable to provide 
that information, then, it can prove very difficult for police officers to determine the site of 
the emergency. To resolve this issue, various government agencies and private businesses 
are planning a new nationwide intelligence network that should be able to locate all calls, 
read texts, and even watch streaming video. The network will not be fully operational, how-
ever, until 2016.41
Incident-Driven Policing  
A reactive approach to policing 
that emphasizes a speedy 
response to calls for service.
Response Time The rapidity 
with which calls for service are 
answered.
Differential Response A 
strategy for answering calls for 
service in which response time 
is adapted to the seriousness 
of the call.
Explain why 
differential 
response 
strategies 
enable police 
departments 
to respond 
efficiently to  
911 calls.
Learning  
objective 4
138   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   139
PATRoL sTRATEgiEs
Earlier in this chapter, we noted that the majority of 
police officers are assigned to patrol duties. Most of these 
officers work general patrol, making the rounds of a 
specific area with the purpose of carrying out the various 
patrol functions. Every police department in the United 
States patrols its jurisdiction using automobiles. In addi-
tion, 53 percent utilize foot patrols; 32 percent, bicycle 
patrols; 16 percent, motorcycle patrols; 4 percent, boat 
patrols; and 1 percent, horse patrols.42
General patrols are random because the officers 
spend a substantial amount of their shifts hoping to 
notice any crimes that may be occurring. In contrast, 
directed patrols are specifically designed to deal with 
crimes that commonly occur in certain locations and under circumstances that pro-
vide police with opportunity for preparation. The Pittsburgh (Pennsylvania) Police 
Department’s recent decision to set up weekend traffic checkpoints and send under-
cover detectives into “nuisance” bars in some of the city’s high-violence neighborhoods 
is a good example of a directed patrol.
TEsTing gEnERAL PATRoL THEoRiEs in kAnsAs CiTy Some observers have compared a 
patrol officer to a scarecrow because of the hope that the officer’s presence alone will 
deter any would-be criminals from attempting a crime.43 This theory was tested in the 
Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment of 1972 and 1973. With the cooperation of the 
local police department, a team of researchers chose three areas, each comprising five 
beats with similar crime statistics. Over the course of twelve months, the police applied 
different patrol strategies to each designated area:
• 
On the control beats, normal preventive measures were taken, meaning that a 
single automobile drove the streets when not answering a call for service.
• 
On the proactive beats, the level of preventive measures was increased, with auto-
mobile patrols being doubled or tripled.
• 
On the reactive beats, preventive patrol was eliminated entirely, and patrol cars 
only answered calls for service.
Before, during, and after the experiments, the researchers also interviewed residents of 
the three designated areas to determine their opinion of police service and fear of crime.
The results of the Kansas City experiment were somewhat shocking. Researchers 
found that increasing or decreasing preventive patrol had little or no impact on crimes, 
public opinion, the effectiveness of the police, police response time, traffic accidents, or 
reports of crime to police.44
PREdiCTivE PoLiCing And CRimE mAPPing 
In the previous chapter, we discussed how predictive, or 
intelligence-led, policing strategies help law enforcement 
agencies anticipate patterns of criminal activity, allowing 
them to respond to, or even prevent, crime more effectively. 
Predictive policing is increasingly attractive to police admin-
istrators because, in theory, it requires fewer resources than 
traditional policing. “We’re facing a situation where we have 
General Patrol A patrol 
strategy that relies on 
police officers monitoring a 
certain area with the goal of 
detecting crimes in progress 
or preventing crime by their 
presence.
Directed Patrol A patrol 
strategy that is designed to 
focus on a specific type of 
criminal activity at a specific 
time.
A communications supervisor 
monitors 911 calls and police 
dispatches for the Boynton 
Beach, Florida, police 
department. What are some 
reasons that a 911 caller might 
not be able to relate her or his 
exact location and the nature of 
the emergency?
Mark Randall/MCT/Landov
“Why aren’t we thinking more 
about ‘wheredunit’ rather than 
‘whodunit’?”
— lawrence sherman, 
American criminologist
Discussion Tip: Ask student 
whether the nearby presence of 
police officers makes them feel 
safer. Does it make any difference 
if the officers are on foot or in a 
patrol car?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
thirty percent more calls for service but twenty percent less staff than in the year 2000,” 
said Zach Friend, a crime analyst for the Santa Cruz (California) Police Department. “So, 
we have to deploy our resources in a more effective way.”45 Friend and his colleagues are 
doing so by using computer models for predicting aftershocks from earthquakes to gener-
ate projections about where property crimes are most likely to take place.
Finding “HoT sPoTs” Predictive policing strategies are strongly linked with directed 
patrols, which seek to improve on general patrols by targeting specific high-crime areas 
already known to law enforcement. The target areas for directed patrols are often called 
hot spots because they contain greater numbers of criminals and have higher-than-average 
levels of victimization. Needless to say, police administrators are not sticking pins in maps 
to determine where hot spots exist. Rather, police departments are using crime mapping 
technology to locate and identify hot spots and “cool” them down. Crime mapping uses 
geographic information systems (GIS) to track criminal acts as they occur in time and space. 
Once sufficient information has been gathered, it is analyzed to predict future crime patterns.
Researchers are using GIS technology and hot spot policing techniques to reassess 
the results of the Kansas City experiment detailed on the previous page. Following that 
undertaking, professor James Q. Wilson noted that it proved nothing about the capa-
bilities of foot patrols, as it focused on police officers in marked automobiles.46 Several 
years ago, a group of criminologists used GIS techniques to study foot patrols in sixty 
violent crime hot spots in Philadelphia. The results, released in 2011, showed that levels 
of violent crime in the proactive beats were 23 percent lower than those in the control 
beats.  These findings suggests that directed foot patrols can make neighborhoods safer, 
particularly neighborhoods marked by high levels of crime.47
THE RisE oF ComPsTAT Computerized crime mapping was popularized when the New 
York Police Department launched CompStat in the mid-1990s. Still in use, CompStat starts 
with police officers reporting the exact location of crime and other crime-related informa-
tion to department officials. These reports are then fed into a computer, which prepares 
grids of a particular city or neighborhood and highlights areas with a high incidence of 
serious offenses. (See Figure 5.3 on the facing page for an example of a GIS crime map.) 
In New York and many other cities, the police department holds “Crime Control 
Strategy Meetings,” during which precinct commanders are held accountable for 
CompStat’s data-based reports in their districts. In theory, this system provides the 
police with accurate information about patterns of crime and gives them the ability to 
flood hot spots with officers at short notice. About two-thirds of large departments now 
employ some form of computerized crime mapping,48 and Wesley Skogan, a criminolo-
gist at Northwestern University, believes that CompStat and similar technologies are the 
most likely cause of recent declines in big-city crime.49
ARREsT sTRATEgiEs
Like patrol strategies, arrest strategies can be broken into two categories that reflect the 
intent of police administrators. Reactive arrests are those arrests made by police offi-
cers, usually on general patrol, who observe a criminal act or respond to a call for service. 
Proactive arrests occur when the police take the initiative to target a particular type of 
criminal or behavior. Proactive arrests are often associated with directed patrols of hot spots, 
and thus are believed by many experts to have a greater influence on an area’s crime rates.50
The popularity of proactive theories was solidified by a magazine article that 
James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling wrote in 1982.51 In their piece, entitled “Broken 
Hot Spots Concentrated 
areas of high criminal activity 
that draw a directed police 
response.
Crime Mapping Technology 
that allows crime analysts to 
identify trends and patterns  
of criminal behavior within a 
given area.
Reactive Arrests Arrests 
that come about as part of 
the ordinary routine of police 
patrol and responses to calls 
for service.
Proactive Arrests Arrests 
that occur because of 
concerted efforts by law 
enforcement agencies to 
respond to a particular type of 
criminal or criminal behavior.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students explore the use of 
crime mapping in your community. 
Does the local police department 
make this information available to 
the general public? If so, which 
areas are most crime prone?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   141
Windows,” Wilson and Kelling argued that reform-era policing strategies focused on 
violent crime to the detriment of the vital police role of promoting the quality of life in 
neighborhoods. As a result, many communities, particularly in large cities, had fallen 
into a state of disorder and disrepute, with two very important consequences. First, 
these neighborhoods—with their broken windows, dilapidated buildings, and lawless 
behavior by residents—send out “signals” that criminal activity is tolerated. Second, this 
disorder spreads fear among law-abiding citizens, dissuading them from leaving their 
homes or attempting to improve their surroundings.
Thus, the broken windows theory is based on “order maintenance” of neighbor-
hoods by cracking down on “quality-of-life” crimes such as panhandling, public drink-
ing and  urinating, loitering, and graffiti painting. Only by encouraging directed arrest 
strategies with regard to these quality-of-life crimes, the two professors argued, could 
American cities be rescued from rising crime rates. 
CommuniTy PoLiCing And PRobLEm soLving
In “Broken Windows,” Wilson and Kelling insisted that to reduce fear and crime in high-
risk neighborhoods, police had to rely on the cooperation of citizens. For all its drawbacks, 
the political era of policing (see Chapter 4) did have characteristics that observers such 
as Wilson and Kelling have come to see as advantageous. During the nineteenth century, 
the police were much more involved in the community than they were after the reforms. 
Officers performed many duties that today are associated with social services, such as 
operating soup kitchens and providing lodging for homeless people. They also played a 
more direct role in keeping public order by “running in” drunks and intervening in minor 
disturbances.52 In many aspects, community policing advocates a return to this under-
standing of the police mission. 
Broken Windows Theory  
Wilson and Kelling’s theory that 
a neighborhood in disrepair 
signals that criminal activity 
is tolerated in the area. By 
cracking down on quality-of-life 
crimes, police can reclaim the 
neighborhood and encourage 
law-abiding citizens to live 
there.
Community Policing  
A policing philosophy that 
emphasizes community support 
for and cooperation with the 
police in preventing crime.
FIGURE 5.3 A GIS Crime Map for a Neighborhood in New Orleans
This crime map shows the incidence of various crimes during a two-week period in a 
neighborhood near downtown New Orleans. 
The Omega Group\crimemapping.com
Explain 
community 
policing and its 
contribution to 
the concept of 
problem-oriented 
policing.
Learning  
objective5
Teaching Tip: Ask students to 
identify places near campus or in 
their home towns that have the 
reputation of being high-crime 
areas. What factors contribute to 
this reputation? Then, have your 
students go online to determine 
if perception equals reality. Are 
crime rates in these neighborhoods 
higher than in surrounding 
neighborhoods?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
RETuRn To THE CommuniTy Community polic-
ing can be defined as an approach that promotes 
community-police partnerships, proactive prob-
lem solving, and community engagement to 
address issues such as fear of crime and the 
causes of such fear in a particular area.53 During 
the reform era, police were more detached from 
the community. They did their jobs to the best of 
their ability but were more concerned with mak-
ing arrests or speedily answering calls for service 
than learning about the problems or concerns of 
the citizenry. In their efforts to eliminate police 
corruption, administrators put more emphasis 
on segregating the police from the public than 
on cooperatively working with citizens to resolve 
community problems. Under community polic-
ing, patrol officers have much more freedom 
to improvise. They are expected to develop personal relationships with residents and to 
encourage those residents to become involved in making the community a safer place. 
The Quiet Revolution The strategy of increasing police presence in the community 
has been part of, in the words of George Kelling, a “quiet revolution” in American law 
enforcement.54 Today, nearly two-thirds of police departments mention community 
policing in their mission statements, and a majority of the departments in large cities 
offer community policing training for employees.55 Furthermore, the idea seems to be 
popular among law enforcement agents. A 2011 survey of more than 1,200 officers in 
eleven police departments found that between 60 and 95 percent agreed with the idea 
that “police officers should try to solve non-crime problems on their beat.”56 A majority 
of the officers also reported having positive relations with members of the public, who 
they felt generally appreciated community policing efforts.57
Criticisms of Community Policing Nevertheless, despite, or maybe because of, its 
“feel-good” associations, community policing has been the target of several criticisms. 
First, more than half of the police chiefs and sheriffs in a survey conducted by the 
National Institute of Justice were unclear about the actual meaning of “community 
policing,”58 leading one observer to joke that Professor Kelling’s revolution is even qui-
eter than expected.59 Second, since its inception, community policing has been criti-
cized—not the least by police officials—as having more to do with public relations than 
with actual crime fighting.60 Finally, a number of experts feel that American law enforce-
ment’s new emphasis on homeland security, which relies on implementing technology 
and gathering intelligence, is incompatible with the tenets of community policing.61
PRobLEm-oRiEnTEd PoLiCing A drawback inherent in most police strategies can be summed 
up with the truism, “Catch a thief, there will always be another one to take his or her place.” In 
other words, common street criminals such as burglars, auto thieves, and shoplifters are so 
numerous that arresting one seems to have little or no impact.62 By itself, community policing 
may not offer much hope for solving this dilemma. But having law enforcement establish a 
cooperative presence in the community is a crucial part of a strategy that focuses on long-
term crime prevention. Introduced by Herman Goldstein of the Police Executive Research 
Forum in the 1970s, problem-oriented policing is based on the premise that police depart-
Two Washington, D.C., police 
officers offer suggestions to a 
six-year-old during the annual 
“Shop with a Cop” event 
in the nation’s capital. How 
can establishing friendly 
relations with citizens help law 
enforcement agencies reduce 
crime?
Andrew Harnik/Washington Times/Landov
Problem-Oriented 
Policing A policing 
philosophy that requires police 
to identify potential criminal 
activity and develop strategies 
to prevent or respond to that 
activity.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
critique the concept of community 
policing. Do they think it is a valid 
anticrime strategy, or simply an 
exercise in public relations? Have 
them explain their answers. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   143
ments devote too many of their resources to reacting to calls for service and too few to “acting 
on their own initiative to prevent or reduce community problems.”63 To rectify this situation, 
problem-oriented policing moves beyond simply responding to incidents and attempts 
instead to control or even solve the root causes of criminal behavior.
Goldstein’s theory encourages police officers to stop looking at their work as a day-
to-day proposition. Rather, they should try to shift the patterns of criminal behavior in 
a positive direction. For example, instead of responding to a 911 call concerning illegal 
drug use by simply arresting the offender—a short-term response—the patrol officers 
should also look at the long-term implications of the situation. They should analyze 
the pattern of similar arrests in the area and interview the arrestee to determine the 
reasons, if any, that the site was selected for drug activity. Then additional police action 
should be taken to prevent further drug sales at the identified location. (For an example 
of problem-oriented policing in action, see Figure 5.4 above.)
SeLFaSSeSSMeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 154.
Without exception, modern police departments practice ____________-driven policing, in 
which officers respond to calls for ____________, such as 911 phone calls after a crime has 
occurred. Along the same lines, most patrol officers work ____________ patrols, in which 
they cover designated areas and react to the incidents they encounter. ____________ 
patrols, which often focus on “hot spots” of crime, and ____________ arrest policies, which 
target a particular type of criminal behavior, have both been shown to be very effective.
“us vERsus THEm”:  
issuEs in modERn PoLiCing
The night after two police officers shot and killed Jaime Gonzalez, described in the open-
ing to this chapter, the Brownsville police received several death threats. Apparently, 
some members of the community were unconvinced by the argument that the officers’ 
FIGURE 5.4 Operation Heat Wave
In 2011, the Dallas Police Department combined aspects of crime mapping, community policing, and problem-oriented policing in an effort 
to reduce burglaries and auto thefts during the summer. The initiative, called Operation Heat Wave, required two steps.
Step One—Create TAAGs
Using GIS technology (see page 140 ), Dallas crime experts have determined which parts of the city are most likely to see high rates of 
victimization and criminal behavior. The resulting Target Area Action Grids (TAAGs) indicated which areas will be provided with directed police 
patrols. To determine the most vulnerable neighborhoods, Dallas police looked at the following indicators:
Event-Based Indicators
Place-Based Indicators
1. Arrests for drugs, prostitution and weapons.
1. Gang members’ home addresses.
2. Calls for service (see page 132 ). 
2.  The home addresses of persons arrested for burglary, robbery, and 
auto theft.
3. Part I offenses (see page 36 in Chapter 2 to review these crimes).
3.  The home addresses of persons on parole 
(covered in Chapter 12).
Step Two—Go Door to Door
The event- and place-based indicators identified twenty-seven at-risk areas, covering about 7 percent of the city. Over the course of the 
summer, each detective within the department spent thirty-two to forty hours in these neighborhoods, in uniform, going door to door to 
engage the residents. The detectives tried to obtain information about offenses committed nearby and encouraged attendance at community 
crime-watch meetings.
Source: Brigitte Gassaway, Steven Armon, and Dana Perez, “Engaging the Community: Operation Heat Wave,” Geography and Public Safety (October 2011), 8–9.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
identify a particular public order 
crime problem in their home 
towns or one that is occurring near 
campus. Then, have them come up 
with a problem-oriented policing 
solution to this problem.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
actions were justified because Gonzalez appeared to be in possession of an actual hand-
gun. Indeed, there seems to be a public perception, fueled by heavy coverage of police 
shootings, that American law enforcement agents are “trigger happy” when it comes to 
using lethal force. The reality is that such fatal shootings are quite rare.64 According to 
one estimate, the average New York City police officer would have to work 694 years to 
shoot and kill someone, and the likelihood is more remote in most other cities.65
The question of when to use lethal force is one of many on-the-job issues that make 
law enforcement such a challenging and often difficult career. When faced with a sce-
nario such as the one in the halls of Brownsville’s Cummings Middle School, sometimes 
police officers make the right decisions, and sometimes they make the wrong ones. 
Often, it is difficult to tell the two apart.
PoLiCE subCuLTuRE
As a rule, police officers do not appreciate being second-guessed when it comes to their 
split-second shooting decisions. To officers, it often seems that civilians believe that 
suspects with weapons should be given a “free shot” before being fired at by law enforce-
ment.66 Feelings of frustration and mistrust toward the public are hallmarks of police  
subculture. This broad term is used to describe the basic assumptions and values that 
permeate law enforcement agencies and are taught to new members of a law enforcement 
agency as the proper way to think, perceive, and act. Every organization has a subculture, 
with values shaped by the particular aspects and pressures of that organization. In the 
police subculture, those values are formed in an environment characterized by danger, 
stress, boredom, and violence.
From the first day on the job, rookies begin the process of socialization, in which 
they are taught the values and rules of police work. This process is aided by a number 
of rituals that are common to the law enforcement experience. Police theorist Harry J. 
Mullins believes that the following events are critical to the police officer’s acceptance, 
and even embrace, of police subculture:
• 
Attending a police academy.
• 
Working with a senior officer, who passes on the lessons of police work and life to 
the younger officer.
• 
Making the initial felony arrest.
• 
 Using force to make an arrest for the first time.
• 
 Using or witnessing deadly force for the first time.
• 
 Witnessing a major, traumatic incident for the first time.67
Each of these rituals makes it clear to the police officer that this is not a “normal” job. 
The only other people who can understand the stresses of police work are fellow officers, 
and consequently, law enforcement officers tend to insulate themselves from civilians. 
Eventually, the insulation breeds mistrust, and the police officer develops an “us versus 
them” outlook toward those outside the force. In turn, this outlook creates what sociolo-
gist William Westly called the blue  curtain, also known as the “blue wall of silence” or 
simply “the code.”68 This curtain separates the police from the civilians they are meant 
to protect.
THE PHysiCAL dAngERs oF PoLiCE woRk
On December 9, 2011, police sergeant David Enzbrenner was serving a nuisance order 
in Atchison, Kansas, when a gunman “came out of nowhere” and fatally shot him in the 
back of the head. According to the Officer Down Memorial Page, Enzbrenner was one of 
Police Subculture The 
values and perceptions that are 
shared by members of a police 
department and, to a certain 
extent, by all law enforcement 
agents. 
Socialization The process 
through which a police officer is 
taught the values and expected 
behavior of the police 
subculture.
Blue Curtain A 
metaphorical term used to refer 
to the value placed on secrecy 
and the general mistrust of the 
outside world shared by many 
police officers.
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Officer Down Memorial 
Page at www.odmp.org. Besides 
violence at the hands of criminal 
suspects, what on-the-job dangers 
do police officers face?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   145
170 law enforcement agents who died in the 
line of duty in 2011, and one of sixty-seven 
who were killed by hostile gunfire.69 In addi-
tion, about 53,000 assaults are committed 
against police officers annually, with a quar-
ter of these assaults resulting in an injury.70 
These numbers are hardly surprising. As 
police experts John S. Dempsey and Linda 
S. Forst point out, police “deal constantly 
with what may be the most dangerous spe-
cies on this planet—the human being.”71 At 
the same time, Dempsey and Forst note that 
according to data compiled by the federal 
government, citizens and the police come 
into contact about 40 million times a year.72 
Given this figure, the police have relatively 
low death and injury rates. 
sTREss And THE mEnTAL 
dAngERs oF PoLiCE woRk
In addition to physical dangers, police work entails considerable mental pressure and 
stress. Professor John Violanti and his colleagues at the University of Buffalo have deter-
mined that police officers experience unusually high levels of cortisol, otherwise known 
as the “stress hormone.” Cortisol is associated with serious health problems such as 
diabetes and heart disease.73 “Intervention is necessary to help officers deal with this 
difficult and stressful occupation,” says Violanti. “[Police officers] need to learn how to 
relax, how to think differently about things they experience as a cop.”74
PoLiCE sTREssoRs The conditions that cause stress—such as worries over finances or 
relationships—are known as stressors. Each profession has its own set of stressors, but 
police are particularly vulnerable to occupational pressures and stress factors such as the 
following:
• 
The constant fear of being a victim of violent crime.
• 
Exposure to violent crime and its victims.
• 
The need to comply with the law in nearly every job action.
• 
Lack of community support.
• 
Negative media coverage.
Police face a number of internal pressures as well, including limited opportunities for 
career advancement, excessive paperwork, and low wages and benefits. The unconven-
tional hours of shift work can also interfere with an officer’s private life and contribute to 
lack of sleep. Each of these is a primary stressor associated with police work.75
THE ConsEquEnCEs oF PoLiCE sTREss Police stress can manifest itself in different ways. The 
University of Buffalo study cited above found that the stresses of law enforcement often lead to 
high blood pressure and heart problems.76 Other research shows that police officers are three 
times more likely to suffer from alcoholism than the average American.77 If stress becomes 
overwhelming, an officer may suffer from burnout, becoming listless and ineffective as a 
result of mental and physical exhaustion. Another problem related to stress is post-traumatic 
Stressors The aspects of 
police work and life that lead to 
feelings of stress.
Burnout A mental state 
that occurs when a person 
suffers from exhaustion and has 
difficulty functioning normally 
as a result of overwork and 
stress.
A fellow officer pays his 
respects during the funeral of 
Chattachoochee Hills, Georgia, 
police officer Mike Vogt, who 
was shot and killed while 
on patrol. Besides physical 
violence, what are some of the 
other occupational threats that 
police officers face on a daily 
basis? 
AP Photo/Brant Sanderlin
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
stress disorder (PTSD). Often recognized in war veterans and rape victims, PTSD is a reaction 
to a stressor that evokes significant stress. For police officers, such stressors might include the 
death of a fellow agent or the shooting of a civilian. An officer suffering from PTSD will:
1. Re-experience the traumatic event through nightmares and flashbacks.
2. Become less and less involved in the outside world by withdrawing from others 
and refusing to participate in normal social interactions.
3. Experience “survival guilt,” which may lead to loss of sleep and memory impairment.78
The effects of stress can be seen most tragically in the high rate of suicide among law 
enforcement officers—three times higher than in the general population.79
AuTHoRiTy And THE usE oF FoRCE
If the police subculture is shaped by the dangers of the job, it often finds expression 
through authority. The various symbols of authority that decorate a police officer—
including the uniform, badge, nightstick, and firearm—establish the power she or he 
holds over civilians. For better or for worse, both police officers and civilians tend to 
equate terms such as authority and respect with the ability to use force. 
Near the beginning of the twentieth century, a police officer stated that his job was 
to “protect the good people and treat the crooks rough.”80 Implicit in the officer’s state-
ment is the idea that to do the protecting, he had to do some roughing up as well. This 
attitude toward the use of force is still with us today. Indeed, it is generally accepted that 
not only is police use of force inevitable, but that police officers who are unwilling to use 
force in certain circumstances cannot do their jobs effectively.
THE “misusE” oF FoRCE In general, the use of physical force by law enforcement person-
nel is very rare, occurring in only about 1.4 percent of the 40 million annual police-public 
encounters mentioned earlier. Still, the Department of Justice estimates that law enforce-
ment officers threaten to use force or do use force in encounters with 770,000 Americans 
a year, and nearly 14 percent of those incidents result in a complaint against the officer. 81 
Federal authorities also report that about 690 civilian deaths occur in the process of an 
arrest on an annual basis.82 Of course, police officers are often justified in using force to 
protect themselves and other citizens. As noted earlier, police officers are the targets of 
tens of thousands of assaults each year. 
At the same time, few observers would be naïve enough to believe that the police 
are always justified in the use of force. A recent survey of emergency room physicians 
found that 98 percent believed that they had treated patients who were victims of exces-
sive police force.83 How, then, is “misuse” of force to be defined? One attempt to define 
excessive force that has been lauded by legal scholars, if not necessarily by police officers, 
was offered by the Christopher Commission. Established in Los Angeles in 1991 after the 
beating of African American motorist Rodney King, the commission advised that “an 
officer may resort to force only where he or she faces a credible threat, and then may only 
use the minimum amount necessary to control the subject.”84 
To provide guidance for officers in this tricky area, nearly every law enforcement 
agency designs a use of force matrix. As the example in Figure 5.5 on the facing page 
shows, such a matrix presents officers with the proper force options for different levels 
of contact with a civilian. Note that there are two examples of less-lethal weapons ref-
erenced in the figure: chemical spray and the Taser. In general, less-lethal weapons are 
designed to subdue but not seriously harm their targets. The most common chemical 
spray is oleoresin capsicum, an organic substance that causes a sensation similar to hav-
Determine 
when police 
officers are 
justified in 
using deadly 
force.
Learning  
objective 6
Social Media and CJ 
Officer.com advertises 
itself as the “leading news 
and information source 
for the police and law 
enforcement community.”  
To access its very active 
Twitter Web page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
Teaching Tip: Using YouTube, 
provide your students with a 
series of clips that allegedly show 
law enforcement officers using 
excessive force. Ask your students  
whether each example indeed 
shows excessive police force, or 
if more information is needed to 
make that determination.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 154, 
which asks them to think about 
policies that limit an officer’s 
discretion to engage in a high-
speed chase. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   147
ing sand or needles in the eyes when sprayed in a suspect’s face. The Taser is a handheld 
electrical stun gun that fires blunt darts up to a range of about twenty-one feet. On con-
tact, these darts deliver 50,000 volts for about five seconds.
TyPEs oF FoRCE To comply with the various, and not always consistent, laws concerning the 
use of force, a police officer must understand that there are two kinds of force: nondeadly force 
and deadly force. Most force used by law enforcement is nondeadly force. In most states, the 
use of nondeadly force is regulated by the concept of reasonable force, which allows the use 
of nondeadly force when a reasonable person would assume that such force was necessary. In 
contrast, deadly force is force that an objective police officer realizes will place the subject in 
direct threat of serious injury or death.
THE uniTEd sTATEs suPREmE CouRT And usE oF FoRCE The United States Supreme 
Court set the limits for the use of deadly force by law enforcement officers in Tennessee 
v. Garner (1985).85 The case involved an incident in which Memphis police officer Elton 
Hymon shot and killed a suspect who was trying to climb over a fence after stealing ten 
dollars from a residence. Hymon testified that he had been trained to shoot to keep a 
suspect from escaping, and indeed Tennessee law at the time allowed police officers to 
apprehend fleeing suspects in this manner.
In reviewing the case, the Court focused not on Hymon’s action but on the 
Tennessee statute itself, ultimately finding it unconstitutional:
FIGURE 5.5 The Orlando (Florida) Police Department’s Use of Force Matrix  
Like most local law enforcement agencies, the Orlando Police Department has a policy 
to guide its officers’ use of force. These policies instruct an officer on how to react to 
an escalating series of confrontations with a civilian and are often expressed visually, as 
shown here. 
Source: Michael E. Miller, “Taser Use and the Use-of-Force Continuum,” Police Chief (September 2010), 72.
Officer presence
No resistance
Hands-on
tactics, 
chemical 
spray
Verbal command
Intermediate weapons: 
baton, Taser, 
nondeadly force
Immediate weapons, 
intensified techniques, 
nondeadly force
Deadly force
Verbal 
noncompliance
Passive 
resistance
Active 
resistance
Aggressive 
resistance
Deadly force 
resistance
OF
FI
CE
R’
S 
US
E 
OF
 F
OR
CE
S
U
S
P
E
C
T’
S 
B
E
H
A
VI
O
R
Mie Ahmt/iStockphoto
Reasonable Force The 
degree of force that is 
appropriate to protect the 
police officer or other citizens 
and is not excessive.
Deadly Force Force applied 
by a police officer that is likely 
or intended to cause death.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When the suspect poses no immediate threat to the officer and no threat to others, the use of 
deadly force is unjustified. . . . It is not better that all felony suspects die than that they escape.86
The Court’s decision forced twenty-three states to change their fleeing felon rules, but it did 
not completely eliminate police discretion in such situations. Police officers still may use 
deadly force if they have probable cause to believe that the fleeing suspect poses a threat 
of serious injury or death to the officers or others. (We will discuss the concept of probable 
cause in the next chapter.) In essence, the Court recognized that police officers must be able 
to make split-second decisions without worrying about the legal ramifications. 
Four years after the Garner case, the Court tried to clarify this concept in Graham v. 
Connor (1989), stating that the use of any force should be judged by the  “reasonableness of 
the moment.”87 In 2004, the Court modified this rule by suggesting that an officer’s use of force 
could be “reasonable” even if, by objective measures, the force was not needed to protect the 
officer or others in the area.88 (See the feature You Be the Sheriff’s Deputy—Threat Level  below.)
SeLFaSSeSSMeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 154.
Like any organization, a police department has a ____________ that determines 
the values of its employees. In law enforcement, these values are shaped by the 
____________ dangers, such as assault, and mental dangers, such as high levels of 
____________, that officers face every day.  Laws regulating police use of force rely on 
two concepts: ____________ force, which is the amount of force that a rational person 
would consider necessary in a given situation, and ____________ force, which is a level of 
force that will place the subject in grave bodily danger.
The SITuaTIoN You receive a call from dispatch telling you that Lee Dylan, a mentally 
unstable man, has just escaped from a local jail where he was being held on suspicion of 
committing a nonviolent felony. Driving toward the jail, you see a man matching Dylan’s 
description running down a back alley. Jumping out of your car, you and your partner follow on 
foot. Eventually, you and your partner corner the man, who is indeed Dylan, in a construction 
site. Dylan, who is of average height and build, grabs a loose brick and makes threatening 
motions with it.  You pull your gun and, along with your partner, move toward Dylan. You yell, 
“Drop the brick!” He screams, “You’re going to have to kill me!” and rushes at you.
The LaW The use of force by a law enforcement agent—even deadly force—is based on 
the concept of reasonableness.  In other words, would a reasonable police officer in this 
officer’s shoes have been justified in using force?
your deCISIoN Does Dylan pose a threat of serious bodily harm to you or your partner? 
How you answer this question will determine the type of force you use against him. Keep in 
mind that almost all police officers experience an adrenaline rush in stressful situations, and 
this may influence your reaction.
[To see how a law enforcement officer in Cincinnati reacted in similar circumstances, go to Example 5.1 in Appendix B.]
you Be The SherIFF’S dePuTy
Threat Level
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
148   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Refer students to 
the “You Be the Sheriff’s Deputy” 
feature on this page. Ask them 
why it might be important to know 
that police officers experience 
an adrenaline rush in stressful 
situations. How does this relate to 
the concept of the “reasonable” 
officer’s behavior in such 
situations?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PoLiCE misConduCT And ETHiCs
As the two deadly force cases highlighted at the end of the previous section show, 
American courts generally will uphold a police officer’s freedom to decide “what law to 
enforce, how much to enforce it, against whom, and on what occasions.”89 This judicial 
support of police discretion is based on the following factors:
• 
Police officers are generally considered trustworthy and are therefore assumed to 
make honest decisions, regardless of contradictory testimony by a suspect.
• 
Experience and training give officers the ability to determine whether certain 
activity poses a threat to society, and to take any reasonable action necessary to 
investigate or prevent such activity.
• 
Due to the nature of their jobs, police officers are extremely knowledgeable in 
human, and by extension criminal, behavior.
• 
Police officers may find themselves in danger of personal, physical harm and must 
be allowed to take reasonable and necessary steps to protect themselves.90
At the same time, as we noted during our discussion of discretion in Chapter 1, freedom 
to make decisions can mean freedom to make the wrong decisions.  Too often, the enor-
mous amount of discretion afforded to police officers, when mixed with the temptations 
inherent in the law enforcement working environment, can lead to excessive force and 
other forms of police misconduct, which we will address in this section.
PoLiCE CoRRuPTion
Police corruption has been a concern since the first organized American police depart-
ments. As you recall from Chapter 4, a desire to eradicate, or at least limit, corruption 
was one of the motivating factors behind the reform movement of policing. For general 
purposes, police corruption can be defined as the misuse of authority by a law enforce-
ment officer in a manner designed to produce personal gain.
TyPEs oF CoRRuPTion The Knapp Commission, set up to investigate the behavior of 
“dirty cops” in New York City in the 1970s, identified three basic, traditional types of 
police corruption:
1.  Bribery, in which the police officer accepts money or other forms of payment in 
exchange for “favors,” which may include allowing a certain criminal activity to 
continue or misplacing a key piece of evidence before a trial. Related to bribery 
are payoffs, in which an officer demands payment from an individual or a business 
in return for certain services.
2.  Shakedowns, in which an officer attempts to coerce money or goods from a citizen 
or criminal.
3.  Mooching, in which the police officer accepts free “gifts” such as cigarettes, liquor, 
or services in return for favorable treatment of the gift giver.91
Additionally, corrupt police officers have many opportunities to engage in theft or 
burglary by taking money or property in the course of their duties. Vice investigations, 
for example, often uncover temptingly large amounts of illegal drugs and cash. In May 
2011, a Wake County (North Carolina) sheriff’s deputy was arrested after she improp-
erly “confiscated” a package of marijuana and $6,435 in cash seized during a drug bust. 
Another scenario involves police misconduct that becomes pervasive, infecting a group 
of officers. In December 2011, the federal government accused several members of the 
East Haven (Connecticut) Police Department of a pattern of harassment toward that 
C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   149
Identify the 
three traditional 
forms of police 
corruption.
Learning  
objective7
Police Corruption The 
abuse of authority by a law 
enforcement officer for 
personal gain.
Group Activity: Provide students 
with different scenarios that 
describe various types of police 
corruption. In small groups, have 
them identify the type of corruption 
involved, and ask them whether 
they believe the acts should be 
considered corruption or simply 
one of the “perks” of being a 
police officer. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
city’s Hispanic community and of trying to cover up 
their behavior by arresting eyewitnesses and destroying 
security videotapes (see photo alongside).92 
CoRRuPTion in PoLiCE subCuLTuRE  There is no single 
reason why police misconduct occurs. Certain types of 
officers do, however, seem more likely to engage in cor-
ruption—the young, the relatively uneducated (lacking 
a college degree), those with records of prior criminal-
ity and citizens’ complaints, and those unlikely to be 
promoted.93 Lawrence Sherman has identified several 
stages in the moral decline of these “bad cops.”94 
In the first stage, the officers accept minor gratu-
ities, such as the occasional free meal from a restaurant 
on their beat. These gratuities gradually evolve into 
outright bribes, in which the officers receive the gratu-
ity for overlooking some violation. For example, a law officer may accept pay from a bar 
owner to ensure that the establishment is not investigated for serving alcohol to minors. 
In the final stage, officers no longer passively accept bribes but actively seek them out. 
The officers may even force the other party to pay for unwanted police services. This 
stage often involves large amounts of money and may entail protection of or involvement 
in drug, gambling, or prostitution organizations.
PoLiCE ACCounTAbiLiTy
Given the seeming inevitability of excessive force, corruption, and other misconduct 
among a small number of law enforcement agents, the question becomes—who shall 
police the police? The mechanism for such investigations within a police department is 
the internal affairs unit (IAU). In many smaller police departments, the police chief 
conducts internal affairs investigations, while midsized and large departments have a 
team of internal affairs officers. The New York Police Department’s IAU has an annual 
budget of nearly $62 million and consists of 650 officers.
As much as police officers may resent internal affairs units, many realize that it is 
preferable to settle disciplinary matters in house. The alternatives may be worse. Police 
officers are criminally liable for any crimes they might commit, and city and state gov-
ernments can be held civilly liable for wrongdoing by their police officers. The taxpayers 
of Pennsylvania, for example, have paid nearly $13 million to settle several civil claims 
against a single state trooper. In 2011, this same officer was a defendant in two more law-
suits, stemming from incidents in which he allegedly beat one civilian following a traffic 
stop and fatally shot another during a car chase.
Many communities also rely on an external procedure for handling citizen com-
plaints, known as citizen oversight. In this process, citizens—people who are not sworn 
officers and, by inference, not biased in favor of law enforcement officers—review allega-
tions of police misconduct or brutality. According to data gathered by police account-
ability expert Samuel Walker, nearly one hundred cities now operate some kind of review 
procedure by an independent body.95 For the most part, citizen review boards can only 
recommend action to the police chief or other executive. They do not have the power to 
discipline officers directly. Police officers generally resent this intrusion by civilians, and 
most studies have shown that civilian review boards are not widely successful in their 
efforts to convince police chiefs to take action against their subordinate officers.96
In January 2012, East Haven, 
Connecticut, police chief 
Leonard Gallo, left, resigned 
after federal agents arrested 
four of his officers. How does 
the kind of misconduct that 
allegedly occurred in East 
Haven undermine public 
confidence in the police?
Courtesy of Julie Weisberg, Patch.com
Internal Affairs Unit (IAU)  
A division within a police 
department that receives and 
investigates complaints of 
wrongdoing by police officers.
Citizen Oversight The 
process by which citizens review 
complaints brought against 
individual police officers or 
police departments. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   151
ETHiCs in LAw EnFoRCEmEnT
Police corruption is intricately connected with the ethics of law enforcement officers. Given 
the significant power that police officers hold, society expects very high standards of ethical 
behavior from them. These expectations are summed up in the Police Code of Conduct, which 
was developed by the International Association of Chiefs of Police in 1989.
In some aspects, the Police Code of Conduct is self-evident: “A police officer will not 
engage in acts of corruption or bribery.” In others, it is idealistic, perhaps unreasonably 
so: “Officers will never allow personal feelings, animosities, or friendships to influence 
official conduct.” The police working environment—rife with lying, cheating, lawbreak-
ing, and violence—often does not allow for such ethical absolutes.
ETHiCAL diLEmmAs Some police actions are obviously unethical, such as the behavior 
of a Pennsylvania officer who paid a woman he was dating $500 to pretend to be an eye-
witness in a murder trial. The majority of ethical dilemmas that a police officer will face 
are not so clear cut. Criminologists Joycelyn M. Pollock and Ronald F. Becker define an 
ethical dilemma as a situation in which law enforcement officers:
• 
Do not know the right course of action;
• 
Have difficulty doing what they consider to be right; and/or
• 
Find the wrong choice very tempting.97
Because of the many rules that govern policing—the subject of the next chapter—police 
officers often find themselves tempted by a phenomenon called noble cause corruption. 
This type of corruption occurs when, in the words of John P. Crank and Michael A. Caldero, 
One form of citizen oversight that has been highly successful in curbing police 
misconduct is cheap digital video. Every week, it seems, video taken by citizens using a 
handheld camera, smartphone, or some other device goes “viral” online, flooding the 
Internet with examples of police brutality or some other form of misbehavior. “All of our 
people should be conducting themselves like they are being recorded all the time,” says 
Robin Larson of the Broward County (Florida) Sheriff’s Department. 
Indeed, law enforcement agents may soon be under constant surveillance—by 
their own superiors. Police departments in Aberdeen (South Dakota), Cincinnati, Fort 
Smith (Arkansas), and San Jose are conducting an experiment in which officers wear tiny 
cameras near their ears. The device sees everything the officer sees, and records it. Police 
administrators hope that this system will help protect officers against unfounded charges 
of misconduct. “In this job we’re frequently accused of things we haven’t done, or things 
that [were] kind of embellished,” says Bainbridge Island (Washington) police officer Ben 
Sias. “And the cameras show a pretty unbiased opinion of what actually did happen.”
thinking aBout selF-surveillance: Dennis Kenney, a professor 
at New York’s John Jay College of Criminal Justice, warns that this technology “raises 
tremendous privacy concerns.” What might be some of those concerns?
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Self-Surveillance
Korhan Hasim Isik/iStockphoto
Noble Cause Corruption  
Knowing misconduct by a 
police officer with the goal 
of attaining what the officer 
believes is a “just” result.
Explain what an 
ethical dilemma 
is and name four 
categories of 
ethical dilemmas 
that a police 
officer typically 
may face.
Learning  
objective8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

“officers do bad things because they believe the outcomes will be good.”98 Examples include 
planting evidence or lying in court to help convict someone the officer knows to be guilty 
and the situation discussed in the feature A Question of Ethics—The“Dirty Harry” Problem 
below.
ELEmEnTs oF ETHiCs Pollock and Becker, both of whom have extensive experience as 
ethics instructors for police departments, further identify four categories of ethical 
dilemmas, involving discretion, duty, honesty, and loyalty.99
• 
 Discretion. The law provides rigid guidelines for how police officers must act and 
how they cannot act, but it does not offer guidelines for how officers should act in 
many circumstances. As mentioned at the beginning of this section, police officers 
often use discretion to determine how they should act, and ethics plays an impor-
tant role in guiding discretionary actions.
• 
 Duty. The concept of discretion is linked with duty, or the obligation to act in a 
certain manner. Society, by passing laws, can make a police officer’s duty clearer 
and, in the process, help eliminate discretion from the decision-making process. 
But an officer’s duty will not always be obvious, and ethical considerations can 
often supplement “the rules” of being a law enforcement agent.
• 
 Honesty. Of course, honesty is a critical attribute for an ethical police officer. A law 
enforcement agent must make hundreds of decisions in a day, and most of them 
require him or her to be honest to properly do the job.
• 
 Loyalty. What should a police officer do if she or he witnesses a partner using 
excessive force on a suspect? The choice often sets loyalty against ethics, espe-
cially if the officer does not condone the violence.
The SITuaTIoN A young girl has been kidnapped by 
a psychotic killer named Scorpio. Demanding a $200,000 
ransom, Scorpio has buried the girl alive, leaving her with 
just enough oxygen to survive for a few hours. Detective 
Harry Callahan manages to find Scorpio, but the kidnapper 
stubbornly refuses to reveal the location of the girl. Callahan 
comes to the conclusion that the only way he can get this 
information from Scorpio in time is to beat it out of him.
The eThICaL dILeMMa The U.S. Constitution, as 
interpreted by the United States Supreme Court, forbids the 
torture of criminal suspects. Following proper procedure, 
Callahan should arrest Scorpio and advise him of his 
constitutional rights. If Scorpio requests an attorney, 
Callahan must comply. If the attorney then advises Scorpio 
to remain silent, there is nothing Callahan can do. Of 
course, after all this time, the girl will certainly be dead.*
WhaT IS The SoLuTIoN? What should Detective 
Callahan do?  According to the late Carl B. Klockars of the 
University of Delaware, “Each time a police officer considers 
deceiving a suspect into confessing by telling him that 
his [or her] fingerprints were found at the scene or that a 
conspirator has already confessed, each time a police officer 
considers adding some untrue details to his [or her] account 
of a probable cause to legitimate a crucial stop or search, 
[that police officer] faces” the same problem as Detective 
Callahan. Are police ever justified in using unlawful 
methods, no matter what good may ultimately be achieved?
*This scenario is taken from Dirty Harry (1971), one of the most popular police 
dramas of all time. In the film, Detective Callahan, played by Clint Eastwood, 
shoots Scorpio and then tortures him. Although Callahan eventually gets the 
information he needs, it is too late to save the girl.
A quEsTion oF ETHICS:  The “Dirty  
Harry” Problem
152   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Duty The moral sense of a 
police officer that she or he 
should behave in a certain 
manner.
Group Activity: Break your class 
up into small groups and give each 
group a different ethical scenario 
relating to law enforcement. 
Have the groups determine what 
actions should be taken in each 
circumstance, and why.
Teaching Tip: Refer your students 
to the “A Question of Ethics” 
feature on this page. Have them 
identify some other police behavior 
that might be illegal but could 
result in a “good” result. Explain 
why, in these new circumstances, 
the end often does not justify the 
means.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   153
Although an individual’s ethical makeup is determined by a multitude of personal fac-
tors, police departments can create an atmosphere that is conducive to professionalism. 
Brandon V. Zuidema and H. Wayne Duff, both captains with the Lynchburg (Virginia) 
Police Department, believe that law enforcement administrators can encourage ethical 
policing by doing the following:
1. Incorporating ethics into the department’s mission statement.
2. Conducting internal training sessions in ethics.
3. Accepting “honest mistakes” and helping the officer learn from those mistakes.
4. Adopting a zero-tolerance policy toward unethical decisions when the mistakes 
are not so honest.100
SeLFaSSeSSMeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 154.
Misconduct such as accepting bribes or shaking down citizens is known as ____________, 
and such behavior is investigated by ____________ ____________ units within police 
departments. In matters of ethics, a police officer is often guided by his or her sense of 
____________, or the obligation to act in a certain manner, and feelings of ____________ 
toward fellow officers.
ChaPTer SuMMary
List the three primary purposes of police 
patrol. (a) The deterrence of crime, (b) the 
maintenance of public order, and (c) the pro-
vision of services that are not related to crime.
Indicate some investigation strategies 
that are considered aggressive. Using 
undercover officers is considered an aggres-
sive (and often dangerous) investigative technique. The use 
of informants is also aggressive, but involves danger for 
those who inform.
Describe how forensic experts use DNA 
fingerprinting to solve crimes. Law 
enforcement agents gather trace evidence 
such as blood, semen, skin, or hair from the crime scene. 
Because these items are rich in DNA, which provides a 
unique genetic blueprint for every living organism, crime 
labs can create a DNA profile of the suspect and test it 
against other such profiles of known criminals stored in 
databases. If the profiles match, then law enforcement 
agents have found a strong suspect for the crime.
Explain why differential response strat-
egies enable police departments to 
respond efficiently to 911 calls. A differ-
ential response strategy allows a police department to dis-
tinguish among calls for service so that officers may respond 
to important calls more quickly. Therefore, a “hot” crime, 
such as a burglary in progress, will receive more immediate 
attention than a “cold” crime, such as a missing automobile 
that disappeared several days earlier.
Explain community policing and its 
contribution to the concept of problem-
oriented policing. Community policing 
involves proactive problem solving and a community- 
police partnership in which the community engages itself 
along with the police to address crime and the fear of 
crime in a particular geographic area. By establishing a 
cooperative presence in a community, police officers are 
better able to recognize the root causes of criminal behav-
ior there and apply problem-oriented policing methods 
when necessary. 
Determine when police officers are jus-
tified in using deadly force. Police offi-
cers must make a reasonable judgment in 
determining when to use force that will place the suspect in 
threat of injury or death. That is, given the circumstances, 
the officer must reasonably assume that the use of such 
force is necessary to avoid serious injury or death to the 
officer or someone else.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Identify the three traditional forms of 
police corruption. The three traditional 
forms are bribery, shakedowns, and mooching.
Explain what an ethical dilemma is and 
name four categories of ethical dilem-
mas that a police officer typically may 
face. An ethical dilemma is a situation in which police 
officers (a) do not know the right course of action, (b) have 
difficulty doing what they consider to be right, and/or 
(c) find the wrong choice very tempting. The four types of 
ethical dilemmas involve (a) discretion, (b) duty, (c) honesty, 
and (d) loyalty.
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QueSTIoNS For CrITICaL aNaLySIS
1. In most states, DNA samples are routinely collected 
from those persons who have been convicted of felonies. 
Eighteen states, however, collect DNA from persons who 
have only been arrested for committing a crime. Why 
might civil libertarians frown on such policies?
2. According to the late University of Delaware professor Carl 
Klockars, “It makes about as much sense to have police 
patrol routinely in cars to fight crime as it does to have 
firemen patrol routinely in fire trucks to fight fire.” What 
point do you think Professor Klockars was trying to make? 
Explain why you agree or disagree with his statement.
3. Research has shown that levels of violence increase in 
areas with high concentrations of bars, restaurants, and 
other establishments that serve liquor for consumption 
on site. How might this information be used as part of a 
predictive policing strategy (see pages 139–140)?
4. Relate the concept of “broken windows” to high-crime 
neighborhoods and potential ways to combat crime in 
such neighborhoods.
5. Nearly every police department in the country has a 
policy that limits its officers’ discretion to engage in 
high-speed automobile pursuits of fleeing suspects. Why 
do you think such policies are so popular among police 
administrators? 
Key TerMS
ballistics  135
blue curtain  144
broken windows theory  141
bureaucracy  129
burnout  145
citizen oversight  150
clearance rate  134
cold case  134
cold hit  135
community policing  141
confidential informant (CI)  134
crime mapping  140
deadly force  147
delegation of authority  129
detective  133
differential response  138
directed patrol  139
DNA fingerprinting  135
duty  152
forensics  134
general patrol  139
hot spots  140
incident-driven policing  138
internal affairs unit (IAU)  150
noble cause corruption  151
police corruption  149
police subculture  144
proactive arrests  140
problem-oriented policing  142
reactive arrests  140
reasonable force  147
response time  138
socialization  144
stressors  145
sworn officer  131
trace evidence  134
SeLF aSSeSSMeNT aNSWer Key
Page 137 i. Patrol; ii. deter; iii. presence; iv. Detectives;  
v. forensics; vi. DNA fingerprinting 
Page 143: i. incident; ii. service; iii. general; iv. Directed;  
v. proactive
Page 148: i. subculture; ii. physical; iii. stress;  
iv. reasonable; v. deadly
Page 153: i. corruption; ii. internal affairs; iii. duty;  
iv. loyalty
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  5 :  P R o b l E m s  A n d  s o l u T i o n s  i n  m o d E R n  P o l i C i n g   155
CourSeMaTe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTeS
 1. Manny Fernandez, “Texas Death Offers 
Grim Reminder That Replicas Can Fool 
Police,” New York Times (January 9, 2012), A8.
 2. J. Pete Blair, Joycelyn Pollock, Don 
Montague, et al., “Reasonableness and 
Reaction Time,” Police Quarterly (December 
2011), 327.
 3. Rogers L. Ken, Post Traumatic Stress 
Disorder: A Police Officer’s Report (Livonia, 
MI: First Page, 2000), 13–24.
 4. Quoted in Gordon Witkin, “When the Bad 
Guys Are Cops,” U.S. News and World Report 
(September 11, 1995), 22.
 5. H. Nees, “Policing 2001,” Law and Order 
(January 1990), 257–264.
 6. Samuel Walker, The Police in America: An 
Introduction, 2d ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1992), 16.
 7. George L. Kelling and Mark H. Moore, 
“From Political to Reform to Community: 
The Evolving Strategy of Police,” in 
Community Policing: Rhetoric or Reality, 
ed. Jack Greene and Stephen Mastrofski  
(New York: Praeger Publishers, 1988), 13.
 8. John S. Dempsey and Linda S. Forst, An 
Introduction to Policing, 6th ed. (Clifton 
Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning, 2011), 
84.
 9. Ibid., 86–87.
 10. Henry M. Wrobleski and Karen M. Hess, 
Introduction to Law Enforcement and 
Criminal Justice, 7th ed. (Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, 2003), 119.
 11. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, December 2010), 6.
 12. Connie Fletcher, “What Cops Know,” On 
Patrol (Summer 1996), 44–45.
 13. David H. Bayley, Police for the Future (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 20.
 14. Walker, 103.
 15. Eric J. Scott, Calls for Service: Citizens 
Demand an Initial Police Response 
(Washington, D.C.: National Institute of 
Justice, 1981), 28–30.
 16. William G. Gay, Theodore H. Schell, and 
Stephen Schack, Routine Patrol: Improving 
Patrol Productivity, vol. 1 (Washington, D.C.: 
National Institute of Justice, 1977), 3–6.
 17. Gary W. Cordner, “The Police on Patrol,” in 
Police and Policing: Contemporary Issues, 
ed. Dennis Jay Kenney (New York: Praeger 
Publishers, 1989), 60–71.
 18. Anthony V. Bouza, The Police Mystique: 
An Insider’s Look at Cops, Crime, and the 
Criminal Justice System (New York: Plenum 
Press, 1990), 27.
 19. Peter W. Greenwood and Joan Petersilia, 
The 
Criminal 
Investigation 
Process: 
Summary and Policy Implications (Santa 
Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 1975).
 20. Fletcher, 46.
 21. 353 U.S. 53 (1957).
 22. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime 
in the United States, 2011 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2012),  
at www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime 
-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011 
/tables/table_25. 
 23. James M. Cronin, Gerard R. Murphy, Lisa 
L. Spahr, Jessica I. Toliver, and Richard 
E. Weger, Promoting Effective Homicide 
Investigations (Washington, D.C.: Police 
Executive Research Forum, August 2007), 
102–103.
 24. Timothy G. Keel, “Homicide Investigations: 
Identifying Best Practices,” FBI Law 
Enforcement Bulletin (February 2008), 5.
 25. Ronald F. Becker, Criminal Investigations, 2d 
ed. (Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett, 2004), 7.
 26. Tom McEwen, The Role and Impact of 
Forensic Evidence in the Criminal Justice 
System: Executive Summary (Alexandria, 
VA: Institute for Law and Justice, December 
2010), 4.
 27. Joseph Peterson, Ira Sommers, Deborah 
Baskin, and Donald Johnson, The Role and 
Impact of Forensic Evidence in the Criminal 
Justice Process (Washington, D.C.: National 
Institute of Justice, September 2010), 8–9.
 28. Simon A. Cole, “More Than Zero: 
Accounting 
for 
Error 
in 
Latent 
Fingerprinting Identification,” Journal of 
Criminal Law and Criminology (Spring 
2005), 985–1078.
 29. Quoted in “New DNA Database Helps 
Crack 1979 N.Y. Murder Case,” Miami 
Herald (March 14, 2000), 18A.
 30. Judith E. Lewter, “The Use of Forensic 
DNA in Criminal Cases in Kentucky as 
Compared with Other Selected States,” 
Kentucky Law Journal (1997–1998), 223. 
 31. “CODIS—NDIS Statistics,” at www.fbi.
gov/about-us/lab/codis/ndis-statistics.
 32. Nancy Ritter, “DNA Solves Property Crimes 
(But Are We Ready for That?),” NIJ Journal 
(October 2008), 2–12.
 33. Evan Pellegrino, “UA Team Adds Precision 
to DNA Forensics,” Arizona Daily Star 
(March 3, 2009), A1; and Gautam Naik, 
“To Sketch a Thief: Genes Draw Likeness 
of Suspects,” Wall Street Journal (March 29, 
2009), A9.
 34. Karen Hawkins, “More Are Getting Away 
with Murder,” Associated Press (December 8, 
2008).
 35. Alex Johnson, “Already under Fire, Crime 
Labs Cut to the Bone” (February 23, 2010), 
at www.msnbc.msn.com/id/35319938/
ns/us_news-crime_and_courts.
 36. Barbara Boyer and Darran Simon, 
“Statistics Say Crime Is Up in Camden 
since Police Layoffs,” Philadelphia Inquirer 
(March 3, 2011), B1.
 37. Jesse McKinley, “Police Departments Turn 
to Volunteers,” New York Times (March 2, 
2011), A13.
 38. Wrobleski and Hess, 173.
 39. National Institute of Justice, Managing 
Calls to the Police with 911/311 Systems 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, February 5, 2005).
 40. Christopher Curran, “Help Is on the Way,” 
Law Enforcement Technology (July 2011), 
10–13.
 41. Christine Kenneally, “How to Fix 911,” Time 
(April 11, 2011), 38.
 42. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2007, Table 12, page 15.
 43. Dale O. Cloninger, “Enforcement Risks and 
Deterrence: A Reexamination,” Journal of 
Socio-Economics 23 (1994), 273.
 44. George L. Kelling, Tony Pate, Duane 
Dieckman, and Charles Brown, The 
Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment: 
A Summary Report (Washington, D.C.: The 
Police Foundation, 1974), 3–4.
 45. Quoted in Erica Goode, “Sending the Police 
Before There’s a Crime,” New York Times 
(August 16, 2011), A11.
 46. James Q. Wilson, Thinking about Crime 
(New York: Basic Books, 1983), 65–66.
 47. Jerry H. Ratcliffe, Travis Tanigughi, 
Elizabeth R. Groff, and Jennifer D. Wood, 
“The Philadelphia Foot Patrol Experiment: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial of Police 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Patrol Effectiveness in Violent Crime 
Hotspots,” Criminology (August 2011), 796–
823.
 48. David Weisburd and Cynthia Lum, 
“The Diffusion of Computerized Crime 
Mapping in Policing: Linking Research 
and Practice,” Police Practice and Research 
6 (2005), 419–434.
 49. Quoted in “New Model Police,” Economist 
(June 9, 2007), 29.
 50. Lawrence W. Sherman, “Policing for Crime 
Prevention,” in Contemporary Policing: 
Controversies, Challenges, and Solutions, ed. 
Quint C. Thurman and Jihong Zhao (Los 
Angeles: Roxbury Publishing, 2004), 62.
 51. Ibid., 65.
 52. Mark H. Moore and George L. Kelling, “‘To 
Serve and Protect’: Learning from Police 
History,” Public Interest (Winter 1983), 
54–57.
 53. A. Steven Deitz, “Evaluating Community 
Policing: Quality Police Service and Fear 
of Crime,” Policing: An International Journal 
of Police Strategies and Management 20 
(1997), 83–100.
 54. George Kelling, “Police and Community: 
The Quiet Revolution,” in Perspectives 
in Policing (Washington, D.C.: National 
Institute of Justice, 1988).
 55. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police 
Departments, 2003, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, 2007), 19.
 56. Wesley K. Skogan and Megan Alderden, 
Police and the Community (Washington, 
D.C.: National Police Research Platform, 
February 2011), 4.
 57. Ibid., 5–6.
 58. National Institute of Justice Preview, 
Community Policing Strategies (Washington, 
D.C.: Office of Justice Programs, November 
1995), 1.
 59. Jihong Zhao and Quint C. Thurman, 
“Community Policing: Where Are We 
Now?” Crime and Delinquency (July 1997), 
345–357.
 60. Robert C. Trojanowicz and David Carter, 
“The Philosophy and Role of Community 
Policing,” at www.cj.msu.edu/~people/
cp/cpphil.html.
 61. Jason 
Vaughn 
Lee, 
“Policing 
after 
9/11: Community Policing in an Age of 
Homeland Security,” Police Quarterly 
(December 2010), 351.
 62. Tom Casady, “Beyond Arrest: Using Crime 
Analysis to Prevent Crime,” The Police Chief 
(September 2008), 24.
 63. Herman Goldstein, “Improving Policing: A 
Problem-Oriented Approach,” Crime and 
Delinquency 25 (1979), 236–258.
 64. Blair, Pollock, and Montague, 324.
 65. William A. Geller and Michael S. Scott, 
Deadly Force: What We Know (Washington, 
D.C.: Police Executive Research Forum, 
1992).
 66. Blair, Pollock, and Montague, 329.
 67. Harry J. Mullins, “Myth, Tradition, and Ritual,” 
Law and Order (September 1995), 197.
 68. William Westly, Violence and the Police: 
A Sociological Study of Law, Custom, and 
Morality (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970).
 69. The Officer Down Memorial Page, 
“Honoring Officers Killed in the Year 2011,” 
at www.odmp.org/year.php?year=2011.
 70. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Law 
Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted, 
2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Justice, 2011), at www.fbi.gov/about-
us/cjis/ucr/leoka/leoka-2010/officers-
assaulted/officers-assaulted.
 71. Dempsey and Forst, 170.
 72. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Contacts 
between Police and the Public, 2008 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, October 2011), 1.
 73. University of Buffalo, “Impact of Stress 
on Police Officers’ Physical and Mental 
Health,” Science Daily (September 29, 
2008), 
at 
www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2008/09/080926105029.htm.
 74. Quoted in ibid.
 75. J. L. O’Neil and M. A. Cushing, The Impact of 
Shift Work on Police Officers (Washington, 
D.C.: Police Executive Research Forum, 
1991), 1.
 76. University of Buffalo.
 77. James Hibberd, “Police Psychology,” On 
Patrol (Fall 1996), 26.
 78. M. J. Horowitz, N. Wilner, N. B. Kaltreider, 
and W. Alvarez, “Signs and Symptoms of 
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder,” Archives of 
General Psychiatry 37 (1980), 85–92.
 79. Laurence Miller, “Practical Strategies for 
Preventing Officer Suicide,” Law and Order 
3 (2006), 90–92.
 80. Lawrence M. Friedman, Crime and 
Punishment in American History (New York: 
Basic Books, 1993), 362.
 81. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Contacts 
between Police and the Public, 2008, 14.
 82. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Arrest-Related 
Deaths, 2003–2009, Statistical Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, November 2011), 1.
 83. H. Range Hutson, Deirdre Anglin, Phillip 
Rice, Demetrious N. Kyriacou, Michael 
Guirguis, and Jared Strote, “Excessive Use 
of Force by Police: A Survey of Academic 
Emergency 
Physicians,” 
Emergency 
Medicine Journal (January 2009), 20–22.
 84. Independent Commission on the Los 
Angeles Police Department, Report of the 
Independent Commission on the Los Angeles 
Police Department (1991), ix.
 85. 471 U.S. 1 (1985).
 86. 471 U.S. 1, 11 (1985).
 87. 490 U.S. 386 (1989).
 88. Brosseau v. Haugen, 543 U.S. 194 (2004).
 89. Kenneth Culp David, Police Discretion (St. 
Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1975).
 90. C. E. Pratt, “Police Discretion,” Law and 
Order (March 1992), 99–100.
 91. Knapp Commission, Report on Police 
Corruption (New York: Brazilier, 1973).
 92. Susan Haigh, “Police Bias Found in E. 
Haven,” (Meriden, CT) Record-Journal 
(December 20, 2011), 11.
 93. Robert J. Kane and Michael D. White, 
“Bad Cops: A Study of Career-Ending 
Misconduct among New York City Police 
Officers,” Criminology & Public Policy 
(November 2009), 764.
 94. Lawrence W. Sherman, “Becoming Bent: 
Moral Careers of Corrupt Policemen,” in 
Police Corruption: A Sociological Perspective, 
ed. Lawrence W. Sherman (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, 1974), 191–208.
 95. “Roster of Civilian Oversight Agencies in 
the U.S.,” National Association for Civilian 
Oversight of Law Enforcement, at www.
nacole.org.
 96. Hazel Glenn Beh, “Municipal Liability for 
Failure to Investigate Citizen Complaints 
against Police,” Fordham Urban Law Journal 
23 (Winter 1998), 209.
 97. Joycelyn M. Pollock and Ronald F. Becker, 
“Ethics Training Using Officers’ Dilemmas,” 
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin (November 
1996), 20–28.
 98. Quoted in Thomas J. Martinelli, “Dodging 
the Pitfalls of Noble Cause Corruption 
and the Intelligence Unit,” The Police Chief 
(October 2009), 124.
 99. Pollock and Becker.
 100. Brandon V. Zuidema and H. Wayne Duff, 
“Organizational Ethics through Effective 
Leadership,” Law Enforcement Bulletin 
(March 2009), 8–9.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   159
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Outline the four major sources that may provide probable 
cause.
2  Explain the exclusionary rule and the exceptions to it.
3  Distinguish between a stop and a frisk, and indicate the 
importance of the case Terry v. Ohio.
4  List the four elements that must be present for an arrest to 
take place.
5  List the four categories of items that can be seized by use 
of a search warrant.
6  Explain when searches can be made without a warrant.
7  Describe the plain view doctrine and indicate one of its 
limitations.
8  Indicate situations in which a Miranda warning is 
unnecessary.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 183 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Police and the  
Constitution
The Rules of Law Enforcement
159
Jim Wilson/New York Times
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• The Fourth Admendment
• Stops and Frisks
• Arrests
• Lawful Searches and Seizures
• The Interrogation Process  
and Miranda
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
T
he Supreme Court’s decision in Kentucky v. King puzzled many legal experts. 
Didn’t the Lexington-Fayette narcotics officers mistakenly create the exigent 
circumstances that they were relying on to avoid the warrant requirement? If 
the officers had not knocked on Hollis King’s door, then they would not have heard the 
“suspicious noises” that allowed them to enter the apartment.1 In the Court’s view, the 
Kentucky law enforcement agents had good reason—erroneous though it may have 
been—to force their way into King’s apartment. Consequently, as Justice Samuel Alito 
stated, their “warrantless entry to prevent the destruction of evidence is reasonable and 
thus allowed.”2
In the previous chapter, we discussed the importance of discretion in the criminal 
justice system. Certainly, as in this case, police officers have a great deal of discretion to 
make the decisions they feel are necessary to enforce criminal law. This discretion is not 
absolute, however. For the most part, a law enforcement agent’s actions are determined 
by the rules for policing set down in the U.S. Constitution and enforced by the courts. 
In this chapter, we will examine the extent to which police behavior is controlled by the 
law, starting with a discussion of the constitutional principles on which such control is 
grounded.
WHAT’s THAT SmELL?
For the three Lexington-Fayette (Kentucky) narcotics 
officers, the odds of making the correct decision 
seemed fifty-fifty. They had just followed a suspected 
drug dealer into the breezeway of an apartment 
complex and saw two doors, one on the left and one 
on the right. They knew the suspect had entered 
one of the apartments, but they had no way of 
determining which one. Then the officers smelled 
marijuana smoke coming from the apartment on the 
left. They immediately started banging on that door, 
yelling, “This is the police!” After hearing suspicious 
movements inside, the officers forced themselves into 
the apartment.
They did not find their suspect. Instead, the 
officers discovered Hollis King and two friends sitting 
on his sofa, smoking marijuana. A quick search of the 
apartment uncovered a stash of marijuana, powder 
and crack cocaine, and cash. King was arrested, 
convicted of several drug-related offenses, and 
sentenced to eleven years in prison. He appealed the 
conviction, claiming that the narcotics officers had 
improperly burst into and searched his apartment.
Generally, law enforcement agents cannot enter 
any sort of dwelling without written permission from 
a judge, called a warrant. As you will learn later 
in the chapter, however, the warrant requirement 
does not apply under certain “exigent,” or urgent, 
circumstances. In this case, the narcotics officers 
believed that the suspicious noises they heard were 
made by someone destroying evidence, thus creating 
an exigent circumstance. In May 2011, the United 
States Supreme Court ruled in favor of the officers, 
holding that their warrantless entry into King’s 
apartment was justified even though, as it turned out, 
the original suspect was elsewhere.
Through its 
decisions, the 
United States 
Supreme Court 
determines the 
guidelines law 
enforcement 
agents must 
follow when 
forcibly 
entering a 
dwelling.
AP Photo/Columbian via Clark Skamania Drug Task Force
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
refer to the “What’s That Smell” 
chapter-opening vignette above. Do 
they agree with the United States 
Supreme Court, that the officers 
were justified in their search of the 
apartment?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n  161
THE FouRTH AmEndmEnT
In Kentucky v. King, the Supreme Court did not address whether Hollis King was guilty 
or innocent of the charges against him. That was for the trial court to decide. Rather, the 
Court ruled that the Lexington-Fayette narcotics officers had not overstepped the bound-
aries of their authority in entering and searching King’s apartment. To understand these 
boundaries, law enforcement officers must understand the Fourth Amendment, which 
reads as follows:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but 
upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
This amendment contains two critical legal concepts: a prohibition against  unreasonable 
searches and seizures and the requirement of probable cause to issue a warrant.
REAsonAbLEnEss
Law enforcement personnel use searches and seizures to look for and collect the evi-
dence they need to convict individuals suspected of crimes. As you have just read, when 
police are conducting a search or seizure, they must act reasonably. Although courts 
have spent innumerable hours scrutinizing the word, no specific meaning for reasonable 
exists. A thesaurus can provide useful synonyms—logical, practical, sensible, intelligent, 
plausible—but because each case is different, those terms are relative.
In the King case, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that the search had been 
so unreasonable as to violate the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition against unreasonable 
searches and seizures. That does not mean that the police officers’ actions would have 
been reasonable under any circumstances. What if the narcotics officers, after having 
lost the trail of their suspected drug dealer, had begun randomly kicking down doors in 
the apartment complex, eventually discovering Hollis King and his illegal drug stash? 
Under those circumstances, their conduct would almost certainly have been considered 
unreasonable. 
Indeed, one Supreme Court justice, Ruth Bader Ginsberg, did believe that the offi-
cers in the King case had acted unreasonably. The Court’s decision, she warned, “arms 
the police with a way routinely to dishonor the Fourth Amendment’s warrant require-
ment.”3 For example, she noted, law enforcement agents can now simply roam the hall-
ways of apartment buildings, knock whenever they smell marijuana, and make a forced 
entry if they think they hear something suspicious.4
PRobAbLE CAusE
The concept of reasonableness is linked to probable cause. The Supreme Court has ruled, 
for example, that any arrest or seizure is unreasonable unless it is supported by probable 
cause.5 The burden of probable cause requires more than mere suspicion on a police 
officer’s part. The officer must know of facts and circumstances that would reasonably 
lead to “the belief that an offense has been or is being committed.”6
souRCEs oF PRobAbLE CAusE If no probable cause existed when a police officer took 
a certain action, it cannot be retroactively applied. If, for example, a police officer stops 
a person for jaywalking and then (without the help of a drug-sniffing dog) finds several 
ounces of marijuana in that person’s pocket, the arrest for marijuana possession would 
probably be disallowed. Remember, suspicion does not equal probable cause. If, however, 
Searches and Seizures The 
legal term, as found in the 
Fourth Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution, that generally 
refers to the searching for and 
the confiscating of evidence by 
law enforcement agents.
Probable Cause Reasonable 
grounds to believe the 
existence of facts warranting 
certain actions, such as the 
search or arrest of a person.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
address “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 1 on page 183, 
which asks them to consider 
the two most important legal 
concepts contained in the Fourth 
Amendment.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
an informant had tipped the officer off that the person was a drug dealer, probable cause 
might exist and the arrest could be valid. Informants are one of several sources that may 
provide probable cause. Other sources include the following:
1. Personal observation. Police officers may use their personal training, experience, 
and expertise to infer probable cause from situations that may not be obviously 
criminal. If, for example, a police officer observes several people in a car slowly 
circling a certain building in a high-crime area, that officer may infer that the 
people are “casing” the building in preparation for a burglary. Probable cause 
could be established for detaining the suspects. 
2. Information. Law enforcement officers receive information from victims, 
eyewitnesses, informants, and official sources such as police bulletins or 
broadcasts. Such information, as long as it is believed to be reliable, is a basis for 
probable cause.
Outline the 
four major 
sources that 
may provide 
probable 
cause.
Learning  
objective 1
F A s T F A C T s
PoLiCE dETECTivE, job dEsCRiPTion:
• Collect evidence and obtain facts 
pertaining to criminal cases. 
• Conduct interviews, observe 
suspects, examine records, and 
help with raids and busts. 
WHAT kind oF TRAining  
is REquiREd? 
• 2–5 years’ experience as a police 
patrol officer is required before 
testing to become a detective. 
• Larger departments require 
60 units of college credit or an 
associate’s degree.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?
• $43,920–$76,350
CAREERS IN CJ
William HoWe 
Police Detective
Each crime scene, each major accident, each time you are called to investigate, you 
are presented with a puzzle with various pieces missing. When you discover and 
interpret the interlocking missing pieces together in a successful prosecution, there 
is no better feeling. The payoff is when you get the opportunity to show off your 
completed “puzzle” to the jury and they agree that the pieces 
fit. When I once thrilled at the chase of the bad guy through 
the alleys and neighborhoods, I now enjoy even more 
pursuing them with the mental skills I have developed—
accident reconstruction, fingerprint identification, and 
the interpretation of crime scenes. This can be every bit 
as rewarding as the foot pursuit, not to mention ever so 
much easier on the body.
Having been in police work for thirty-five years, I have 
been assaulted only four times on the job (two of which 
were at gunpoint). This confirmed for me, once and for all, the 
importance of being able to use your mind rather than your size 
to, first, talk your way out of trouble and, second, talk the bad guys into going 
along with your plans for them.
Social media career tip  
For your profile photo, stick with a close-up, business-appropriate photo in which you 
are smiling and wearing something you would wear as a potential employee. Avoid 
symbols, party photos, long-distance shots, or baby pictures.
Photo Courtesy of William Howe
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   163
3. Evidence. In certain circumstances, which will be examined later in this chapter, 
police have probable cause for a search or seizure based on evidence—such as a 
shotgun—in plain view.
4. Association. Under certain circumstances, if the police see a person with a known 
criminal background in a high-crime neighborhood, they have probable cause 
to stop that person. Generally, however, association is not adequate to establish 
probable cause.7
THE PRobAbLE CAusE FRAmEWoRk In a sense, the concept of probable cause allows 
police officers to do their job effectively. Most arrests are made without a warrant, because 
most arrests are the result of quick police reaction to the commission of a crime. Indeed, 
it would not be practical to expect a police officer to obtain a warrant before making an 
arrest on the street. Thus, probable cause provides a framework that limits the situations in 
which police officers can make arrests, but also gives officers the freedom to act within that 
framework. In 2003, the Supreme Court reaffirmed this freedom by ruling that Baltimore 
(Maryland) police officers acted properly when they arrested all three passengers of a car in 
which cocaine had been hidden in the back seat. “A reasonable officer,” wrote Chief Justice 
William H. Rehnquist, “could conclude that there was probable cause to believe” that the 
defendant, who had been sitting in the front seat, was in “possession” of the illicit drug 
despite his protestations to the contrary.8
Once an arrest is made, the arresting officer must prove to a judge that probable 
cause existed. In County of Riverside v. McLaughlin (1991),9 the Supreme Court ruled that 
this judicial determination of probable cause must be made within forty-eight hours after 
the arrest, even if this two-day period includes a weekend or holiday. (The Comparative 
Criminal Justice—Extending a Firm Hand feature on the following page describes one 
country’s elastic interpretation of probable cause in response to a vicious crime wave.)
THE ExCLusionARy RuLE
Historically, the courts have looked to the Fourth Amendment for guidance in regulating the 
activity of law enforcement officers, as the language of the Constitution does not expressly 
do so. The courts’ most potent legal tool in this endeavor is the exclusionary rule, which 
prohibits the use of illegally seized evidence. According to this rule, any evidence obtained by 
an unreasonable search or seizure is inadmissible (may not be used) against a defendant in a 
criminal trial.10 Even highly incriminating evidence, such as a knife stained with the victim’s 
blood, usually cannot be introduced at a trial if illegally obtained. 
Furthermore, any physical or verbal evidence police are able to acquire by using 
illegally obtained evidence is known as the fruit of the poisoned tree and is also inad-
missible. In Kentucky v. King, the case that opened this chapter, if a court had found 
that the narcotics officers had improperly entered Hollis King’s apartment, the illegal 
drugs found there would have been considered “poisoned” evidence and inadmissible. 
The main implication of the exclusionary rule is that it forces police to gather evidence 
properly. If they follow appropriate procedures, they are more likely to be rewarded with 
a conviction. If they are careless or abuse the rights of the suspect, they are less likely to 
get a conviction. A strict application of the exclusionary rule, therefore, will permit guilty 
people to go free because of police carelessness, errors, or improper tactics.
THE “inEviTAbLE disCovERy” ExCEPTion Critics of the exclusionary rule have long main-
tained that the costs to society of losing critical evidence are higher than the benefits of 
deterring police misconduct. Several Supreme Court decisions have mirrored this view and 
Exclusionary Rule A rule 
under which any evidence that 
is obtained in violation of the 
accused’s rights, as well as any 
evidence derived from illegally 
obtained evidence, will not be 
admissible in criminal court.
Fruit of the Poisoned 
Tree Evidence that is acquired 
through the use of illegally 
obtained evidence and is 
therefore inadmissible in court. 
Explain the 
exclusionary 
rule and the 
exceptions to it.
Learning  
objective2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
provided exceptions to the exclusionary rule. The “inevitable discovery” exception was 
established in the wake of the disappearance of ten-year-old Pamela Powers of Des Moines, 
Iowa, on Christmas Eve, 1968.
The primary suspect in the case, a religious fanatic named Robert Williams, was 
tricked by a detective into leading police to the site where he had buried Powers. The 
detective convinced Williams that if he did not lead police to the body, he would soon 
forget where it was buried. This would deny his victim a “Christian burial.” Initially, in 
Brewer v. Williams (1977),11 the Court ruled that the evidence (Powers’s body) had been 
obtained illegally because Williams’s attorney had not been present during the interro-
gation that led to his admission. Several years later, in Nix v. Williams (1984),12 the Court 
reversed itself, ruling that the evidence was admissible because the body would have 
eventually (“inevitably”) been found by lawful means.
THE “good FAiTH” ExCEPTion The scope of the exclusionary rule has been further 
diminished by two cases involving faulty warrants. In the first, United States v. Leon 
(1984),13 the police seized evidence on authority of a search warrant that had been 
improperly issued by a judge. In the second, Herring v. United States (2009),14 due to a 
computer error, police officers detained a man on the mistaken belief that he was subject 
to an arrest warrant. As a result, they found that the suspect was carrying illegal drugs 
and an unregistered firearm. 
ExTENdINg A FIRm HANd  
Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) is one of the 
most powerful and fastest-growing street 
gangs in the world. In the United States, 
where MS-13 has about 10,000 members and a presence 
in forty-two states, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
has set up a task force to deal exclusively with the gang. 
U.S. immigration officials routinely deport members back 
to their home countries in Central America. One of these 
countries, El Salvador, has responded to the resulting influx 
of violent gang members with strict antigang legislation. 
Over the past decade, Salvadoran politicians passed 
a series of mano dura, or “firm hand,” laws designed to 
crack down on criminal gang activity. These laws made it 
easier for police to detain suspects who exhibited certain 
characteristics such as having gang tattoos or loitering in 
known gang areas. Still, several years ago, MS-13 members 
fired on two crowded buses in San Salvador, the country’s 
capital, killing seventeen people and intensifying public 
outrage over gang violence. Three months later, in response, 
Salvadoran president Muaricio Funes signed the country’s 
harshest antigang legislation to date. Under the new law, 
merely belonging to a gang is punishable by four to six years 
in prison, even if no other criminal activity is proved.
For CriTiCAl AnAlysis At times, Salvadoran police 
officers have been permitted to use gang tattoos as proof 
of gang membership, and thus grounds for immediate 
arrest. How does the Fourth Amendment’s probable cause 
requirement prohibit this sort of action by American law 
enforcement agents? 
ComPARATIvE CRiminAL jusTiCE
Gang tattoos cover the face and body of a prisoner 
incarcerated in El Salvador’s Izalco penitentiary.
Reuters/Ulises Rodriguez/Landov
“Inevitable Discovery” 
Exception The legal 
principle that illegally obtained 
evidence can be admissible 
in court if police using lawful 
means would have “inevitably” 
discovered it.
Teaching Tip: Provide students with 
different scenarios of warrantless 
searches, and ask them to identify 
which exception to the exclusionary 
rule might apply. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   165
In both cases, the Court allowed the evidence to stand under a “good faith” exception 
to the exclusionary rule. Under this exception, evidence acquired by a police officer using a 
technically invalid warrant is admissible during trial if the officer was unaware of the error. 
In these two cases, the Court said that the officers acted in “good faith.” By the same token, 
if police officers use a search warrant that they know to be technically incorrect, the good 
faith exception does not apply, and the evidence can be suppressed.
SELFASSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 184.
The Fourth Amendment contains two critically important restrictions on police 
authority: a prohibition against ____________ searches and seizures and a requirement 
of ____________ ____________ that a crime has been committed before a warrant 
for a search or seizure can be issued. Judges rely on the ____________ rule to keep 
____________ that has been improperly obtained by the police out of criminal courts. 
sToPs And FRisks
In February 2011, an Indianapolis (Indiana) police officer was patrolling a high-crime 
neighborhood when he saw a bicycle sitting next to a car in a gas station parking lot. 
The officer watched as Michael Woodson got out of the car, put on a backpack, and 
began to cycle away. After stopping Woodson, the officer searched the backpack, finding 
more than thirty contraband DVDs. Woodson challenged his eventual conviction on two 
charges of fraud, claiming that the police officer had no good reason to stop him in the 
first place.
A three-judge Indiana appeals panel agreed and overturned Woodson’s convic-
tion. The panel rejected the argument that, given the setting and Woodson’s behavior, 
the police officer was justified in thinking that a drug deal was taking place. That is, no 
reasonable suspicion existed that a crime had been committed in the gas station park-
ing lot.15 When such reasonable suspicion does exist, police officers are well within their 
rights to stop and frisk a suspect. In a stop and frisk, law enforcement officers (1) briefly 
detain a person they reasonably believe to be suspicious and, (2) if they believe the per-
son to be armed, proceed to pat down, or “frisk,” that person’s outer clothing.16
THE ELusivE dEFiniTion oF REAsonAbLE susPiCion
The precedent for the ever-elusive definition of a “reasonable” suspicion in stop-and-
frisk situations was established in Terry v. Ohio (1968).17 In that case, a detective named 
McFadden observed two men (one of whom was Terry) acting strangely in downtown 
Cleveland. The men would walk past a certain store, peer into the window, and then stop 
at a street corner and confer. While they were talking, another man joined the conversa-
tion and then left quickly. Several minutes later the three men met again at another cor-
ner a few blocks away. Detective McFadden believed the trio was planning to break into 
the store. He approached them, told them who he was, and asked for identification. After 
receiving a mumbled response, the detective frisked the three men and found handguns 
on two of them, who were tried and convicted of carrying concealed weapons. 
The Supreme Court upheld the conviction, ruling that Detective McFadden had  
reasonable cause to believe that the men were armed and dangerous and that swift 
action was necessary to protect himself and other citizens in the area.18 The Court 
accepted McFadden’s interpretation of the unfolding scene as based on objective facts 
“Good Faith” Exception  
The legal principle that 
evidence obtained with the use 
of a technically invalid search 
warrant is admissible during 
trial if the police acted in good 
faith when they sought the 
warrant from a judge.
Distinguish 
between a stop 
and a frisk, and 
indicate the 
importance of 
the case Terry  
v. Ohio.
Learning  
objective3
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students 
whether they agreed with the 
ruling of the Indiana appeals panel 
in the case of Michael Woodson, 
described on this page. Did the 
police officers have probable cause 
to stop Woodson and search his 
backpack? Or could it be argued 
that they did not have reasonable 
suspicion that a crime had been 
committed? 
Discussion Tip: Have students 
debate the concept of “reasonable 
suspicion.” What does it mean to 
be reasonably suspicious? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and practical conclusions. It therefore concluded that the detective’s suspicion was reason-
able. In contrast, in the case just described, the Indianapolis police officer’s grounds for 
stopping Michael Woodson—activity that looked like an illegal drug deal in a part of town 
where such activity is common—were not seen by the Indiana appeals court as reasonable.
THE “ToTALiTy oF THE CiRCumsTAnCEs” TEsT For the most part, the judicial system has 
refrained from placing restrictions on police officers’ ability to make stops. In the Terry 
case, the Supreme Court did say that an officer must have “specific and articulable facts” 
to support the decision to make a stop, but added that the facts may be “taken together 
with rational inferences.”19 The Court has consistently ruled that because of their practi-
cal experience, law enforcement agents are in a unique position to make such inferences 
and should be given a good deal of freedom in doing so.
In the years since the Terry case was decided, the Court has settled on a “totality of 
the circumstances” test to determine whether a stop is based on reasonable suspicion.20 
In 2002, for example, the Court ruled that a U.S. Border Patrol agent’s stop of a minivan 
in Arizona was reasonable.21 On being approached by the Border Patrol car, the driver 
had stiffened, slowed down his van, and avoided making eye contact with the agent. 
Furthermore, the children in the van waved at the officer in a mechanical manner, as 
if ordered to do so. The agent pulled over the van and found 128 pounds of marijuana. 
In his opinion, Chief Justice William Rehnquist pointed out that such conduct 
might have been unremarkable on a busy city highway, but on an unpaved road thirty 
miles from the Mexican border it was enough to reasonably arouse the agent’s suspi-
cion.22 The justices also made clear that the need to prevent terrorist attacks is part of 
the “totality of the circumstances,” and therefore, law enforcement agents will have more 
leeway to make stops near U.S. borders. 
RACE And REAsonAbLE susPiCion In general, a person’s race or ethnicity alone cannot 
provide reasonable suspicion for stops and frisks. Some statistical measures, however, 
seem to show that these factors do, at times, play a troubling role in this area of polic-
ing. African Americans and Hispanics represented 87 percent of the nearly 700,000 stops 
made by New York City police officers in 2011, even though these two groups constitute a 
relatively small percentage of the city’s population.23 That same year, just four Shelbyville 
(Tennessee) police officers made nearly two-thirds of all arrests of Hispanics for traffic 
violations in Bedford County, Tennessee.24
These and other similar data are seen as proof that police sometimes use racial 
profiling in deciding which suspects to stop. Racial profiling occurs when a police 
action is based on the race, ethnicity, or national origin of 
the suspect rather than any reasonable suspicion that he or 
she has broken the law. The issue of racial profiling gained 
national attention in 2010, when Arizona passed a law aimed 
at policing its large number of undocumented immigrants. 
The legislation, known as S.B. 1070, requires state and local 
police officers, “when practicable,” to check the immigration 
status of someone they have a “reasonable suspicion” is in the 
country illegally.25 
The language of Arizona’s law does prohibit officers 
from using a suspect’s race or ethnicity as the sole consider-
ation in determining reasonable suspicion. The law’s critics, 
however, believe that police will have no choice but to focus 
Racial Profiling The 
practice of targeting people for 
police action based solely on 
their race, ethnicity, or national 
origin.
Under a new state law, Arizona 
law enforcement agents such as 
this Tucson police officer would 
be required to detain anyone 
they suspected of being an 
“unauthorized alien.” Why do 
critics of this law believe that it 
requires racial profiling on the 
part of police officers? Do you 
agree with this criticism? Why 
or why not?
Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images
166   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Teaching Tip: Provide students with 
various news stories of alleged 
racial profiling (by police officers, 
security officers, airport officials, 
and so on). Then, ask them if 
they find the profiling in any of 
the scenarios to be justified. Why 
or why not? How many of your 
students think that racial profiling is 
never justified?
Technology Tip: Have your 
students explore the arguments 
against racial profiling offered by 
the ACLU on its Web site. Then 
ask them if this organization’s 
perspective has changed their own 
views on the subject.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

on Arizona’s Hispanic population, as determined primarily by skin color. In 2012, the U.S. 
Supreme Court upheld the “show me your papers” provision of S.B. 1070. At the same 
time, the Court suggested that it would revisit the issue should evidence show that the 
statute indeed leads to racial profiling in Arizona.26 
A sToP
The terms stop and frisk are often used in concert, but they describe two separate acts. A 
stop takes place when a law enforcement officer has reasonable suspicion that a crimi-
nal activity is about to take place. Because an investigatory stop is not an arrest, there 
are limits to the extent police can detain someone who has been stopped. For example, 
in one situation an airline traveler and his luggage were restrained for ninety minutes 
while the police waited for a drug-sniffing dog to arrive. The Supreme Court ruled that 
the initial stop of the passenger was constitutional, but that the ninety-minute wait was 
excessive.27
In 2004, the Court held that police officers could require suspects to identify them-
selves during a stop that is otherwise valid under the Terry ruling.28 The case involved 
a Nevada rancher who was fined $250 for refusing to give his name to a police officer 
investigating a possible assault. The defendant argued that such requests force citizens to 
incriminate themselves against their will, which is prohibited, as we shall see later in the 
chapter, by the Fifth Amendment. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote, however, that “asking 
questions is an essential part of police investigations” that would be made much more 
difficult if officers could not determine the identity of a suspect.29 The ruling validated 
“stop-and-identify” laws in twenty states and numerous cities and towns.
A FRisk
The Supreme Court has stated that a frisk should be a protective measure. Police offi-
cers cannot conduct a frisk as a “fishing expedition” simply to try to find items besides 
weapons, such as illegal narcotics, on a suspect.30 A frisk does not necessarily follow a 
stop and in fact may occur only when the officer is justified in thinking that the safety of 
police officers or other citizens may be endangered.
Again, the question of reasonable suspicion is at the heart of determining the 
legality of frisks. In the Terry case, the Court accepted that Detective McFadden reason-
ably believed that the three suspects posed a threat. The suspects’ refusal to answer 
McFadden’s questions, though within their rights because they had not been arrested, 
provided the detective with sufficient motive for the frisk. In 2009, the Court extended the 
“stop and frisk” authority by ruling that a police officer could order a passenger in a car 
that had been pulled over for a traffic violation to submit to 
a pat-down.31 To do so, the officer must have a reasonable 
suspicion that the suspect may be armed and dangerous.
SELFASSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 184.
A police officer can make a ____________ , which is not 
the same as an arrest, if she or he has a ____________ 
suspicion that a criminal act is taking place or is about 
to take place. Then, the officer has the ability to 
____________ the suspect for weapons as a protective 
measure. 
Stop A brief detention of a 
person by law enforcement 
agents for questioning. 
Frisk A pat-down or minimal 
search by police to discover 
weapons. 
A police officer frisks a 
suspect in San Francisco, 
California. What is the main 
purpose behind a frisk? When 
are police justified in frisking 
someone?
Mark Richards/PhotoEdit
C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   167
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
whether they agree with the 
Supreme Court’s decision that 
allows a police officer to order a 
passenger in a car that has been 
pulled over for a traffic violation 
to submit to a pat-down, if the 
officer reasonably believes that 
the passenger may be armed and 
dangerous. Do students think this 
ruling is appropriate, or does it 
violate the rights of automobile 
passengers?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
ARREsTs
As in the Terry case, a stop and frisk may lead to an arrest. An arrest is the taking into 
custody of a citizen for the purpose of detaining her or him on a criminal charge. It is 
important to understand the difference between a stop and an arrest. In the eyes of the 
law, a stop is a relatively brief intrusion on a citizen’s rights, whereas an arrest—which 
involves a deprivation of liberty—is deserving of a full range of constitutional protec-
tions, which we shall discuss throughout the chapter (see Mastering Concepts—The 
Difference between a Stop and an Arrest below). Consequently, while a stop can be made 
based on reasonable suspicion, a law enforcement officer needs probable cause, as 
defined earlier, to make an arrest.32
ELEmEnTs oF An ARREsT
When is somebody under arrest? The easy—and incorrect—answer would be whenever the 
police officer says so. In fact, the state of being under arrest is dependent not only on the 
actions of the law enforcement officers but also on the perception of the suspect. Suppose 
Mr. Jones is stopped by plainclothes detectives, driven to the police station, and detained 
for three hours for questioning. During this time, the police never tell Mr. Jones he is under 
arrest, and in fact, he is free to leave at any time. But if Mr. Jones or any other reasonable 
person believes he or she is not free to leave, then, according to the Supreme Court, that 
person is in fact under arrest and must receive the necessary constitutional protections.33
Criminal justice professor Rolando V. del Carmen of Sam Houston State University 
has identified four elements that must be present for an arrest to take place:
1. The intent to arrest. In a stop, though it may entail slight inconvenience and a 
short detention period, there is no intent on the part of the law enforcement 
officer to take the person into custody. Therefore, there is no arrest. As intent is a 
subjective term, it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the police officer 
intended to arrest. In situations when the intent is unclear, courts often rely—as 
in our hypothetical case of Mr. Jones—on the perception of the arrestee.34 
During a stop, police can interrogate the person and frisk his or her outer 
clothing. If a “probable cause” event occurs during the stop, such as the 
discovery of an illegal weapon, then officers may arrest the person. if an 
arrest is made, the suspect is now in police custody and is protected by 
the U.S. Constitution in a number of ways that will be discussed later in the 
chapter.
sToP
ArresT
Justification
Reasonable suspicion only
Probable cause
Warrant
None
Required in some, but not all, situations
intent of officer
To investigate suspicious activity
To make a formal charge against the suspect
search
May frisk, or “pat down,” for weapons
May conduct a full search for weapons or evidence
scope of search
Outer clothing only
Area within the suspect’s immediate control or “reach”
mASTERINgCoNCEPTS
The DiFFerenCe beTWeen A sToP AnD An ArresT 
PhotoDisc
List the four 
elements 
that must be 
present for an 
arrest to take 
place.
Learning  
objective 4
Arrest To take into custody 
a person suspected of criminal 
activity.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   169
2. The authority to arrest. State laws give police officers the authority to place citi-
zens under custodial arrest, or take them into custody. Like other state laws, the 
authorization to arrest varies among the fifty states. Some states, for example, 
allow off-duty police officers to make arrests, while others do not.
3. Seizure or detention. A necessary part of an arrest is the detention of the subject. 
Detention is considered to have occurred as soon as the arrested individual sub-
mits to the control of the officer, whether peacefully or under the threat or use 
of force.
4. The understanding of the person that she or he has been arrested. Through either 
words—such as “you are now under arrest”—or actions, the person taken into 
custody must understand that an arrest has taken place. When a suspect has been 
forcibly subdued by the police, handcuffed, and placed in a patrol car, he or she is 
believed to understand that an arrest has been made. This understanding may be 
lacking if the person is intoxicated, insane, or unconscious.35
ARREsTs WiTH A WARRAnT
When law enforcement officers have established probable cause to arrest an individual 
who is not in police custody, they obtain an arrest warrant for that person. An arrest 
warrant contains information such as the name of the person suspected and the crime 
she or he is suspected of having committed. (See Figure 6.1 below for an example of an 
arrest warrant.) Judges or magistrates issue arrest warrants after first determining that 
the law enforcement officers have indeed established 
probable cause of criminal activity.
EnTERing A dWELLing There is a perception that an 
arrest warrant gives law enforcement officers the author-
ity to enter a dwelling without first announcing them-
selves. This is not accurate. In Wilson v. Arkansas (1995),36 
the Supreme Court reiterated the common law requirement 
that police officers must knock and announce their identity 
and purpose before entering a dwelling. As you may recall 
from the opening of this chapter, under certain conditions, 
known as exigent circumstances, law enforcement officers 
need not announce themselves. These circumstances include 
situations in which the officers have a reasonable belief of any 
of the following:
• 
The suspect is armed and poses a strong threat  
of violence to the officers or others inside the  
dwelling.
• 
 Persons inside the dwelling are in the process of 
destroying evidence or escaping because of the pres-
ence of the police.
• 
 A felony is being committed at the time the officers 
enter.37
THE WAiTing PERiod The Supreme Court severely weakened 
the practical impact of the “knock and announce” rule with its 
decision in Hudson v. Michigan (2006).38 In that case, Detroit 
Arrest Warrant A written 
order, based on probable 
cause and issued by a judge 
or magistrate, commanding 
that the person named on the 
warrant be arrested by the 
police.
Exigent Circumstances  
Situations that require 
extralegal or exceptional 
actions by the police.
FiGUre 6.1 example of an Arrest Warrant
Teaching Tip: Provide students with 
a number of different scenarios in 
which an arrest may or may not 
have taken place. Then, ask them if 
the four requirements for an arrest 
have been met.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
police did not knock before entering the defendant’s home with a warrant. Instead, they 
announced themselves and then waited only three to five seconds before making their 
entrance, not the fifteen to twenty seconds suggested by a prior Court ruling.39 Hudson 
argued that the drugs found during the subsequent search were inadmissible because 
the law enforcement agents did not follow proper procedure. 
The Court disagreed. In his majority opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia stated that an 
improper “knock and announce” is not unreasonable enough to provide defendants with 
a “get-out-of-jail-free card” by disqualifying evidence uncovered on the basis of a valid 
search warrant.40 Thus, the exclusionary rule, discussed earlier in this chapter, would no 
longer apply under such circumstances. Legal experts still advise, however, that police 
observe a reasonable waiting period after knocking and announcing to be certain that 
any evidence found during the subsequent search will be allowed in court.41
ARREsTs WiTHouT A WARRAnT
Arrest warrants are not always required, and in fact, most arrests are made on the scene 
without a warrant.42 A law enforcement officer may make a warrantless arrest if:
1. The offense is committed in the presence of the officer; or
2. The officer has knowledge that a crime has been committed and probable cause 
to believe the crime was committed by a particular suspect.43
The type of crime also comes to bear in questions of arrests without a warrant. As a general 
rule, officers can make a warrantless arrest for a crime they did not see if they have prob-
able cause to believe that a felony has been committed. For misdemeanors, the crime must 
have been committed in the presence of the officer for a warrantless arrest to be valid. 
In certain situations, warrantless arrests are unlawful even though a police officer 
can establish probable cause. In Payton v. New York (1980),44 for example, the Supreme 
Court held that when exigent circumstances do not exist and the suspect does not give 
consent to enter a dwelling, law enforcement officers cannot force themselves in for the 
purpose of making a warrantless arrest. The Payton ruling was expanded to cover the 
homes of third parties in Steagald v. United States (1981).45 That case saw the Court rule 
that if the police wish to arrest a criminal suspect in another person’s home, they cannot 
enter that home to arrest the suspect without first obtaining a search warrant, a process 
we will discuss in the following section.
SELFASSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 184.
An arrest occurs when a law enforcement agent takes a suspect into ____________ on a 
criminal charge. If the officer has prior knowledge of the suspect’s criminal activity, she 
or he must obtain a ____________ from a judge or magistrate before making the arrest. 
Officers can, however, make ____________ arrests if an offense is committed in their 
presence or they have ____________ ____________ to believe that a crime was committed 
by the particular subject. 
LAWFuL sEARCHEs And sEizuREs
How far can law enforcement agents go in searching and seizing private property? 
Consider the steps taken by Jenny Stracner, an investigator with the Laguna Beach 
(California) Police Department. After receiving information that a suspect, Greenwood, 
Warrantless Arrest An 
arrest made without first 
seeking a warrant for the 
action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   171
was engaged in drug trafficking, Stracner enlisted the aid of the local trash collector in 
procuring evidence. Instead of taking Greenwood’s trash bags to be incinerated, the col-
lector agreed to give them to Stracner. The officer found enough drug paraphernalia in 
the garbage to obtain a warrant to search the suspect’s home. Subsequently, Greenwood 
was arrested and convicted on narcotics charges.46
Remember, the Fourth Amendment is quite specific in forbidding unreasonable 
searches and seizures. Were Stracner’s search of Greenwood’s garbage and her seizure 
of its contents “reasonable”? The Supreme Court thought so, holding that Greenwood’s 
garbage was not protected by the Fourth Amendment.47
THE RoLE oF PRivACy in sEARCHEs
A crucial concept in understanding search and seizure law is privacy. By definition, a search 
is a governmental intrusion on a citizen’s reasonable expectation of privacy. The recognized 
standard for a “reasonable expectation of privacy” was established in Katz v. United States 
(1967).48 The case dealt with the question of whether the defendant was justified in his 
expectation of privacy in the calls he made from a public phone booth. The Supreme Court 
held that “the Fourth Amendment protects people, not places,” and Katz prevailed.
In his concurring opinion, Justice John Harlan, Jr., set a two-pronged test for a per-
son’s expectation of privacy:
1. The individual must prove that she or he expected privacy, and
2. Society must recognize that expectation as reasonable.49
Accordingly, the Court agreed with Katz’s claim that he had a reasonable right to privacy 
in a public phone booth. (Remember, however, that the Terry case allows for conditions 
under which a person’s privacy rights are overcome by a reasonable suspicion on the part 
of a law enforcement officer that a threat to public safety exists.)
In contrast, in California v. Greenwood (1988),50 described above, the Court did not 
believe that the suspect had a reasonable expectation of privacy when it came to his 
garbage bags. The Court noted that when we place our trash on a curb, we expose it to 
any number of intrusions by “animals, children, scavengers, snoops, and other mem-
bers of the public.”51 In other words, if Greenwood had truly intended for the contents 
of his garbage bags to remain private, he would not have left them on the side of the 
road. To give another example, the Court also upheld the search in a case in which a 
drug-sniffing dog was used to detect marijuana in the trunk of a car after the driver 
was stopped for speeding. The Court ruled that no one has a legitimate privacy inter-
est in possessing illegal drugs or other contraband such as explosives in the trunk of 
his or her car.52
sEARCH And sEizuRE WARRAnTs
To protect against charges that they have unreasonably infringed on privacy rights dur-
ing a search, law enforcement officers can obtain a search warrant. (See Figure 6.2 on 
the following page for an example of a search warrant.) Similar to an arrest warrant, a 
search warrant is a court order that authorizes police to search a certain area. Before a 
judge or magistrate will issue a search warrant, law enforcement officers must provide 
the following:
• 
 Information showing probable cause that a crime has been or will be committed.
• 
 Specific information on the premises to be searched, the suspects to be found and 
the illegal activities taking place at those premises, and the items to be seized.
Search The process by which 
police examine a person or 
property to find evidence that 
will be used to prove guilt in a 
criminal trial.
Search Warrant A written 
order, based on probable 
cause and issued by a judge 
or magistrate, commanding 
that police officers or criminal 
investigators search a specific 
person, place, or property to 
obtain evidence.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
respond to the question of whether 
the search of Greenwood’s trash 
was reasonable. Do students 
think that trash left on a sidewalk 
should be protected by the Fourth 
Amendment? Why or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
The purpose of a search warrant is to establish, before the 
search takes place, that a probable cause to search justifies 
infringing on the suspect’s reasonable expectation of privacy. 
PARTiCuLARiTy oF sEARCH WARRAnTs The members of the 
First Congress specifically did not want law enforcement 
officers to have the freedom to make “general, exploratory” 
searches through a person’s belongings.53 Consequently, the 
Fourth Amendment requires that a warrant describe with 
“particularity” the place to be searched and the things—either 
people or objects—to be seized. 
This “particularity” requirement places a heavy burden 
on law enforcement officers. Before going to a judge to ask 
for a search warrant, they must prepare an affidavit in which 
they provide specific, written information on the property that 
they wish to search and seize. They must know the specific 
address of any place they wish to search. General addresses 
of apartment buildings or office complexes are not sufficient. 
Furthermore, courts generally frown on vague descriptions of 
goods to be seized. “Stolen goods” would most likely be con-
sidered unacceptably imprecise, while “1 MacBook Pro laptop 
computer” would be preferred.
A seizure is the act of taking possession of a person or 
property by the government because of a (suspected) violation 
of the law. In general, four categories of items can be seized by use of a search warrant:
1. Items resulting from the crime, such as stolen goods.
2. Items that are inherently illegal for anybody to possess (with certain exceptions), 
such as narcotics and counterfeit currency.
3. Items that can be called “evidence” of the crime, such as a bloodstained sneaker or 
a ski mask.
4. Items used in committing the crime, such as an ice pick or a printing press used to 
make counterfeit bills.54
REAsonAbLEnEss duRing A sEARCH And sEizuRE No matter how “particular” a warrant 
is, it cannot provide for all the conditions that are bound to come up during its service. 
Consequently, the law gives law enforcement officers the ability to act “reasonably” dur-
ing a search and seizure in the event of unforeseeable circumstances. For example, if a 
police officer is searching an apartment for a stolen MacBook Pro laptop computer and 
notices a vial of crack cocaine sitting on the suspect’s bed, that contraband is considered 
to be in “plain view” and can be seized.
Note that if law enforcement officers have a search warrant that authorizes them to 
search for a stolen laptop computer, they would not be justified in opening small draw-
ers. Because a computer could not fit in a small drawer, an officer would not have a basis 
for reasonably searching one. Hence, officers are restricted in terms of where they can 
look by the items they are searching for.
sEARCHEs And sEizuREs WiTHouT A WARRAnT
Although the Supreme Court has established the principle that searches conducted without 
warrants are per se (by definition) unreasonable, it has set “specifically established” excep-
Affidavit A written statement 
of facts, confirmed by the oath 
or affirmation of the party 
making it and made before a 
person having the authority 
to administer the oath or 
affirmation.
Seizure The forcible taking of 
a person or property in response 
to a violation of the law.
FiGUre 6.2 example of a search Warrant
List the four 
categories of 
items that can 
be seized by 
use of a search 
warrant.
Learning  
objective 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

tions to the rule.55 In fact, most searches, like most arrests, take place in the absence of a judi-
cial order. Warrantless searches and seizures can be lawful when police are in “hot pursuit” 
of a subject or when they search bags of trash left at the curb for regular collection. Because 
of the magnitude of smuggling activities in “border areas” such as airports, seaports, and 
international boundaries, a warrant normally is not needed to search property in those 
places. Furthermore, in 2006 the Court held unanimously that police officers do not need a 
warrant to enter a private home in an emergency, such as when they reasonably fear for the 
safety of the  inhabitants.56 The two most important circumstances in which a warrant is not 
needed, though, are (1) searches incidental to an arrest and (2) consent searches.
sEARCHEs inCidEnTAL To An ARREsT The most frequent exception to the warrant 
requirement involves searches incidental to arrests, so called because nearly every 
time police officers make an arrest, they also search the suspect. As long as the original 
arrest was based on probable cause, these searches are valid for two reasons, established 
by the Supreme Court in United States v. Robinson (1973):
1. The need for a police officer to find and confiscate any weapons a suspect may be 
carrying.
2. The need to protect any evidence on the suspect’s person from being destroyed.57
Law enforcement officers are, however, limited in the searches they may make during 
an arrest. These limits were established by the Supreme Court in Chimel v. California 
(1969).58 In that case, police arrived at Chimel’s home with an arrest warrant but not a 
search warrant. Even though Chimel refused their request to “look around,” the officers 
searched the entire three-bedroom house for nearly an hour, finding stolen coins in the 
process. Chimel was convicted of burglary and appealed, arguing that the evidence of the 
coins should have been suppressed. 
The Supreme Court held that the search was unreasonable. In doing so, the Court 
established guidelines as to the acceptable extent of searches incidental to an arrest. 
Primarily, the Court ruled that police may search any area within the suspect’s “immedi-
ate control” to confiscate any weapons or evidence that the suspect could destroy. The 
Court found, however, that there was no justification
for routinely searching rooms other than that in which the arrest occurs—or, for that matter, 
for searching through all desk drawers or other closed or concealed areas in that room itself. 
Such searches, in the absence of well-recognized exceptions, may be made only under the 
authority of a search warrant.59
The exact interpretation of the “area within immediate control” has been left to indi-
vidual courts, but in general it has been taken to mean the area within the reach of the 
arrested person. Thus, the Court is said to have established the “arm’s reach doctrine” in 
its Chimel decision.
sEARCHEs WiTH ConsEnT Consent searches, the second most common type of war-
rantless searches, take place when individuals voluntarily give law enforcement officers 
permission to search their persons, homes, or belongings. The most relevant factors in 
determining whether consent is voluntary are the following:
1. The age, intelligence, and physical condition of the consenting suspect.
2. Any coercive behavior by the police, such as the language used to request consent.
3. The length of the questioning and its location.60
If a court finds that a person has been physically threatened or otherwise coerced into 
giving consent, the search is invalid.61 Furthermore, the search consented to must be 
Explain when 
searches can be 
made without a 
warrant.
Learning  
objective6
Searches Incidental 
to Arrests Searches for 
weapons and evidence that 
are conducted on persons who 
have just been arrested. 
Consent Searches Searches 
by police that are made after 
the subject of the search has 
agreed to the action. In these 
situations, consent, if given of 
free will, validates a warrantless 
search.
C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   173
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
reasonable. Several years ago, the North Carolina Supreme Court invalidated a consent 
search that turned up a packet of cocaine. As part of this search, the police had pulled 
down the suspect’s underwear and shone a flashlight on his groin. The court ruled that 
a reasonable person in the defendant’s position would not consent to such an intrusive 
examination.62
The standard for consent searches was set in Schneckcloth v. Bustamonte (1973),63 
in which, after being asked, the defendant told police officers to “go ahead” and search 
his car. A packet of stolen checks found in the trunk was ruled valid evidence because 
the driver consented to the search. Numerous court decisions have also supported the 
“knock and talk” strategy, in which the law enforcement agent simply walks up to the 
door of a residence, knocks, and asks to come in and talk to the resident.64 The officer 
does not need reasonable suspicion or probable cause that a crime has taken place in this 
situation, because the decision to cooperate rests with the civilian. (For an overview of 
the circumstances under which warrantless searches are allowed, see Figure 6.3 below.)
sEARCHEs oF AuTomobiLEs
In Carroll v. United States (1925),65 the Supreme Court ruled that the law would distinguish 
among automobiles, homes, and persons in questions involving police searches. In the 
years since its Carroll decision, the Court has established that the Fourth Amendment 
does not require police to obtain a warrant to search automobiles or other movable vehi-
cles when the police have probable cause to believe that a vehicle contains contraband 
or evidence of criminal activity.66 The reasoning behind such leniency is straightforward: 
requiring a warrant to search an automobile places too heavy a burden on police officers. 
By the time the officers could communicate with a judge and obtain the warrant, the sus-
pects could have driven away and destroyed any evidence. Consequently, the Court has 
consistently held that someone in a vehicle does not have the same reasonable expecta-
tion of privacy as someone at home or even in a phone booth.
WARRAnTLEss sEARCHEs oF AuTomobiLEs For nearly three decades, police officers 
believed that if they lawfully arrested the driver of a car, they could legally make a war-
rantless search of the car’s entire front and back compartments. This understanding 
was based on the Supreme Court’s ruling in New York v. Benton (1981),67 which seemed 
FiGUre 6.3 exceptions to the requirement that officers have a search Warrant
In many instances, it would be impractical for police officers to leave a crime scene, go to a judge, and obtain a search 
warrant before conducting a search. Therefore, under the following circumstances, a search warrant is not required.
inCiDenT To lAWFUl ArresT
Police officers may search the area within immediate control of a 
person after they have arrested him or her. 
ConsenT
Police officers may search a person without a warrant if that person 
voluntarily agrees to be searched and has the legal authority to 
authorize the search. 
sToP AnD Frisk
Police officers may frisk, or “pat down,” a person if they suspect that 
the person may be involved in criminal activity or pose a danger to 
those in the immediate area. 
hoT PUrsUiT
If police officers are in “hot pursuit,” or chasing a person they have 
probable cause to believe committed a crime, and that person enters 
a building, the officers may search the building without a warrant. 
AUTomobile exCePTion
If police officers have probable cause to believe that an automobile 
contains evidence of a crime, they may, in most instances, search the 
vehicle without a warrant.  
PlAin VieW
If police officers are legally engaged in police work and happen to 
see evidence of a crime in “plain view,” they may seize it without a 
warrant. 
AbAnDoneD ProPerTy
Any property, such as a hotel room that has been vacated or 
contraband that has been discarded, may be searched and seized by 
police officers without a warrant. 
borDer seArChes
Law enforcement officers on border patrol do not need a warrant to 
search vehicles crossing the border.
Discussion Tip: Ask your students 
their opinions of the “knock and 
talk” strategy. Given that most 
civilians are unaware that they are 
free to refuse a police officer’s 
request, is this an unfair loophole for 
law enforcement? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   175
to allow this expansive interpretation of the “area within 
immediate control” with regard to automobiles.
In Arizona v. Gant (2009), however, the Court 
announced that its Benton decision had been misinter-
preted. Such warrantless searches are allowed only if (1) 
the person being arrested is close enough to the car to 
grab or destroy evidence or a weapon inside the car or (2) 
the arresting officer reasonably believes that the car con-
tains evidence pertinent to the same crime for which the 
arrest took place.68 So, for example, police will no longer be 
able to search an automobile for contraband if the driver 
has been arrested for failing to pay previous speeding 
tickets—unless the officer reasonably believes the suspect 
has the ability to reach and destroy any such contraband. 
signiFiCAnT PoWERs As you can imagine, the law 
enforcement community reacted negatively to the new 
restrictions outlined in the Gant decision.69 Police officers, however, still can conduct a 
warrantless search of an automobile based on circumstances other than the incidental-
to-an-arrest doctrine. These circumstances include probable cause of criminal activity, 
consent of the driver, and “protective searches” to search for weapons if police officers 
have a reasonable suspicion that such weapons exist.70
In addition, officers have a great deal of leeway in making automobile stops and 
searches. Crucially, as long as an officer has probable cause to believe that a traffic law has 
been broken, her or his “true” motivation for making the stop is irrelevant.71 Even if the 
officer pulls over a car based on the driver’s race, for example, if that person was indeed 
speeding or his or her car had a broken taillight, the stop is valid. To learn more about such 
“pretextual stops,” see the feature You Be the Judge—A Valid Pretext? on the following page.
THE PLAin viEW doCTRinE
The Constitution, as interpreted by our courts, provides very little protection to contra-
band in plain view. For example, suppose a traffic officer pulls over a person for speeding, 
looks in the driver’s side window, and clearly sees what appears to be a bag of heroin 
resting on the passenger seat. In this instance, under the plain view doctrine, the officer 
would be justified in seizing the drugs without a warrant.
The plain view doctrine was first enunciated by the Supreme Court in Coolidge v. 
New Hampshire (1971).72 The Court ruled that law enforcement officers may make a war-
rantless seizure of an item if four criteria are met:
1. The item is positioned so as to be detected easily by an officer’s sight or some 
other sense.
2. The officer is legally in a position to notice the item in question.
3. The discovery of the item is inadvertent. That is, the officer had not intended to 
find the item.
4. The officer immediately recognizes the illegal nature of the item. No interrogation 
or further investigation is allowed under the plain view doctrine.
Advances in technology that allow law enforcement agents to “see” beyond normal 
human capabilities have raised new issues in regard to plain view principles. Thermal 
imagers, for example, measure otherwise invisible levels of infrared radiation. These 
Plain View Doctrine The 
legal principle that objects in 
plain view of a law enforcement 
agent who has the right to 
be in a position to have that 
view may be seized without a 
warrant.
Describe the 
plain view 
doctrine and 
indicate one of 
its limitations.
Learning  
objective7
ohio state highway Patrol 
troopers talk with motorists at a 
sobriety checkpoint designed to 
deter drivers who drink or use 
drugs. What argument could 
be made that these sobriety 
checkpoints—which allow police 
to stop all drivers on a certain 
road—constitute unreasonable 
searches and seizures?
AP Photo/David Kohl
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

devices are particularly effective in detecting marijuana plants grown indoors because 
of the heat thrown off by the “grow lights” that the plants need to survive. The ques-
tion for the courts has been whether a warrantless search of a dwelling through its 
walls by means of a thermal imager violates Fourth Amendment protections of privacy. 
According to the Supreme Court, an item is not in plain view if law enforcement agents 
need the aid of technology to “see” it.73 Thus, information from a thermal imager is not 
by itself justification for a warrantless search.
ELECTRoniC suRvEiLLAnCE 
During the course of a criminal investigation, law enforcement officers may decide to use 
electronic surveillance, or electronic devices such as wiretaps or hidden microphones 
(“bugs”), to monitor and record conversations, observe movements, and trace or record 
telephone calls.
bAsiC RuLEs: ConsEnT And PRobAbLE CAusE Given the invasiveness of electronic 
surveillance, the Supreme Court has generally held that the practice is prohibited by 
the Fourth Amendment. In Burger v. New York (1967),74 however, the Court ruled that 
it was permissible under certain circumstances. That same year, Katz v. United States 
(discussed on page 171) established that recorded conversations are inadmissible as 
evidence unless certain procedures are followed. 
THE SITuATIoN Six months ago, Lieutenant Collier, a drug task force agent, arrested Hector 
Ramirez after Collier found five hundred grams of heroin in Ramirez’s late-model Ford. In 
his postarrest report, written two days after the stop, Collier described clocking Ramirez 
at seventy-nine miles per hour (mph) in a seventy mph zone before pulling him over and 
finding the illegal drugs. Evidence from the dashboard camera in Collier’s own automobile, 
however, contradicts his version of events. The recording shows that Ramirez had been 
driving the speed limit at the time of the stop. Furthermore, in court, Collier has changed his 
story, saying that he had pulled over the defendant because he thought he saw a suspicious 
object—that turned out to be a pink child’s car seat—in the back of the Ford. 
THE LAw As far as the Fourth Amendment is concerned, any subjective reasons that a police 
officer might have for stopping a suspect, including any motives based on racial stereotyping 
or bias, are irrelevant. As long as the officer has objective probable cause to believe a traffic 
violation or other wrongdoing has occurred, the stop is valid.
YouR dECISIoN No one disputes that Ramirez was in possession of the illegal drugs. The 
important question is, Did Collier have a valid, objective reason to stop Ramirez and search 
his car? If not, then the search was unconstitutional, and the heroin cannot be used against 
Ramirez in court. If you were the judge in the case, how would you rule?
[To see what a federal district judge in Tennessee did in a similar situation, go to Example 6.1 in Appendix B.]
You BE THE JudgE
A Valid Pretext?
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
176   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Electronic Surveillance  
The use of electronic 
equipment by law enforcement 
agents to record private 
conversations or observe 
conduct that is meant to be 
private.
Group Activity: Present your 
students with several different 
scenarios that involve the plain 
view doctrine. In small groups, 
have them determine whether the 
warrantless seizure in each scenario 
was constitutional, given the 
doctrine’s four requirements.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In general, law enforcement officers can use electronic surveillance only if consent 
is given by one of the parties to be monitored, or, in the absence of such consent, with a 
warrant.75 For the warrant to be valid, it must:
1. Detail with “particularity” the conversations that are to be overheard.
2. Name the suspects and the places that will be under surveillance.
3. Show probable cause to believe that a specific crime has been or will be committed.76
Once the specific information has been gathered, the law enforcement officers must end 
the electronic surveillance immediately.77 In any case, the surveillance cannot last more 
than thirty days without a judicial extension.
FoRCE muLTiPLying More pervasive forms of electronic surveillance are allowed under 
the theory that people who are in public places have no reasonable expectation of pri-
vacy.78 For example, many Americans would be surprised to learn how often they are 
under the watchful eye of law enforcement via closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras. 
CCTV surveillance relies on strategically placed video cameras to record and transmit 
all activity in a targeted area, such as on a public street or in a government building. The 
images are monitored in real time so that law enforcement personnel can investigate any 
suspicious or criminal activity captured by cameras.
The growing use of traffic cameras has also been a boon to law enforcement. Police in 
Red Bank, Tennessee, were recently able to catch four suspects in a violent home invasion by 
reviewing video of the suspects’ car captured by a nearby red-light camera. CCTV and traffic 
cameras are examples of force multipliers, so called because these forms of electronic sur-
veillance allow law enforcement agencies to expand their capabilities without a significant 
increase in personnel. Speaking of CCTV, Brian Harvey, a deputy chief with the Dallas Police 
Department, says, “One camera operator can cover a lot more area than field officers can.”79
C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   177
An increasingly popular force multiplier involves computerized infrared cameras that take 
digital photos of license plates. Usually mounted on police cars, these automatic license-
plate recognition (ALPR) devices convert the images to text. Then the numbers are 
instantly checked against databases that contain records of the license plates of stolen 
cars and other vehicles driven by a wide variety of targets, from wanted felons to citizens 
with unpaid parking tickets. In heavy-traffic areas, ALPR units can check thousands of 
license plates each hour. After adding ALPR technology to its patrol cars in December 
2011, the Gloucester Township (New Jersey) police used the system to arrest twenty 
wanted criminals in just under a month.
tHinking about automatic licenSe Plate 
Recognition: How might law enforcement use ALPR not only to identify “hot” 
license plates but also as part of ongoing criminal investigations? For example, how 
might narcotics officers on a stakeout of a suspected drug dealer’s house take advantage 
of ALPR technology? 
Automatic License Plate Recognition
Monica Almeida/New York Times/Redux Pictures
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have your students 
critique the concept of pretextual 
stops, discussed on the previous 
page. Do they think such stops 
should be allowed? Why or why 
not? Why might it be difficult, or 
undesirable, for the courts to stop 
this practice?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
ConsTiTuTionAL ConCERns Critics of CCTV cameras, ALPR, and other forms of high-tech 
surveillance contend that these technologies infringe on individual privacy, allowing law 
enforcement to create “digital dossiers” on people without probable cause.80 As long as the 
periods of public surveillance are relatively short, however, courts have ruled that such 
tracking of a person or a vehicle on public streets does not constitute a Fourth Amendment 
search, because no reasonable expectation of privacy exists in such situations.81 
That outlook changes when the period of surveillance in question is much longer. 
Consider the case of suspected Washington, D.C., drug kingpin Antoine Jones. Without 
first getting a warrant, police placed a Global Positioning System (GPS) device on Jones’s 
Grand Jeep Cherokee, allowing them to track his movements for a month using satellite 
technology. With this information, prosecutors were able to convict Jones of conspiring to 
sell cocaine, and he was sentenced to life in prison. In 2012, the Supreme Court overturned 
the conviction, holding that the installation of the GPS device constituted a search and the 
police’s failure to obtain a warrant rendered much of the evidence against Jones invalid.82
soCiAL mEdiA sEARCHEs
As we saw in Chapter 4, law enforcement agents now routinely use social networking 
sites such as Facebook and Twitter to investigate criminal behavior. Given that the 
widespread use of these sites is a relatively new phenomenon, the law governing such 
investigations has yet to settle. From 2008 to 2011, federal law enforcement agents did 
obtain at least two dozen warrants to search individuals’ Facebook accounts, following 
the procedure for electronic surveillance detailed on pages 176–177.83 At the same time, 
Facebook receives up to twenty police requests for information a day and often complies 
with such requests. In such instances, neither the government nor the social networking 
company is required to inform the suspect of law enforcement’s interest in her or his 
personal profile.84
Furthermore, even though most social networking sites forbid individuals from 
using fake identities, police officers routinely do so when investigating criminal activity. 
On a number of occasions, law enforcement agents have gone “friending undercover” 
online to apprehend sex offenders, thwart drug deals, find missing persons, and monitor 
juvenile misconduct. As of yet, no court decision or law prohibits such behavior. When 
the issue does arise, it will inevitably focus on whether people have a reasonable expecta-
tion of privacy when it comes to posting information about themselves online.85
SELFASSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 184.
A search is a governmental intrusion on the ____________ of an individual. To protect these 
rights, law enforcement agents must procure a ____________ ____________ before examining 
a suspect’s home or personal possessions. During a properly executed search, officers may 
____________ any items that may be used as evidence or that are inherently illegal to possess. 
Law enforcement agents do not need a judge’s prior approval to conduct a search incidental 
to an ____________ or when the subject of the search gives his or her ____________. 
THE inTERRogATion  
PRoCEss And miRAndA
After the Pledge of Allegiance, there is perhaps no recitation that comes more readily to 
the American mind than the Miranda warning:
Social media and CJ 
The electronic Privacy 
information Center is a 
public-interest research 
center that focuses on a 
number of online privacy 
issues, including social 
media privacy.  To access 
its Facebook page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 
184, which asks them to think 
about whether it is unethical 
for police officers to use fake 
social networking profiles in their 
investigations.
Discussion Tip: Ask your students 
if they agree or disagree with the 
statement that “people who are in 
public places have no reasonable 
expectation of privacy.” How 
might society benefit from the 
widespread use of CCTV cameras 
in public places? What might be 
some of the drawbacks of this 
strategy?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

You have the right to remain silent. If you give up that right, anything you say can and will be 
used against you in a court of law. You have the right to speak with an attorney and to have the 
attorney present during questioning. If you so desire and cannot afford one, an attorney will be 
appointed for you without charge before questioning.
The Miranda warning is not a mere prop. It strongly affects one of the most important 
aspects of any criminal investigation—the interrogation, or questioning of a suspect from 
whom the police want to get information concerning a crime, and perhaps a confession. 
THE LEgAL bAsis FoR miRAndA
The Fifth Amendment guarantees protection against self-incrimination. In other words, as we 
shall see again in Chapter 8, a defendant cannot be required to provide information about his 
or her own criminal activity. A defendant’s choice not to incriminate himself or herself cannot 
be interpreted as a sign of guilt by a jury in a criminal trial. A confession, or admission of guilt, 
is by definition a statement of self-incrimination. How, then, to reconcile the Fifth Amendment 
with the critical need of law enforcement officers to gain confessions? The answer lies in the 
concept of coercion, or the use of physical or psychological duress to obtain a confession.
When torture or brutality is involved, it is relatively easy to determine that a confes-
sion was improperly coerced and is therefore invalid. When the Supreme Court handed 
down its decision in Miranda v. Arizona (1966),86 establishing the Miranda rights, it 
was more concerned with the possibility of what Columbia University law professor  
H. Richard Uviller called inherent coercion. This terms refers to the assumption that even 
if a police officer does not lay a hand on a suspect, the general atmosphere of an inter-
rogation is in and of itself coercive.87
Although the Miranda case is best remembered for the procedural requirement 
it spurred, at the time the Supreme Court was more concerned about the treatment of 
suspects during interrogation. (See the feature Landmark Cases—Miranda v. Arizona on 
the following page.) The Court found that routine police interrogation strategies, such as 
leaving suspects alone in a room for several hours before questioning them, were inher-
ently coercive. Therefore, the Court reasoned, every suspect needed protection from 
coercion, not just those who had been physically abused. The Miranda warning is a result 
of this need. In theory, if the warning is not given to a suspect before an interrogation, the 
fruits of that interrogation, including a confession, are invalid.
WHEn A miRAndA WARning is REquiREd
As we shall see, a Miranda warning is not necessary under several conditions, such as 
when no questions are asked of the suspect. Generally, Miranda requirements apply 
only when a suspect is in custody. In a series of rulings 
since Miranda, the Supreme Court has defined custody 
as an arrest or a situation in which a reasonable person 
would not feel free to leave.88 Consequently, a custodial 
interrogation occurs when a suspect is under arrest or 
is deprived of her or his freedom in a significant manner. 
Remember, a Miranda warning is only required before a 
custodial interrogation takes place. For example, if four 
police officers enter a suspect’s bedroom at 4:00 a.m., wake 
him, and form a circle around him, then they must give 
him a Miranda warning before questioning. Even though 
the suspect has not been arrested, he will “not feel free to 
go where he please[s].”89
Interrogation The direct 
questioning of a suspect to 
gather evidence of criminal 
activity and to try to gain a 
confession.
Coercion The use of physical 
force or mental intimidation 
to compel a person to do 
something—such as confess to 
committing a crime—against 
her or his will.
Miranda Rights The 
constitutional rights of accused 
persons taken into custody by 
law enforcement officials, such 
as the right to remain silent and 
the right to counsel.
Custody The forceful 
detention of a person, or the 
perception that a person is not 
free to leave the immediate 
vicinity.
Custodial Interrogation  
The questioning of a suspect 
after that person has been 
taken into custody. In this 
situation, the suspect must be 
read his or her Miranda rights 
before interrogation can begin.
What aspects of the situation 
shown in this photo indicate 
that the Aspen (Colorado) 
police officer is required to 
“Mirandize” the suspect before 
asking him any questions, even 
if he never formally places the 
suspect under arrest?
Photo by Chris Hondros/Getty Images
C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   179
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
WHEn A miRAndA WARning is noT REquiREd
A Miranda warning is not necessary in a number of situations:
1. When the police do not ask the suspect any questions that are testimonial in 
nature. Such questions are designed to elicit information that may be used against 
the suspect in court. Note that “routine booking questions,” such as the suspect’s 
name, address, height, and eye color, do not require a Miranda warning. Even 
though answering these questions may provide incriminating evidence (especially 
if the person answering is a prime suspect), the Supreme Court has held that they 
In 1963, a rape and 
kidnapping victim 
identified produce worker 
Ernesto Miranda as her 
assailant in a lineup. 
Detectives questioned 
Miranda for two hours 
concerning the crime, 
at no time informing 
him that he had a right 
to have an attorney 
present. When the 
police emerged from 
the session, they had 
a signed statement by 
Miranda confessing to 
the crimes. He was subsequently convicted and sentenced 
to twenty to thirty years in prison. After the conviction was 
confirmed by the Arizona Supreme Court, Miranda appealed 
to the United States Supreme Court, claiming that he had 
not been warned that any statement he made could be used 
against him, and that he had a right to counsel during the 
interrogation. The Miranda case was one of four examined by 
the Court that dealt with the question of coercive questioning.
Miranda v. Arizona
United states supreme Court
384 U.s. 436 (1966)
laws.findlaw.com/Us/384/436.html
in tHe WoRDS oF tHe couRt...
ChieF JUsTiCe WArren, mAJoriTy oPinion
* * * *
The cases before us raise questions which go to the roots 
of our concepts of American criminal jurisprudence: the 
restraints society must observe consistent with the Federal 
Constitution in prosecuting individuals for crime. More 
specifically, we deal with the admissibility of statements 
obtained from an individual who is subjected to custodial 
police interrogation and the necessity for procedures which 
assure that the individual is accorded his privilege under the 
Fifth Amendment to the Constitution not to be compelled to 
incriminate himself.
* * * *
It is obvious that such an interrogation environment 
is created for no purpose other than to subjugate the 
individual to the will of his examiner. This atmosphere carries 
its own badge of intimidation. To be sure, this is not physical 
intimidation, but it is equally destructive of human dignity. 
The current practice of incommunicado interrogation is at 
odds with one of our Nation’s most cherished principles—
that the individual may not be compelled to incriminate 
himself. Unless adequate protective devices are employed 
to dispel the compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings, 
no statement obtained from the defendant can truly be the 
product of his free choice.
Decision 
The Court overturned Miranda’s conviction, stating that 
police interrogations are, by their very nature, coercive 
and therefore deny suspects their constitutional right 
against self-incrimination by “forcing” them to confess. 
Consequently, any person who has been arrested and 
placed in custody must be informed of his or her right to 
be free from self-incrimination and to be represented by 
counsel during any interrogation. In other words, suspects 
must be told that they do not have to answer police 
questions. To accomplish this, the Court established the 
Miranda warning.
FoR cRitical analYSiS
What is meant by the phrase “coercion can be mental as well 
as physical”? What role does the concept of “mental coercion” 
play in Chief Justice Warren’s opinion?
LANdmARK CAsEs: miranda v. Arizona
AP/Wide World
Ernesto Miranda
Indicate 
situations 
in which a 
Miranda 
warning is 
unnecessary.
Learning  
objective 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   181
are absolutely necessary if the police are to do their 
jobs.90 (Imagine the officer not being able to ask a 
suspect her or his name.)
2. When the police have not focused on a suspect and 
are questioning witnesses at the scene of a crime.
3. When a person volunteers information before the 
police have asked a question.
4. When the suspect has given a private statement to 
a friend or some other acquaintance. Miranda does 
not apply to these statements so long as the govern-
ment did not orchestrate the situation.
5. During a stop and frisk, when no arrest has been made.
6. During a traffic stop.91
Suspects can waive their Fifth Amendment rights 
and speak to a police officer, but only if the waiver is made 
voluntarily. Silence on the part of a suspect does not mean 
that his or her Miranda protections have been relinquished. To waive their rights, sus-
pects must state—either in writing or orally—that they understand those rights and that 
they will voluntarily answer questions without the presence of counsel.
To ensure that the suspect’s rights are upheld, prosecutors are required to prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the suspect “knowing and intelligently” waived his 
or her Miranda rights.92 To make the waiver perfectly clear, police will ask suspects two 
questions in addition to giving the Miranda warning:
1. Do you understand your rights as I have read them to you?
2. Knowing your rights, are you willing to talk to another law enforcement officer or me?
If the suspect indicates that she or he does not want to speak to the officer, thereby 
invoking her or his right to silence, the officer must immediately stop any questioning.93 
Similarly, if the suspect requests a lawyer, the police can ask no further questions until 
an attorney is present.94 
THE FuTuRE oF miRAndA
“Miranda has become embedded in routine police practice to the point where the 
warnings have become part of our national culture,” wrote then chief justice William 
Rehnquist over a decade ago.95 This may be so, but at the same time, many legal scholars 
believe that a series of Supreme Court rulings have eroded Miranda’s protections. “It’s 
death by a thousand cuts,” says Jeffrey L. Fisher of the National Association of Criminal 
Defense Lawyers, who believes the Court is “doing everything it can to ease the admis-
sibility of confessions that police wriggle out of suspects.”96 
voLunTARy sTATEmEnTs  One such exception, created by the Supreme Court in 2004, 
is crucial to understanding the status of the Miranda rights in current criminal law. 
The case involved a Colorado defendant who voluntarily told the police the location 
of his gun (which, being an ex-felon, he was not allowed to possess) without being 
read his rights.97 The Court upheld the conviction, finding that the Miranda warning is 
merely prophylactic. In other words, it is only intended to prevent violations of the Fifth 
Amendment. Because only the gun, and not the defendant’s testimony, was presented 
at trial, the police had not violated the defendant’s constitutional rights. In essence, 
A los Angeles police officer 
reads a handcuffed “suspect” 
his Miranda rights during 
a training exercise. Does a 
police officer need to take this 
action every time he or she 
arrests a suspect? If not, under 
what circumstances must an 
officer administer the Miranda 
warning? 
Kim Kulish/Corbis
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Suppose a suspect 
answers some questions, and then 
stops and demands to see her or 
his lawyer. Do students feel that 
the suspect should be allowed to 
invoke Miranda in the middle of an 
interrogation? Why or why not?
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students do discuss whether 
the Supreme Court should put an 
age limit on the Miranda warnings.  
In other words, at what age might a 
person be considered too young to 
understand the rights involved?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the Court was ruling that the “fruit of the poisoned tree” doctrine, discussed earlier in 
this chapter, does not bar the admission of physical evidence that is discovered based 
on voluntary statements by a suspect who has not been “Mirandized.”98 (See Figure 6.4 
above for a rundown of other significant Court rulings that have weakened the Miranda 
requirements over the past two decades.)
RECoRding ConFEssions Miranda may eventually find itself obsolete regardless of any 
decisions made in the courts. A relatively new trend in law enforcement has been for 
agencies to record interrogations and confessions digitally. Several states now require 
that all interrogations of suspects of serious felonies be recorded, and hundreds of law 
enforcement agencies voluntarily engage in the practice. Some scholars have suggested 
that recording all custodial interrogations would satisfy the Fifth Amendment’s prohibi-
tion against coercion and thus render the Miranda warning unnecessary. 
SELFASSESSmENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 184.
Miranda requirements apply only when law enforcement agents have the suspect 
in ____________. The Miranda warning is only required ____________ a custodial 
interrogation takes place. A suspect can _____ his or her Miranda rights, but this must be 
done “knowingly and intentionally.” If the suspect indicates that he or she does not wish 
to speak, the police officer must ____________ stop any questioning. The suspect can 
also end questioning any time by requesting the presence of an ____________. 
FiGUre 6.4 supreme Court Decisions eroding Miranda rights
New York v. Quarles (467 U.S. 649 [1984]). 
This case established the “public-
safety” exception to the Miranda rule. It 
concerned a police officer who, after feeling 
an empty shoulder holster on a man he had 
just arrested, asked the suspect the location 
of the gun without informing him of his 
Miranda rights. The Court ruled that the  
gun was admissible as evidence and that 
the need for police officers to protect the 
public is more important than a suspect’s 
Miranda rights. 
Moran v. Burbine (475 U.S. 412 [1986]).  
This case established that police 
officers are not required to tell suspects 
undergoing custodial interrogation that 
their attorney is trying to reach them. 
The Court ruled that events that the suspect 
could have no way of knowing about 
have no bearing on his ability to waive his 
Miranda rights. 
Arizona v. Fulminante (499 U.S. 279 [1991]). 
in this very important ruling, the Court 
held that a conviction is not automatically 
overturned if the suspect was coerced into 
making a confession. If the other evidence 
introduced at the trial is strong enough to 
justify a conviction without the confession, 
then the fact that the confession was illegally 
gained can be, for all intents and purposes, 
ignored. 
Texas v. Cobb (532 U.S. 162 [2001]). When a 
suspect refuses to waive his or her Miranda 
rights, a police officer cannot lawfully continue 
the interrogation until the suspect’s attorney 
arrives on the scene. In this case, however, 
the Court held that a suspect may be 
questioned without having a lawyer present 
if the interrogation does not focus on the 
crime for which he or she was arrested, 
even though it does touch on another, closely 
related, offense. 
Florida v. Powell (559 U.S. ___ [2010]). 
Florida’s version of the Miranda warning 
informs suspects that they have a right “to 
talk with an attorney” but does not clearly 
inform them of the right to a lawyer during 
any police interrogation. The Court upheld 
Florida’s warning, ruling that different 
jurisdictions may use whatever version 
of the Miranda warning they please, as 
long as it reasonably conveys the essential 
information about a suspect’s rights.
Howes v. Fields (556 U.S. ___ [2012]) The 
Court ruled that a Michigan jail inmate 
who was questioned by sheriff’s deputies 
in a conference room for five to seven 
hours was not improperly coerced into 
confessing to a sex crime. In general, 
people already in prison and jail are not 
in “custody” for purposes of determining 
custodial interrogation, and therefore a 
Miranda warning is not required before 
questioning them.
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
whether they believe that all 
interrogations and confessions 
should be digitally recorded. Do 
students see any unintended 
consequences of such a 
requirement? Would it make the 
Miranda warning unnecessary? 
Why or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   183
CHAPTER SummARY
Outline the four major sources that may 
provide probable cause. (a) Personal 
observation, usually due to an officer’s per-
sonal training, experience, and expertise; (b) information, 
gathered from informants, eyewitnesses, victims, police bul-
letins, and other sources; (c) evidence, which often has to 
be in plain view; and (d) association, which generally must 
involve a person with a known criminal background who is 
seen in a place where criminal activity is openly taking place. 
Explain the exclusionary rule and the 
exceptions to it. This rule prohibits ille-
gally seized evidence, or evidence obtained 
by an unreasonable search and seizure in an inadmissible 
way, from being used against the accused in criminal court. 
Exceptions to the exclusionary rule are the “inevitable dis-
covery” exception established in Nix v. Williams and the 
“good faith” exception established in United States v. Leon and  
Herring v. United States. 
Distinguish between a stop and a frisk, 
and indicate the importance of the case 
Terry v. Ohio. Although the terms stop and 
frisk are often used in concert, a stop is the separate act of 
detaining a suspect when an officer reasonably believes that 
a criminal activity is about to take place. A frisk is the physical  
pat-down of a suspect. In Terry v. Ohio, the Supreme Court 
ruled that an officer must have “specific and articulable 
facts” before making a stop, but those facts may be “taken 
together with rational inferences.”
List the four elements that must be pres-
ent for an arrest to take place. (a) Intent,  
(b) authority, (c) seizure or detention, and 
(d) the understanding of the person that he or she has been 
arrested.
List the four categories of items that can 
be seized by use of a search warrant. 
(a)  Items resulting from a crime, such as 
stolen goods; (b) inherently illegal items; (c) evidence of the 
crime; and (d) items used in committing the crime.
Explain when searches can be made 
without a warrant. Searches and seizures 
can be made without a warrant if they are 
incidental to an arrest (but they must be reasonable); when 
they are made with voluntary consent; when they involve 
the “movable vehicle” exception; when property has been 
abandoned; and when items are in plain view, under certain 
restricted circumstances (see Coolidge v. New Hampshire).
Describe the plain view doctrine and 
indicate one of its limitations. Under the 
plain view doctrine, police officers are justi-
fied in seizing an item if (a) the item is easily seen by an offi-
cer who is legally in a position to notice it; (b) the discovery 
of the item is unintended; and (c) the officer, without further 
investigation, immediately recognizes the illegal nature of the 
item. An item is not in plain view if the law enforcement agent 
needs to use technology such as a thermal imager to “see” it.
Indicate situations in which a Miranda 
warning is unnecessary. (a) When no 
questions that are testimonial in nature 
are asked of the suspect; (b) when there is no suspect and 
witnesses in general are being questioned at the scene of a 
crime; (c) when a person volunteers information before the 
police ask anything; (d) when a suspect has given a private 
statement to a friend without the government orchestrat-
ing it; (e) during a stop and frisk when no arrests have been 
made; and (f) during a traffic stop. 
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective 2
Learning  
objective 3
Learning  
objective 4
Learning  
objective 5
Learning  
objective 6
Learning  
objective 7
Learning  
objective 8
QuESTIoNS FoR CRITICAL ANALYSIS
1. What are the two most significant legal concepts contained 
in the Fourth Amendment, and why are they important?
2. Suppose that a police officer stops a person who “looks 
funny.” The person acts strangely, so the police officer 
decides to frisk him. The officer feels a bulge in the 
suspect’s coat pocket, which turns out to be a bag of 
cocaine. Would the arrest for cocaine possession hold up 
in court? Why or why not?
3. What if, in the case that opens this chapter, the Kentucky 
police officers had not smelled marijuana and had 
simply knocked on Hollis King’s door and asked to talk 
with him? What would have been King’s options in that  
situation?
4. Should law enforcement agents be required to get a 
search warrant before accessing records that reveal a 
cell phone user’s location? Those who think a warrant 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184   C R i M i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
is unnecessary in this situation argue that once users 
turn their phones on, they have decided to waive their 
expectations of privacy by “voluntarily” transmitting 
their location. What is your opinion of this argument?
5. Do you think it is unethical for police officers to use 
fake profiles in online social networking sites to “friend” 
suspects or crime victims as part of a criminal investiga-
tion? Why or why not?
KEY TERmS
affidavit  172
arrest  168
arrest warrant  169
coercion  179
consent searches  173
custodial interrogation  179
custody  179
electronic surveillance  176
exclusionary rule  163
exigent circumstances  169
frisk  167
fruit of the poisoned tree  163
“good faith” exception  165
“inevitable discovery”  
exception  164
interrogation  179
Miranda rights  179
plain view doctrine  175
probable cause  161
racial profiling  166
search  171
search warrant  171
searches and seizures  161
searches incidental to arrests  173
seizure  172
stop  167
warrantless arrest  170
SELF ASSESSmENT ANSwER KEY
Page 165: i. unreasonable; ii. probable cause;  
iii. exclusionary; iv. evidence
Page 167: i. stop; ii. reasonable; iii. frisk
Page 170: i. custody; ii. warrant; iii. warrantless;  
iv. probable cause
Page 178: i. privacy; ii. search warrant; iii. seize;  
iv. arrest; v. consent
Page 182: i. custody; ii. before; iii. waive; iv. immediately; 
v. attorney
CouRSEmATE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTES
 1. Orin Kerr, “Police-Created Exigent Circum-
stances in Kentucky v. King,” January 5, 2011, 
at www.scotusblog.com/?p=111396.
 2. Kentucky v. King, 131 S.Ct. 1849, 1858 (2011).
 3. Ibid., 1869.
 4. Adam Liptak, “Justices Look Again at How 
Police May Search Homes,” New York Times 
(January 13, 2011), A18.
 5. Michigan v. Summers, 452 U.S. 692 (1981).
 6. Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160 (1949).
 7. Rolando V. del Carmen, Criminal Procedure 
for Law Enforcement Personnel (Monterey, CA: 
Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 1987), 63–64.
 8. Maryland v. Pringle, 540 U.S. 366 (2003).
 9. 500 U.S. 44 (1991).
10. United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984).
11. 430 U.S. 387 (1977).
12. 467 U.S. 431 (1984).
13. 468 U.S. 897 (1984).
14. 555 U.S. 135 (2009).
15. Woodson v. Indiana, No. 49A05-1106-CR-306 
(2011).
16. Karen M. Hess and Henry M. Wrobleski, 
Police Operation: Theory and Practice (St. 
Paul, MN: West Publishing Co., 1997), 122.
17. 392 U.S. 1 (1968).
18. Ibid., 20.
19. Ibid., 21.
20. See United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411 
(1981); and United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 
1 (1989).
21. United States v. Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266 (2002).
22. Ibid., 270.
23. Center for Constitutional Rights, “2011 
Data Reveals Record Number of Stop-and-
Frisks with No Change in Racial Disparities,” 
February 14, 2012, at ccrjustice.org/
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  6 :  P o l i C E  A n d  T H E  C o n s T i T u T i o n   185
newsroom/press-releases/2011-data-
reveals-record-number-of-stop-and-
frisks-no-change-racial-disparities.
24. Sarah White and Salmun Kazerounian, 
The Forgotten Constitution: Racial Profiling 
and Immigration Enforcement in Bedford 
County, Tennessee (Nashville, TN: Tennessee 
Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition, 
2011), 7.
25. Arizona Revised Statutes Sections 11- 
1051(B), 13-1509, 13-2929(C).
26. Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. ____ (2012).
27. United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696 (1983).
28. Hibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court, 542 U.S. 
177 (2004).
29. Ibid., 182.
30. Minnesota v. Dickerson, 508 U.S. 366 (1993).
31. Arizona v. Johnson, 555 U.S. 323 (2009).
32. Rolando V. del Carmen and Jeffrey T. Walker, 
Briefs of Leading Cases in Law Enforcement, 
2d ed. (Cincinnati, OH: Anderson, 1995), 
38–40.
33. Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491 (1983).
34. See also United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 
544 (1980).
35. del Carmen, 97–98.
36. 514 U.S. 927 (1995).
37. Linda J. Collier and Deborah D. Rosenbloom, 
American Jurisprudence, 2d ed. (Rochester, 
NY: Lawyers Cooperative Publishing, 1995), 
122.
38. 547 U.S. 586 (2006).
39. United States v. Banks, 540 U.S. 31, 41 (2003).
40. Hudson v. Michigan, 547 U.S. 586, 593 (2006).
41. Tom Van Dorn, “Violation of Knock-
and-Announce Rule Does Not Require 
Suppression of All Evidence Found in 
Search,” The Police Chief (October 2006), 10.
42. Wayne R. LeFave and Jerold H. Israel, 
Criminal Procedure (St. Paul, MN: West 
Publishing Co., 1985), 141–144.
43. David Orlin, Jacob Thiessen, Kelli C. 
McTaggart, Lisa Toporek, and James Pearl, 
“Warrantless Searches and Seizures,” in 
“Twenty-Sixth Annual Review of Criminal 
Procedure,” Georgetown Law Journal 85 (April 
1997), 847.
44. 445 U.S. 573 (1980).
45. 451 U.S. 204 (1981).
46. California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35 (1988).
47. Ibid.
48. 389 U.S. 347 (1967).
49. Ibid., 361.
50. 486 U.S. 35 (1988).
51. Ibid.
52. Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405 (2005).
53. Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 467 
(1971).
54. del Carmen, 158.
55. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 357 (1967).
56. Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398 (2006).
57. 414 U.S. 234–235 (1973).
58. 395 U.S. 752 (1969).
59. Ibid., 763.
60. Carl A. Benoit, “Questioning ‘Authority’: 
Fourth Amendment Consent Searches,” FBI 
Law Enforcement Bulletin (July 2008), 24.
61. Bumper v. North Carolina, 391 U.S. 543 (1968).
62. State v. Stone, 362 N.C. 50, 653 S.E.2d 414 
(2007).
63. 412 U.S. 218 (1973).
64. Jayme W. Holcomb, “Knock and Talks,” FBI 
Law Enforcement Bulletin (August 2006), 
22–32.
65. 267 U.S. 132 (1925).
66. United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798, 804–809 
(1982); and Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 
44, 52 (1970).
67. 453 U.S. 454 (1981).
68. Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. 332 (2009).
69. Adam Liptak, “Justices Significantly Cut Back 
Officers’ Searches of Cars of People They 
Arrest,” New York Times (April 22, 2009), A12.
70. Dale Anderson and Dave Cole, “Search 
and Seizure after Arizona v. Gant,” Arizona 
Attorney (October 2009), 15.
71. Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806 (1996).
72. 403 U.S. 443 (1971).
73. Kyollo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2001).
74. 388 U.S. 42 (1967).
75. 18 U.S.C. Sections 2510(7), 2518(1)(a), 2516 
(1994).
76. Christopher K. Murphy, “Electronic Surveil-
lance,” in “Twenty-Sixth Annual Review of 
Criminal Procedure,” Georgetown Law Jour-
nal 85 (April 1997), 920.
77. United States v. Nguyen, 46 F.3d 781, 783 (8th 
Cir. 1995).
78. Joseph Siprut, “Privacy Through Anonymity: 
An Economic Argument for Expanding the 
Right of Privacy in Public Places,” Pepperdine 
Law Review 33 (2006), 311, 320.
79. Quoted in Rebecca Kanable, “Dallas’ 
First Year with CCTV,” Law Enforcement 
Technology (February 2008), 35.
80. Sharon B. Franklin, “Watching the Watchers: 
Establishing Limits on Public Video 
Surveillance,” Champion (April 2008), 40.
81. United States v. Knotts, 460 U.S. 276 (1983).
82. United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. ____ (2012).
83. Reuters, “Facebook Fishing: Officials Using 
Sites to Crack Cases—Without Telling Users,” 
Chicago Tribune (July 13, 2011), 6.
84. Shirin Chahal, “Balancing the Scales of  
Justice: Undercover Investigations on Social 
Networking Sites,” Journal on Telecom-
munications and High Technology Law (Winter 
2011), 293–298.
85. Edward M. Marsico, “Social Networking 
Websites: Are MySpace and Facebook the 
Fingerprints of the Twenty-First Century?” 
Widener Law Journal 19 (2010), 967–976.
86. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
87. H. Richard Uviller, Tempered Zeal (Chicago: 
Contemporary Books, 1988), 188–198.
88. Orozco v. Texas, 394 U.S. 324 (1969); Oregon v. 
Mathiason, 429 U.S. 492 (1977); and California 
v. Beheler, 463 U.S. 1121 (1983).
89. Orozco, 325.
90. Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582 (1990).
91. del Carmen, 267–268.
92. Moran v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412 (1986).
93. Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96 (1975).
94. Fare v. Michael C., 442 U.S. 707, 723–724 
(1979).
95. Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 443 (2000).
96. Quoted in Jesse J. Holland, “High Court 
Trims Miranda Warning Rights Bit by Bit,” 
Associated Press (August 2, 2010).
97. United States v. Patane, 542 U.S. 630 (2004).
98. Ibid., 640.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   187
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Define jurisdiction and contrast geographic and subject-
matter jurisdiction.
2  Explain the difference between trial and appellate courts.
3  Outline the several levels of a typical state court system.
4  Outline the federal court system.
5  Explain briefly how a case is brought to the Supreme Court.
6  List and describe the members of the courtroom work 
group.
7  List the different names given to public prosecutors and 
indicate the general powers that they have.
8  Delineate the responsibilities of defense attorneys.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 211 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Courts and 
the Quest for 
Justice
187
PierreDesrosiers/Shutterstock
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Functions of the Courts
• The Basic Principles of the 
American Judicial System
• State Court Systems
• The Federal Court System
• Judges in the Court System
• The Courtroom Work Group
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
“F
rankly, I think Dharun Ravi should be charged with more than just inva-
sion of privacy, which is essentially calling him a ‘Peeping Tom,’” said Steven 
Goldstein of Garden State Equality, a gay rights group. “In my view, he should 
be charged with manslaughter.”1 Although it would have been practically impossible 
to prove that Ravi’s actions reached the level of manslaughter (defined on page 74), 
Goldstein’s words reflected widespread frustration with the criminal justice system’s 
response to Tyler Clementi’s suicide. “Sometimes the laws don’t adequately address the 
situation,” admitted one New Jersey official.2
On March 16, 2012, the New Jersey jury found Ravi guilty on multiple counts of 
invasion of privacy and bias intimidation. The jurors felt that, even though Ravi did not 
intend to harass or intimidate Clementi, such was the actual effect of his actions. Many 
observers disagreed with the verdict, given the lack of a violent, underlying crime. Even 
within the gay rights community, Ravi’s conviction drew a mixed reception. According to 
one activist, the verdict demonstrated that “bias crimes do not require physical weapons 
like a knife in one’s hands.”3 Another said, “I would hesitate to use the word ‘justice’ here. 
It was a difficult case.”4 In May 2012, a judge sentenced the defendant to spend thirty days 
in jail and three years on probation.
A PRAnk oR A Crime?
Clearly, there was one reason—and one reason 
only—why Dharun Ravi found himself facing criminal 
charges in a New Brunswick, New Jersey, courtroom, 
on February 24, 2012: his role in Tyler Clementi’s 
death. Eighteen months earlier, Ravi and Clementi 
had been freshman roommates at Rutgers University, 
when Ravi set up a hidden webcam in their dorm 
room. Ravi then joined Molly Wei, another Rutgers 
student, in her room, and the pair briefly watched a 
live stream of Clementi embracing another man. “I 
saw him making out with a dude. Yay,” Ravi tweeted 
soon thereafter. Two days later, Ravi attempted to 
set up another viewing of his roommate’s romantic 
activities. One day after that, Clementi took a train to 
nearby New York City and jumped to his death from 
the George Washington Bridge.
Despite these troubling circumstances, Clementi’s 
suicide was not mentioned once during Ravi’s three-
week trial. Legally, his death was irrelevant to the 
proceedings. Instead, prosecutors had charged 
Ravi with invasion of privacy for observing Clementi 
engaged in sexual contact. (Despite reports to 
the contrary, Ravi never recorded the footage or 
uploaded it onto the Internet.) In addition, Ravi was 
charged with “bias intimidation,” with prosecutors 
alleging that he had harassed his roommate because 
of Clementi’s homosexuality. Due to the nature of 
hate crime law, which we discussed in Chapter 3, Ravi 
faced a maximum sentence of ten years behind bars 
for what is normally a relatively minor offense.
On the first day of Ravi’s trial, prosecutor Julie 
McClure told jurors that the defendant deliberately 
planned to deprive Clement of his dignity. Earlier, 
she called Ravi’s actions “malicious, purposeful, 
and criminal.” In contrast, Ravi’s defense attorneys 
characterized his behavior as that of an immature 
eighteen-year-old boy. It was a “kid’s prank that 
went wrong,” contended one supporter. For his part, 
James Clementi, Tyler’s father, 
had only one request of the 
court: “[T]hat justice will be 
found.” 
Former Rutgers University 
student Dharun Ravi looks 
back at family members 
during his trial in Middlesex 
County, New Jersey, for 
invasion of privacy and 
bias intimidation.
Lucas Jackson/Reuters/Landov
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: First, have your 
students refresh their memories as 
to the meaning of manslaughter. 
Then, ask them whether Dharun 
Ravi should have been charged with 
that crime, as Steven Goldstein 
suggests. Why or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   189
In the end, was Dharun Ravi treated fairly by the court system? Famed jurist 
Roscoe Pound characterized  “justice” as society’s demand “that serious offenders be 
convicted and punished,” while at the same time “the innocent and unfortunate are not 
oppressed.”5 We can expand on this noble, if idealistic, definition. Citizens expect their 
courts to discipline the guilty, provide deterrents for illegal activities, protect civil liber-
ties, and rehabilitate criminals—all simultaneously. Over the course of the next three 
chapters, we shall examine these lofty goals and the extent to which they can be reached. 
We start with a discussion of how courts in the United States work.
FunCTions oF THE CouRTs
Simply stated, a court is a place where arguments are settled. The argument may be 
between the federal government and a corporation accused of violating environmental 
regulations, between business partners, between a criminal and the state, or between any 
number of other parties. The court provides an environment in which the basis of the 
argument can be decided through the application of the law. 
Courts have extensive powers in our criminal justice system: they can bring the 
authority of the state to seize property and to restrict individual liberty. Given that 
the rights to own property and to enjoy personal freedom are enshrined in the U.S. 
Constitution, a court’s legitimacy in taking such measures must be unquestioned by soci-
ety. This legitimacy is based on two factors: impartiality and independence.6 In theory, 
each party involved in a courtroom dispute must have an equal chance to present its 
case and must be secure in the belief that no outside factors are going to influence the 
decision rendered by the court. In reality, as we shall see over the next three chapters, it 
does not always work that way.
DuE PRoCEss AnD CRimE ConTRoL in THE CouRTs
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the criminal justice system has two sets of underlying val-
ues: due process and crime control. Due process values focus on protecting the rights 
of the individual, whereas crime control values stress the punishment and repression of 
criminal conduct. The competing nature of these two value systems is often evident in 
the nation’s courts.
THE DuE PRoCEss FunCTion The due process function of the courts is to protect individu-
als from the unfair advantages that the government—with its immense resources—auto-
matically enjoys in legal battles. Seen in this light, constitutional guarantees such as the 
right to counsel, the right to a jury trial, the right to confront one’s accusers, and protec-
tion from self-incrimination are equalizers in the “contest” between the state and the 
individual. The idea that the two sides in a courtroom dispute are adversaries is, as we 
shall discuss later in the chapter, fundamental in American courts.
THE CRimE ConTRoL FunCTion Advocates of crime control distinguish between the 
court’s obligation to be fair to the accused and its obligation to be fair to society.7 The 
crime control function of the courts emphasizes punishment and retribution—criminals 
must suffer for the harm done to society, and it is the courts’ responsibility to see that 
they do so. Given this responsibility to protect the public, deter criminal behavior, and 
“get criminals off the streets,” the courts should not be concerned solely with giving the 
accused a fair chance. Rather than using due process rules as “equalizers,” the courts 
should use them as protection against blatantly unconstitutional acts. For example, a 
Teaching Tip: Choose a high-profile 
criminal case that is currently in 
the news, but has not yet reached 
its conclusion. Have students 
determine what possible outcome 
would reflect due process values 
and what possible outcome would 
reflect crime control values.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
come up with their own definitions 
of the term “justice.” Then, ask 
them if they think that American 
courts are a place where justice 
is served. Have them explain their 
answers.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
detective who beats a suspect with a tire iron to 
get a confession has obviously infringed on the 
suspect’s constitutional rights. If, however, the 
detective uses trickery to gain a confession, the 
court should allow the confession to stand because 
it is not in society’s interest that law enforcement 
agents be deterred from outwitting criminals.
THE REHAbiLiTATion FunCTion
A third view of the court’s responsibility is based 
on the “medical model” of the criminal justice 
system. In this model, criminals are analogous to 
patients, and the courts perform the role of physi-
cians who dispense “treatment.”8 The criminal is 
seen as sick, not evil, and therefore treatment is 
morally justified. Of course, treatment varies from 
case to case, and some criminals require harsh penalties such as incarceration. In other 
cases, however, it may not be in society’s best interest for the criminal to be punished 
according to the formal rules of the justice system. Perhaps the criminal can be reha-
bilitated to become a productive member of society and thus save taxpayers the costs of 
incarceration or further punishment.
THE buREAuCRATiC FunCTion
In many ways, the crime control, due process, and rehabilitation functions of a court are 
secondary to its bureaucratic function. A court may have the general goal of protecting 
society or protecting the rights of the individual, but on a day-to-day basis that court has 
the more pressing task of dealing with the cases brought before it. 
Like any bureaucracy, a court is concerned with speed and efficiency, and loftier 
concepts such as justice can be secondary to a judge’s need to wrap up a particular case 
before six o’clock so that administrative deadlines can be met. Indeed, many observers 
feel that the primary adversarial relationship in the courts is not between the two par-
ties involved but between the ideal of justice and the reality of bureaucratic limitations.9
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
The ____________ ____________ function of American courts is to protect ____________ from 
the unfair advantages that the government enjoys during legal proceedings. In contrast, the 
____________ ____________ function of the courts emphasizes punishment—criminals must 
suffer for the harm they do to ____________. A third view of the court system focuses on the 
need to ____________ a criminal, in much the same way as a doctor would treat a patient.
THE bAsiC PRinCiPLEs oF THE  
AmERiCAn juDiCiAL sysTEm
One of the most often cited limitations of the American judicial system is its complex 
nature. In truth, the United States does not have a single judicial system, but fifty-two 
different systems—one for each state, the District of Columbia, and the federal govern-
Three trial lawyers confer 
as the judge waits at the 
Sedgwick County Courthouse 
in Wichita, Kansas. What role 
do bureaucratic requirements 
play in the functioning of a 
typical criminal court?
Jaime Oppenheimer/MCT/Landov
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ment. As each state has its own unique judiciary with its own set of rules, some of which 
may be in conflict with the federal judiciary, it is helpful at this point to discuss some 
basics—jurisdiction, trial and appellate courts, and the dual court system.
juRisDiCTion
In Latin, juris means “law,” and diction means “to speak.” Thus, jurisdiction literally 
refers to the power “to speak the law.” Before any court can hear a case, it must have 
jurisdiction over the persons involved in the case or its subject matter. The jurisdiction 
of every court, even the United States Supreme Court, is limited in some way.
gEogRAPHiC juRisDiCTion One limitation is geographic. Generally, a court can exercise 
its authority only over residents of a certain area. A state trial court, for example, normally 
has jurisdictional authority over crimes committed in a particular area of the state, such 
as a county or a district. A state’s highest court (often called the state supreme court) has 
jurisdictional authority over the entire state, and the United States Supreme Court has juris-
diction over the entire country. 
For the most part, criminal jurisdiction is determined by legislation. The U.S. 
Congress or a state legislature can determine what acts are illegal within the geographic 
boundaries it controls, thus giving federal or state courts jurisdiction over those crimes. 
One interesting geographic jurisdictional situation involves the 310 Native American 
reservations in the United States. Under federal law, tribal courts do have jurisdiction 
to prosecute tribal members for crimes committed on reservation land.10 These courts, 
however, cannot sentence most convicted defendants to more than three years in prison. 
Consequently, tribal leaders often ask the U.S. Department of Justice to prosecute serious 
crimes such as murder and rape in federal courts.
inTERnATionAL juRisDiCTion Under international law, each country has the right to create 
and enact criminal law for its territory. Therefore, the notion that a nation has jurisdiction 
over any crimes committed within its borders is well established. The situation becomes 
more delicate when one nation feels the need to go outside its own territory to enforce its 
criminal law. International precedent does, however, provide several bases for expanding 
jurisdiction across international borders.
For example, either through treaty-based agreements or case-by-case nego-
tiations, one country may decide to extradite a criminal suspect to another country. 
Extradition is the formal process in which one legal authority, such as a state or a 
nation, transfers a fugitive or a suspect to another country that has a valid claim on 
that person.  In 2011, for example, The Netherlands extradited Mohamud Said Omar to 
the United States. American officials believe that Omar, a citizen of Somalia, recruited 
about twenty young men from Minnesota to join the terrorist group al-Shabaab in that 
African country.
For legal and political reasons, some countries will not expedite criminal sus-
pects to the United States. Nevertheless, American authorities have been able to assert 
authority in such cases, particularly regarding possible terrorists. They have relied on 
the principle that our government has jurisdiction over persons who commit crimes 
against U.S. citizens even when these suspects live in a foreign country. This principle 
was cited after the drone attack that killed Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen, an event dis-
cussed in Chapter 3 (see page 90). Yemeni officials had resolutely refused to extradite 
Awlaki to the United States.11 Furthermore, some behavior, such as piracy and genocide, 
Jurisdiction The authority 
of a court to hear and decide 
cases within an area of the law 
or a geographic territory.
Extradition The process 
by which one jurisdiction 
surrenders a person accused or 
convicted of violating another 
jurisdiction’s criminal law to the 
second jurisdiction.
C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   191
Define 
jurisdiction 
and contrast 
geographic and 
subject-matter 
jurisdiction.
Learning  
objective1
Technology Tip: Have students go 
online to research the Tribal Law 
and Order Act of 2010. Ask them 
how the jurisdictional aspects of this 
legislation aim to reduce the amount 
of violent crime in the Native 
American community.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
is considered a crime against all nations collectively and, 
according to the principles of universal jurisdiction, can be 
prosecuted by any nation with custody of the wrongdoer (see 
the photo alongside). 
subjECT-mATTER juRisDiCTion Jurisdiction over subject 
matter also acts as a limitation on the types of cases a court 
can hear. State court systems include courts of general 
(unlimited) jurisdiction and courts of limited jurisdiction. 
Courts of general jurisdiction have no restrictions on the 
subject matter they may address, and therefore deal with the 
most serious felonies and civil cases. Courts of limited juris-
diction, also known as lower courts, handle misdemeanors 
and civil matters under a certain amount, usually $1,000. 
As we will discuss later in the chapter, many states 
have created special subject-matter courts that only dispose 
of cases involving a specific crime. For example, a number 
of jurisdictions have established drug courts to handle an 
overload of illicit narcotics arrests. Furthermore, under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice, the U.S. military has juris-
diction over active personnel who commit crimes, even if those crimes occur outside 
the course of duty.12 In such cases, military officials can either attempt to court-martial 
the suspect in military court or allow civilian prosecutors to handle the case in state or 
federal court. 
TRiAL AnD APPELLATE CouRTs
Another distinction is between courts of original jurisdiction and courts of appellate, or 
review, jurisdiction. Courts having original jurisdiction are courts of the first instance, or 
trial courts. Almost every case begins in a trial court. It is in this court that a trial (or 
a guilty plea) takes place, and the judge imposes a sentence if the defendant is found 
guilty. Trial courts are primarily concerned with questions of fact. They are designed to 
determine exactly what events occurred that are relevant to questions of the defendant’s 
guilt or innocence.
Courts having appellate jurisdiction act as reviewing courts, or appellate courts. In 
general, cases can be brought before appellate courts only on appeal by one of the par-
ties in the trial court. (Note that because of constitutional protections against being tried 
twice for the same crime, prosecutors who lose in criminal trial court cannot appeal the 
verdict.) An appellate court does not use juries or witnesses to reach its decision. Instead, 
its judges make a decision on whether the case should be reversed and remanded, or sent 
back to the court of original jurisdiction for a new trial. Appellate judges present written 
explanations for their decisions, and these opinions of the court are the basis for a great 
deal of the precedent in the criminal justice system.
It is important to understand that appellate courts do not determine the defen-
dant’s guilt or innocence—they only make judgments on questions of procedure. In 
other words, they are concerned with questions of law and normally accept the facts as 
established by the trial court. Only rarely will an appeals court question a jury’s decision. 
Instead, the appellate judges will review the manner in which the facts and evidence 
were provided to the jury and rule on whether errors were made in the process. 
In February 2011, Somali 
pirates killed Scott and Jean 
Adam, the American couple 
shown here, off the coast of 
Oman in the Arabian Sea. Why 
do American law enforcement 
authorities have the power to 
arrest the pirates, even though 
they are foreign citizens and 
the alleged crime took place 
far from the United States? 
Splash News/SvQuest/Newscom
Trial Courts Courts in which 
most cases usually begin and 
in which questions of fact are 
examined.
Appellate Courts Courts 
that review decisions made 
by lower courts, such as trial 
courts. 
Opinions Written statements 
by the judges expressing the 
reasons for the court’s decision 
in a case.
Explain the 
difference 
between trial 
and appellate 
courts.
Learning  
objective 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   193
THE DuAL CouRT sysTEm
As we saw in Chapter 1, America’s system of federalism allows both the federal govern-
ment and the governments of the fifty states a measure of authority over the law. As 
a result, the federal government and each of the fifty states, as well as the District of 
Columbia, have their own separate court systems. Because of the split between the federal 
courts and the state courts, this is known as the dual court system. (See Figure 7.1 above 
to get a better idea of how federal and state courts operate as distinct yet parallel entities.) 
Federal and state courts both have limited jurisdiction. Generally, federal courts 
preside over cases involving violations of federal law, and state courts preside over cases 
involving violations of state law. The distinction is not always clear, however. Federal 
courts have jurisdiction over more than four thousand crimes, many of which also exist 
in state criminal codes. Thus, concurrent jurisdiction, which occurs when two differ-
ent court systems have simultaneous jurisdiction over the same case, is quite common. 
Most often in these situations, federal and state officials will decide which of the two 
systems is best equipped to handle the case. 
In rare, high-profile instances, a defendant will receive two trials for the same crimi-
nal activity, one in federal court and one in state court.  For example, in 2008, professional 
football player Michael Vick faced state dogfighting charges in a Surry County, Virginia, 
courtroom after having being found guilty of similar charges in federal court.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
Before any court can hear a case, it must have ____________ over the persons involved or 
the ____________ ____________ of the dispute. Almost every case begins in a ____________ 
court, which is primarily concerned with determining the facts of the dispute. After this 
first trial, the participants can, under some circumstances, ask an ____________ court to 
review the proceedings for errors in applying the law. The American court system is called 
a ____________ court system because ____________ courts address violations of federal law 
and ____________ courts address violations of state law. 
Dual Court System The 
separate but interrelated court 
system of the United States, 
made up of the courts on the 
national level and the courts on 
the state level.
Concurrent Jurisdiction  
The situation that occurs when 
two or more courts have the 
authority to preside over the 
same criminal case.
U.S. District
Courts
Specialized
U.S. Courts
Federal
Administrative
Agencies
Supreme Court
of the United States
State Courts
of Appeals
State Trial Courts
of General Jurisdiction
State Administrative
Agencies
Local Trial Courts of
Limited Jurisdiction
•  Bankruptcy Courts
•  Court of Federal 
  Claims
•  Court of International 
  Trade
•  Tax Court
U.S. Courts
of Appeals
Highest
State Courts
FIGURE 7.1 The Dual Court System
Discussion Tip: Ask students if 
it seems fair that someone like 
Michael Vick could face two trials for 
the same crime. What are some of 
the ways that society might benefit 
from a defendant being tried in both 
state and federal court for the same 
criminal activity?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
sTATE CouRT sysTEms
Typically, a state court system includes several levels, or tiers, of courts. State courts may 
include (1) lower courts, or courts of limited jurisdiction, (2) trial courts of general juris-
diction, (3) appellate courts, and (4) the state’s highest court. As previously mentioned, 
each state has a different judicial structure, in which different courts have different juris-
dictions, but there are enough similarities to allow for a general discussion. Figure 7.2 
below shows a typical state court system.
CouRTs oF LimiTED juRisDiCTion
Most states have local trial courts that are limited to trying cases involving minor crimi-
nal matters, such as traffic violations, prostitution, and drunk and disorderly conduct. 
Although these minor courts usually keep no written record of the trial proceedings and 
cases are decided by a judge rather than a jury, defendants have the same rights as those 
in other trial courts. The majority of all minor criminal cases are decided in these lower 
courts. Courts of limited jurisdiction can also be responsible for the preliminary stages 
of felony cases. Arraignments, bail hearings, and preliminary hearings, all discussed in 
the next chapter, often take place in these lower courts.
Outline the 
several levels 
of a typical 
state court 
system.
Learning  
objective 3
*Courts of special jurisdiction, such as probate, family, 
or juvenile, and the so-called inferior courts, such as 
common pleas or municipal courts, may be separate 
courts or may be part of the trial court of general 
jurisdiction.
†Justices of the peace do not exist in all states. 
Their jurisdiction varies greatly from state to state
when they do exist.
DOMESTIC RELATIONS COURT
Also called family court 
or children’s court. 
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE†
AND POLICE MAGISTRATE
Lowest courts in judicial hierarchy.
Limited in jurisdiction in both civil
and criminal cases. 
PROBATE COURT
Some states call it surrogate court or 
orphans’ court. It is a special court that 
handles wills, administration of estates, 
and guardianship of minors 
and incompetents. 
DOMESTIC RELATIONS COURT
MUNICIPAL COURT
In some cities, it is customary
to have less important cases
tried by municipal justices 
or municipal magistrates. 
COUNTY COURT*
These courts, sometimes called
common pleas or district courts, 
have limited jurisdiction
in both civil and criminal cases. 
STATE SUPREME COURT
Court of final resort. Some states call it court of appeals, 
supreme judicial court, or supreme court of appeals.
SUPERIOR COURT
Highest trial court with general jurisdiction. Some states call 
it circuit court, district court, court of common pleas, or, 
in New York, supreme court. 
SUPERIOR COURT
INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURTS
About three-fourths of the states have intermediate appellate 
courts, which are intermediate appellate tribunals situated 
between the trial courts and the courts of final resort. A majority 
of cases decided by appellate court go no further.
FIGURE 7.2 A Typical State Court System
Technology Tip: Have each student 
go online to prepare a diagram of 
the court system of his or her home 
state. Does it follow the “typical” 
state court system shown in  
Figure 7.2? If not, how does it differ? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   195
Magistrates, or, in some states, munici-
pal court judges, preside over courts whose 
jurisdiction is limited to disputes between 
private individuals and to crimes punishable 
by small fines or short jail terms. Magistrate 
courts have the same limited jurisdiction as 
do justice courts in rural settings. In most 
jurisdictions, magistrates are responsible for 
providing law enforcement agents with search 
and seizure warrants, discussed in Chapter 6.
As mentioned earlier, many states have 
created specialty courts that have jurisdic-
tion over very narrowly defined areas of crimi-
nal justice. Not only do these courts remove 
many cases from the existing court system, but they also allow court personnel to 
become experts in a particular subject. Specialty courts include the following:
1. Drug courts, which deal only with illegal substance crimes.
2. Gun courts, which have jurisdiction over crimes that involve the illegal use of firearms.
3. Juvenile courts, which specialize in crimes committed by minors. (We will discuss 
juvenile courts in more detail in Chapter 13.)
4. Domestic courts, which deal with crimes of domestic violence, such as child and 
spousal abuse.
5. Mental health courts, which focus primarily on the treatment and rehabilitation of 
offenders with mental health problems.
As we will see in Chapter 10, many state and local governments are searching for cheaper 
alternatives to locking up nonviolent offenders in prison or jail. Because specialty courts 
offer a range of treatment options for wrongdoers, these courts are becoming increas-
ingly popular in today’s more budget-conscious criminal justice system. For example, 
about 2,500 drug courts are now operating in the United States, a number that is 
expected to increase as the financial benefits of diverting drug law violators from cor-
rectional facilities become more attractive to politicians.
TRiAL CouRTs oF gEnERAL juRisDiCTion
State trial courts that have general jurisdiction may be called county courts, district 
courts, superior courts, or circuit courts. In Ohio, the name is the court of common 
pleas and in Massachusetts, the trial court. (The name sometimes does not correspond 
with the court’s functions. For example, in New York the trial court is called the supreme 
court, whereas in most states the supreme court is the state’s highest court.) Courts of 
general jurisdiction have the authority to hear and decide cases involving many types of 
subject matter, and they are the setting for criminal trials.
sTATE CouRTs oF APPEALs
Every state has at least one court of appeals (known as an appellate, or reviewing, court), 
which may be an intermediate appellate court or the state’s highest court. About three-
fourths of the states have intermediate appellate courts. The highest appellate court in a 
state is usually called the supreme court, but in both New York and Maryland, the high-
est state court is called the court of appeals. The decisions of each state’s highest court 
on all questions of state law are final. Only when issues pertaining to federal law or the 
Magistrate A public civil 
officer or official with limited 
judicial authority within a 
particular geographic area, 
such as the authority to issue 
an arrest warrant.
Specialty Courts Lower 
courts that have jurisdiction 
over one specific area of 
criminal activity, such as illegal 
drugs or domestic violence.
Judge Sarah Smith, left, talks 
with an offender at her drug 
court in downtown Tulsa, 
Oklahoma. What are some of 
the benefits of drugs courts 
and other specialty courts?
Photo by Adam Wisneski/Tulsa World
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
Constitution are involved can the United States Supreme Court overrule a decision made 
by a state’s highest court. 
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
State court systems include several levels of courts. Lower courts, or courts of 
____________ jurisdiction, hear only cases involving minor criminal matters or narrowly 
defined areas of crime such as domestic violence. Trial courts of ____________ 
jurisdiction hear cases involving many different subject matters. The state courts of 
____________ make the final decisions on all questions of state law. 
THE FEDERAL CouRT sysTEm
The federal court system is basically a three-tiered structure consisting of (1) U.S. district 
courts (trial courts of general jurisdiction) and various courts of limited jurisdiction, 
(2) U.S. courts of appeals (intermediate courts of appeals), and (3) the United States 
Supreme Court.
Unlike state court judges, who are usually elected, federal court judges—including 
the justices of the Supreme Court—are appointed by the president of the United States, 
subject to the approval of the Senate. All federal judges receive lifetime appointments 
(because under Article III of the Constitution they “hold their offices during Good 
Behavior”).
u.s. DisTRiCT CouRTs
On the lowest tier of the federal court system are the U.S. district courts, or federal trial 
courts. These are the courts in which cases involving federal laws begin, and a judge or 
jury decides the case (if it is a jury trial). Every state has at least one federal district court, 
and there is one in the District of Columbia. The number of judicial districts varies over 
time, primarily owing to population changes and corresponding caseloads. At the present 
time, there are ninety-four judicial districts. The federal system also includes other trial 
courts of limited jurisdiction, such as the Tax Court and the Court of International Trade. 
u.s. CouRTs oF APPEALs
In the federal court system, there are thirteen U.S. courts of appeals—also referred to 
as U.S. circuit courts of appeals. The federal courts of appeals for twelve of the circuits 
hear appeals from the district courts located within their respective judicial circuits (see 
Figure 7.3 on the facing page). The Court of Appeals for the Thirteenth Circuit, called the 
Federal Circuit, has national appellate jurisdiction over certain types of cases, such as 
cases in which the U.S. government is a defendant. The decisions of the circuit courts of 
appeals are final unless a further appeal is pursued and granted. In that case, the matter 
is brought before the United States Supreme Court. 
THE uniTED sTATEs suPREmE CouRT
Although it reviews a minuscule percentage of the cases decided in this country each 
year, the rulings of the United States Supreme Court profoundly affect American society. 
The impact of Court decisions on the criminal justice system is equally far reaching: 
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963)13 established every American’s right to be represented by 
counsel in a criminal trial; Miranda v. Arizona (1966)14 transformed pretrial interroga-
Outline the 
federal court 
system.
Learning  
objective 4
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the federal court system’s 
Web site at www.uscourts.gov/
FederalCourts.aspx. Which federal 
courts are located in their home 
states, and what is the jurisdiction 
of these federal courts?
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the United States  
Supreme Court’s Web site at  
www.supremecourt.gov to learn 
more about the Court, the justices, 
and any recent cases.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   197
tions; Furman v. Georgia (1972)15 ruled that the death penalty was unconstitutional; and 
Gregg v. Georgia (1976)16 spelled out the conditions under which the death penalty could 
be allowed. As you have no doubt noticed from references in this textbook, the Court has 
addressed nearly every important facet of criminal law.
inTERPRETing AnD APPLying THE LAw The Supreme Court “makes” criminal justice policy 
in two important ways: through judicial review and through its authority to interpret the law. 
Judicial review refers to the power of the Court to determine whether a law or action by the 
other branches of the government is constitutional. For example, in the late 1990s, Congress 
passed a law restricting Internet sales of “crush” videos, which showed women crushing 
small animals to death with their bare feet or high heels.17 The wording of the statute prohib-
ited the sale of videos showing any form of graphic violence against animals. Several years 
after the law’s passage, Robert Stevens of Pittsville, Virginia, was sentenced to three years 
in prison for distributing videos that featured pit bull fights.  In 2010, the Supreme Court 
overturned Stevens’s conviction and invalidated the federal law as unconstitutional on the 
ground that it violated the First Amendment’s protections of freedom of expression.18
As the final interpreter of the Constitution, the Supreme Court must also determine 
the meaning of certain statutory provisions when applied to specific situations. In the 
previous chapter, you learned that a law enforcement officer must immediately stop 
questioning a suspect who invokes her or his Miranda rights (see page 180). In Maryland 
v. Shatzer (2010),19 the Court considered a situation in which a sexual abuse suspect 
invoked his Miranda rights, spent more than two years in prison (for an unrelated 
W
E
 
E
N
C
S
W
N
E
N
W
W
E
S
E
S
N
E
W
W
E
S
N
W
E
C
E
S
S
N
S
W
W
E
E
N
N
M
M
S
N
S
M
S
E
E
W
S
N
M
W
N
W
M
W
N
M
W
W
N
M
E
S
9
10
5
8
3
6
4
11
2
1
7
3
Atlanta
Maine
Vermont
1
Puerto Rico
Virgin
Islands
D.C.
Circuit
Federal
Circuit
9
9
Hawaii
Michigan
Washington, D.C.
Washington, D.C.
Legend
Circuit boundaries
State boundaries
District boundaries
Louisiana
Florida
Maryland
Delaware
New
Jersey
Pennsylvania
Connecticut
Rhode Island
Massachusetts
New 
Hampshire
New
York
9
Guam
Northern
Mariana
Islands
Boston
New York
Philadelphia
District of Columbia
Washington, D.C.
Richmond
New Orleans
Cincinnati
Chicago
St. Louis
Denver
San
Francisco
SOURCE: Administrative Ofﬁce of the United States Courts.
Texas
Miss.
Alaska
California
Nevada
Oregon
Washington
Idaho
Montana
Wyoming
Utah
Arizona
New
Mexico
Colorado
Kansas
Oklahoma
Nebraska
So.
Dakota
No. Dakota
Minnesota
Iowa
Missouri
Arkansas
Georgia
Alabama
So.
Carolina
No. Carolina
Virginia
W. Va.
Ohio
Kentucky
Tennessee
Michigan
Indiana
Illinois
Wisconsin
12
13
FIGURE 7.3 Geographic Boundaries of the Federal Circuit Courts of Appeals
Judicial Review The 
power of a court—particularly 
the United States Supreme 
Court—to review the actions 
of the executive and legislative 
branches and, if necessary, 
declare those actions 
unconstitutional.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
crime), and then waived his Miranda rights. The Court rejected the suspect’s claim that 
due to his much earlier action, the later waiver, although made willingly, “did not count.” 
Instead, the Court decided on a new rule: a Miranda invocation is good for only fourteen 
days. After that, a suspect must clearly reestablish his or her right to silence.
juRisDiCTion oF THE suPREmE CouRT The United States Supreme Court consists of 
nine justices—a chief justice and eight associate justices. The Supreme Court has origi-
nal, or trial, jurisdiction only in rare instances (set forth in Article III, Section 2, of the 
Constitution). In other words, only rarely does a case originate at the Supreme Court 
level. Most of the Court’s work is as an appellate court. It has appellate authority over 
cases decided by the U.S. courts of appeals, as well as over some cases decided in the 
state courts when federal questions are at issue.
wHiCH CAsEs REACH THE suPREmE CouRT? There is no absolute right to appeal to the 
United States Supreme Court. Although thousands of cases are filed with the Supreme Court 
each year, in 2011–2012 the Court heard only seventy-seven. With a writ of certiorari (pro-
nounced sur-shee-uh-rah-ree), the Supreme Court orders a lower court to send it the record 
of a case for review.  A party can petition the Supreme Court to issue a writ of certiorari, but 
whether the Court will do so is entirely within its discretion. More than 90 percent of the peti-
tions for writs of certiorari (or “certs,” as they are popularly called) are denied. A denial is not a 
decision on the merits of a case, nor does it indicate agreement with the lower court’s opinion. 
Therefore, the denial of the writ has no value as a precedent. 
The Court will not issue a writ unless at least four justices approve of it. This is 
called the rule of four. Although the justices are not required to give their reasons for 
refusing to hear a case, the discretionary decision generally is based on whether the legal 
issue involves a “substantial federal question.” Often, such questions arise when lower 
courts split on a particular issue. For example, in recent years different federal and state 
courts have produced varying opinions on the question of whether police officers can 
search the stored digital contents of cell phones incident to an arrest.20 To clear up confu-
sion on this increasingly important matter, the Court will likely hear a case involving cell 
phone searches in the near future. Practical considerations aside, if the justices feel 
that a case does not address an important federal law or constitutional issue, 
they will vote to deny the writ of certiorari.
suPREmE CouRT DECisions Like all appellate courts, the 
Supreme Court normally does not hear any evidence. 
The Court’s decision in a particular case is based on 
the written record of the case and the written argu-
ments (briefs) that the attorneys submit. The attor-
neys also present oral arguments—arguments 
presented in person rather than on paper—to the 
Court, after which the justices discuss the case in  
conference. The conference is strictly private—only 
the justices are allowed in the room. 
 
When the Court has reached 
a decision, the chief justice, if in the 
majority, assigns the task of writing 
the Court’s opinion to one of the 
justices. When the chief justice is 
not in the majority, the most senior 
Writ of Certiorari A request 
from a higher court asking a 
lower court for the record of a 
case. In essence, the request 
signals the higher court’s 
willingness to review the case.
Rule of Four A rule of the 
United States Supreme Court 
that the Court will not issue a 
writ of certiorari unless at least 
four justices approve of the 
decision to hear the case.
Oral Arguments The verbal 
arguments presented in person 
by attorneys to an appellate 
court.
John G. Roberts, Jr., pictured 
here, is the seventeenth chief 
justice of the United States 
Supreme Court. What does it 
mean to say that Roberts and 
the eight associate members 
of the Court “make criminal 
justice policy”?
AP Photo/Lawrence Jackson, File
Explain briefly 
how a case 
is brought to 
the Supreme 
Court.
Learning  
objective 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   199
justice voting with the majority assigns the writing of the Court’s opinion. The opinion 
outlines the reasons for the Court’s decision, the rules of law that apply, and the decision.
Often, one or more justices who agree with the Court’s decision may do so for dif-
ferent reasons than those outlined in the majority opinion. These justices may write 
 concurring opinions setting forth their own legal reasoning on the issue. Frequently, 
one or more justices disagree with the Court’s conclusion. These justices may write 
dissenting opinions outlining the reasons why they feel the majority erred. Although 
a dissenting opinion does not affect the outcome of the case before the Court, it may be 
important later. In a subsequent case concerning the same issue, a justice or attorney 
may use the legal reasoning in the dissenting opinion as the basis for an argument to 
reverse the previous decision and establish a new precedent.
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
The lowest tier of the federal court system contains U.S. ____________ courts, also 
known as federal trial courts. Appeals from this lower tier are heard in the thirteen U.S. 
____________ courts of appeals. A decision handed down by a court in this second tier is 
final unless the United States ____________ Court issues a writ of ____________, indicating 
that it has agreed to review the case. 
juDgEs in THE CouRT sysTEm
Supreme Court justices are the most visible and best-known American jurists, but in 
many ways they are unrepresentative of the profession as a whole. Few judges enjoy 
three-room office suites fitted with a fireplace and a private bath, as do the Supreme 
Court justices. Few judges have four clerks to assist them. Few judges get a yearly vaca-
tion that stretches from July through September. Most judges, in fact, work at the lowest 
level of the system, in criminal trial courts, where they are burdened with overflowing 
caseloads and must deal daily with the pettiest of criminals.
One attribute a Supreme Court justice and a criminal trial judge in any small 
American city do have in common is the expectation that they will be just. Of all the par-
ticipants in the criminal justice system, no single person is held to the same high standards 
as the judge. From her or his lofty perch in the courtroom, the judge is counted on to be 
“above the fray” of the bickering defense attorneys and prosecutors. When the other court-
room contestants rise at the entrance of the judge, they are placing the burden of justice 
squarely on the judge’s shoulders.
THE RoLEs AnD REsPonsibiLiTiEs oF TRiAL juDgEs
One of the reasons that judicial integrity is considered so important is the amount of dis-
cretionary power a judge has over the court proceedings. Nearly every stage of the trial 
process includes a decision or action to be taken by the presiding judge.
bEFoRE THE TRiAL A great deal of the work done by a judge takes place before the trial even 
starts, free from public scrutiny. These duties, some of which you have seen from a different 
point of view in the section on law enforcement agents, include determining the following:
1. Whether there is sufficient probable cause to issue a search or arrest warrant.
2. Whether there is sufficient probable cause to authorize electronic surveillance of 
a suspect.
Concurring Opinions  
Separate opinions prepared 
by judges who support the 
decision of the majority of the 
court but who want to make 
or clarify a particular point or 
to voice disapproval of the 
grounds on which the decision 
was made.
Dissenting Opinions  
Separate opinions in which 
judges disagree with the 
conclusion reached by the 
majority of the court and 
expand on their own views 
about the case.
Group Activity: In small groups, ask 
students to choose a case decided 
by the United States Supreme Court 
within the previous year, and then 
have them map out the path of that 
case to the Court.
Teaching Tip: The Oyez Project 
(www.oyez.org) provides audio 
recordings of the arguments in 
United States Supreme Court cases. 
Pick a recent or relevant case and 
play the entire recording, or clips, 
for the class.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
3. Whether enough evidence exists to justify the temporary incarceration of a suspect.
4. Whether a defendant should be released on bail, and if so, the amount of the bail.
5. Whether to accept pretrial motions by prosecutors and defense attorneys.
6. Whether to accept a plea bargain.
During these pretrial activities, the judge takes on the role of the negotiator.21 As most cases 
are decided through plea bargains rather than through trial proceedings, the judge often 
offers his or her services as a negotiator to help the prosecution and the defense “make 
a deal.” The amount at which bail is set is often negotiated as well. Throughout the trial 
process, the judge usually spends a great deal of time in his or her chambers, or office, nego-
tiating with the prosecutors and defense attorneys. 
DuRing THE TRiAL When the trial starts, the judge takes on the role of referee. In this 
role, she or he is responsible for seeing that the trial unfolds according to the dictates of 
the law and that the participants in the trial do not overstep any legal or ethical bounds. 
While doing so, the judge is expected to be neutral, determining the admissibility of 
testimony and evidence on a completely objective basis. The judge also acts as a teacher 
during the trial, explaining points of law to the jury. If the trial is not a jury trial, then 
the judge must also make decisions concerning the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
At the close of the trial, if the defendant is found guilty, the judge must decide on 
the length of the sentence and the type of sentence. (Different types of sentences, such as 
incarceration, probation, and other forms of community-based corrections, will be dis-
cussed in Chapters 9 and 10.) The sentencing phase also gives the judge a chance to make 
personal comments about the proceedings, if he or she wishes. While sentencing Dr. 
Conrad Murray to the maximum four years behind bars for the involuntary manslaugh-
ter of pop singer Michael Jackson on November 28, 2011, Los Angeles County Superior 
Court judge Michael Pastor delivered a thirty-minute scolding.  Pastor chastised the 
defendant for being motivated by a desire for “money, fame, and prestige” and criticized 
Murray for suggesting, in a documentary film, that Jackson was responsible for his own 
death. “Yikes,” said Pastor at the hearing. “Talk about blaming the victim!”22
Despite the widespread use of DNA evidence testing, old-fashioned fingerprint matching is 
still the favored forensic method for determining who was at a crime scene. (Both techniques 
were described in Chapter 5). Just over a decade ago, however, federal judge Louis H. 
Pollak, in his role as referee of a trial, became the first judge to question the scientific 
reliability of fingerprint matches. In the years since then, additional questions have been 
raised. An internal audit by the Federal Bureau of Investigation found an error rate of nearly 
1 percent for its fingerprint matches. A National Academy of Sciences report found little 
basis for claims that the process is infallible. Most recently, in 2011, Psychological Science 
magazine published the results of an experiment that found that thirty-seven qualified 
fingerprint experts mistakenly matched 0.68 percent of fingerprints to innocent persons.
CJ&TECHnoLogy
New Fingerprinting Techniques
Andrey Prokhorov/iStockphoto
Teaching Tip: Invite a local judge to 
attend class and speak to students 
about his or her educational and 
professional background, duties, and 
the challanges of the job.
Group Activity: Have the class 
attend a criminal court proceeding 
that is open to the public. Afterwards, 
break the class up into small groups 
to discuss the experience. Was it 
what your students expected? Did 
what they observed coincide with 
what they have learned about the 
judicial process?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   201
THE ADminisTRATivE RoLE Judges are also administrators and are responsible for the day-
to-day functioning of their courts. A primary administrative task of a judge is scheduling. 
Each courtroom has a docket, or calendar of cases, and it is the judge’s responsibility to keep 
the docket current. This entails not only scheduling the trial but also setting pretrial motion 
dates and deciding whether to grant attorneys’ requests for continuances, or additional time 
to prepare for the trial. Judges must also keep track of the immense paperwork generated by 
each case and manage the various employees of the court. In 1939, Congress, recognizing the 
burden of such tasks, created the Administrative Office of the United States Courts to provide 
administrative assistance for federal court judges.23 Most state court judges, however, do not 
have the luxury of similar aid, though they are supported by a court staff.
sELECTion oF juDgEs
In the federal court system, all judges are appointed by the president and confirmed by 
the Senate. It is difficult to make a general statement about how judges are selected in 
state court systems, however, because the procedure varies widely from state to state. In 
some states, such as New Jersey, all judges are appointed by the governor and confirmed 
by the upper chamber of the state legislature. In other states, such as Alabama, partisan 
elections are used to choose judges. In these elections, a judicial candidate declares alle-
giance to a political party, usually the Democrats or the Republicans, before the election. 
States such as Kentucky that conduct nonpartisan elections do not require a candidate 
to affiliate herself or himself with a political party in this manner. 
In 1940, Missouri became the first state to combine appointment and election in a 
single process. When all jurisdiction levels are counted, nineteen states and the District 
of Columbia now utilize the Missouri Plan, as this process has been labeled. The 
Missouri Plan consists of three basic steps:
• 
When a vacancy on the bench arises, candidates are nominated by a nonpartisan 
committee of citizens.
• 
The names of the three most qualified candidates are sent to the governor or exec-
utive of the state judicial system, and that person chooses who will be the judge.
Some of these imperfect matches can be attributed to human error. But it is also 
clear that there are flaws in the predominant method of fingerprint identification, 
known as ACE-V (Analysis Comparison Evaluation Verification). ACE-V usually relies on 
infrared or X-ray imaging of secretions from the body, which may be incomplete or in 
some way damaged, to produce fingerprint matches. One new method, developed by 
forensic scientists at Penn State University, reads the shape of the fingerprint without the 
damaging use of chemicals. Another, created by researchers in Australia and Illinois, uses 
gold nanoparticles to give a clearer image of the body chemicals that make up each 
fingerprint. This process can even “read” old and dry fingerprints, potentially allowing 
for “cold hits” in cases where only fingerprint evidence remains.
Thinking abouT new FingerprinT Techniques: The vast 
majority of judges still accept fingerprint evidence without hesitation. Given the studies 
noted above, what would be the pros and cons of judges telling juries that ACE-V 
fingerprint matching is not 100 percent reliable? What role, if any, should judges play in 
improving fingerprinting methods?
Docket The list of cases 
entered on a court’s calendar 
and thus scheduled to be 
heard by the court. 
Partisan Elections  
Elections in which candidates 
are affiliated with and receive 
support from political parties.
Nonpartisan Elections  
Elections in which candidates 
are presented on the ballot 
without any party affiliation.
Missouri Plan A method of 
selecting judges that combines 
appointment and election.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
• 
A year after the new judge has been installed, a “retention election” is held so that 
voters can decide whether the judge deserves to keep the post.24
The goal of the Missouri Plan is to eliminate partisan politics from the selection proce-
dure, while at the same time giving the citizens a voice in the process. (See the feature 
Comparative Criminal Justice—Back to School  below to learn about the French alterna-
tive to choosing judges through elections.)
DivERsiTy on THE bEnCH
One criticism of the Missouri plan is that the members of the selection committee, 
who are mostly white, upper-class attorneys, nominate mostly white, upper-class 
attorneys.25 In South Carolina, which uses this method to select most members of the 
judiciary, only 16 of the state’s 186 judges are African American, and only 5 of its 46 
circuit court judges are women. “There’s a perception that [the selection process] is 
tied to the good-old-boys network rather than picking the best person for the seat,” 
says one observer.26 The lack of diversity is particularly striking given that almost 30 
percent of South Carolina’s population is black, a pattern that is repeated in other 
states. Arizona’s population, for example, is 40 percent nonwhite, but the state has 
no minority supreme court justices, and minorities hold less than 20 percent of other 
state judgeships.27 
FEDERAL DivERsiTy The federal judiciary shows a similar pattern. Of the nearly 1,300 
federal judges in this country, 8 percent are African American, 5 percent are Hispanic, 
and less than 1 percent are Asian American. Furthermore, only 15 percent are women.28 
BACk To SChooL  
Elections for judges are extremely rare 
outside the United States. Indeed, only 
two nations—Japan and Switzerland—
engage in the practice, and then only in very limited 
situations. For the rest of the world, according to one 
expert, “American adherence to judicial elections is as 
incomprehensible as our rejection of the metric system.” 
Much more common, for example, is the French system, 
crafted to provide extensive training for potential judges.
French judicial candidates must pass two exams. The 
first, open to law school graduates only, combines oral and 
written sections and lasts at least four days. In some years, 
only 5 percent of the applicants overcome this hurdle. 
Not surprisingly, the pressure is intense. “It gives you 
nightmares for years afterwards,” says Jean-Marc Baissus, a 
judge in Toulouse. “You come out of [the exam] completely 
shattered.” Those who do survive the first test enter a two-
year program at the École Nationale de la Magistrature, a 
judicial training academy. This school is similar to a police 
training academy in the United States, in that candidates 
spend half of their time in the classroom and the other half 
in the courtroom.
At the end of this program, judicial candidates are 
subject to a second examination. Only those who pass 
the exam may become judges. The result, in the words 
of Mitchell Lasser, a law professor at Cornell University, is 
that French judges “actually know what the hell they are 
doing. They’ve spent years in school taking practical and 
theoretical courses on how to be a judge.” The French also 
pride themselves on creating judges who are free from the 
kind of political pressures faced by American judges who 
must go before the voters.
FoR CRITICAl AnAlySIS Do you think that the French 
system of training judges is superior to the American 
system of electing them? Before explaining your answer, 
consider that French judges lack the practical courtroom 
experience of American judges, the majority of whom 
served as lawyers earlier in their careers.
CompArATive CRiminAL jusTiCE
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to determine the judicial 
selection process (or processes) in 
their home states.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After students have 
read the “Comparative Criminal 
Justice” feature below, ask them 
why they think the United States is 
practically unique in its adherence to 
judicial elections. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   203
Of the 111 justices who have served on the United 
States Supreme Court, two have been African American: 
Thurgood Marshall (1970–1991) and Clarence Thomas 
(1991–present). In 2009, Sonia Sotomayor became the first 
Hispanic appointed to the Court and the third woman, 
following Sandra Day O’Connor (1981–2006) and Ruth 
Bader Ginsburg (1993–present). A year later, Elena Kagan 
became the fourth woman appointed to the Court.
THE imPACT oF PAsT DisCRiminATion Edward Chen, 
a federal judge for the Northern District of California, 
identifies a number of reasons for the low minority 
representation on the bench. Past discrimination in 
law schools has limited the pool of experienced minor-
ity attorneys who have the political ties, access to “old 
boy” networks, and career opportunities that lead to judgeships.29 Only recently, 
as increased numbers of minorities have graduated from law schools, have rates 
of minority judges begun to creep slowly upward. Traditionally, efforts to diversify 
American judges by race, ethnicity, and gender have been met with resistance from 
those who argue that because judges must be impartial, it makes no difference 
whether a judge is black, Asian, Hispanic, or white.30
Sherrilyn A. Ifill of the University of Maryland School of Law rejects this argument. 
She believes that “diversity on the bench” can only enrich our judiciary by introducing a 
variety of voices and perspectives into what are perhaps the most powerful positions in 
the criminal justice system. By the same token, Ifill credits the lack of diversity in many 
trial and appeals courts with a number of harmful consequences, such as more severe 
sentences for minority youths than for white youths who have committed similar crimes, 
disproportionate denial of bail to minority defendants, and the disproportionate imposi-
tion of the death penalty on minority defendants accused of killing white victims.31
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
In the federal court system, judges are appointed by the ____________ and confirmed 
by the ____________. In state court systems, however, the selection process varies. Some 
states mirror the federal system, with the ____________ making judicial appointments with 
the approval of the legislature. Others conduct either ____________ elections, in which 
political parties openly support judicial candidates, or ____________ elections, in which 
the candidate is not affiliated with any political group. Finally, a number of states rely on 
____________ selection, which combines appointment and election. 
THE CouRTRoom woRk gRouP
Television dramas often depict the courtroom as a battlefield, with prosecutors and 
defense attorneys spitting fire at each other over the loud and insistent protestations 
of a frustrated judge. Consequently, many people are somewhat disappointed when 
they witness a real courtroom at work. Rarely does anyone raise his or her voice, 
and the courtroom professionals appear—to a great extent—to be cooperating with 
each other. In Chapter 5, we discussed the existence of a police subculture, based on 
the shared values of law enforcement agents. A courtroom subculture exists as well,  
centered on the courtroom work group. 
Courtroom Work Group  
The social organization 
consisting of the judge, 
prosecutor, defense attorney, 
and other court workers. 
Before his appointment, 
New Jersey Superior Court 
judge Sohail Mohammed, a 
native of India, represented 
nearly three dozen suspects 
detained following the 9/11 
terrorist attacks. He has also 
trained more than 7,000 
law enforcement agents to 
better understand the Muslim 
American community. What are 
the benefits of having judges 
with a wide range of cultural 
experiences on the bench?
New Jersey Governor’s Office/Tim Larsen
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
The most important feature of any work group is that it is a cooperative unit, whose 
members establish shared values and methods that help the group efficiently reach its 
goals. Although cooperation is not a concept usually associated with criminal courts, it 
is in fact crucial to the adjudication process.
mEmbERs oF THE CouRTRoom woRk gRouP
The courtroom work group is made up of those individuals who are involved with the 
defendant from the time she or he is arrested until sentencing. Its most prominent 
members are the judge, the prosecutor, and the defense attorney (you will be introduced 
to the latter two shortly). Three other important courtroom participants complete the 
work group:
1. The bailiff of the court is responsible for maintaining security and order in the 
judge’s chambers and the courtroom. Bailiffs lead the defendant in and out of the 
List and 
describe the 
members of 
the courtroom 
work group.
Learning  
objective 6
F A s T  F A C T s
bAiLiFF 
job DEsCRiPTion:
• Maintain order and provide 
security in the courtroom during 
trials.
• Open and close court, call cases, 
call witnesses, and the like. 
• Escort and guard juries, prevent 
juries from having contact with 
the public.
wHAT kinD oF TRAining  
is REquiRED?
• At a minimum, a high school 
diploma or GED.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
• $30,000–$38,000
CAreerS iN CJ
shawn Davis 
bailiFF
Basically, there are two kinds of bailiffs: administrative bailiffs and criminal bailiffs. 
An administrative bailiff will handle paperwork, set up court dates, and answer 
questions about filings that the attorneys may have. A criminal bailiff is responsible 
for bringing the court to session, directing jurors, and overseeing court security, which 
involves keeping everybody—judges, attorneys, jurors, spectators, witnesses, and 
defendants—safe. In my case, I do double duty as an administrative and criminal 
bailiff. 
Violence in the courtroom is rare. Most inmates are on their best behavior 
in front of the judge. It can flare up in an instant, however, and you have to be 
constantly on guard. One time, an inmate under my control made a run for it as we 
were transporting him back to the jail from his court appearance. His leg shackles 
broke, giving him a short-lived sense of freedom. We were able to tackle him in 
front of the courthouse just before he could jump into a waiting convertible. We 
later learned that the accomplice—the inmate’s brother—was supposed to bring a 
handgun and shoot us as part of the escape plan. Another time, a defendant started 
taking off his shirt and tried to attack the victim, who had just given testimony. He 
was quickly tackled, cuffed, and carted off to jail.
social Media career Tip  
Networking is crucial. Develop as many useful social media contacts as possible, 
and cultivate those contacts. Also, reciprocate. If you help others establish online 
contacts, they are likely to remember you and return the favor.
Photo Courtesy of Shawn Davis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   205
courtroom and attend to the needs of the jurors during the trial. A bailiff, often a 
member of the local sheriff’s department but sometimes an employee of the court, 
also delivers summonses in some jurisdictions.
2. The clerk of the court has an exhausting list of responsibilities. Any plea, motion, 
or other matter to be acted on by the judge must go through this court employee. 
The large amount of paperwork generated during a trial, including transcripts, 
photographs, evidence, and any other records, is maintained by the clerk. She 
or he also issues subpoenas for jury duty and coordinates the jury selection pro-
cess. In the federal court system, judges select clerks, while state clerks are either 
appointed or, in nearly a third of the states, elected.
3. Court reporters record every word that is said during the course of the trial. They 
also record any depositions, or pretrial question-and-answer sessions in which a 
party or a witness answers an attorney’s questions under oath. 
THE juDgE in THE CouRTRoom woRk gRouP
The judge is the dominant figure in the courtroom and therefore exerts the most influ-
ence over the values and norms of the work group. A judge who runs a “tight ship” 
follows procedure and restricts the freedom of attorneys to 
deviate from regulations, while a “laissez-faire” judge allows 
more leeway to members of the work group. A judge’s personal 
philosophy also affects the court proceedings. If a judge has a 
reputation for being “tough on crime,” both prosecutors and 
defense attorneys will alter their strategies accordingly. 
Although preeminent in the work group, a judge must still 
rely on other members of the group. Ideally, the judge should 
be the least informed member of the trio. Like a juror, the judge 
generally learns the facts of the case as they are presented by the 
attorneys. If the attorneys do not properly present the facts, then the judge is hampered in 
making rulings. 
THE PRosECuTion
If the judge is, as we suggested on page 200, the referee of the courtroom, then the pros-
ecutor and the defense attorney are its two main combatants. On the side of the gov-
ernment, acting in the name of “the people,” the public prosecutor tries cases against 
criminal defendants. The public prosecutor in federal criminal cases is called a U.S. attor-
ney. In cases tried in state or local courts, the public prosecutor may be referred to as a 
 state’s attorney, state prosecutor, district attorney, county attorney, or city attorney. Given 
their great autonomy, prosecutors are generally considered the most dominant figures in 
the American criminal justice system. In some jurisdictions, the district attorney is the 
chief law enforcement officer, with broad powers over police operations. 
Prosecutors have the power to bring the resources of the state against the individ-
ual, and they hold the legal keys to meting out or withholding punishment.32 Ideally, this 
power is balanced by a duty of fairness and a recognition that the prosecutor’s ultimate 
goal is not to win cases, but to see that justice is done. In Berger v. United States (1935), 
Justice George Sutherland called the prosecutor 
in a peculiar and very definite sense the servant of the law, the twofold aim of which is that 
guilt shall not escape or innocence suffer. He may prosecute with earnestness and vigor—
indeed, he should do so. But, while he may strike hard blows, he is not at liberty to strike 
Public Prosecutor An 
individual, acting as a 
trial lawyer, who initiates 
and conducts cases in the 
government’s name and on 
behalf of the people.
“A judge is not supposed to know 
anything about the facts . . . 
until they have been presented 
in evidence and explained to 
him at least three times.”
— lord chief Justice parker, 
British judge (1961)
List the different 
names given 
to public 
prosecutors and 
indicate the 
general powers 
that they have.
Learning  
objective7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
foul ones. It is as much his duty to refrain from improper methods calculated to produce a 
wrongful conviction as it is to use every legitimate means to bring about a just one.33
In part to lessen the opportunity for “foul” behavior by prosecutors, they are not per-
mitted to keep from the defendant evidence that may be useful in showing his or her 
innocence.34 For example, in 1995, Juan Smith was convicted of five murders at a party in 
New Orleans and eventually sentenced to death. The only eyewitness to the crime gave 
conflicting comments to police, including that he could not “ID anyone because [he] 
couldn’t see faces.”35 Obviously, Smith’s defense attorneys could have used such state-
ments to create doubt in the jurors’ minds concerning their client’s guilt. Because pros-
ecutors never provided them with this evidence, in 2012 the Supreme Court overturned 
Smith’s conviction and ordered a new trial.36
THE oFFiCE oF THE PRosECuToR As we have just seen, when he or she is acting as an 
 officer of the law during a criminal trial, there are limits on the prosecutor’s conduct. 
During the pretrial process, however, prosecutors have a great deal of discretion in mak-
ing the following important decisions:
1. Whether an individual who has been arrested by the police will be charged with a 
crime.
2. The level of the charges to be brought against the suspect.
3. If and when to stop the prosecution.37
There are more than eight thousand prosecutor’s offices around the country, serving 
state, county, and municipal jurisdictions. Even though the attorney general is the 
chief law enforcement officer in any state, she or he has limited (and in some states, no) 
control over prosecutors within the state’s boundaries.
Each jurisdiction has a chief prosecutor, who is sometimes appointed but more 
often elected. As an elected official, he or she typically serves a four-year term, though 
in some states, such as Alabama, the term is six years. In smaller jurisdictions, the chief 
prosecutor has several assistants, and they work closely together. In larger ones, the 
chief prosecutor may have numerous assistant prosecutors, many of whom she or he 
rarely meets. Assistant prosecutors—for the most part, young attorneys recently gradu-
ated from law school—may be assigned to particular sections of the organization, such 
as criminal prosecutions in general or areas of special prosecution, such as narcotics or 
gang crimes. (See Figure 7.4 on the facing page for the structure of a typical prosecutor’s 
office.)
THE PRosECuToR As ELECTED oFFiCiAL The chief prosecutor’s autonomy is not absolute. 
As an elected official, she or he must answer to the voters. (There are exceptions: U.S. 
attorneys are nominated by the president and approved by the Senate, and chief prose-
cutors in Alaska, Connecticut, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and the District of Columbia are 
either appointed or hired as members of the attorney general’s office.) The prosecutor 
may be part of the political machine. In many jurisdictions, the prosecutor must declare 
a party affiliation and is expected to reward fellow party members with positions in the 
district attorney’s office if elected. 
The post is often seen as a “stepping-stone” to higher political office, and many 
prosecutors have gone on to serve in legislatures or as judges. Sonia Sotomayor (see 
the photo on the facing page), the first Hispanic member of the United States Supreme 
Court, started her legal career in 1979 as an assistant district attorney in New York 
City. While at that job, she first came to public attention by helping to prosecute the 
Social media and CJ 
Like police departments,  
many prosecutors’ offices 
have set up Facebook pages 
to keep the communities 
they serve in touch with local 
crime news. To access the 
Cuyahoga County (ohio) 
Prosecutor’s office Facebook 
page, visit the Criminal Justice 
CourseMate at cengagebrain.
com and select the Web Links 
for this chapter.
Attorney General The chief 
law officer of a state; also, the 
chief law officer of the nation.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

“Tarzan Murderer,” an athletic criminal responsible for at least twenty burglaries and 
four killings.
Like judges, who are the other elected members of the courtroom work group, 
prosecutors are subject to community pressures. Following Tyler Clementi’s suicide, 
described in the opening of this chapter, prosecutors initially seemed disinclined to 
bring any charges against Dharun Ravi. Nonetheless, according to a former New Jersey 
prosecutor, because of pressure from antibullying groups and gay rights groups, as well 
as global media attention, the case was “one that had to be prosecuted.”38 Furthermore, 
when prosecutorial misconduct leads to wrongful convictions of innocent defendants, 
that misconduct is often explained—though not excused—as being the result of public 
demands that prosecutors be “tough on crime.”
THE DEFEnsE ATToRnEy
The media provide most people’s perception of defense counsel: the idealistic public 
defender who nobly serves the poor, the “ambulance chaser,” or the celebrity attorney in the 
$3,000 suit. These stereotypes, though not entirely fictional, tend to obscure the crucial role 
that the defense attorney plays in the criminal justice system. Most persons charged with 
crimes have little or no knowledge of criminal procedure. Without assistance, they would 
be helpless in court. By acting as a staunch advocate for her or his client, the defense attor-
ney (ideally) ensures that the government proves every point against that client beyond a 
reasonable doubt, even for cases that do not go to trial. In sum, the defense attorney pro-
vides a counterweight against the state in our criminal justice system.
THE REsPonsibiLiTiEs oF THE DEFEnsE ATToRnEy The Sixth Amendment right 
to counsel is not limited to the actual criminal trial. In a number of instances, 
the United States Supreme Court has held that defendants are entitled to 
representation as soon as their rights may be denied, which includes, as we 
FIGURE 7.4 The Baltimore City State’s Attorney’s office
*F.I.V.E. is an acronym for “Firearms Investigation Violence Enforcement.”
Source: Baltimore City State’s Attorney’s Office.
Executive Assistant
General Felony
Division
Collateral
Nonsupport
Central Booking
Intake Facility
District Courts
Fiscal Officer
Homicide Division
Narcotics
Witness Security
F.I.V.E. Division*
Domestic Violence
Collateral
Nonsupport
Economic Crimes
Division
Administrative
Officer
Research and
Development Division
Management
Information Systems
Sex Offenses
Division
Auto Forfeiture
Unit
Community Services
Division
Family Bereavement
Center
Child Abuse
Division
Police Liaison
Deputy for Operations
Deputy for Administration
State’s Attorney
Defense Attorney The 
lawyer representing the 
 defendant.
Give several reasons why 
experience as a prosecutor 
would make someone such as 
United States Supreme Court 
justice Sonia Sotomayor a more 
effective judge. 
AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais
C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   207
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
whether they believe that 
prosecutors should be elected or 
not. Is it likely that prosecutors feel 
pressure to act in certain ways due 
to public pressure and the desire to 
get reelected?
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
complete “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 4 on page 212, 
which asks them to think about 
the blanket immunity policies 
prosecutors have against lawsuits.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

have seen, the custodial interrogation and various identification procedures.39 Therefore, 
an important responsibility of the defense attorney is to represent the defendant at the 
various stages of the custodial process, such as arrest, interrogation, lineup, and arraign-
ment. Other responsibilities include the following:
• 
Investigating the incident for which the defendant has been charged.
• 
 Communicating with the prosecutor, which includes negotiating plea  bargains.
• 
Preparing the case for trial.
• 
Submitting defense motions, including motions to suppress evidence.
• 
Representing the defendant at trial.
• 
 Negotiating a sentence, if the client has been convicted.
• 
Determining whether to appeal a guilty verdict.40
DEFEnDing THE guiLTy At one time or another in their 
careers, all defense attorneys will face a difficult question: 
Must I defend a client whom I know to be guilty? According 
to the American Bar Association’s code of legal ethics, the 
answer is almost always, “yes.”41 The most important respon-
sibility of the criminal defense attorney is to be an advocate 
for his or her client. As such, the attorney is obligated to use 
all ethical and legal means to achieve the client’s desired 
goal, which is usually to avoid or lessen punishment for the charged crime. 
As Supreme Court justice Byron White once noted, defense counsel has no “obliga-
tion to ascertain or present the truth.” Rather, our criminal justice system insists that 
the defense attorney “defend the client whether he is innocent or guilty.”42 Indeed, if 
defense attorneys refused to represent clients whom they believed to be guilty, the Sixth 
Amendment guarantee of a criminal trial for all accused persons would be rendered 
meaningless. (To learn more about the difficult situations that can arise with a guilty 
defendant, see the feature A Question of Ethics—The Right Decision? on the facing page.)
THE PubLiC DEFEnDER Generally speaking, there are two different types of defense attor-
neys: (1) private attorneys, who are hired by individuals, and (2) public defenders, who 
work for the government. The distinction is not absolute, as many private attorneys 
accept employment as public defenders, too. 
The modern role of the public defender was established by the Supreme Court’s 
interpretation of the Sixth Amendment in Gideon v. Wainwright (1963).43 In that case, the 
Court ruled that no defendant can be “assured a fair trial unless counsel is provided for 
him,” and therefore the state must provide a public defender to those who cannot afford 
to hire an attorney for themselves. Subsequently, the Court extended this protection to 
juveniles in In re Gault (1967)44 and to those faced with imprisonment for committing 
misdemeanors in Argersinger v. Hamlin (1972).45 The impact of these decisions has been 
substantial: about 90 percent of all criminal defendants in the United States are repre-
sented by public defenders or other appointed counsel.46
Eligibility Issues Although the Supreme Court’s Gideon decision obligated the govern-
ment to provide attorneys for poor defendants, it offered no guidance on just how poor 
the defendant needs to be to qualify for a public defender. In theory, counsel should be 
provided for those who are unable to hire an attorney themselves without “substan-
tial hardship.”47 In reality, each jurisdiction has its own guidelines, and a defendant 
refused counsel in one area might be entitled to it in another. A judge in Kittitas County, 
Delineate the 
responsibilities 
of defense 
attorneys.
Learning  
objective 8
“Look at the stakes. in civil 
law, if you screw up, it’s just 
money. here, it’s the client—
his life, his time in jail.”
— stacey richman  
Criminal defense attorney
208   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
Public Defenders Court-
appointed attorneys who are 
paid by the state to represent 
defendants who are unable to 
hire private counsel.
Discussion Tip: Ask students how 
they feel about appointed counsel 
for indigent defendants. Do they 
feel that this is a service that the 
government should provide?  Why  
or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Washington, to give an extreme example, frequently denies public counsel for college 
student defendants. This judge believes that any person who chooses to go to school 
rather than work automatically falls outside the Gideon case’s definition of indigence.48
Effectiveness of Public Defenders Under the U.S. Constitution, a defendant who is pay-
ing for her or his defense attorney has a right to choose that attorney without interference 
from the court.49 This right of choice does not extend to indigent defendants. According 
to the United States Supreme Court, “a defendant may not insist on an attorney he cannot 
afford.”50 In other words, an indigent defendant must accept the public defender provided 
by the court system. (Note that unless the presiding judge rules otherwise, a person can 
waive his or her Sixth Amendment rights and act as his or her own defense attorney.) 
This lack of control contributes to the widespread belief that public defenders do 
not provide an acceptable level of defense to indigents. Statistics show, however, that 
conviction rates of defendants with private counsel and those represented by publicly 
funded attorneys are generally the same. The difference comes during sentencing, when 
a higher percentage of defendants with public defenders are sent to prison.51
ATToRnEy-CLiEnT PRiviLEgE To defend a client effectively, a defense attorney must 
have access to all the facts concerning the case, even those that may be harmful to the 
defendant. To promote the unrestrained flow of information between the two parties, 
The SiTuATioN Gerard Marrone is the defense attorney 
for Levi Aron, charged with kidnapping, murdering, and 
dismembering eight-year-old Leiby Kletzky in Brooklyn, New 
York. There is little question of Aron’s guilt, as he provided 
the police with a signed confession and has no alibi for his 
whereabouts at the time of the crime. Marrone is uncertain 
about whether he wants to continue representing this 
“horrific” client. “You can’t look at your kids and then look 
at yourself in the mirror, knowing that a little boy, who’s 
close in age to my eldest son, was murdered so brutally,” 
Marrone said about his conflicting feelings.
The eThiCAL DiLemmA The criminal justice system 
would not be able to function if lawyers refused to 
represent clients they knew to be guilty. At the same 
time, a lawyer must be guided by his or her own 
conscience. If a client is so repugnant to the 
lawyer as to impair the quality of representation, 
then perhaps the lawyer should drop  
the case.
WhAT iS The SoLuTioN? What would you do in 
Marrone’s shoes? In July 2011, he decided that his 
conscience prevented him from representing 
Aron, and he withdrew from the case. His 
replacement, Jennifer McCann, criticized Marrone’s actions. 
“To sit there and say, ‘This is a hard case, I don’t want to 
take it,’” McCann said. “That’s for somebody else, that’s not 
who I am.” She added, “It’s not about defending [Aron’s] 
actions. It’s about defending his rights.”
A quEsTion oF ETHICS: The Right Decision?
Defense attorneys Pierre Bazile, right, and Jennifer 
McCann appear with their client Levi Aron at the State 
Supreme Court in Brooklyn in New York on  
August 4, 2011.
Jesse Ward via New York Times/Redux Pictures
C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   209
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After students read 
“A Question of Ethics” below, 
have them debate the practice 
of defending the guilty. Do they 
agree that the practice is necessary 
for our criminal justice system to 
function? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
 legislatures and lawyers themselves have constructed rules of attorney-
client privilege. These rules require that communications between 
a client and his or her attorney be kept confidential, unless the client 
consents to the disclosure.
The Privilege and Confessions Attorney-client privilege does not stop 
short of confessions.52 Indeed, if, on hearing any statement that points 
toward guilt, the defense attorney could alert the prosecution or try to 
resign from the case, attorney-client privilege would be rendered mean-
ingless. Even if the client says, “I have just killed seventeen women. 
I selected only pregnant women so I could torture them and kill two 
people at once. I did it. I liked it. I enjoyed it,” the defense attorney must 
continue to do her or his utmost to serve that client.53
Without attorney-client privilege, observes legal expert John 
Kaplan, lawyers would be forced to give their clients the equivalent of 
the Miranda warning before representing them.54 In other words, law-
yers would have to make clear what clients could or could not say in 
the course of preparing for trial, because any incriminating statement 
might be used against the client in court. Such a development would have serious rami-
fications for the criminal justice system.
The Exception to the Privilege The scope of attorney-client privilege is not all encom-
passing. In United States v. Zolin (1989),55 the Supreme Court ruled that lawyers may dis-
close the contents of a conversation with a client if the client has provided information 
concerning a crime that has yet to be committed. This exception applies only to commu-
nications involving a crime that is ongoing or will occur in the future. If the client reveals 
a past crime, the privilege is still in effect, and the attorney may not reveal any details of 
that particular criminal act. 
SeLFASSeSSmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 212.
If the courtroom work group can be said to have a dominant figure, it is the 
____________. Public ____________ are employed by the government and try cases on 
behalf of “the people.” There are two types of defense attorneys: (1) ____________ 
attorneys hired by individuals and (2) ____________ defenders, provided to 
____________ defendants by the government. 
Attorney-Client Privilege  
A rule of evidence requiring 
that communications between 
a client and his or her attorney 
be kept confidential, unless the 
client consents to disclosure.
Defense attorney John 
Amabile makes a point on 
behalf of his client in a Woburn, 
Massachusetts, courtroom. 
Why are the rules of attorney-
client privilege necessary for a 
defense attorney to properly 
do his or her job?
ZUMA Press/Newscom
Discussion Tip: Ask students how 
they feel about attorney-client 
privilege. In general, why should 
defense attorneys be barred from 
disclosing information given to them 
by their clients? In what situations, if 
any, do students think exceptions to 
this privilege should be made?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   211
ChApTer SummArY
Define jurisdiction and contrast geo-
graphic and subject-matter jurisdiction. 
Jurisdiction relates to the power of a court 
to hear a particular case. Courts are typically limited in 
geographic jurisdiction—for example, to a particular state. 
Some courts are restricted in subject matter, such as a small 
claims court, which can hear only cases involving civil mat-
ters under a certain monetary limit. 
Explain the difference between trial and 
appellate courts. Trial courts are courts 
of the first instance, where a case is first 
heard. Appellate courts review the proceedings of a lower 
court. Appellate courts do not have juries. 
Outline the several levels of a typical 
state court system. (a) At the lowest level 
are courts of limited jurisdiction, (b) next 
are trial courts of general jurisdiction, (c) then appellate 
courts, and (d) finally, the state’s highest court.
Outline the federal court system. (a) At 
the lowest level are the U.S. district courts, 
in which trials are held, as well as various 
minor federal courts of limited jurisdiction; (b) next are the 
U.S. courts of appeals, otherwise known as circuit courts of 
appeals; and (c) finally, the United States Supreme Court.
Explain briefly how a case is brought to 
the Supreme Court. Cases decided in U.S. 
courts of appeals, as well as cases decided 
in the highest state courts (when federal questions arise), 
can be appealed to the Supreme Court. If at least four jus-
tices approve of a case filed with the Supreme Court, the 
Court will issue a writ of certiorari, ordering the lower 
court to send the Supreme Court the record of the case for 
review. 
List and describe the members of the 
courtroom work group. (a) The judge; 
(b) the prosecutor, who brings charges 
in the name of the people (the state) against the accused; 
(c) the defense attorney; (d) the bailiff, who is responsible 
for maintaining security and order in the judge’s chambers 
and the courtroom; (e) the clerk, who accepts all pleas, 
motions, and other matters to be acted on by the judge; and  
(f) court reporters, who record what is said during a trial, as 
well as at depositions. 
List the different names given to public 
prosecutors and indicate the general 
powers that they have. At the federal level, 
the prosecutor is called the U.S. attorney. In state and local 
courts, the prosecutor may be referred to as the state’s attor-
ney, state prosecutor, district attorney, county attorney, or city 
attorney. Prosecutors in general have the power to decide 
when and how the state will pursue an individual suspected 
of criminal wrongdoing. In some jurisdictions, the district 
attorney is also the chief law enforcement officer, holding 
broad powers over police operations.
Delineate the responsibilities of defense 
attorneys. (a) Representation of the defen-
dant during the custodial process, (b) 
investigation of the supposed criminal incident, (c) commu-
nication with the prosecutor (including plea bargaining), 
(d) preparation of the case for trial, (e) submission of defense 
motions, (f) representation of the defendant at trial, (g) 
negotiation of a sentence after conviction, and (h) appeal of 
a guilty verdict.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QueSTioNS For CriTiCAL ANALYSiS
1. In 2010, authorities in Thailand extradited Russian citizen 
and alleged international arms dealer Viktor Bout to the 
United States. The evidence against Bout included an audio 
recording of a conversation he had with American agents 
posing as Colombian rebels. During this conversation, 
Bout agreed to furnish the “revolutionaries” with weapons 
for the purpose of killing American pilots. How does this 
evidence give the United States jurisdiction over Bout?
2. Several years ago, the United States Supreme Court 
“denied cert” in the case of Yasin Muhammed Basardh, 
a Yemeni citizen still in the custody of the U.S. military 
even though he had been ruled innocent of terrorism 
charges by a U.S. court. What does it mean for the Court 
to “deny cert”? In this instance, what might be some of 
the reasons for the Court’s refusal to consider Basardh’s 
case?
3. The United States Supreme Court does not allow its 
proceedings to be televised. Do you think that doing 
so would increase or diminish public confidence in the 
Court? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212   C R I M I N A L  J U S T I C E  I N  A C T I O N :  T h e  C o r e
4. Prosecutors cannot face civil lawsuits for misconduct, 
even if they have deliberately sent an innocent person to 
prison. In practical terms, why do you think prosecutors 
are protected in this manner? Do you agree with a policy 
of blanket immunity for prosecutors? Why or why not?
5. Government agencies can charge fees for “free” legal 
counsel when the fees will not impose a “significant 
legal hardship” on the defendant. Why might this prac-
tice go against the Supreme Court’s ruling in Gideon v. 
Wainwright (see page 208)?
keY TermS
appellate courts  192
attorney-client privilege  210
attorney general  206
concurrent jurisdiction  193
concurring opinions  199
courtroom work group  203
defense attorney  207
dissenting opinions  199
docket  201
dual court system  193
extradition  191
judicial review  197
jurisdiction  191
magistrate  195
Missouri Plan  201
nonpartisan elections  201
opinions  192
oral arguments  198
partisan elections  201
public defenders  208
public prosecutor  205
rule of four  198
specialty courts  195
trial courts  192
writ of certiorari  198
SeLF ASSeSSmeNT ANSWer keY
Page 190: i. due process; ii. individuals; iii. crime control; 
iv. society; v. rehabilitate
Page 193: i. jurisdiction; ii. subject matter; iii. trial;  
iv. appellate; v. dual; vi. federal; vii. state
Page 196: i. limited; ii. general; iii. appeals
Page 199: i. district; ii. circuit; iii. Supreme;  
iv. certiorari 
Page 203: i. president; ii. Senate; iii. governor; iv. partisan; 
v. nonpartisan; vi. merit
Page 210: i. judge; ii. prosecutors; iii. private; iv. public; v. 
poor/indigent
CourSemATe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTeS
 1. Quoted in Kerry Sanders, “Rutgers Suicide 
Trial: This Isn’t an Open and Shut Case,” 
U.S. News on msnbc.com (February 21, 
2012), at usnews.msnbc.msn.com/_news 
/2012/02/21/10470351-rutgers-suicide 
-trial-this-isnt-an-open-and-shut-case.
 2. Quoted in Ian Parker, “The Story of a Suicide,” 
New Yorker (February 6, 2012), 51.
 3. Quoted in George Anastasia, “Rutgers 
Student Lost His Dice Roll,” Philadelphia 
Inquirer (March 18, 2012), B1.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Roscoe Pound, “The Administration of 
Justice in American Cities,” Harvard Law 
Review 12 (1912).
 6. Russell Wheeler and Howard Whitcomb, 
Judicial Administration: Text and Readings 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,  
1977), 3.
 7. Herbert Packer, “The Courts, the Police  
and the Rest of Us,” Criminal Law, 
Criminology & Political Science 57 (1966), 
238–239.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7 :  C O U R T S  A N D  T H E  Q U E S T  F O R  J U S T I C E   213
 8. Larry J. Siegel, Criminology: Instructor’s 
Manual, 6th ed. (Belmont, CA: West/
Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1998), 440.
 9. Gerald F. Velman, “Federal Sentencing 
Guidelines: A Cure Worse Than the Disease,” 
American Criminal Law Review 29 (Spring 
1992), 904.
10. Pub. L. No. 111-211, 124 Stat. 2258, 2279 
(2010).
11. Eli Lake, “Yemen Refuses to Let U.S. Try 
Cleric,” Washington Times (May 12, 2010), A1.
12. 18 U.S.C. Section 3231; and Solorio v. United 
States, 483 U.S. 435 (1987).
13. 372 U.S. 335 (1963).
14. 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
15. 408 U.S. 238 (1972).
16. 428 U.S. 153 (1976).
17. 18 U.S.C. Section 48 (1999).
18. United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. ____ (2010).
19. 559 U.S. _____ (2010).
20. Carl Milazzo, “Searching Cell Phones 
Incident to Arrest: 2009,” The Police Chief 
(May 2009), 12.
21. Barry R. Schaller, A Vision of American Law: 
Judging Law, Literature, and the Stories We 
Tell (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997).
22. Quoted in Linda Deutsch, “Murray Gets 
4-Year Sentence, Tongue-Lashing from 
Judge,” Associated Press (November 29, 2011).
23. Pub. L. No. 76-299, 53 Stat. 1223, codified as 
amended at 28 U.S.C. Sections 601–610 (1988 
& Supp. V 1993).
24. James E. Lozier, “The Missouri Plan a.k.a. 
Merit Selection Is the Best Solution for 
Selecting Michigan’s Judges,” Michigan Bar 
Journal 75 (September 1996), 918.
25. Richard A. Watson and Rondal G. Downing, 
The Politics of the Bench and Bar: Judicial 
Selection under the Missouri Nonpartisan 
Court Plan (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1969).
26. Quoted in Robert Hehre, “League Looks 
to Diversify Courts,” The Post and Courier 
(Charleston, SC) (October 4, 2010), at www.
postandcourier.com/news/2010/oct/04/
league-looks-to-diversify-courts.
27. Ciara Torres-Spelliscy, Monique Chase, 
and Emma Greenman, Improving Judicial 
Diversity, 2d ed. (New York: Brennan Center 
for Justice, 2010), 1.
28. Russell Wheeler, The Changing Face of 
the Federal Judiciary (Washington, D.C.: 
The Brookings Institution, August 2009), 
Appendix table 1, page 11.
29. Edward M. Chen, “The Judiciary, Diversity, 
and Justice for All,” California Law Review 
(July 2003), 1109.
30. Theresa B. Beiner, “The Elusive (but 
Worthwhile) Quest for a Diverse Bench 
in the New Millennium,” University of 
California at Davis Law Review (February 
2003), 599.
31. Sherrilyn A. Ifill, “Racial Diversity on the 
Bench: Beyond Role Models and Public 
Confidence,” Washington and Lee Law Review 
(Spring 2000), 405.
32. Bennett L. Gershman, “Abuse of Power in 
the Prosecutor’s Office,” in Criminal Justice 
92/93, ed. John J. Sullivan and Joseph L. 
Victor (Guilford, CT: Dushkin Publishing 
Group, 1991), 117–123.
33. 295 U.S. 78 (1935).
34. Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. (1963).
35. Smith v. Cain, 132 S.Ct. 627 (2012).
36. Ibid.
37. Celesta Albonetti, “Prosecutorial Discre-
tion: The Effects of Uncertainty,” Law and 
Society Review 21 (1987), 291–313.
38. Quoted in Michael Koenigs and Ian Shern, 
“Tyler Clementi Cyberbullying Trial Begins 
Today,” Good Morning America/Yahoo! 
News (February 20, 2012), at gma.yahoo.
com/tyler-clementi-cyberbullying-trial-
begins-today-182111675-abc-news.html.
39. Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335 (1963); 
Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 (1964); 
United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218 (1967); 
Argersinger v. Hamlin, 407 U.S. 25 (1972); and 
Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387 (1977).
40. Larry Siegel, Criminology, 6th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: West/Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1998), 
487–488.
41. Center for Professional Responsibility, Model 
Rules of Professional Conduct (Washington, 
D.C.: American Bar Association, 2003), Rules 
1.6 and 3.1.
42. United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 256–258 
(1967).
43. 372 U.S. 335 (1963).
44. 387 U.S. 1 (1967).
45. 407 U.S. 25 (1972).
46. Peter A. Joy and Kevin C. McMunigal, “Client 
Autonomy and Choice of Counsel,” Criminal 
Justice (Fall 2006), 57.
47. American Bar Association, “Providing 
Defense Services,” Standard 5-7.1, at www.
abanet.org/crimjust/standards/defsvcs_
blk.html#7.1.
48. Robert C. Boruchowitz, “The Right to 
Counsel: Every Accused Person’s Right,” 
Washington State Bar Association Bar 
News (January 2004), at www.wsba.org/
media/publications/barnews/2004/jan-
04-boruchowitz.htm.
49. United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. 140 
(2006).
50. Wheat v. United States, 486 U.S. 153, 159 
(1988).
51. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Defense Counsel 
in Criminal Cases (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, 2000), 3.
52. Model Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 
1.2(c)–(d).
53. Randolph 
Braccialarghe, 
“Why 
Were 
Perry Mason’s Clients Always Innocent?” 
Valparaiso University Law Review (Fall 2004), 
65.
54. John Kaplan, “Defending Guilty People,” 
University of Bridgeport Law Review (1986), 
223.
55. 491 U.S. 554 (1989).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   215
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Identify the steps involved in the pretrial criminal process.
2 
Explain how a prosecutor screens potential cases.
3 
Indicate why prosecutors, defense attorneys, and 
defendants often agree to plea bargains.
4  Identify the basic protections enjoyed by criminal 
defendants in the United States.
5 
Explain what “taking the Fifth” really means.
6 
Contrast challenges for cause and peremptory challenges 
during voir dire.
7 
Explain the difference between testimony and real 
evidence, between lay witnesses and expert witnesses, and 
between direct and circumstantial evidence.
8 
List the five basic steps of an appeal.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 246 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Pretrial  
 Procedures  
and the  
Criminal Trial
215
Deborah Cheramie/iStockphoto
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Pretrial Detention
• Establishing Probable Cause
• The Prosecutorial Screening 
Process
• Pleading Guilty
• Special Features of  
Criminal Trials
• Jury Selection
• The Trial
• The Final Steps of the Trial  
and Postconviction Procedures
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
G
iven the options of first degree murder and involuntary manslaughter, the 
jury in George Huguely’s trial chose neither. Instead, the jurors decided that 
although Huguely had acted maliciously, he had not intended to kill Yeardley 
Love. So, on February 22, 2012, the jurors found Huguely guilty of second degree murder 
and sentenced him to twenty-six years behind bars. In the end, the competing theories 
of how Love died held little interest for the jurors. Of more importance was a video of 
Huguely’s interview with police in which the defendant reacted with shock and anguish 
at the news of Love’s death. “I was emotionally shredded inside” by the sight of Huguely 
crying on the video, said one juror. “I absolutely feel for the guy.”1
Not surprisingly, given the youth and attractiveness of Huguely and Love—both 
lacrosse players from privileged backgrounds—the trial drew nationwide attention. 
According to the “wedding cake” model, those who followed the proceedings may have 
gotten a skewed version of how the criminal justice system works.2 This model suggests 
that only the top, and smallest, “layer” of trials comes close to meeting our standards of 
justice. In these celebrity trials, such as Huguely’s, committed (and expensive) attorneys 
argue minute technicalities for days, and numerous expert (and expensive) witnesses 
take the stand for both sides.
no ExCusEs
By the time University of Virginia senior George 
Huguely got to Yeardley Love’s off-campus apartment 
just after midnight, he was quite drunk. When Love, 
also a senior at the school, refused to open the door, 
Huguely kicked his way in. Later, speaking to the 
Charlottesville police, Huguely admitted grabbing 
Love, his ex-girlfriend, by the neck and wrestling her 
to the floor. He also admitted that when he left, Love 
was suffering from a “nosebleed” as a result of their 
altercation. Several hours later, Love’s roommate 
found her face down in a pool of blood on a pillow, 
dead. “I should not have gone over there when I was 
drinking,” Huguely told the detectives who quickly 
arrested him.
During Huguely’s February 2012 trial, prosecutors 
portrayed the defendant as a violent time bomb. 
District attorney Warner Chapman read an e-mail 
to the jury in which Huguely had written to Love, 
“I should have killed you,” after learning that she 
was seeing someone else. Witnesses testified to a 
previous incident in which he had choked her at a 
party. According to the government lawyers, Love 
died of blunt-force trauma to the head, and they 
charged Huguely with premeditated, first degree 
murder. If convicted of this crime, the defendant 
faced a lifetime in prison.
In contrast, Huguely’s lawyers painted their client 
as an immature “boy athlete” who made a bad 
decision under the influence of alcohol. He had no 
intention of harming Love on the night of her death, 
they argued, and had left the apartment thinking 
that she was not seriously injured. They presented 
evidence that Love suffocated to death on her wet, 
blood-stained pillow and therefore reasoned that 
Huguely was guilty of the lesser crime of involuntary 
manslaughter. “George’s 
drinking was out of control,” 
defense attorney Rhonda 
Quagliana told the jury. “It’s 
not an excuse, it’s not a 
justification. It’s just a fact.”
George Huguely, center, 
is escorted to court in 
Charlottesville, Virginia, 
during the trial for the 
death of his former 
girlfriend, Yeardley Love.
Andrew Shurtleff/ZUMA Press/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   217
On the bottom, largest layer of the wedding cake, the vast majority of defendants are 
dealt with informally, and the end goal seems to be speed rather than justice. Indeed, as 
you will see in this chapter, trial by jury is quite rare. The fate of most criminal suspects 
in this country is decided during pretrial procedures, which start almost as soon as the 
police have identified a suspect.
PRETRiAL DETEnTion
After an arrest has been made, the first step toward determining the suspect’s guilt or 
innocence is the initial appearance. (For an overview of the entire process, see Figure 8.1 
on the following page.) During this brief proceeding, a magistrate (see Chapter 7) informs 
the defendant of the charges that have been brought against him or her and explains 
his or her constitutional rights—particularly, the right to remain silent (under the Fifth 
Amendment) and the right to be represented by counsel (under the Sixth Amendment).
At this point, if the defendant cannot afford to hire a private attorney, a public 
defender may be appointed, or private counsel may be hired by the state to  represent 
the defendant. As the U.S. Constitution does not specify how soon a defendant must be 
brought before a magistrate after arrest, it has been left to the judicial branch to determine  
the timing of the initial appearance. The Supreme Court has held that the initial appear-
ance must occur “promptly,” which in most cases means within forty-eight hours of 
booking.3
In misdemeanor cases, a defendant may decide to plead guilty and be sentenced 
during the initial appearance. Otherwise, the magistrate will usually release those 
charged with misdemeanors on their promise to return at a later date for further pro-
ceedings. For felony cases, however, the defendant is not permitted to make a plea at 
the initial appearance because a magistrate’s court does not have jurisdiction to decide 
felonies. Furthermore, in most cases the defendant will be released only if she or he posts 
bail—an amount paid by the defendant to the court and retained by the court until the 
defendant returns for further proceedings. In theory, then, bail ensures that the defen-
dant will not flee the jurisdiction of the court before her or his trial.
THE PuRPosE of bAiL
Bail is provided for under the Eighth Amendment. The amendment does not, however, 
guarantee the right to bail. Instead, it states that “excessive bail shall not be required.” 
This has come to mean that in all cases except those involving a capital crime (where 
bail is prohibited), the amount of bail required must be reasonable compared with the 
seriousness of the wrongdoing. It does not mean that the amount of bail must be within 
the defendant’s ability to pay.
sETTing bAiL There is no uniform system that governs pretrial detention. Each jurisdic-
tion has its own bail tariffs, or general guidelines concerning the proper amount of bail. 
For misdemeanors, the police usually follow a preapproved bail schedule created by local 
judicial authorities. In felony cases, the primary responsibility to set bail lies with the 
judge, with the bail tariff acting as a loose guideline. Figure 8.2 on page 219 shows the 
typical bail amounts for violent offenses.
Defendants who cannot afford bail are generally kept in a local jail or lockup until 
the date of their trial, though many jurisdictions are searching for alternatives to this 
practice because of overcrowded incarceration facilities. Government statistics show 
that 62 percent of felony defendants are released before their trials.4
Initial Appearance An 
accused’s first appearance 
before a judge or magistrate 
following arrest. 
Bail The dollar amount or 
conditions set by the court 
to ensure that an individual 
accused of a crime will 
appear for further criminal 
proceedings.
Identify the 
steps involved 
in the pretrial 
criminal process.
Learning  
objective1
Teaching Tip: Discuss with 
students how bail is handled in your 
jurisdiction. What kinds of bail tariffs 
are in place? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
PREvEnTivE DETEnTion The vagueness of the Eighth Amendment has encouraged a 
second purpose of bail: to protect the community by preventing the defendant from 
committing another crime before trial. To achieve this purpose, a judge can set bail at 
a level the suspect cannot possibly afford. In January 2012, for example, a Los Angeles 
superior court judge set the bail for indigent defendant Harry Burkhart, accused of 
setting dozens of fires across the city over the New Year’s weekend, at $2.85 million. 
Booking    After arrest, at the police station, the suspect is searched, photographed, 
fingerprinted, and allowed at least one telephone call. After the booking, charges are 
reviewed, and if they are not dropped, a complaint is filed and a judge or magistrate 
examines the case for probable cause.
Initial Appearance   The suspect appears before the judge, who informs the suspect of 
the charges and of her or his rights. If the suspect requests a lawyer, one is appointed. 
The judge sets bail (monetary conditions under which a suspect can obtain release 
pending disposition of the case).
Arraignment    The suspect is brought before the trial court, informed of the charges, 
and asked to enter a plea.
Plea Bargain    A plea bargain is a prosecutor’s promise of concessions (or promise to 
seek concessions) in return for the defendant’s guilty plea. Concessions include a 
reduced charge and/or a lesser sentence.
 
Grand Jury   A grand jury determines 
whether there is probable cause to 
believe that the defendant committed 
the crime. The federal government and 
about one-third of the states require 
grand jury indictments for at least 
some felonies.
Guilty Plea    In most jurisdictions, the 
majority of cases that reach the 
arraignment stage do not go to trial but 
are resolved by a guilty plea, often as 
the result of a plea bargain. 
Trial   If the defendant refuses to plead 
guilty, he or she proceeds to either a 
jury trial (in most instances) or a bench 
trial.
Indictment    An indictment is the 
charging instrument issued by the 
grand jury. 
Information   An information is the 
charging instrument issued by the 
prosecutor. 
Preliminary Hearing    A preliminary 
hearing is a court proceeding in which 
the prosecutor presents evidence and 
the judge determines whether there is 
probable cause to hold the defendant 
over for trial.
FIGURE 8.1 The Steps Leading to a Trial
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   219
Alternatively, more than thirty states and the federal government have 
passed preventive detention legislation to the same effect. These laws 
allow judges to act “in the best interests of the community” by denying 
bail to arrestees with prior records of violence, thus keeping them in 
custody prior to trial. 
gAining PRETRiAL RELEAsE
One of the most popular alternatives to bail is release on recognizance 
(ROR). This is used when the judge, based on the advice of trained person-
nel, decides that the defendant is not at risk to “jump” bail and does not pose 
a threat to the community. The defendant is then released at no cost with 
the understanding that he or she will return at the time of the trial. The Vera 
Institute, a nonprofit organization in New York City, introduced the concept 
of ROR as part of the Manhattan Bail Project in the 1960s, and such programs 
are now found in nearly every jurisdiction. When properly administered, ROR 
programs seem to be successful, with less than 5 percent of the participants 
failing to show for trial.5
PosTing bAiL Those suspected of com mitting a felony are rarely released 
on recognizance. These defendants may post, or pay, the full amount of 
the bail to the court in cash. The money will be returned when the suspect 
appears for trial. Given the large amount of funds required, and the rela-
tive lack of wealth of many criminal defendants, a defendant can rarely 
post bail in cash. Another option is to use real property, such as a house, 
instead of cash as collateral. These property bonds are also rare, because most courts 
require property valued at double the bail amount. Thus, if bail is set at $20,000, the 
defendant (or the defendant’s family and friends) will have to produce property valued 
at $40,000.
bAiL bonD AgEnTs If unable to post bail with cash or property, a defendant may 
arrange for a bail bond agent to post a bail bond on the defendant’s behalf. The bond 
agent, in effect, promises the court that she or he will turn over to the court the full 
amount of bail if the defendant fails to return for further proceedings. The defendant 
usually must give the bond agent a certain percentage of the bail (frequently 10 per-
cent) in cash. This amount, which is often not returned to the defendant later, is con-
sidered payment for the bond agent’s assistance and assumption of risk. Depending on 
the amount of the bail bond, the defendant may also be required to sign over to the 
bond agent rights to certain property as security for the bond. Such property can be a 
car, a watch, or some other valuable asset.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
During the ____________ ____________, a magistrate informs the defendant of the charges 
brought against her or him and explains her or his ____________ rights. Following this 
proceeding, the defendant will be detained until trial unless he or she can post ____________, 
the amount of which is determined by the ____________. Even if the defendant can afford 
to pay this amount, he or she may be kept in jail until trial under a ____________ detention 
statute if the court decides that he or she poses a risk to the community. 
FIGURE 8.2 Average Bail Amounts  
for Violent Felonies
These figures represent the mean bail amounts 
for the seventy-five largest counties in the 
nation.
Source: Adapted from Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Defendants 
in Large Urban Counties, 2006 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, May 2010), Table 7, page 7.
Average Bail Amounts for Violent Felonies
Murder
Assault
Rape
Robbery
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
$1,000,000
ssssss
l
aul
aul
ault
Rap
Ra
Rap
Rap
Rappe
b
obb
ob
ob
obber
ber
ber
bery
As
As
As
A
Ro
Ro
Ro
R
Preventive Detention The 
retention of an accused person 
in custody due to fears that 
she or he will commit a crime if 
released before trial.
Release on Recognizance 
(ROR) A judge’s order that 
releases an accused from jail 
with the understanding that 
he or she will return for further 
proceedings of his or her own 
will.
Property Bond An 
alternative to posting bail in 
cash, in which the defendant 
gains pretrial release by 
providing the court with 
property valued at the bail 
amount as assurance that she 
or he will return for trial.
Bail Bond Agent A 
businessperson who agrees, for 
a fee, to pay the bail amount if 
the accused fails to appear in 
court as ordered.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EsTAbLisHing PRobAbLE CAusE
Once the initial appearance has been completed and bail has been set, the prosecutor 
must establish probable cause. In other words, the prosecutor must show that a crime 
was committed and link the defendant to that crime. There are two formal procedures 
for establishing probable cause at this stage of the pretrial process: preliminary hearings 
and grand juries.
THE PRELiminARy HEARing
During the preliminary hearing, the defendant appears before a judge or magistrate 
who decides whether the evidence presented is sufficient for the case to proceed to trial. 
Normally, every person arrested has a right to this hearing within a reasonable amount 
of time after her or his initial arrest6—usually, no later than ten days if the defendant is 
in custody or within thirty days if he or she has gained pretrial release. 
THE PRELiminARy HEARing PRoCEss The preliminary hearing is conducted in the man-
ner of a mini-trial. Typically, a police report of the arrest is presented by a law enforce-
ment officer, supplemented with evidence provided by the prosecutor. Because the 
burden of proving probable cause is relatively light (compared with proving guilt beyond 
a reasonable doubt), prosecutors rarely call witnesses during the preliminary hearing, 
saving them for the trial. 
During this hearing, the defendant has a right to be represented by counsel, who 
may cross-examine witnesses and challenge any evidence offered by the prosecutor. In 
most states, defense attorneys can take advantage of the preliminary hearing to begin 
the process of discovery, in which they are entitled to have access to any evidence in 
the possession of the prosecution relating to the case. Discovery makes trial proceedings 
fairer by allowing each side access to all relevant information the other side may have 
concerning the details of the case.
WAiving THE HEARing The preliminary hearing often seems rather perfunctory, although 
in some jurisdictions it replaces grand jury proceedings. It usually lasts no longer than five 
minutes, and the judge or magistrate rarely finds that probable cause does not exist. For 
this reason, defense attorneys commonly advise their clients to waive their right to a pre-
liminary hearing. Once a judge has ruled affirmatively, in many jurisdictions the defendant 
is bound over to the grand jury, a group of citizens called to decide whether probable 
cause exists. In other jurisdictions, the prosecutor issues an information, which replaces 
the police complaint as the formal charge against the 
defendant for the purposes of a trial.
THE gRAnD juRy
The federal government and about one-third of the states 
require a grand jury to make the decision as to whether 
a case should go to trial. Grand juries are  impaneled, or 
created, for a period of time usually not exceeding three 
months. During that time, the grand jury sits in closed 
(secret) session and hears only evidence presented by the 
prosecutor—the defendant cannot present evidence at 
this hearing. The prosecutor can introduce key aspects 
of his or her case against the defendant, including  
Preliminary Hearing An 
initial hearing in which a 
magistrate decides whether 
there is probable cause to 
believe that the defendant 
committed the crime with 
which he or she is charged.
Discovery Formal 
investigation by each side prior 
to trial. 
Grand Jury The group 
of citizens called to decide 
whether probable cause exists 
to believe that a suspect 
committed the crime with which 
she or he has been charged. 
Information The formal 
charge against the accused 
issued by the prosecutor after 
a preliminary hearing has found 
probable cause.
While trial juries decide the 
defendant’s guilt or innocence, 
a grand jury decides only 
whether the prosecutor 
has enough evidence to 
charge the defendant with a 
crime. Practically, why does 
the prosecution hold a major 
advantage during grand jury 
proceedings?
Johnny Hanson/Houston Chronicle
220   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   221
photographs, documents, tangible objects, the testimony of witnesses, and other items. 
If the grand jury finds that probable cause exists, it issues an indictment  (pronounced 
in-dyte-ment) against the defendant. Like an information in a preliminary hearing, the 
indictment becomes the formal charge against the defendant. 
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
If a case is to proceed to trial, the prosecutor must establish ____________ ____________ 
that the defendant committed the crime in question. One way of doing this involves a 
____________ hearing, in which a judge or magistrate rules whether the prosecutor has 
met this burden. In the other method, the decision rests with a group of citizens called 
a ____________ ____________, who will hand down an ____________ if they believe the 
evidence is sufficient to support the charges. 
THE PRosECuToRiAL sCREEning PRoCEss
Some see the high government success rates in pretrial proceedings as proof that pros-
ecutors successfully screen out weak cases before they get to a grand jury or preliminary 
hearing. Others, however, point out that procedural rules at this stage favor the prosecu-
tion and that grand juries rarely, if ever, fail to indict defendants set before them. That 
being the case, what is to keep prosecutors from using their charging powers indiscrimi-
nately? Nothing, say many observers. Once the police have initially charged a defendant 
with committing a crime, the prosecutor can prosecute the case as it stands, reduce or 
increase the initial charge, file additional charges, or dismiss the case. 
In a system of government and law that relies on checks and balances, asked legal 
expert Kenneth Culp Davis, why should the prosecutor be “immune to review by other 
officials and immune to review by the courts?”7 Although American prosecutors have 
far-ranging discretionary  charging powers, it is not entirely correct to say that they are 
unrestricted. Controls are indirect and informal, but they do exist.
CAsE ATTRiTion
Prosecutorial discretion includes the power not to prosecute cases. For example, federal 
prosecutors decline to bring charges in nearly three out of every four computer fraud 
cases referred to them by investigators.8 Figure 8.3 on the following page depicts the 
average outcomes of one hundred felony arrests in the United States. As you can see, 
of the sixty-five adult arrestees brought before the district attorney, only thirty-five are 
prosecuted, and only eighteen of these prosecutions lead to incarceration. Consequently, 
fewer than one in three adults arrested for a felony sees the 
inside of a prison or jail cell. This phenomenon is known as 
case attrition, and it is explained in part by prosecutorial 
discretion.
About half of those adult felony cases brought to pros-
ecutors by police are dismissed through a nolle prosequi 
(Latin for “unwilling to pursue”). Why are these cases “nolled,” or not prosecuted by the 
district attorney? In the section on law enforcement, you learned that the police do not 
have the resources to arrest every lawbreaker in the nation. Similarly, district attorneys 
do not have the resources to prosecute every arrest. They must choose how to distribute 
their scarce resources. Several years ago, for example, Contra Costa County (California) 
Indictment A charge or 
written accusation, issued by a 
grand jury, that probable cause 
exists to believe that a named 
person has committed a crime.
Case Attrition The process 
through which prosecutors, by 
deciding whether to prosecute 
each person arrested, effect an 
overall reduction in the number 
of persons prosecuted. 
“You can paint pictures and get 
people indicted for just about 
anything.”
— Alfonse D’Amato  
Former U.S. senator from 
New York
Teaching Tip: If possible, have a 
local prosecutor attend class to 
speak to students about her or 
his educational and professional 
background, how she or he screens 
cases, and the general requirments 
of the job.
Group Activity: Have students 
break into small groups and 
determine whether your state uses 
grand juries or a preliminary hearing 
to determine probable cause. Then, 
have each group find an example of 
this process in action.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
district attorney Robert Kochly announced that due to budget shortfalls, his office would 
no longer prosecute anyone caught with less than a gram of methamphetamine or 
cocaine, less than half a gram of heroin, and fewer than five pills of Ecstasy.9
In some cases, the decision is made for prosecutors, such as when police break 
procedural law and negate important evidence. This happens rarely—less than 1 percent 
of felony arrests are dropped because of the exclusionary rule (see pages 163–165) and 
almost all of these dismissals are the result of illegal drug searches.10
sCREEning fACToRs
Most prosecutors have a screening process for deciding when to prosecute and when to 
“noll.” This process varies a bit from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but most prosecutors 
consider several factors in making the decision:
• 
The most important factor in deciding whether to prosecute is not the prosecu-
tor’s belief in the guilt of the suspect, but whether there is sufficient evidence for 
conviction.11 If prosecutors have strong physical evidence and a number of reliable 
and believable witnesses, they are quite likely to prosecute. 
• 
Prosecutors also tend to establish case  priorities. In other words, everything else 
being equal, a district attorney will prosecute a rapist instead of a jaywalker, 
because the former presents a greater threat to society than does the latter. A 
prosecutor will also be more likely to prosecute someone with an extensive record 
of wrongdoing than a first-time offender. Often, in coordination with the police, a 
Explain how 
a prosecutor 
screens 
potential  
cases.
Learning  
objective 2
FIGURE 8.3 Following One Hundred Felony Arrests: The Criminal Justice Funnel
Source: Adapted from Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael D. Reisig, American Corrections, 9th ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2011), 134.
30 cases go to
trial
35 cases accepted
for prosecution
5 jump bail
3 acquitted
9 placed on
probation
27 sentenced 
Incarcerated: 
18 adults
5 juveniles
65 adults 
considered
for prosecution
35 juveniles go to
juvenile court 
100 people arrested
30 put on probation
or dismissed
30 cases
 dropped
23 plead guilty
4 found guilty
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   223
district attorney’s office will target a single area of crime, such as illegal drug use 
or drunk driving. 
• 
Sometimes a case is dropped even when it involves a serious crime and a wealth of 
evidence exists against the suspect. These situations usually involve  uncooperative 
victims. Domestic violence cases are particularly difficult to prosecute because the 
victims may want to keep the matter private, fear reprisals, or have a strong desire 
to protect their abuser.12 In some jurisdictions, as many as 80 percent of domestic 
violence victims refuse to cooperate with the prosecution.13
• 
A prosecutor may be willing to drop a case or reduce the charges against a 
defendant who is willing to testify against other offenders. Federal law encourages 
this kind of behavior by offering sentencing reductions to defendants who provide 
“substantial assistance in the investigation or prosecution of another person who 
has committed an offense.”14
The unreliability of a victim can also affect prosecutorial screening decisions. In 
2011, for example, Manhattan prosecutors gathered significant physical evidence sug-
gesting that Dominique Strauss-Kahn, a prominent French politician, had “engaged in 
a hurried sexual encounter” with a housekeeper in the Sofitel New York hotel. None 
of the evidence clearly indicated a lack of consent, however, so the case hinged on the 
housekeeper’s testimony that she had been sexually assaulted. 
Although prosecutors initially believed the victim to be truthful, they eventually 
learned that she had lied previously about being gang-raped by soldiers in her native 
Guinea in order to gain immigration benefits in the United States. Also, she had been 
less than forthcoming about her desire to benefit financially from Strauss-Kahn’s 
alleged sexual assault. Finally, prosecutors asked the presiding judge to drop all 
charges. “If we do not believe her beyond a reasonable doubt,” the prosecutors said in 
a statement, “we cannot ask a jury to do so.”15 (To learn about one country’s especially 
prosecutor-friendly system, see the feature Comparative Criminal Justice—Japan’s All-
Powerful Prosecutors on the following page.)
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
On average, of sixty-five adult arrestees, a district attorney will prosecute only thirty-
five. This process, which is known as case ____________, requires that the prosecutor 
____________ all potential cases and dismiss the ones where the likelihood of ____________ 
is weakest. The most important factor in this decision is whether there is sufficient 
____________ to find the defendant guilty. 
PLEADing guiLTy
Based on the information (delivered during the preliminary hearing) or indictment 
(handed down by the grand jury), the prosecutor submits a motion to the court to order 
the defendant to appear before the trial court for an arraignment. Due process of law, 
as guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment, requires that a criminal defendant be informed 
of the charges brought against her or him and be offered an opportunity to respond to 
those charges. The arraignment is one of the ways in which due process requirements are 
satisfied by criminal procedure law.
At the arraignment, the defendant is informed of the charges and must respond 
by pleading not guilty or guilty. In some but not all states, the defendant may also enter 
Arraignment A court 
proceeding in which the 
suspect is formally charged 
with the criminal offense stated 
in the indictment. 
Discussion Tip: Many jurisdictions 
have adopted “no drop” prosecution 
policies for domestic violence cases. 
In these jurisdictions, prosecutors 
will prosecute domestic violence 
offenders even without victim 
cooperation. Ask students their 
opinions of such “no drop” policies.  
Is it ethical to ignore the wishes of 
the victim in these cases? Why or 
why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
a plea of nolo contendere, which is Latin for “I will not contest it.” The plea of nolo 
 contendere is neither an admission nor a denial of guilt. (The consequences for someone 
who pleads guilty and for someone who pleads nolo contendere are the same in a crimi-
nal trial, but the latter plea cannot be used in a subsequent civil trial as an admission 
of guilt.) Most frequently, the defendant pleads guilty to the initial charge or to a lesser 
charge that has been agreed on through plea bargaining between the prosecutor and 
the defendant. If the defendant pleads guilty, no trial is necessary, and the defendant is 
sentenced based on the crime he or she has admitted committing.
PLEA bARgAining in THE CRiminAL jusTiCE sysTEm
Plea bargaining most often takes place after the arraignment and before the beginning 
of the trial. In its simplest terms, it is a process by which the accused, represented by the 
defense counsel, and the prosecutor work out a mutually satisfactory disposition of the 
case, subject to court approval. Usually, plea bargaining involves the defendant’s plead-
ing guilty to the charges against her or him in return for a lighter sentence, but other 
variations are possible as well. The defendant can agree to plead guilty in exchange for 
having the charge against her or him reduced from, say, felony burglary to the lesser 
offense of breaking and entering. Or a person charged with multiple counts may agree 
to plead guilty if the prosecutor agrees to drop one or more of the counts. Whatever the 
JAPAN’s ALL-PowErFuL 
ProsECuTors
Prosecutors in the United States are 
generally believed to have a great deal 
of charging discretion. The discretionary power of American 
prosecutors, however, does not equal that of their Japanese 
counterparts. With the ability to “cherry pick” their cases, 
prosecutors in Japan routinely have annual conviction rates 
of over 99.9 percent.
The “Confession Mill”
One observer described the Japanese courts as a 
“confession mill.” Unlike the American system, Japan has 
no arraignment procedure during which the accused can 
plead guilty or innocent. Instead, the focus of the Japanese 
criminal justice system is on extracting confessions of 
guilt: police can hold and question suspects for up to 
twenty-three days without pressing charges. Furthermore, 
the suspect has no absolute right to counsel during the 
interrogation, and police are often able to get confessions 
that make for open-and-shut convictions. The prosecutor 
also has the “benevolent” discretion to drop the case 
altogether if the suspect expresses remorse.
In addition, the extraordinarily high conviction rate 
is a product of Japanese culture. To fail in an attempt to 
convict results in a loss of face, not only for the individual 
prosecutor but also for the court system as a whole. The 
Japanese Justice Ministry estimates that, to avoid the risk 
of losing, prosecutors decline to press charges against 
35 percent of indictable suspects each year. Japanese 
judges—there are almost no juries—contribute to the high 
conviction rate by rarely questioning the manner in which 
prosecutors obtain confessions.
No Plea Bargaining
Interestingly, given the amount of prosecutorial discretion, 
the Japanese criminal justice system does not allow for plea 
bargaining. The Japanese see the practice of “trading” a 
guilty plea for a lesser sentence as counterproductive, as a 
defendant may be tempted to confess to crimes she or he 
did not commit if the prosecution has a strong case. For the 
Japanese, a confession extracted after, say, twenty-three 
days of interrogation may be  “voluntary,” but a confession 
gained through a promise of leniency is “forced” and 
therefore in conflict with the system’s goals of truth seeking 
and accuracy. 
FOR CRITICAL AnALySIS Explain the fundamental 
differences between the American and Japanese criminal 
justice systems. Do you think the power wielded by Japan’s 
prosecutors weakens or strengthens the Japanese system in 
comparison with the American one? 
CoMPArATivE CRiminAL jusTiCE
Nolo Contendere Latin for  
“I will not contest it.” A criminal 
defendant’s plea, in which she 
or he chooses not to challenge, 
or contest, the charges brought 
by the government. 
Plea Bargaining The 
process by which the accused 
and the prosecutor work out a 
mutually satisfactory conclusion 
to the case, subject to court 
approval. 
Discussion Tip: In the “Comparative 
Criminal Justice” feature above, 
the authors note that Japanese 
prosecutors have discretion to 
drop charges against remorseful 
defendants. Ask students if they 
think this practice should be 
encouraged in the United States. 
Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

particulars, the results of a plea bargain are generally the same: the prosecutor gets a 
conviction, and the defendant a lesser punishment.
In Santobello v. New York (1971),16 the Supreme Court held that plea bargaining “is 
not only an essential part of the process but a highly desirable part for many reasons.” 
Some observers would agree, but with ambivalence. They understand that plea bargain-
ing offers the practical benefit of saving court resources, but they question whether it is 
the best way to achieve justice.17
moTivATions foR PLEA bARgAining
Sometimes, it is difficult to perceive criminal court proceedings as anything other than 
a sort of a contest in which the prosecution and the defense treat each other as adver-
saries, with a verdict of guilty or not guilty as the “prize” to be won at the conclusion. In 
many instances, this adversarial system begins in earnest when the two sides try to work 
out a plea bargain. Still, given the extremely high rate of plea bargaining—accounting for 
about 97 percent of criminal convictions in state courts18—it follows that the defendant, 
prosecutor, and defense attorney each have strong reasons to engage in the practice.
DEfEnDAnTs AnD PLEA bARgAining The plea bargain allows the defendant a measure of 
control over his or her fate. Several years ago, for example, John Albert Gardner was con-
victed of killing fourteen-year-old Amber Dubois and seventeen-year old Chelsea King (see 
the photo below). Despite the violent nature of the crimes, San Diego County prosecutors 
agreed not to seek the death penalty if Gardner pleaded guilty to both murders. He did so, 
and a judge sentenced him to life in prison without parole. As Figure 8.4 on the following 
page shows, defendants who plea bargain receive significantly lighter sentences on average 
than those who are found guilty at trial. 
PRosECuToRs AnD PLEA bARgAining In most cases, a prosecutor has a single goal after 
charging a defendant with a crime: conviction. If a case goes to trial, no matter how 
certain a prosecutor may be that the defendant is guilty, there is always a chance that a 
jury or judge will disagree. Plea bargaining removes this risk. Furthermore, the prosecu-
torial screening process described earlier in the chapter is not infallible. Sometimes, a 
prosecutor will find that the evidence against the accused is weaker than first thought 
or will uncover new information that changes the complexion of the case. In these situ-
ations, the prosecutor may decide to drop the charges or, if he or she still feels that the 
defendant is guilty, turn to plea bargaining to “save” a questionable case.
The prosecutor’s role as an administrator also comes into play. She or he may be inter-
ested in the quickest, most efficient manner to dispose of caseloads, and plea bargains reduce 
the time and money spent on each case. Personal philosophy 
can affect the proceedings as well. A prosecutor who feels 
that a mandatory minimum sentence for a particular crime, 
such as marijuana possession, is too strict may plea bargain 
in order to lessen the penalty. Similarly, some prosecutors will 
consider plea bargaining only in certain instances—for bur-
glary and theft, for example, but not for more serious felonies 
such as rape and murder.19
DEfEnsE ATToRnEys AnD PLEA bARgAining Political sci-
entist Milton Heumann has said that the most important 
lesson that a defense attorney learns is that “most of his 
Indicate why 
prosecutors, 
defense 
attorneys, and 
defendants 
often agree to 
plea bargains.
Learning  
objective3
Why did John Albert Gardner 
agree to plead guilty to 
murdering two teenagers? 
What incentives might the San 
Diego prosecutors have had 
for accepting Gardner’s guilty 
plea and declining to seek his 
execution? 
AP Photo/San Diego Union-Tribune, Nelvin C. 
Cepeda, Pool
C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   225
Technology: Show the PBS 
Frontline documentary “The 
Plea” (www.pbs.org/wgbh/
pages/frontline/shows/plea) 
in class. Discuss with students 
their thoughts on plea bargaining 
and the pros and cons of allowing 
prosecutors to offer plea bargains.  
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 2 on page 247, 
which asks them to think about 
the practice of prosecutors offering 
helpful defendants a favorable plea 
bargain.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
[or her] clients are guilty.”20 Given this stark reality, favorable plea bargains are often the 
best a defense attorney can do for clients, aside from helping them to gain acquittals. 
Some have suggested that defense attorneys have other, less savory motives for convinc-
ing a client to plead guilty, such as a desire to increase profit margins by quickly disposing 
of cases21 or a wish to ingratiate themselves with the other members of the courtroom 
work group by showing their “reasonableness.”22
PRoTECTing THE DEfEnDAnT Often, the defendant plays only a minor role in the plea-
bargaining process, which is dominated by give-and-take between the prosecutor and 
the defense attorney. The Supreme Court is aware of the potential for taking advantage of 
the defendant in plea bargaining and has taken steps to protect the accused. Until Boykin 
v. Alabama (1969),23 judges would often accept the defense counsel’s word that the defen-
dant wanted to plead guilty. In Boykin, the Court held that the defendant must make a 
clear statement that he or she accepts the plea bargain. As a result, many jurisdictions 
now ask the accused to sign a Boykin form waiving her or his right to a trial. 
PLEADing noT guiLTy Despite the large number of defendants who eventually plead 
guilty, the plea of not guilty is fairly common at the arraignment. This is true even when 
the facts of the case seem stacked against the defendant. Generally, a not-guilty plea in 
the face of strong evidence is part of a strategy to (1) gain a more favorable plea bargain, 
(2) challenge a crucial part of the evidence on constitutional grounds, or (3) submit one 
of the affirmative defenses discussed in Chapter 3.
Of course, if either side is confident in the strength of its arguments and evidence, it 
will obviously be less likely to accept a plea bargain. Also, both prosecutors and defense 
attorneys may favor a trial to gain publicity, and sometimes public pressure will force a 
chief prosecutor (who is, remember, normally an elected official) to take a weak case to 
trial. Finally, a defendant may be convinced of her or his innocence, regardless of any 
Murder
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sexual
Assault
Robbery
Aggravated
Assault
Burglary
Drug
Possession
Drug
Trafficking
Trial
Guilty Plea
Average Maximum Prison Sentence (in Months)
for Convictions
Mur
Mur
Mu
Mu
Mu
Mu derr
Se
Se
Se
Se
S
Rob
Rob
Rob
ob
ob
R
gg
ggg
ggr
A
l
Bur
Bur
Bur
ur
B
D
D
rder
der
der
der
derr
l
ex
ex
ex
ex
l
ual
ual
ual
ual
ual
R
y
A
bber
ber
ber
ber
ber
bery
Ag
Ag
ed
rav
rav
rav
rav
rav tate
ate
ate
ate
ate
y
r lgla
gla
gla
gla
gla
g ryryryryry
Drug
Dru
Dru
Drug
g
Dru
Dru
Drug
FIGURE 8.4 Sentencing Outcomes for Guilty Pleas
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2006—Statistical Tables (Washington, D.C.:  
U.S. Department of Justice, December 2009), Table 4.3. 
Boykin Form A form that 
must be completed by a 
defendant who pleads guilty. 
The defendant states that she 
or he has done so voluntarily 
and with full comprehension of 
the  consequences.
Discussion Tip: Have students 
examine Figure 8.4 and discuss the 
finding that defendants found guilty 
at trial often receive a longer prison 
sentences than defendants who 
accept plea bargains. Are students 
surprised by this? Do they think it 
is appropriate, or does it unfairly 
pressure defendants to seek and 
accept plea bargains?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   227
other factors. Dharun Ravi, whose invasion of privacy charges we discussed at the begin-
ning of Chapter 7, twice refused plea bargains that would have allowed him to avoid 
incarceration and thus risked the possibility of a ten-year sentence at trial. In the remain-
der of this chapter, we examine what happens to the roughly 3 percent of defendants who 
do, for one reason or another, find themselves in criminal court.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
A ____________ ____________ occurs when the prosecution and the defense work out an 
agreement that resolves the case. Generally, a defendant will plead guilty in exchange 
for a reduction of the ____________ against him or her or a lighter ____________, or both. 
To ensure that the defendant understands the terms of the plea, she or he must sign a 
____________ form waiving her or his right to a ____________. 
sPECiAL fEATuREs  
of CRiminAL TRiALs
Criminal trial procedures reflect the need to protect criminal defendants against the power 
of the state by providing them with a number of rights. Many of the significant rights of the 
accused are spelled out in the Sixth Amendment, which reads, in part, as follows:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by 
an impartial jury of the State and the district wherein the crime shall have been committed, 
. . . and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and 
to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defense.
In the last chapter, we discussed the Sixth Amendment’s guarantee of the right to coun-
sel. Here, we will examine the other important aspects of the criminal trial, beginning 
with two protections explicitly stated in the Sixth Amendment: the right to a speedy trial 
by an impartial jury.
A “sPEEDy” TRiAL
As you have just read, the Sixth Amendment requires a speedy trial for those accused 
of a criminal act. The reason for this requirement is obvious: depending on various fac-
tors, the defendant may lose his or her right to move freely and may be incarcerated 
prior to trial. Also, the accusation that a person has committed a crime jeopardizes 
that person’s reputation in the community. If the defendant is innocent, the sooner the 
trial is held, the sooner his or her innocence can be established in the eyes of the court 
and the public.
THE DEfiniTion of A sPEEDy TRiAL The Sixth Amendment does not specify what is meant 
by the term speedy. The United States Supreme Court has refused to measure “speedy” as 
well, ruling instead in Barker v. Wingo (1972)24 that only in situations in which the delay 
is unwarranted and proved to be prejudicial can the accused claim a violation of Sixth 
Amendment rights.
sPEEDy-TRiAL LAWs To meet constitutional requiements, all fifty states have their own 
speedy-trial statutes. For example, the Illinois Speedy Trial Act holds that a defendant 
must be tried within 120 days of arrest unless both the prosecution and the defense agree 
Identify 
the basic 
protections 
enjoyed 
by criminal 
defendants 
in the United 
States.
Learning  
objective4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

otherwise.25 Keep in mind, however, that a defendant does not automatically go free if 
her or his trial is not “speedy” enough. There must be judicial action, which is rare but 
does occur from time to time. In 2012, for example, Ernest Burnett spent 106 days in the 
Schenectady County (New York) jail—sixteen days more than allowed under state law—
while prosecutors failed to start his trial process. As a result of this oversight, a county 
judge was forced to release Burnett, who had been arrested for kidnapping and trying to 
kill an ex-girlfriend.
Nearly half of all criminal trials in state courts are settled within three months of 
the defendant’s arrest. About 12 percent take more than a year to adjudicate.26 At the 
national level, the Speedy Trial Act of 197427 (amended in 1979) specifies the following 
time limits for those in the federal court system:
1. No more than thirty days between arrest and indictment.
2. No more than ten days between indictment and arraignment.
3. No more than seventy days between arraignment and trial.
Federal law allows extra time for hearings on pretrial motions, mental competency 
examinations, and other procedural actions.
sTATuTEs of LimiTATions Note that the Sixth Amendment’s guarantee of a speedy trial 
does not apply until a person has been accused of a crime. Citizens are protected against 
unreasonable delays before accusation by statutes of  limitations. These legislative time 
limits require prosecutors to charge a defendant with a crime within a certain amount of 
time after the illegal act took place. If the statute of limitations on a particular crime is ten 
years, and the police do not identify a suspect until ten years and one day after the criminal 
act occurred, then that suspect cannot be charged with that particular offense.
In general, prosecutions for murder and other offenses that carry the death penalty 
do not have a statute of limitations. This exception provides police with the ability to 
conduct cold case investigations (see page 134) that last for decades. In 2011, for example, 
Sycamore (Illinois) police arrested Jack Daniel McCullough for the abduction and murder 
of a seven-year-old girl in 1957. The long-awaited break in this case came when investiga-
tors were finally able to disprove McCullough’s alibi that he had been on a train at the time 
of the crime. The problem with prosecuting such cases, of course, is that so much time 
has passed since the criminal act that witnesses may be missing or dead, memories may 
be unreliable, and other evidence may have been lost.
THE RoLE of THE juRy
The Sixth Amendment also states that anyone accused 
of a crime shall be judged by “an impartial jury.” In 
Duncan v. Louisiana (1968),28 the Supreme Court solidi-
fied this right by ruling that in all felony cases, the defen-
dant is entitled to a jury trial. The Court has, however, 
left it to the individual states to decide whether juries 
are required for misdemeanor cases.29 If the defendant 
waives her or his right to trial by jury, a bench trial 
takes place, in which a judge decides questions of legal-
ity and fact, and no jury is involved. 
The typical American jury consists of twelve per-
sons. About a dozen states do, under varying cir-
cumstances, allow for juries with fewer than twelve 
Statute of Limitations A 
law limiting the amount of 
time prosecutors have to bring 
criminal charges against a 
suspect after the crime has 
occurred.
Jury Trial A trial before a 
judge and a jury.
Bench Trial A trial 
conducted without a jury, in 
which a judge determines the 
defendant’s guilt or innocence.
In 2011, new york prosecutors 
gathered “credible” evidence 
that former Syracuse University 
assistant basketball coach 
Bernie Fine, right, had sexually 
abused a minor eight years 
earlier. Because the statute of 
limitations for the crime had 
expired, however, authorities 
could not charge Fine with 
any wrongdoing. What are 
the arguments for and against 
statutes of limitations in sexual 
abuse cases?
Jim McIsaac/Getty Images
228   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   229
members for felony cases. In federal courts, defendants are entitled to have the case 
heard by a twelve-member jury unless both parties agree in writing to a smaller jury.
In most jurisdictions, jury verdicts in criminal cases must be unanimous for acquittal—
a declaration of innocence—or conviction. In other words, all twelve jurors must agree on the 
defendant’s fate. The Supreme Court has held that unanimity is not a rigid requirement. It 
declared that jury verdicts must be unanimous in federal criminal trials, but has given states 
leeway to set their own rules.30 As a result, Louisiana and Oregon continue to require only ten 
votes for conviction in criminal cases.
THE PRiviLEgE AgAinsT sELf-inCRiminATion
In addition to the Sixth Amendment, which specifies the protections we have just dis-
cussed, the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution also provides important safeguards for 
the defendant. The Fifth Amendment states that no person “shall be compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself.” Therefore, a defendant has the right not to 
testify at a trial if to do so would implicate him or her in the crime. 
Witnesses may also refuse to testify on this ground. For example, if a witness, while 
testifying, is asked a question and the answer would reveal his or her own criminal 
wrongdoing, the witness may “take the Fifth.” In other words, she or he can refuse to 
testify on the ground that such testimony may be self-incriminating. Such a refusal rarely 
occurs, however, as witnesses are often granted immunity before testifying, meaning 
that no information they disclose can be used to bring criminal charges against them. 
Witnesses who have been granted immunity cannot refuse to answer questions on the 
basis of self-incrimination. 
It is important to note that not only does the defendant have the right to “take 
the Fifth,” but also that the decision to do so should not prejudice the jury in the pros-
ecution’s favor. The Supreme Court came to this controversial decision while reviewing 
Adamson v. California (1947),31 a case involving the convictions of two defendants who 
had declined to testify in their own defense against charges of robbery, kidnapping, and 
murder. The prosecutor in the Adamson proceedings frequently and insistently brought 
this silence to the notice of the jury in his closing argument, insinuating that if the pair 
had been innocent, they would not have been afraid to testify. The Court ruled that such 
tactics effectively invalidated the Fifth Amendment by using the defendants’ refusal to 
testify as a sign of their guilt. Now judges are required to inform the jury that an accused’s 
decision to remain silent cannot be held against him or her. 
THE PREsumPTion of A DEfEnDAnT’s innoCEnCE 
The presumption in criminal law is that a defendant is innocent until proved guilty. The bur-
den of proving guilt falls on the state (the public prosecutor). Even if a defendant did in fact 
commit the crime, she or he will be “innocent” in the eyes of the law unless the prosecutor 
can support the charge with sufficient evidence to convince a jury (or judge in a bench trial) 
of the defendant’s guilt.32 
Sometimes, especially when a case involves a high-profile violent crime, pretrial 
publicity may have convinced many members of the community—including poten-
tial jurors—that a defendant is guilty. In these instances, a judge has the authority to 
change the venue of the trial to ensure an unbiased jury. In 2012, defense attorneys for 
Thayne Ormsby successfully requested a change of venue for their client’s trial for the 
brutal murders of two men and a ten-year-old boy in Houlton, Maine. Given the size of 
Houlton—population 6,123—and the case’s local notoriety, Ormsby’s lawyers argued that 
the trial should be moved to Caribou, sixty miles to the north. 
Acquittal A declaration 
following a trial that the 
individual accused of the crime 
is innocent in the eyes of the 
law and thus is absolved of the 
charges.
Explain what 
“taking the 
Fifth” really 
means.
Learning  
objective5
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short writing 
assignment, ask students if they 
agree that a defendant’s silence 
should not be used against him or 
her at trial. Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
A sTRiCT sTAnDARD of PRoof
In a criminal trial, the defendant is not required to prove his or her innocence. As mentioned 
earlier, the burden of proving the defendant’s guilt lies entirely with the state. Furthermore, 
the state must prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In other words, the 
prosecution must show that, based on all the evidence, the defendant’s guilt is clear and 
unquestionable. In In re Winship (1970),33 a case involving the due process rights of juve-
niles, the Supreme Court concluded that the reasonable doubt standard is a Constitutional 
requirement.  As such, according to the Court, it reduces the risks of convicting innocent 
people and therefore reassures Americans of the law’s moral force and legitimacy.
This high standard of proof in criminal cases reflects a fundamental social value—
the belief that it is worse to convict an innocent individual than to let a guilty one go 
free. The consequences to the life, liberty, and reputation of an accused person from an 
erroneous conviction for a crime are substantial, and this idea has been factored into 
the process. Placing a high standard of proof on the prosecutor reduces the margin of 
error in criminal cases (at least in one direction). This strict standard of proof is one of 
the few protections enjoyed by defendants in military tribunals. The Anti-Terrorism in 
Action—Trying Times feature below addresses these tribunals, the once and future venue 
According to federal prosecutors, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, 
a citizen of Tanzania, was an integral member of a 1998 
al Qaeda plot that led to the bombing of two American 
embassies in East Africa. In 2011, a federal jury in New York 
convicted Ghailani of one count of conspiracy to destroy 
government buildings and property, and Judge Lewis A. 
Kaplan sentenced him to life in prison. At the same time, 
however, Ghailani was acquitted of more than 280 counts of 
conspiracy and murder, partially because Kaplan disallowed 
damning evidence that had been improperly obtained by a 
coerced interrogation.
To a certain degree, the Ghailani trial was a test of 
President Barack Obama’s strategy of trying terrorism suspects 
in civilian criminal courts. Given the suppression of important 
evidence and Ghailani’s acquittal on almost all the charges, 
many observers felt it was a test that failed. According to 
Republican senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Ghailani 
verdict was “all the proof we need that the administration’s 
approach to prosecuting terrorists has been deeply misguided 
and indeed potentially harmful as a matter of national security.” 
POLICy CHAnGE 
The Obama administration seems to have taken this 
criticism to heart. In April 2011, federal officials announced 
that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four other defendants 
would be tried by military tribunals, rather than by 
civilian courts as originally intended. Mohammed and 
the others were accused of plotting the September 11, 
2001, terrorist attacks. In these tribunals, defendants do 
not have the right to a trial by jury, as guaranteed by the 
Sixth Amendment. Instead, a panel of at least five military 
officials acts in place of the judge and jury and decides 
questions of both “fact and law.” 
Only two-thirds of the panel members need to 
agree for a conviction, in contrast to the unanimous jury 
required in criminal trials. Furthermore, evidence that 
would be inadmissible in criminal court is allowed before 
these tribunals. In response to complaints that Obama 
had “flip-flopped” on military tribunals, a White House 
spokesperson replied, “First and foremost, the president 
does what is in the best security interests of the United 
States.”
FOR CRITICAL AnALySIS Do you think that foreigners 
suspected of terrorist acts should be given the same 
protections as defendants in U.S. criminal courts? Why or 
why not?
AnTi-TERRoRism iN ACTioN
TRyInG TImES
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: One criticism of 
military tribunals, described in the 
“Anti-Terrorism in Action” feature 
on this page, is that they don’t 
give terrorism defendants the 
same incentive to plea bargain as 
do civilian courts. Ask students to 
brainstorm some circumstances 
under which it might be beneficial 
to “make a deal” with a terrorism 
defendant.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   231
for judging terrorist suspects, most of whom were captured during military operations 
in Iraq and Afghanistan.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
The defendant in any felony case is entitled to a trial by ____________. If the defendant 
waives this right, a ____________ trial takes place, in which the ____________ decides 
questions of law and fact. Another benefit for the defendant is the privilege against 
____________-____________, which gives her or him the right to “take the Fifth.” Perhaps 
the most important protection for the defendant, however, is the presumption in criminal 
law that she or he is ____________ until proved ____________. Thus, the burden is on the 
____________ to prove the defendant’s culpability beyond a ____________ ____________. 
juRy sELECTion
The initial step in a criminal trial involves choosing the jury. The main goal of jury selec-
tion is to produce a representative cross section of the population of the jurisdiction 
where the crime was committed. Besides having to live in the jurisdiction where the 
case is being tried, there are very few restrictions on eligibility to serve on a jury. State 
legislatures generally set the requirements, and they are similar in most states. For the 
most part, jurors must be 
1. Citizens of the United States.
2. Over eighteen years of age.
3. Free of felony convictions.
4. Healthy enough to function in a jury setting.
5. Sufficiently intelligent to understand the issues of a trial.
6. Able to read, write, and comprehend the English language (with one exception—
New Mexico does not allow non-English-speaking citizens to be eliminated from 
jury lists simply because of their lack of English-language skills).
The master jury list, sometimes called the jury pool, is made up of all the eligible jurors 
in a community. This list is usually drawn from voter-registration lists or driver’s license 
rolls, which have the benefit of being easily available 
and timely. 
The next step in gathering a jury is to draw 
together the venire (Latin for “to come”). The venire 
is composed of all those people who are notified by 
the clerk of the court that they have been selected 
for jury duty. Those selected to be part of the venire 
are ordered to report to the courthouse on the date 
specified by the notice. 
voiR DiRE
At the courthouse, prospective jurors are gathered, 
and the process of selecting those who will actually 
hear the case begins. This selection process is not 
haphazard. The court ultimately seeks jurors who 
are free of any biases that may affect their willing-
ness to listen to the facts of the case impartially. To 
Master Jury List The list 
of citizens in a court’s district 
from which a jury can be 
selected; compiled from voter-
registration lists, driver’s license 
lists, and other sources.
Venire The group of citizens 
from which the jury is selected.
During the 2012 murder 
trial of Shanterrica Madden 
in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, 
jurors were allowed to question 
witnesses directly from the jury 
box. What is your opinion of 
this practice, which is rarely 
permitted? Do you agree with 
Madden’s attorneys, who felt 
that it was unfair to their client?
AP Photo/Daily News Journal, Jim Davis
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to research the jury 
requirements in their home states. 
How do courts obtain juror lists? 
Who cannot serve on a jury?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
this end, both the prosecutor and the defense attorney have some input into the ultimate 
makeup of the jury. Each attorney questions prospective jurors in a proceeding known as 
voir dire (French for “to speak the truth”). During voir dire, jurors are required to provide 
the court with a significant amount of personal information, including home address, 
marital status, employment status, arrest record, and life experiences.
The voir dire process involves both written and oral questioning of potential jurors. 
Attorneys fashion their inquiries in such a manner as to uncover any biases on the parts 
of prospective jurors and to find persons who might identify with the plights of their 
respective sides. As one attorney noted, though a lawyer will have many chances to talk 
to a jury as a whole, voir dire is his or her only chance to talk with the individual jurors. 
(To better understand the specific kinds of questions asked during this process, see 
Figure 8.5 on the facing page.) Increasingly, attorneys are also conducting virtual voir 
dires on the Internet, using social networking sites such as Facebook to learn valuable 
information about potential jurors.
CHALLEnging PoTEnTiAL juRoRs During voir dire, the attorney for each side may exercise a 
certain number of challenges to prevent particular persons from serving on the jury. Both 
sides can exercise two types of challenges: challenges “for cause” and peremptory challenges. 
Challenges for Cause If a defense attorney or prosecutor con-
cludes that a prospective juror is unfit to serve, the attorney may 
exercise a challenge for cause and request that that person not 
be included on the jury. Attorneys must provide the court with a 
sound, legally justifiable reason for why potential jurors are “unfit” 
to serve. For example, jurors can be challenged for cause if they are 
mentally incompetent, do not understand English, or are proved to have 
a prior link—be it personal or financial—with the defendant or victim.
Peremptory Challenges Each attorney may also exercise a limited number of  
peremptory challenges. These challenges are based solely on an attorney’s subjective 
reasoning, and the attorney usually is not required to give any legally justifiable reason 
for wanting to exclude a particular person from the jury. Because of the rather random 
nature of peremptory challenges, each state limits the number that an attorney may 
utilize: between five and ten for felony trials (depending on the state) and between ten 
and twenty for trials that could possibly result in the death penalty (also depending on 
the state). Once an attorney’s peremptory challenges are used up, he or she must accept 
forthcoming jurors, unless a challenge for cause can be used. 
RACE AnD gEnDER issuEs in juRy sELECTion
For many years, prosecutors used their peremptory challenges as an instrument of seg-
regation in jury selection. Prosecutors were able to keep African Americans off juries 
in cases in which an African American was the defendant. The argument that African 
Americans—or members of any other racial or ethnic group—would be partial toward 
one of their own was tacitly supported by the Supreme Court. Despite its own assertion, 
made in Swain v. Alabama (1965),34 that blacks have the same right to appear on a jury as 
whites, the Court mirrored the apparent racism of society as a whole by protecting the 
questionable actions of many prosecutors.
THE bATson REvERsAL The Supreme Court reversed this policy in 1986 with Batson v. 
Kentucky.35 In that case, the Court declared that the Constitution prohibits prosecutors 
Voir Dire The preliminary 
questions that the trial 
attorneys ask prospective jurors 
to determine whether they are 
biased or have any connection 
with the defendant or a witness.
Challenge for Cause A 
voir dire challenge for which an 
attorney states the reason why 
a prospective juror should not 
be included on the jury.
Peremptory Challenges  
Voir dire challenges to exclude 
potential jurors from serving on 
the jury without any supporting 
reason or cause.
— Robert Frost,  
American poet  
(1874–1963)
“A jury consists of twelve 
persons chosen to decide who 
has the better lawyer.”
Contrast 
challenges 
for cause and 
peremptory 
challenges 
during voir 
dire.
Learning  
objective 6
Group Activity: Provide students 
with different juror profiles. Assign 
each group to be either the defense 
attorney or prosecutor, and have 
them discuss whether they would 
keep the juror or dismiss him or her. 
If they dismiss the juror, have them 
articulate why and what type of 
challenge they would use.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   233
from using peremptory challenges to strike possible jurors on the basis of race. Under 
the Batson ruling, the defendant must prove that the prosecution’s use of a peremptory 
challenge was racially motivated. Doing so requires a number of legal steps:36
1. First, the defendant must make a prima facie case that there has been discrimina-
tion during venire. (Prima facie is Latin for “at first sight.” Legally, it refers to a fact 
that is presumed to be true unless contradicted by evidence.) 
2. To do so, the defendant must show that she or he is a member of a recognizable 
racial group and that the prosecutor has used peremptory challenges to remove 
members of this group from the jury pool.
3. Then, the defendant must show that these facts and other relevant circumstances 
raise the possibility that the prosecutor removed the prospective jurors solely 
because of their race.
4. If the court accepts the defendant’s charges, the burden shifts to the prosecu-
tion to prove that its peremptory challenges were race neutral. If the court finds 
against the prosecution, it rules that a Batson violation has occurred. 
FIGURE 8.5  Sample Juror Questionnaire 
Several years ago, Brian David Mitchell went on trial in Salt Lake City, Utah, for 
kidnapping fourteen-year-old Elizabeth Smart and keeping her in captivity for “nine 
months of hell.” Mitchell held a number of extreme religious views, including the belief 
that he was a godlike figure who would play a prominent role in the coming “end of the 
world.” As Mitchell’s religion would play a significant part in the criminal proceedings, 
both the prosecution and the defense were interested in the religious beliefs of potential 
jurors, as this excerpt from the juror questionnaire shows.
47. Do you consider yourself a religious  
person?      ___ Yes       ___ No 
What is your religious affiliation, if any? 
49. Are there  any religious groups that 
you think children should not be brought 
up in?    ___ Yes       ___ No   
If yes, which ones, and why? 
50. If you attend church, what do you feel are 
the most important things you learned from your 
church or house of worship? 
52. Have you ever been a member of or 
contributed to any group opposed to any 
religious group or sect?      ___ Yes       ___ No   
If yes, what groups and how long have you  
participated?   
A U.S. marshal escorts Brian 
David Mitchell outside the 
federal courthouse in Salt 
Lake City, Utah. 
AP Photo/Colin E. Braley
Paul-Andre Belle-Isle/Shutterstock
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
The Court has revisited the issue of race a number of times in the years since its Batson 
decision. In Powers v. Ohio (1991),37 it ruled that a defendant may contest race-based 
peremptory challenges even if the defendant is not of the same race as the excluded 
jurors. In Georgia v. McCollum (1992),38 the Court placed defense attorneys under the 
same restrictions as prosecutors when making race-based peremptory challenges.
Finally, in 2008, the Court, reaffirming its Batson decision of twenty-two years 
earlier, overturned the conviction of an African American death row inmate because a 
Louisiana prosecutor improperly picked an all-white jury for his murder trial.39 These 
rulings do not mean that a black defendant can never be judged by a jury made up 
entirely of whites. Rather, they indicate that attorneys cannot use peremptory challenges 
to reject a prospective juror because of her or his race. 
WomEn on THE juRy In J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B. (1994),40 the Supreme Court extended 
the principles of the Batson ruling to cover gender bias in jury selection. The case was a 
civil suit for paternity and child support brought by the state of Alabama. Prosecutors 
f A s T f A C T s
PubLiC DEfEnDER, job DEsCRiPTion:
• Interview low-income applicants 
for legal services; advise and 
counsel individuals and groups 
regarding their legal rights; 
handle a reasonable caseload; 
and, where necessary, engage 
in the negotiation, trial, and/or 
appeal of legal issues that have a 
substantial impact on the rights 
of eligible clients.
WHAT kinD of TRAining  
is REquiRED?
• A law degree and membership 
in the relevant state bar 
association.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
• $44,000–$92,000
CArEErs iN CJ
ANNikA CARlsTeN 
PuBliC DeFeNDeR
My very first day on the job, I watched another attorney conduct voir dire (see 
page 232) on a domestic violence assault. I wondered if I would ever be that 
comfortable and confident in court. Many years later, the cases have started to blur 
in my memory. That said, I will always remember my very first “not guilty” verdict. 
I was utterly convinced of my client’s innocence, and very emotionally invested 
in winning the case for him. At the other end of the spectrum, I will never forget 
having to explain court proceedings to a man only hours after he accidentally 
shot and killed his child. Nothing in law school prepares you for that conversation. 
Nothing in life prepares you for that conversation.
Most of all, I believe passionately in the idea of what I do, in the principle of 
equal justice for everyone, regardless of money or circumstance. On a good day, I 
see that ideal fulfilled. On a great day, I feel like I personally have done something 
to make it so.
social Media Career Tip  
You need to differentiate yourself from everyone else on line by providing unique, 
relevant, high-quality content on a regular basis. You should network with a purpose, 
not just to share fun things.
Photo Courtesy of Annika Carlsten
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   235
used nine of their ten challenges to remove men from the jury, while the defense made 
similar efforts to remove women. When challenged, the state defended its actions by 
referring to what it called the rational belief that men and women might have different 
views on the issues of paternity and child support. The Court disagreed and held this 
approach to be unconstitutional.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
The ____________ is composed of all those people who have been identified as 
potential jurors for a particular trial. These people are then gathered for the process of 
____________ ____________, in which the prosecution and defense choose the actual 
members of the jury. Both sides can remove jurors in two ways: (1) through unlimited 
challenges for ____________, which require the attorney to give a reason for the removal, 
and (2) through a limited number of ____________ challenges, for which no reason is 
necessary. According to the United States Supreme Court, potential jurors cannot be 
removed for reasons of ____________ or ____________. 
THE TRiAL
Once the jury members have been selected, the judge swears them in and the trial itself 
can begin. A rather pessimistic truism among attorneys is that every case “has been won 
or lost when the jury is sworn.” This reflects the belief that a juror’s values are the major, 
if not dominant, factor in the decision of guilt or innocence.41 
In actuality, it is difficult to predict how a jury will go about reaching a decision. 
Despite a number of studies on the question, researchers have not been able to identify 
any definitive consistent patterns of jury behavior. Sometimes, jurors in a criminal trial will 
follow instructions to find a defendant guilty unless there is a reasonable doubt, and some-
times they seem to follow instinct or prejudice and apply the law any way they choose.42
oPEning sTATEmEnTs
Attorneys may choose to open the trial with a statement to the jury, though they are not 
required to do so. In these opening statements, the attorneys give a brief version of the 
facts and the supporting evidence that they will present during the trial. Because some trials 
can drag on for weeks or even months, it is extremely helpful for jurors to hear a summary 
of what will unfold. In short, the opening statement is a kind of “road map” that describes 
the destination that each attorney hopes to reach and outlines how he or she plans to reach 
it. The danger for attorneys is that they will offer evidence during the trial that might con-
tradict an assertion made during the opening statement. This may cause jurors to disregard 
the evidence or shift their own thinking further away from the narrative being offered by the 
attorney.43 (For an example of an opening statement, see Figure 8.6 on the following page.)
THE RoLE of EviDEnCE
Once the opening statements have been made, the prosecutor begins the trial proceedings 
by presenting the state’s evidence against the defendant. Courts have complex rules about 
what types of evidence may be presented and how the evidence may be brought out dur-
ing the trial. Evidence is anything that is used to prove the existence or nonexistence of a 
fact. For the most part, evidence can be broken down into two categories: testimony and 
real evidence. Testimony consists of statements by competent witnesses. Real evidence, 
Opening Statements The 
attorneys’ statements to the 
jury at the beginning of the 
trial. 
Evidence Anything that is 
used to prove the existence or 
nonexistence of a fact.
Testimony Verbal evidence 
given by witnesses under oath.
Real Evidence Evidence 
that is brought into court and 
seen by the jury, as opposed to 
evidence that is described for 
a jury.
social Media and CJ 
The Center for Court 
Innovation is a New York-
based nonprofit organization 
dedicated to improving 
the public’s trust in the 
court system.  To access 
its Twitter page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links for this 
chapter.
Teaching Tip: Set up a mock trial 
with your students. Create a case 
(or use an existing case) and assign 
students to be the various members 
of the courtroom work group and 
the jury. Have students act out the 
entire trial process, coming to a 
verdict at the end.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
presented to the court in the form of exhibits, includes any physical items—such as the 
murder weapon or a bloodstained piece of clothing—that affect the case.
Rules of evidence are designed to ensure that testimony and exhibits presented to 
the jury are relevant, reliable, and not unfairly prejudicial against the defendant. One of 
the tasks of the defense attorney is to challenge evidence presented by the prosecution by 
establishing that the evidence is not reliable. Of course, the prosecutor also tries to dem-
onstrate the irrelevance or unreliability of evidence presented by the defense. The final 
decision on whether evidence is allowed before the jury rests with the judge, in keeping 
with his or her role as the “referee” of the adversary system. 
TEsTimoniAL EviDEnCE A person who is called to testify on factual matters that would be 
understood by the average citizen is referred to as a lay witness. If asked about the condi-
tion of a victim of an assault, for example, a lay witness could relate certain facts, such as “she 
was bleeding from her forehead” or “she was unconscious on the ground for several minutes.” 
A lay witness could not, however, give information about the medical extent of the 
victim’s injuries, such as whether she suffered from a fractured skull or internal bleeding. 
Coming from a lay witness, such testimony would be inadmissible. When the matter in ques-
tion requires scientific, medical, or technical skill beyond the scope of the average person, 
prosecutors and defense attorneys may call an expert witness to the stand. The expert 
witness is an individual who has professional training, advanced knowledge, or substantial 
experience in a specialized area, such as medicine, computer technology, or ballistics. 
DiRECT vERsus CiRCumsTAnTiAL EviDEnCE Two types of testimonial evidence may be 
brought into court: direct evidence and circumstantial evidence. Direct evidence is evi-
dence that has been witnessed by the person giving testimony. “I saw Bill shoot Chris” is 
Explain the 
difference 
between 
testimony and 
real evidence, 
between lay 
witnesses 
and expert 
witnesses, 
and between 
direct and 
circumstantial 
evidence.
Learning  
objective 7
FIGURE 8.6  The Opening Statement 
Mazoltuv Borukhova was charged with hiring her cousin, Mikhail Mallayev, to kill 
her husband. In his opening statement, New York prosecutor Brad Leventhal 
asked the jury why Mallayev would commit such a murder, given that he did not 
know the victim. The prosecutor proceeded to answer his own question: 
 
                        Leventhal then pointed his finger at Borukhova and said,  
Source: Janet Malcolm, “Iphigenia in Forest Hills,” New Yorker (May 3, 2010), 36.
“Because he was hired to do it. He was paid 
to do it. He’s an assassin. A paid assassin. An 
executioner. A hit man. For who? Who would hire 
this man, this defendant, to murder in cold blood 
an innocent victim in the presence of his own 
daughter? Who could have such strong feelings 
toward Daniel malekov that they would hire an 
assassin to end his life. Who?”  
mazoltuv Borukhova was 
sentenced to life in prison after 
being found guilty of hiring a hit 
man to murder her husband. 
Photo Courtesy the Queens District Attorney’s office
“Her.”
Lay Witness A witness who 
can truthfully and accurately 
testify on a fact in question 
without having specialized 
training or knowledge.
Expert Witness A witness 
with professional training 
or substantial experience 
qualifying her or him to testify 
on a certain subject.
Direct Evidence Evidence 
that establishes the existence 
of a fact that is in question 
without relying on inference.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   237
an example of direct evidence. Circumstantial evidence is indirect evidence that, even 
if believed, does not establish the fact in question but only the degree of likelihood of the 
fact. In other words, circumstantial evidence can create an inference that a fact exists.
Suppose, for example, that the defendant owns a gun that shoots bullets of the type 
found in the victim’s body. This circumstantial evidence, by itself, does not establish that 
the defendant committed the crime. Combined with other circumstantial evidence, how-
ever, it may do just that. For instance, if other circumstantial evidence indicates that the 
defendant had a motive for harming the victim and was at the scene of the crime when 
the shooting occurred, the jury might conclude that the defendant committed the crime. 
THE “Csi EffECT.” When possible, defense attorneys will almost always make the argu-
ment that the state has failed to present any evidence other than circumstantial evi-
dence against their client. Recently, this tactic has been aided by a phenomenon known 
as the “CSI effect,” taking its name from the popular television series CSI: Crime Scene 
Investigation and its spin-offs. According to many prosecutors, these shows have fostered 
unrealistic notions among jurors as to what high-tech forensic science can accomplish 
as part of a criminal investigation. In reality, the kind of physical evidence used to solve 
crimes on CSI is often not available to the prosecution, which must rely instead on 
witnesses and circumstantial evidence. 
Several years ago, researchers surveyed more than one thousand jurors in 
Washtenaw County, Michigan, and found that nearly 
half “expected the prosecutor to present scien-
tific evidence in every criminal case.” This 
expectation was particularly strong in rape 
trials and trials lacking direct evidence of a 
crime.44 Indeed, some observers believe the 
CSI effect was responsible for Casey Anthony’s 
acquittal of charges that she murdered her two-
year old daughter, discussed in Chapter 1. In 
that 2011 trial, prosecutors could provide 
only circumstantial evidence of Anthony’s 
guilt, and even that evidence 
sometimes worked against them. 
For example, Anthony’s attorneys 
were able to convince jurors that 
DNA traces found on the duct tape used to suffocate the child could not be matched to 
their client (see photo alongside).45 
RELEvAnCE Evidence will not be admitted in court unless it is relevant to the case being 
considered. Relevant evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a fact in 
question. Forensic proof that the bullets found in a victim’s body were fired from a gun 
discovered in the suspect’s pocket at the time of arrest, for example, is certainly relevant. 
The suspect’s prior record, showing a conviction for armed robbery ten years earlier, is, 
as we shall soon see, irrelevant to the case at hand and in most instances will be ruled 
inadmissible by the judge.
PREjuDiCiAL EviDEnCE Evidence may be excluded if it would tend to distract the jury 
from the main issues of the case, mislead the jury, or cause jurors to decide the issue 
on an emotional basis. In practice, this rule often precludes prosecutors from using 
Circumstantial Evidence  
Indirect evidence that is offered 
to establish, by inference, the 
likelihood of a fact that is in 
question.
Relevant Evidence  
Evidence tending to make a 
fact in question more or less 
probable than it would be 
without the evidence. Only 
relevant evidence is admissible 
in court.
Jennifer Welch, a crime scene 
investigator with the Orange 
County (Florida) Sheriff’s Office, 
holds up duct tape found on 
Caylee Anthony’s body. How 
did Casey Anthony’s defense 
attorney use this duct tape to 
create reasonable doubt that 
their client bound and killed 
her daughter?
Joe Burbank/MCT/Landov
Teaching Tip: Provide students with 
different scenarios and descriptions 
of evidence. Then, have them 
determine whether the evidence is 
direct or circumstantial, whether it 
is relevant, and whether it might be 
prejudicial.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
prior purported criminal activities or actual convictions to show that the defendant has 
criminal propensities or an “evil character.”46 This concept is codified in the Federal Rules 
of Evidence, which state that evidence of “other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible 
to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.” Such 
evidence is allowed only when it does not apply to character construction and focuses 
instead on “motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence 
of mistake or accident.”47
Although this legal concept has come under a great deal of criticism, it is consistent 
with the presumption-of-innocence standards discussed earlier. Arguably, if a prosecutor 
is allowed to establish that the defendant has shown antisocial or even violent character 
traits in the past, this will prejudice the jury against the defendant in the present trial. 
Even if the judge instructs jurors that this prior evidence is irrelevant, human nature 
dictates that it will probably have a “warping influence” on the jurors’ perception of the 
defendant.48 Therefore, whenever possible, defense attorneys will keep such evidence 
from the jury.
THE PRosECuTion’s CAsE
Because the burden of proof is on the state, the prosecution is generally considered to 
have a more difficult task than the defense. The prosecutor attempts to establish guilt 
beyond a reasonable doubt by presenting the corpus delicti (“body of the offense” in 
Latin) of the crime to the jury. The corpus delicti is simply a legal term that refers to 
the substantial facts that show a crime has been committed. By establishing such facts 
through the presentation of relevant and nonprejudicial evidence, the prosecutor hopes 
to convince the jury of the defendant’s guilt.
DiRECT ExAminATion of WiTnEssEs Witnesses are crucial to establishing the prosecu-
tor’s case against the defendant. The prosecutor will call witnesses to the stand and ask 
them questions pertaining to the sequence of events that the trial is addressing. This form 
of questioning is known as direct examination. During direct examination, the prosecu-
tor will usually not be allowed to ask leading questions—questions that might suggest to the 
witness a particular desired response. 
A leading question might be something like “So, Mrs. Williams, you noticed the 
defendant threatening the victim with a broken beer bottle?” If Mrs. Williams answers 
“yes” to this question, she has, in effect, been “led” to the conclusion that the defendant 
was, in fact, threatening with a broken beer bottle. The fundamental purpose behind 
testimony is to establish what actually happened, not what the trial attorneys would like 
the jury to believe happened. (A properly worded query would be, “Mrs. Williams, please 
describe the defendant’s manner toward the victim during the incident.”)
HEARsAy When interviewing a witness, both the prosecutor and the defense attorney 
will make sure that the witness’s statements are based on the witness’s own knowledge 
and not hearsay. Hearsay can be defined as any testimony given in court about a state-
ment made by someone else. Literally, it is what someone heard someone else say. For the 
most part, hearsay is not admissible as evidence. It is excluded because the listener may 
have misunderstood what the other person said, and without the opportunity of cross- 
examining the originator of the statement, the misconception cannot be challenged. 
For example, prosecutors in the trial of Dharun Ravi, discussed in the previous 
chapter, tried to introduce a dorm room change application on which Tyler Clementi 
had written “Roommate with webcam spying on me.” The judge did not allow the state-
Direct Examination The 
examination of a witness by the 
attorney who calls the witness 
to the stand to testify.
Hearsay An oral or written 
statement made by an out-
of-court speaker that is later 
offered in court by a witness 
(not the speaker) concerning 
a matter before the court. 
Hearsay usually is not 
admissible as  evidence.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   239
ment in court, ruling that it was hearsay because Clementi was not available to attest to 
its authenticity.49
CRoss-ExAminATion
After the prosecutor has directly examined her or his witnesses, the defense attorney is 
given the chance to question the same witnesses. The Sixth Amendment states, “In all 
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be confronted with wit-
nesses against him.” This confrontation clause gives the accused, through his or her 
attorneys, the right to cross-examine witnesses. Cross-examination refers to the ques-
tioning of an opposing witness during trial, and both sides of a case are allowed to do so.
Cross-examination allows the attorneys to test the truthfulness of opposing wit-
nesses and usually entails efforts to create doubt in the jurors’ minds that the witness is 
reliable. Cross-examination is also linked to the problems presented by hearsay evidence. 
When a witness offers hearsay, the person making the original remarks is not in the court 
and therefore cannot be cross-examined. If such testimony were allowed, the defendant’s 
Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses against him or her would be violated.
After the defense has cross-examined a prosecution witness, the prosecutor may 
want to reestablish any reliability that might have been lost. The prosecutor can do so by 
again questioning the witness, a process known as redirect examination. Following the 
redirect examination, the defense attorney will be given the opportunity to ask further 
questions of prosecution witnesses, or recross-examination. Thus, each side has two 
opportunities to question a witness. The attorneys need not do so, but only after each 
side has been offered the opportunity will the trial move on to the next witness or the 
next stage. 
THE DEfEnDAnT’s CAsE
After the prosecution has finished presenting its evidence, the defense has the option to 
offer the defendant’s case. Because the burden is on the state to prove the accused’s guilt, 
the defense is not required to offer any case at all. It can simply “rest” without calling any 
witnesses or producing any real evidence and ask the jury to decide the merits of the case 
on what it has seen and heard from the prosecution.
CREATing A REAsonAbLE DoubT Defense lawyers most commonly defend their clients 
by attempting to expose weaknesses in the prosecutor’s case. Remember that if the 
defense attorney can create reasonable doubt concerning the client’s guilt in the mind of 
just a single juror, the defendant has a good chance of gaining an acquittal or at least a 
hung jury, a circumstance explained later in the chapter. 
Even if the prosecution can present seemingly strong evidence, a defense attorney 
may succeed by creating reasonable doubt. In an illustrative case, Jason Korey bragged to 
his friends that he had shot and killed Joseph Brucker in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and 
a great deal of circumstantial evidence linked Korey to the killing. The police, however, 
could find no direct evidence: they could not link Korey to the murder weapon, nor could 
they match his footprints to those found at the crime scene. Michael Foglia, Korey’s 
defense attorney, explained his client’s bragging as an attempt to gain attention, not a 
true statement. Although this explanation may strike some as unlikely, in the absence 
of physical evidence it did create doubt in the jurors’ minds, and Korey was acquitted. 
(For a better idea of how this strategy works in court, see the feature You Be the Defense 
Attorney—A Gang Murder on the following page.)
Confrontation Clause The 
part of the Sixth Amendment 
that guarantees all defendants 
the right to confront witnesses 
testifying against them during 
the criminal trial. 
Cross-Examination The 
questioning of an opposing 
witness during trial.
Teaching Tip: If possible, have a 
local defense attorney visit class 
to speak to students about his or 
her educational and professional 
background, the challenges of the 
job, and the best strategies for 
defending clients.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

oTHER DEfEnsE sTRATEgiEs The defense can choose among a number of strategies 
to generate reasonable doubt in the jurors’ minds. It can present an alibi defense, by 
submitting evidence that the accused was not at or near the scene of the crime at the 
time the crime was committed. Another option is to attempt an affirmative defense, by 
presenting additional facts to the ones offered by the prosecution. Possible affirmative 
defenses, which we discussed in detail in Chapter 3, include the following:
1. Self-defense    2. Insanity    3. Duress    4. Entrapment
With an affirmative defense strategy, the defense attempts to prove that the defendant 
should be found not guilty because of certain circumstances surrounding the crime. 
An affirmative strategy can be difficult to carry out because it forces the defense to 
prove the reliability of its own evidence, not simply disprove the evidence offered by 
the prosecution.
The defense is often willing to admit that a certain criminal act took place, espe-
cially if the defendant has already confessed. When this happens, the primary question 
of the trial becomes not whether the defendant is guilty, but what the defendant is 
guilty of. In these situations, the defense strategy focuses on obtaining the lightest pos-
sible penalty for the defendant. As we saw earlier, this strategy is responsible for the 
high percentage of proceedings that end in plea bargains. 
ThE siTuATioN Your client is Daniel, a twenty-three-year-old member of a violent Los 
Angeles street gang. Daniel is charged with the first degree murder of Christopher, his 
best friend and fellow gang member. Christopher was killed because other gang members 
believed he had “snitched” about their criminal activity. According to prosecutors, Daniel 
lured Christopher to a garage, where other gang members hit him in the head with a shotgun 
and then stabbed him more than sixty times. During the trial, José, the prosecution’s main 
witness, who admitted taking part in the stabbing while high on methamphetamine, testified 
that Daniel kicked Christopher’s dead body. In her opening argument, the prosecutor told the 
jury that even though your client did not stab Christopher, he was just as guilty of murder as 
those who did.
ThE LAw To find a defendant guilty (in this jurisdiction), a jury must find beyond a 
reasonable doubt that he or she committed the crime. For Daniel to be guilty of first degree 
murder, the prosecution must prove that he acted with “malice aforethought” in luring 
Christopher to his death in the garage. 
Your DECisioN As a defense attorney, your job is to create reasonable doubt in the jurors’ 
minds about Daniel’s intent to lure Christopher to his death. Besides the  
facts presented above, other important details about this case include the following:  
(1) José, the prosecution’s main witness, was allowed to plead guilty to a lesser charge of 
voluntary manslaughter in return for his testimony, and (2) José was dating Christopher’s sister 
at the time of the murder. What argument will you make before the jury to create reasonable 
doubt?
[To see how a Los Angeles defense attorney argued in a case with similar facts, go to Example 8.1 in Appendix B.]
You BE ThE DEFENsE ATTorNEY
A Gang murder
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
240   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After students read 
the “You Be the Defense Attorney” 
feature above, ask them to articulate 
why it might be important that José 
was dating the victim’s sister at the 
time of the crime.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   241
REbuTTAL AnD suRREbuTTAL
After the defense closes its case, the prosecution is permitted to bring new evidence 
forward that was not used during its initial presentation to the jury. This is called the 
rebuttal stage of the trial. When the rebuttal stage is finished, the defense is given the 
opportunity to cross-examine the prosecution’s new witnesses and introduce new wit-
nesses of its own. This final act is part of the surrebuttal. After these stages have been 
completed, the defense may file a request called a motion for a directed verdict, asking 
the judge to find in the defendant’s favor. If this motion is rejected—and it almost always 
is—the trial continues, and the opposing sides offer their closing arguments.
CLosing ARgumEnTs
In their closing arguments, the attorneys summarize their presentations and argue 
one final time for their respective cases. In most states, the defense attorney goes 
first, and then the prosecutor. (In Colorado, Kentucky, and Missouri, the order is 
reversed.) An effective closing argument includes all of the major points that support 
the defense’s or the government’s case. It also emphasizes the shortcomings of the 
opposing party’s case. 
Jurors will view a closing argument with some skepticism if it merely recites the 
central points of a party’s claim or defense without also responding to the unfavorable 
facts or issues raised by the other side. Of course, neither attorney wants to focus too 
much on the other side’s position, but the elements of the opposing position do need 
to be acknowledged and their flaws highlighted. (For an example of opposing closing 
arguments, see Figure 8.7 below.) Once both attorneys have completed their remarks, 
Rebuttal Evidence given 
to counteract or disprove 
evidence presented by the 
opposing party.
Closing Arguments  
Arguments made by each side’s 
attorney after the cases for the 
prosecution and the defense 
have been presented.
Renee Keith/iStockphoto
FIGURE 8.7  Closing Arguments 
Defense attorneys for Keith Kidwell, charged with murdering a convenience store 
worker in Bull City, North Carolina, argued that the case against their client was 
“flawed to the core.” In her closing argument, district attorney Tracey Cline 
focused on one particular piece of evidence to contradict this assertion:
 
           
 
 
The jury found Kidwell guilty of first degree murder, and he was 
sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. 
Source: For a complete transcript of Cline’s closing argument, go to media2.newsobserver.com/smedia/2011/09/05/09/47/ 
qSaKF.So.156.pdf.
Inside that [store] that morning, there were footprints, 
shoe impressions. All the ones that were in blood—and 
I’m not talking about what the kids put on their face at 
Halloween. Real blood. Blood that had once run warm 
inside a body. But all of the shoe prints in blood can 
be traced to mr. Kidwell’s shoes. Outside sole design, 
same physical size, general wear, similar features. 
Scientific words. you, each of you, had in your hands 
the picture of that bloody shoe print on mr. nelms’ 
back and matched it up—I said matched—with his 
shoe. Coincidence?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the case is submitted to the jury, and the attorneys’ role in the trial is, for the moment, 
complete.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
Evidence is any object or spoken ____________ that can be used in a criminal trial to 
prove or disprove a ____________ related to the crime. Evidence will not be admitted 
into the trial unless it is ____________ and does not unfairly ____________ the jury against 
the defendant by appealing to emotion rather than fact. The prosecution will usually try 
to build its case through ____________ examination of its witnesses, which the defense 
will counter with a ____________ -examination of its own. The defense’s main goal is to 
create ____________ ____________ concerning the defendant’s guilt in the minds of as 
many jurors as possible. 
THE finAL sTEPs of THE TRiAL  
AnD PosTConviCTion PRoCEDuREs
After closing arguments, the outcome of the trial is in the hands of the jury. Before the 
jurors begin their deliberations, the judge gives the jury a charge, summing up the case 
and instructing the jurors on the rules of law that apply to the issues in the case. These 
charges, also called jury instructions, are usually prepared during a special charging 
conference involving the judge and the trial attorneys. In this conference, the attorneys 
suggest the instructions they would like to see be sent to the jurors, but the judge makes 
the final decision as to the charges submitted. If the defense attorney disagrees with the 
charges sent to the jury, he or she can enter an objection, thereby setting the stage for a 
possible appeal.
juRy DELibERATion
After receiving the charge, the jury begins its deliberations. Jury deliberation is a 
somewhat mysterious process, as it takes place in complete seclusion. Most of what 
is known about how a jury deliberates comes from mock trials or interviews with 
jurors after the verdict has been reached. A general picture of the deliberation pro-
cess constructed from this research shows that the romantic notion of jurors with 
high-minded ideals of justice making eloquent speeches is, for the most part, not the 
reality. In approximately three out of every ten cases, the initial vote by the jury led to 
a unanimous decision. In 90 percent of the remaining cases, the majority eventually 
dictated the decision.50
One of the most important instructions that a judge normally gives the jurors is 
that they should seek no outside information during deliberation. The idea is that jurors 
should base their verdict only on the evidence that the judge has deemed admissible. 
In extreme cases, the judge will order that the jury be sequestered, or isolated from the 
public, during the trial and deliberation stages of the proceedings. Sequestration is used 
when deliberations are expected to be lengthy, or the trial is attracting a high amount 
of interest and the judge wants to keep the jury from being unduly influenced. Juries are 
usually sequestered in hotels and kept under the watch and guard of officers of the court. 
Charge The judge’s 
instructions to the jury following 
the attorneys’ closing arguments. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   243
THE vERDiCT
Once it has reached a decision, the jury issues a verdict. The most common verdicts are 
guilty and not guilty, though juries may signify different degrees of guilt if instructed to 
do so by the judge. Following the announcement of a guilty or not guilty verdict and, in 
some instances we will discuss in the next chapter, the sentencing phase, the jurors are 
discharged, and the jury trial proceedings are finished. 
When a jury in a criminal trial is unable to agree on a unanimous verdict—or a 
majority of the jurors in certain states—it returns with no decision. This is known as a 
hung jury. Following a hung jury, the judge will declare a mistrial, and the case will be 
tried again in front of a different jury if the prosecution decides to pursue the matter a 
second time. A judge can do little to reverse a hung jury, considering that “no decision” 
is just as legitimate a verdict as guilty or not guilty. 
In some states, if there are only a few dissenters to the majority view, a judge can 
send the jury back to the jury room under a set of rules set forth more than a century 
ago by the Supreme Court in Allen v. United States (1896).51 The Allen Charge, as this 
instruction is called, asks the jurors in the minority to reconsider the majority opinion. 
Many jurisdictions do not allow Allen Charges on the ground that they improperly coerce 
jurors with the minority opinion to change their minds.52
One former juror, fresh from trial, complained that the members of the courtroom work 
group had not provided the jury with enough information to render a fair verdict. “We 
felt deeply frustrated at our inability to fill those gaps in our knowledge,” he added. 
Until recently, frustrated jury members have lacked the means to carry out their own 
investigations in court. Today, however, jurors with smartphones have news stories and 
online research tools at their fingertips. With wireless devices, they can look up legal 
terms, blog and tweet about their experiences, and sometimes even try to contact other 
participants in the trial through “friend” requests on social media Web sites.
This access can cause serious problems for judges, whose responsibility it is to 
ensure that no outside information taints the jury’s decision. During deliberations at the 
end of one recent trial in Florida concerning illegal Internet drug sales, the judge found 
that nine of the twelve jurors had conducted Google research about the case. One jury 
member even discovered that the defendant had previously prescribed drugs later used 
in a double suicide—information that the defense had successfully argued should be 
kept out of court. The judge had no choice but to declare a mistrial, requiring that the 
proceedings start again with a different jury.
ThiNkiNg ABouT WiReless DeviCes iN The CouRTRooM: 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the accused the right to trial by an “impartial jury.” 
How does the use of wireless devices in the courtroom threaten this right?
Wireless Devices in the Courtroom
Alina Solovyova-Vincent/iStockphoto
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Verdict A formal decision 
made by the jury.
Hung Jury A jury whose 
members are so irreconcilably 
divided in their opinions that 
they cannot reach a verdict.
Allen Charge An instruction 
by a judge to a deadlocked jury 
with only a few dissenters that 
asks the jurors in the minority 
to reconsider the majority 
opinion. 
Discussion Tip: Have students 
debate why jury verdicts are, 
in most cases, required to be 
unanimous. What would be the pros 
and cons of having a majority of 
jurors decide a defendant’s guilt or 
innocence?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPEALs
Even if a defendant is found guilty, the trial process is not 
necessarily over. In our criminal justice system, a person 
convicted of a crime has a right to appeal. An appeal is 
the process of seeking a higher court’s review of a lower 
court’s decision for the purpose of correcting or changing 
the lower court’s judgment. A defendant who loses a case 
in a trial court cannot automatically appeal the conviction. 
The defendant normally must first be able to show that the 
trial court acted improperly on a question of law. Common 
reasons for appeals include the introduction of tainted evi-
dence by the prosecution or faulty jury instructions deliv-
ered by the trial judge. In federal courts, about 17 percent of 
criminal convictions are appealed.53
DoubLE jEoPARDy The appeals process is available only to the defense. If a jury finds the 
accused not guilty, the prosecution cannot appeal to have the decision reversed. To do 
so would infringe on the defendant’s Fifth Amendment rights against multiple trials for 
the same offense. This guarantee against being tried a second time for the same crime 
is known as protection from double jeopardy. The prohibition against double jeopardy 
means that once a criminal defendant is found not guilty of a particular crime, the govern-
ment may not reindict the person and retry him or her for the same crime. 
There are several nuances to this rule, however. First, a state’s prosecution does not 
prevent a separate federal prosecution of the same crime, and vice versa. Second, acquit-
ted defendants can be sued in civil court for circumstances arising from the alleged 
wrongdoing on the theory that they are not being tried for the same crime twice. Third, a 
hung jury is not an acquittal for purposes of double jeopardy. So, if a jury is deadlocked, 
the government is free to seek a new trial.
THE APPEAL PRoCEss There are two basic reasons for the appeal process. The first is to 
correct an error made during the initial trial. The second is to review policy. Because of 
this second function, the appellate courts are an important part of the flexible nature of the 
criminal justice system. When existing law has ceased to be effective or no longer reflects 
the values of society, an appellate court can effectively change the law through its decisions 
and the precedents that it sets.54 A classic example was the Miranda v. Arizona decision (see 
page 180), which, although it failed to change the fate of the defendant (he was found guilty 
on retrial), had a far-reaching impact on custodial interrogation of suspects.
It is also important to understand that once the appeal process begins, the defen-
dant is no longer presumed innocent. The burden of proof has shifted, and the  defendant 
is obligated to prove that her or his conviction should be overturned. The method of fil-
ing an appeal differs slightly among the fifty states and the federal government, but the 
five basic steps are similar enough for summarization in Figure 8.8 on the facing page. 
For the most part, defendants are not required to exercise their right to appeal. The one 
exception involves the death sentence. Given the seriousness of capital punishment, the 
defendant is required to appeal the case, regardless of his or her wishes. 
HAbEAs CoRPus Even after the appeals process is exhausted, a convict may have access 
to one final procedure, known as habeas corpus (Latin for “you have the body”). Habeas 
corpus is a judicial order that commands a corrections official to bring a prisoner before 
Appeal The process of 
seeking a higher court’s review 
of a lower court’s decision for 
the purpose of correcting or 
changing this decision.
Double Jeopardy To twice 
place at risk (jeopardize) a 
person’s life or liberty. The 
Fifth Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution prohibits a second 
prosecution in the same court 
for the same criminal offense.
Habeas Corpus An order 
that requires corrections 
officials to bring an inmate 
before a court or a judge and 
explain why she or he is being 
held in prison.
In 2009, the murder trial of 
John Katehis, left, for stabbing 
New York radio reporter George 
Weber fifty times ended 
in a hung jury. Following a 
second trial in 2011, Katehis 
was convicted and sentenced 
to twenty-five years to life in 
prison. Why should trials that end 
in a hung jury not “count” for 
purposes of double jeopardy?
AP Photo/Robert Mecea
244   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
List the five 
basic steps of 
an appeal.
Learning  
objective 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   245
a federal court so that the court can hear the convict’s claim that he or she is being held 
illegally. A writ of habeas corpus differs from an appeal in that it can be filed only by 
someone who is imprisoned. 
WRongfuL ConviCTions
The appeals process is primarily concerned with “legal innocence.” That is, appeals 
courts focus on how the law was applied in a case, rather than on the facts of the case. 
But what if a defendant who is factually innocent has been found guilty at trial? For the 
most part, such wrongful convictions can be righted only with the aid of new evidence 
suggesting the defendant’s innocence. When such new evidence is uncovered, a prosecu-
tor’s office can choose to reopen the case in order to acquit. Or, the defendant’s attorneys 
can use the habeas corpus procedure described above to restart court proceedings.
In Chapter 5, we saw how DNA fingerprinting has been a boon for law enforce-
ment. According to the Innocence Project, a New York–based legal group, as of August 
2012, the procedure has also led to the exoneration of 297 convicts in the United States.55 
For example, in 1986, Michael Morton was wrongly convicted of murdering his wife 
in Williamson County, Texas. Morton subsequently spent twenty-five years in prison 
before tests of DNA on a bloody blue bandana found near the murder scene showed his 
wife’s blood mingled with the blood of another suspect. Acting on this new evidence, on 
October 4, 2011, a district judge set Morton free.
sELFAssEssMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 247.
Once both the prosecution and the defense have completed their closing arguments, 
the judge will give the jury a ____________ summing up the case and providing 
instructions on how to proceed. After the jury has _____ and reached a decision, it will 
announce a ____________ of guilty or not guilty. If the jury cannot do so, a ____________ 
jury occurs, and the judge will call a mistrial. If a defendant is convicted, he or she has 
the option of ____________ this outcome based on a showing that the trial court acted 
improperly on a question of ____________, not fact, during the proceedings. 
Wrongful Conviction The 
conviction, either by verdict 
or by guilty plea, of a person 
who is factually innocent of the 
charges.
FIGURE 8.8  The Steps of an Appeal  
1.  The defendant, or appellant, files a notice of appeal  —a short written statement outlining the 
basis of the appeal. 
2.  The appellant transfers the trial court record to the appellate court. This record contains items 
such as evidence and a transcript of the testimony. 
3.  Both parties file briefs. A brief is a written document that presents the party’s legal arguments. 
4.  Attorneys from both sides present oral arguments before the appellate court. 
5.  Having heard from both sides, the judges of the appellate court retire to deliberate the case 
and make their decision. As described in Chapter 7, this decision is issued as a written opinion. 
Appellate courts generally do one of the following: 
•  Uphold the decision of the lower court.
•  modify the lower court’s decision by changing only a part of it.
•  Reverse the decision of the lower court.
•   Reverse and remand the case, meaning that the matter is sent back to the lower court for 
further proceedings. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 247, 
which asks them to think about the 
importance of the appeals process 
in the American criminal justice 
system. 
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Innocence Project’s Web 
site (www.innocenceproject.org) 
to learn more about the issue of 
wrongful convictions in the United 
States.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
ChAPTEr suMMArY
Identify the steps involved in the pre-
trial criminal process. (a) Suspect taken 
into custody or arrested; (b) initial appear-
ance before a magistrate, at which time the defendant is 
informed of his or her constitutional rights and a public 
defender may be appointed or private counsel may be hired 
by the state to represent the defendant; (c) the posting of 
bail or release on recognizance; (d) preventive detention 
(if deemed necessary to ensure the safety of other persons 
or the community) or regular detention (if the defendant is 
unable to post bail); (e) preliminary hearing (mini-trial), at 
which the judge rules on whether there is probable cause 
and the prosecutor issues an information; or, alternatively, 
(f) grand jury hearings, after which an indictment is issued 
against the defendant if the grand jury finds probable cause; 
(g) arraignment, in which the defendant is informed of the 
charges and must respond by pleading not guilty or guilty 
(or in some cases nolo contendere); and (h) plea bargaining.
Explain how a prosecutor screens 
potential cases. (a) Is there sufficient evi-
dence for conviction? (b) What is the pri-
ority of the case? The more serious the alleged crime, the 
higher the priority. The more extensive the defendant’s 
criminal record, the higher the priority. (c) Are the victims 
cooperative? Violence against family members often yields 
uncooperative victims, so these cases are rarely prosecuted. 
(d) Might the defendant be willing to testify against other 
offenders? (e) Are the victims reliable?
Indicate why prosecutors, defense attor-
neys, and defendants often agree to plea 
bargains. For prosecutors, a plea bargain 
removes the risk of losing the case at trial, particularly if the 
evidence against the defendant is weak. For defense attor-
neys, the plea bargain may be the best deal possible for a 
potentially guilty client. For defendants, plea bargains give a 
measure of control over a highly uncertain future.
Identify the basic protections enjoyed 
by criminal  defendants in the United 
States. According to the Sixth Amendment, 
a criminal defendant has the right to a speedy and public 
trial by an impartial jury in the physical location where the 
crime was committed. Additionally, a person accused of a 
crime must be informed of the nature of the crime and be 
confronted with the witnesses against him or her. Further, 
the accused must be able to summon witnesses in her or his 
favor and have the assistance of counsel.
Explain what “taking the Fifth” really 
means. The Fifth Amendment states that 
no person “shall be compelled in any crimi-
nal case to be a witness against himself.” Thus, defendants do 
not have to testify if their testimony would implicate them 
in the crime. Witnesses may refuse to testify on this same 
ground. (Witnesses, though, are often granted immunity 
and thereafter can no longer take the Fifth.) In the United 
States, silence on the part of a defendant cannot be used by 
the jury in forming its opinion about guilt or innocence. 
Contrast challenges for cause and 
peremptory challenges during voir dire. 
A challenge for cause occurs when an attor-
ney provides the court with a legally justifiable reason why 
a potential juror should be excluded—for example, the juror 
does not understand English. In contrast, peremptory chal-
lenges do not require any justification by the attorney and 
are usually limited to a small number. They cannot, however, 
be based, even implicitly, on race or gender.
Explain the difference between testi-
mony and real  evidence, between lay 
witnesses and expert witnesses, and 
between direct and circumstantial evidence. Testimony 
consists of statements by competent witnesses, whereas 
real evidence includes physical items that affect the case. A 
lay witness is an “average person,” whereas an expert wit-
ness speaks with the authority of one who has professional 
training, advanced knowledge, or substantial experience in 
a specialized area. Direct evidence is evidence presented by 
witnesses; circumstantial evidence can create an inference 
that a fact exists, but it does not directly establish the fact.
List the five basic steps of an appeal. 
(a) The filing of a notice of appeal; (b) the 
transfer of the trial court record to the 
appellate court; (c) the filing of briefs; (d) the  presentation 
of oral arguments; and (e) the issuance of a written opinion 
by the appellate judges, upholding the decision of the lower 
court, modifying part of the decision, reversing the decision, 
or reversing and remanding the case to the trial court. 
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8 :  P R E T R i A l  P R o C E d u R E s  A n d  T H E  C R i m i n A l  T R i A l   247
QuEsTioNs For CriTiCAL ANALYsis
1. Suppose that a billionaire investment adviser is arrested for 
defrauding her clients out of millions of dollars. Should she 
be released on recognizance, released on bail, or denied bail 
before her trial? Why? How do bail issues for white-collar 
criminals differ from those for violent criminals?
2. Do you think that a prosecutor should offer a favorable 
plea bargain to a defendant who provides helpful infor-
mation concerning a different defendant? What are the 
pros and cons of this practice?
3. How might the “CSI effect” (see page 237) have a positive 
impact on criminal trials from the standpoint of both 
prosecutor preparation and juror interest?
4. Police find a critically wounded man lying in the parking 
lot of a gas station. When they ask him what happened, 
he indicates that the defendant shot him. Then, the man 
dies. Should the dead man’s identification of his killer be 
allowed in court? Before answering, review the concepts 
of hearsay (page 238) and the confrontation clause 
(page 239). (To see how the United States Supreme 
Court ruled in a similar case, go to www.scotusblog 
.com/case-files/cases/michigan-v-bryant.)
5. Why is the appeals process so important to the American 
criminal justice system? What would be some of the con-
sequences if criminal defendants did not have the ability 
to appeal questionable convictions?
KEY TErMs
acquittal  229
Allen Charge  243
appeal  244
arraignment  223
bail  217
bail bond agent  219
bench trial  228
Boykin form  226
case attrition  221
challenge for cause  232
charge  242
circumstantial evidence  237
closing arguments  241
confrontation clause  239
cross-examination  239
direct evidence  236
direct examination  238
discovery  220
double jeopardy  244
evidence  235
expert witness  236
grand jury  220
habeas corpus  244
hearsay  238
hung jury  243
indictment  221
information  220
initial appearance  217
jury trial  228
lay witness  236
master jury list  231
nolo contendere  224
opening statements  235
peremptory challenges  232
plea bargaining  224
preliminary hearing  220
preventive detention  219
property bond  219
real evidence  235
rebuttal  241
release on recognizance (ROR)  219
relevant evidence  237
statute of limitations  228
testimony  235
venire  231
verdict  243
voir dire  232
wrongful conviction  245
sELF AssEssMENT ANswEr KEY
Page 219: i. initial appearance; ii. constitutional; iii. bail; 
iv. judge; v. preventive
Page 221: i. probable cause; ii. preliminary; iii. grand 
jury; iv. indictment
Page 223: i. attrition; ii. screen; iii. conviction; iv. evidence
Page 227: i. plea bargain; ii. charges; iii. sentence;  
iv. Boykin; v. trial
Page 231: i. jury; ii. bench; iii. judge; iv. self-incrimination; 
v. innocent; vi. guilty; vii. state/prosecutor;  
viii. reasonable doubt
Page 235: i. venire; ii. voir dire; iii. cause; iv. peremptory; 
v. race; vi. gender
Page 242: i. testimony; ii. fact; iii. relevant; iv. prejudice; 
v. direct; vi. cross; vii. reasonable doubt
Page 245: i. charge; ii. deliberated; iii. verdict; iv. hung;  
v. appealing; vi. law
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
CoursEMATE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access code 
for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your choice 
for additional online study aids. 
NoTEs
 1. Quoted in Jenna Johnson and Mary Pat 
Flaherty, “Juror: Jury Split over Huguely’s 
Intent,” Winchester (Virginia) Star (February 
27, 2012), A3.
 2. Lawrence M. Friedman and Robert V. 
Percival, The Roots of Justice (Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1981).
 3. Riverside County, California v. McLaughlin, 
500 U.S. 44 (1991).
 4. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Pretrial Release 
of Felony Defendants in State Courts 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, November 2007), 2.
 5. Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael 
D. Reisig, American Corrections, 10th ed. 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2013), 173.
 6. Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U.S. 103 (1975).
 7. Kenneth C. Davis, Discretionary Justice: 
A Preliminary Inquiry (Baton Rouge, LA: 
Louisiana State University Press, 1969), 189.
 8. Ryan Blitstein, “Online Crooks Often 
Escape Prosecution,” San Jose Mercury News 
(November 18, 2007), 1A.
 9. Henry K. Lee, “D.A. Cuts Efforts on Lesser 
Crimes,” San Francisco Chronicle (April 22, 
2009), B1.
10. Milton Hirsh and David Oscar Markus, 
“Fourth Amendment Forum,” Champion 
(December 2002), 42.
11. Barbara Boland, Paul Mahanna, and Ronald 
Scones, The Prosecution of Felony Arrests, 
1988 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, 1992).
12. Richard Felson and Paul-Philippe Pare, 
The Reporting of Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Assault by Nonstrangers to the Police 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, March 2005), 6.
13. Tom Lininger, “Evidentiary Issues in Federal 
Prosecutions of Violence against Women,” 
Indiana Law Review 36 (2003), 709.
14. 18 U.S.C. Section 3553(e) (2006).
15. William K. Rashbaum and John Elgion, 
“District Attorney Asks Judge to Drop 
Strauss-Kahn Case,” New York Times (August 
23, 2011), A1.
16. 404 U.S. 257 (1971).
17. Fred C. Zacharias, “Justice in Plea 
Bargaining,” William and Mary Law Review 
39 (March 1998), 1121.
18. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prosecutors 
in State Courts, 2007—Statistical Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2011), 2.
19. Albert W. Alschuler, “The Prosecutor’s Role 
in Plea Bargaining,” University of Chicago Law 
Review 36 (1968), 52.
20. Milton Heumann, Plea Bargaining: The 
Experiences of Prosecutors, Judges, and 
Defense Attorneys (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1978), 58.
21. Albert W. Alschuler, “The Defense Attorney’s 
Role in Plea Bargaining,” Yale Law Journal 84 
(1975), 1200.
22. Stephen J. Schulhofer, “Plea Bargaining as 
Disaster,” Yale Law Journal 101 (1992), 1987.
23. 395 U.S. 238 (1969).
24. 407 U.S. 514 (1972).
25. 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes Section 
5/103-5 (1992).
26. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Defendants 
in Large Urban Counties, 2006 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, May 2010), 
Table 10, page 10.
27. 18 U.S.C. Section 3161.
28. 391 U.S. 145 (1968).
29. Blanton v. Las Vegas, 489 U.S. 538 (1989).
30. Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U.S. 404 (1972); and 
Lee v. Louisiana, No. 07-1523 (2008).
31. 332 U.S. 46 (1947).
32. Barton L. Ingraham, “The Right of Silence, 
the Presumption of Innocence, the Burden 
of Proof, and a Modest Proposal,” Journal 
of Criminal Law and Criminology 85 (1994), 
559–595.
33. 397 U.S. 358 (1970).
34. 380 U.S. 224 (1965).
35. 476 U.S. 79 (1986).
36. Eric L. Muller, “Solving the Batson Paradox: 
Harmless Error, Jury Representation, and 
the Sixth Amendment,” Yale Law Journal 106 
(October 1996), 93.
37. 499 U.S. 400 (1991).
38. 502 U.S. 1056 (1992).
39. Snyder v. Louisiana, 552 U.S. 472 (2008).
40. 511 U.S. 127 (1994).
41. Harry Kalven and Hans Zeisel, The American 
Jury (Boston: Little, Brown, 1966), 163–167.
42. Douglas D. Koski, “Testing the Story Model 
of Juror Decision Making,” Sex Offender Law 
(June/July 2003), 53–58.
43. Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie, “The 
Story Model for Juror Decision Making,” 
in Inside the Juror: The Psychology of Juror 
Decision Making (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1983), 192, 194–195.
44. Donald E. Shelton, “Juror Expectations 
for Scientific Evidence in Criminal Cases: 
Perceptions and Reality about the ‘CSI 
Effect’ Myth,” Thomas M. Cooley Law Review 
27 (2010), at lawreview.tmc.cooley.edu/
Resources/Documents/1_27-1%20
Shelton%20Article.pdf.
45. Kyle Hightower, “Defense Focuses on DNA 
in Anthony Trial,” Associated Press (June 16, 
2011).
46. Thomas J. Reed, “Trial by Propensity: 
Admission of Other Criminal Acts Evidenced 
in Federal Criminal Trials,” University of 
Cincinnati Law Review 50 (1981), 713.
47. Ibid.
48. People v. Zackowitz, 254 N.Y. 192 (1930).
49. Colleen Cury, “Rutgers Trial: Jury Won’t Hear 
Why Tyler Clementi Wanted Room Change,” 
ABC News (February 27, 2012).
50. David W. Broeder, “The University of Chicago 
Jury Project,” Nebraska Law Review 38 (1959), 
744–760.
51. 164 U.S. 492 (1896).
52. United States v. Fioravanti, 412 F.2d 407 (3d 
Cir. 1969).
53. Bureau 
of 
Justice 
Statistics, 
Federal 
Justice Statistics, 2008—Statistical Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, November 2010), Table 5.2 and 
Table 6.1.
54. David W. Neubauer, America’s Courts and the 
Criminal Justice System, 5th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 1996), 254.
55. The Innocence Project, “Innocence Project 
Case Files,” at www.innocenceproject.org/
know.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   251
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  List and contrast the four basic philosophical reasons for 
sentencing criminals.
2  Contrast indeterminate with determinate sentencing.
3  List the four primary forms of punishment available to the 
judge.
4  State who has input into the sentencing decision and list 
the factors that determine a sentence.
5  Explain some of the reasons why sentencing reform has 
occurred.
6  Identify the arguments for and against the use of victim 
impact statements during sentencing hearings.
7  Identify the two stages that make up the bifurcated process 
of death penalty sentencing.
8  Describe the main issues of the death penalty debate.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 279 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Punishment 
   and  
Sentencing
251
AP Photo/John O’Boyle, Pool
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• The Purpose of Sentencing
• The Structure of Sentencing
• Inconsistencies in Sentencing
• Sentencing Reform
• Capital Punishment—The 
Ultimate Sentence
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
O
ne problem with child pornography laws, say critics, is that they were written 
under the assumption that it takes time and effort to obtain sexually explicit 
images of children. Taking such time and effort, it was assumed, indicated a 
particularly dangerous form of deviance. While this might once have been the case, with 
the advent of the Internet, hundreds or even thousands of explicit images can be down-
loaded in a short time. When each image represents a single criminal count, the resulting 
punishment can be quite severe, as was the case with Daniel Vilca.1
 
Furthermore, there is considerable debate concerning the link between child pornog-
raphy and child molestation. On the one hand, some research identifies child pornogra-
phers as generally passive viewers of illicit images who rarely engage in the sexual assault 
of children.2 On the other hand, a recent study conducted at a North Carolina prison found 
that 85 percent of those convicted of possessing child pornography had also engaged in 
at least one “hands-on” sexual offense against a minor.3 This finding would suggest that a 
harsher approach is justified to deter potential sexual abusers. The authors of that study, 
however, cautioned against a one-size-fits-all approach, pointing out that “we know less 
about online child pornographers than many other types of offenders.”4 
 
As you can see, punishment  and sentencing present some of the most complex issues 
of the criminal justice system. One scholar has even asserted:
A LifETimE foR LOOking
Daniel Vilca’s conviction for possession of child 
pornography came as no great surprise. After all, 
Collier County, Florida, sheriff’s investigators had 
found plenty of evidence. A computer in the twenty-
six-year-old’s East Naples apartment contained 
about three hundred photos and thirty taped hours 
of sexually explicit content involving children. Vilca’s 
case gained nationwide attention, however, when, on 
November 3, 2011, a circuit county judge sentenced 
Vilca to life in prison without parole for his crimes.
Does a child pornographer deserve the same 
punishment as someone found guilty of first degree 
murder? Technically, yes. Under Florida law, possession 
of child pornography is a third degree felony, punishable 
by as many as five years behind bars. Because Vilca was 
charged with 454 counts of possession—one for each 
image found on his computer—the judge had little 
choice but to impose a lengthy sentence. Regardless, 
many questioned the fairness of Vilca’s fate. Lee 
Hollander, Vilca’s defense attorney, said, “Life in prison 
for looking at images, even child images, is beyond 
comprehension.”
Within the criminal justice system, opinions about 
the proper punishment for child pornography–related 
crimes vary widely. A recent poll of federal judges found 
that 70 percent believe the sentencing requirements 
for child pornography defendants are too harsh. Ingrid 
Cronin, a federal public defender, points out that 
defendants such as Vilca often receive longer prison 
terms than those who are caught “actually having sex 
with a child.” Florida assistant state attorney Steve 
Marseca, who prosecuted Vilca, counters that real 
children are harmed in the production of these images. 
“Too many people look at this as a victimless crime, and 
that’s not true,” he said. “These 
children are victimized, and 
when the images are shown 
over and over again, they’re 
victimized over and over 
again.”
Daniel Vilca, shown here in 
a Collier County (Florida) 
courtroom, was sentenced 
to life in prison without 
parole for possessing 
a large cache of child 
pornography.
Greg Kahn/Naples Daily News
Discussion Tip: After students 
have read the chapter-opening 
vignette above, ask them their 
opinions of the case. Was Daniel 
Vilca’s sentence too harsh, or was 
it an appropriate punishment for his 
crimes? Have your students explain 
their answers.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   253
There is no such thing as “accurate” sentencing; there are only sentences that are more or 
less just, more or less effective. Nothing in the recent or distant history of sentencing reform 
suggests that anything approaching perfection is attainable.5
In this chapter, we will discuss the various attempts to “perfect” the practice of sen-
tencing over the past century. We will particularly focus on recent national and state 
efforts to limit judicial discretion in this area, a trend that has had the overall effect of 
producing harsher sentences for many offenders. In addition, we will examine the issues 
surrounding the death penalty, a controversial subject that forces us to confront the 
basic truth of sentencing: the way we punish criminals says a great deal about the kind 
of people we are.
THE PuRPosE of sEnTEnCing
Professor Herbert Packer of Stanford University said that punishing criminals serves two 
ultimate purposes: the “deserved infliction of suffering on evil doers” and “the prevention 
of crime.”6 Even this straightforward assessment raises several questions. How does one 
determine the sort of punishment that is “deserved”? How can we be sure that certain 
penalties “prevent” crime? Should criminals be punished solely for the good of society, 
or should their well-being also be taken into consideration? Sentencing laws indicate 
how any given group of people has answered these questions, but do not tell us why they 
were answered in that manner. To understand why, we must first consider the four basic 
philosophical reasons for sentencing—retribution, deterrence, incapacitation, and reha-
bilitation. (For an introduction to these concepts, see Figure 9.1 below.)
RETRibuTion 
The oldest and most common justification for punishing someone is that he or she 
“deserved it”—as the Old Testament states, “an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.” 
Under a system of justice that favors  retribution, a wrongdoer who has freely chosen 
to violate society’s rules must be punished for the infraction. Retribution relies on the 
principle of just deserts, which holds that the severity of the punishment must be in 
proportion to the severity of the crime. Retributive justice is not the same as revenge. 
Whereas revenge implies that the wrongdoer is punished only with the aim of satisfy-
ing a victim or victims, retribution is more concerned with the needs of society as a 
whole.
Retribution The philosophy 
that those who commit criminal 
acts should be punished based 
on the severity of the crime and 
that no other factors need be 
considered. 
Just Deserts A sanctioning 
philosophy based on the 
assertion that criminals deserve 
to be punished for breaking 
society’s rules. 
 List and 
contrast the 
four basic 
philosophical 
reasons for 
sentencing 
criminals.
Learning  
objective1
FIGURE 9.1 Sentencing Philosophies
Recently, a judge sentenced Eric Stefanski to a five-year prison term for shoplifting $622 worth 
of clothing from a Macy’s department store in Kahului, Hawaii. Although the sentence may seem 
harsh, Stefanski was a repeat offender participating in a drug court program at the time of his 
arrest. Thus, his punishment was in keeping with the four main philosophies of sentencing.
Retribution
Punishment is society’s means of expressing condemnation of illegal acts such 
as shoplifting. Repeat offenders should be punished more harshly because of 
their continuing criminal behavior.
Deterrence
Harsh sentences for shoplifting may convince others not to engage in that 
behavior. Also, when Stefanski has completed his sentence, he will avoid 
repeating his crimes because he will want to avoid returning to prison.
Incapacitation
While he is in prison, Stefanski will be unable to commit more crimes.
Rehabilitation
Stefanski’s shoplifting may be connected to his substance abuse. While in 
prison, he can participate in drug treatment programs to address this problem.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

One problem with retributive ideas of justice lies in proportional-
ity. Whether or not one agrees with the death penalty, the prin-
ciple behind it is easy to fathom: the punishment (death) often 
fits the crime (murder). But what about the theft of an automo-
bile? How does one fairly determine the amount of time the thief 
must spend in prison for that crime? Should the type of car or the 
wealth of the car owner matter? Theories of retribution often have a difficult 
time providing answers to such questions.7
DETERREnCE
The concept of deterrence (as well as incapacitation and rehabilitation) takes a different 
approach than does retribution. That is, rather than seeking only to punish the wrongdoer, 
the goal of sentencing should be to prevent future crimes. By “setting an example,” soci-
ety is sending a message to potential criminals that certain actions will not be tolerated. 
Deterrence can take two forms: general and specific. The basic idea of general deterrence 
is that by punishing one person, others will be discouraged from committing a similar 
crime. Specific deterrence assumes that an individual, after being punished once for a 
certain act, will be less likely to repeat that act because she or he does not want to be 
punished again.8 
 
Both forms of deterrence have proved problematic in practice. General deterrence 
assumes that a person commits a crime only after a rational decision-making process, 
in which he or she implicitly weighs the benefits of the crime against the possible costs 
of the punishment. This is not necessarily the case, especially for young offenders who 
tend to value the immediate rewards of crime over the possible future consequences. The 
argument for specific deterrence is somewhat weakened by the fact that a relatively small 
number of habitual offenders are responsible for the majority of certain criminal acts.
inCAPACiTATion
“Wicked people exist,” said James Q. Wilson. “Nothing avails except to set them apart 
from innocent people.”9 Wilson’s blunt statement summarizes the justification for  
incapacitation as a form of punishment. As a purely practical matter, incarcerating 
criminals guarantees that they will not be a danger to society, at least for the length of 
their prison terms. At some level, the death penalty can also be justified in terms of inca-
pacitation, as it prevents the offender from 
committing any future crimes.
 
Several studies do support incapaci-
tation’s efficacy as a crime-fighting tool. 
Criminologist Isaac Ehrlich of the University 
of Buffalo estimated that a 1 percent increase 
in sentence length will produce a 1 percent 
decrease in the crime rate.10 University of 
Chicago professor Steven Levitt has noticed 
a trend that further supports incapacitation. 
He found that violent crime rates rise in com-
munities where inmate litigation over prison 
overcrowding has forced the early release of 
some inmates and a subsequent drop in the 
prison population.11 More recently, Avinash 
Deterrence The strategy  
of preventing crime through  
the threat of punishment. 
Incapacitation A strategy 
for preventing crime by 
detaining wrongdoers in prison, 
thereby separating them from 
the community and reducing 
criminal opportunities. 
“Men are not hanged for 
stealing horses, but that horses 
may not be stolen.”
— Marquis de Halifax,  
Political Thoughts and 
Reflections (1750)
In a Santa Ana, California, 
courtroom, Andrew Gallo 
reacts to his sentence of fifty-
one years in prison for killing 
three people in a drunk driving 
automobile accident. How do 
theories of deterrence and 
incapacitation justify Gallo’s 
punishment? 
AP Photo/Mark Rightmire, Pool
254   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Singh Bhati of the Urban Institute in Washington, D.C., found that higher levels of incar-
ceration lead to fewer violent crimes but have little impact on property crime rates.12
 
Incapacitation as a theory of punishment does suffer from several weaknesses. 
Unlike retribution, it offers no proportionality with regard to a particular crime. Giving a 
burglar a life sentence would certainly ensure that she or he would not commit another 
burglary. Does that justify such a severe penalty? Furthermore, incarceration protects 
society only until the criminal is freed. Many studies have shown that, on release, offend-
ers may actually be more likely to commit crimes than before they were imprisoned.13 In 
that case, incapacitation may increase the likelihood of crime, rather than diminish it. 
REHAbiLiTATion
For most of the past century, rehabilitation has been seen as the most “humane” goal of 
punishment. This line of thinking reflects the view that crime is a “social  phenomenon” 
caused not by the inherent criminality of a person but by factors in that person’s sur-
roundings. By removing wrongdoers from their environment and intervening to change 
their values and personalities, the rehabilitative model suggests, criminals can be 
“treated” and possibly even “cured” of their proclivities toward crime.14
 
Although studies of the effectiveness of rehabilitation are too varied to be easily 
summarized, it does appear that, under certain circumstances, criminals who receive 
treatment are less likely to reoffend than those who do not. (See the feature Comparative 
Criminal Justice—The Norwegian Way below to learn about a country where a national 
commitment to rehabilitation shapes sentencing practices.)
Rehabilitation The 
philosophy that society is best 
served when wrongdoers are 
provided the resources needed 
to eliminate criminality from 
their behavioral pattern.
C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   255
The nOrwegian way 
On July 22, 2011, thirty-three-year-old 
Anders Behring Breivik fatally shot sixty-
nine people on Utoya Island off the coast 
of Norway. He also claimed responsibility for a bomb attack 
that killed another eight people in the capital city of Oslo. 
After a seven-month investigation, Norwegian prosecutors 
charged Breivik with committing a terrorist act.  In the 
United States, Breivik would almost certainly face the death 
penalty for his multiple, violent offenses.  
In Norway, however, a terror charge carries a maximum 
sentence of twenty-one years in prison. Indeed, the 
maximum sentence for most crimes in Norway, including 
premeditated murder, is twenty-one years. Like all European 
countries, Norway prohibits the death penalty, and it has 
also abolished the life sentence as a possible form of 
punishment. This reflects the Norwegian criminal justice 
system’s focus on rehabilitation rather than retribution or 
incapacitation. The goal in Norway is to return offenders 
to—rather than separate them from—society.
extended Stay 
In August 2012, as expected, Breivik received the maximum 
twenty-one year prison sentence. Theoretically, he could 
remain incarcerated for the rest of his life. Norwegian law 
allows prison terms to be extended for periods of five years 
at a time if the offender remains a threat to society. Still, 
the incident seems to have shaken the country’s confidence 
in its system of punishment, which sees few offenders 
spending more than fourteen years behind bars. In a poll 
conducted six days after Breivik’s attacks, 65 percent of 
Norwegians said that the penalties for serious crimes in 
their country were “too low.”
FoR CRItICAl AnAlySIS Norway’s murder rate is 
minuscule—about 0.7 murders per 100,000 people. By 
comparison, the murder rate in the United States is 4.8 per 
100,000. Similarly, violent crime is much more common in 
the United States than in Norway. How do you think these 
differences shape the two nations’ divergent sentencing 
philosophies?
COMParaTive CRiminAL jusTiCE 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short writing 
assignment, ask students to 
discuss which of the four purposes 
of punishment they believe to be 
most important for the overall good 
of society. Have students provide 
real-life sentencing examples to 
support their positions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
REsToRATivE jusTiCE
Despite the emergence of victim impact statements, which we will discuss later in the 
chapter, victims have historically been restricted from participating in the punishment 
process. Such restrictions are supported by the general assumption that victims are 
focused on vengeance rather than justice. According to criminologists Heather Strang of 
Australia’s Center for Restorative Justice and Lawrence W. Sherman of the University of 
Pennsylvania, however, this is not always the case. After the initial shock of the crime has 
worn off, Strang and Sherman have found, victims are more interested in three things that 
have little to do with revenge: (1) an opportunity to participate in the process, (2) financial 
reparations, and (3) an apology.15
 
Restorative justice strategies focus on these concerns by attempting to repair the 
damage that a crime does to the victim, the victim’s family, and society as a whole. This 
outlook relies on the efforts of the offender to “undo” the harm caused by the criminal 
act through an apology and restitution, or monetary compensation for losses suffered 
by the victim or victims. 
 
The amount of restitution is sometimes determined through victim-offender 
 mediation, a process that involves a face-to-face meeting between the two parties of the 
crime. Usually only available when the underlying offense is a property crime or minor 
assault, this form of intercession allows the victim to speak directly to the offender about 
the criminal incident, and for the offender to apologize directly to the victim.  Although 
victim-offender mediation services are not universally available, research suggests that 
the experience is often satisfying for both parties.16
SeLFaSSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 280.
The saying “an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth” reflects the concept of 
____________ as a justification for punishment. The goal of ____________ is to prevent 
future crimes by “setting an example,” while ____________ purports to prevent crime by 
keeping offenders behind bars. Models of ____________ suggest that criminals can be 
“treated” and possibly even “cured.” 
THE sTRuCTuRE of sEnTEnCing
Philosophy not only is integral to explaining why we punish criminals, but also influences 
how we do so. The history of criminal sentencing in the United States has been characterized 
by shifts in institutional power among the three branches of the government. When public 
opinion moves toward more severe strategies of retribution, deterrence, and incapacitation, 
legislatures have responded by asserting their power over determining sentencing guidelines. 
In contrast, periods of rehabilitative justice are marked by a transfer of this power to judges.
LEgisLATivE sEnTEnCing AuTHoRiTy
Because legislatures are responsible for making laws, these bodies are also initially 
responsible for passing the criminal codes that determine the length of sentences. 
inDETERminATE sEnTEnCing For a good part of the twentieth century, goals of reha-
bilitation dominated the criminal justice system, and legislatures were more likely to 
enact  indeterminate sentencing policies. Penal codes with indeterminate sentences 
set a minimum and maximum amount of time that a person must spend in prison. For 
Contrast 
indeterminate 
with determinate 
sentencing.
Learning  
objective 2
Restorative Justice An 
approach to punishment 
designed to repair the harm 
done to the victim and the 
community by the offender’s 
criminal act.
Restitution Monetary 
compensation for damages 
done to the victim by the 
offender’s criminal act.
Indeterminate Sentencing  
An indeterminate term of 
incarceration in which a 
judge decides the minimum 
and maximum terms of 
imprisonment. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After students have 
read the “Comparative Criminal 
Justice” feature on the previous 
page, ask them which sentencing 
philosophy they find more 
reasonable: Norway’s or the  
United States’? Why?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   257
example, the indeterminate sentence for aggravated assault can be three to nine years, or 
six to twelve years, or twenty years to life. Within these parameters, a judge can prescribe 
a particular term, after which an administrative body known as the parole board decides 
at what point the offender is to be released. A prisoner is aware that he or she is eligible 
for parole as soon as the minimum time has been served and that good behavior can 
further shorten the sentence.
DETERminATE sEnTEnCing Disillusionment with the ideals of rehabilitation has led to 
determinate sentencing, or fixed sentencing. As the name implies, in determinate sen-
tencing an offender serves exactly the amount of time to which she or he is sentenced 
(minus “good time,” described below). For example, if the legislature deems that the 
punishment for a first-time armed robber is ten years, then the judge has no choice but 
to impose a sentence of ten years, and the criminal will serve ten years minus good time 
before being freed.
“gooD TimE” AnD TRuTH in sEnTEnCing Often, the amount of time prescribed by a judge 
bears little relation to the amount of time the offender actually spends behind bars. In 
states with indeterminate sentencing, parole boards have broad powers to release prison-
ers once they have served the minimum portion of their sentence. Furthermore, all but four 
states offer prisoners the opportunity to reduce their sentences by doing “good time”—or 
behaving well—as determined by prison administrators. (See Figure 9.2 below for an idea 
of the effects of good-time regulations and other early-release programs on state prison 
sentences.) 
 
Sentence-reduction programs promote discipline within a correctional institution 
and reduce overcrowding, so many prison officials welcome them. The public, however, 
may react negatively to news that a violent criminal has served a shorter term than 
ordered by a judge and pressure elected officials to “do something.” In Illinois, for example, 
some inmates were serving less than half their sentences by receiving a one-day reduction 
in their term for each day of “good time.” Under pressure from victims’ groups, the state 
legislature passed a truth-in-sentencing law in 1995 that requires murderers and  others 
Determinate Sentencing  
A period of incarceration that is 
fixed by a sentencing authority 
and cannot be reduced by 
judges or other corrections 
officials. 
“Good Time” A reduction in 
time served by prisoners based 
on good conduct, conformity 
to rules, and other positive 
behavior.
Truth-in-Sentencing Laws  
Legislative attempts to 
ensure that convicts will serve 
approximately the terms 
to which they were initially 
sentenced. 
50
100
150
200
0
250
Sentence Length (in Months)
Murder
Rape
Robbery
Assault
Burglary
Drug trafficking
 Conviction Offense
Average Prison Sentence
Estimated Time in Prison
FIGURE 9.2 Average Sentence length and Estimated time 
 to Be Served in State Prison
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Corrections Reporting Program: Sentence Length of State Prisoners, by Offense, 
Admission Type, Sex, and Race (January 20, 2011), “Table 9: First Releases from State Prison, 2008,” at bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.
cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2056.
Teaching Tip: Research your state’s 
sentencing policies (determinate 
or indeterminate, the use of “good 
time,” and so on) and incorporate 
this information into your lectures 
or presentations.
Discussion Tip: Ask students to think 
about the benefits and limitations 
of indeterminate and determinate 
sentences. Which type of sentence 
do they think is most effective? Why?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
convicted of serious crimes to complete at least 85 percent of 
their sentences with no time off for good behavior.17 
 
As their name suggests, the primary goal of these 
truth-in-sentencing laws is to provide the public with more 
accurate information about the actual amount of time an 
offender will spend behind bars. They have also found sup-
port with those who believe that keeping offenders incapaci-
tated for longer periods of time will reduce crime.18 Today, 
forty states have  instituted some form of truth-in-sentencing 
laws, though the future viability of such statutes is somewhat 
in doubt due to the pressure of overflowing prisons.
juDiCiAL sEnTEnCing AuTHoRiTy
During the pretrial procedures and the trial itself, the judge’s 
role is somewhat passive and reactive. She or he is primar-
ily a “procedural watchdog,” ensuring that the rights of the 
defendant are not infringed while the prosecutor and defense attorney dictate the course 
of action. At a traditional sentencing hearing, however, the judge is no longer an arbiter 
between the parties. He or she is now called on to exercise the ultimate authority of the 
state in determining the defendant’s fate.
 
From the 1930s to the 1970s, when theories of rehabilitation held sway over the 
criminal justice system, indeterminate sentencing practices were guided by the  theory of 
“individualized justice.” Just as a physician gives specific treatment to individual patients 
depending on their particular health needs, the hypothesis goes, a judge needs to con-
sider the specific circumstances of each individual offender in choosing the best form 
of punishment. Taking the analogy one step further, just as the diagnosis of a qualified 
physician should not be questioned, a qualified judge should have absolute discretion in 
making the sentencing decision. Judicial  discretion rests on the assumption that a judge 
should be given ample leeway in determining punishments that fit both the crime and 
the criminal.19 As we shall see later in the chapter, the growth of determinate sentencing 
has severely restricted judicial discretion in many jurisdictions.
juDiCiAL DisPosiTions Within whatever legislative restrictions apply, the sentencing 
judge has a number of options when it comes to choosing the proper form of punish-
ment. These sentences, or dispositions, include the following:
1. Capital punishment. Reserved normally for those who commit first degree mur-
der—that is, a premeditated killing—capital punishment, or the death penalty, 
is a sentencing option in thirty-three states.  It is also an option in federal court, 
where a defendant can be put to death for murder, as well as for trafficking in 
a large amount of illegal drugs, espionage (spying), and treason (betraying the 
United States).
2. Imprisonment. Whether for the purpose of retribution, deterrence, incapacita-
tion, or rehabilitation, a common form of punishment in American history has 
been imprisonment. In fact, it is used so commonly today that judges—and 
 legislators—are having to take factors such as prison overcrowding into consider-
ation when making sentencing decisions. The issues surrounding imprisonment 
will be discussed in Chapters 11 and 12.
3. Probation. One of the effects of prison overcrowding has been a sharp rise in the 
use of probation, in which an offender is permitted to live in the community under 
Judge Dee Anna Farnell of the 
Pinellas County (Florida) Drug 
Court tells a drug offender that 
if she keeps shooting heroin, 
she’s “going to die.” What 
are some of the arguments for 
giving judges the discretion to 
make sentencing decisions? 
ZUMA Press/Newscom
List the four 
primary forms 
of punishment 
available to the 
judge.
Learning  
objective 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   259
supervision and is not incarcerated. (Probation is covered 
in Chapter 10.) Alternative sanctions (also discussed in 
Chapter 10) combine probation with other dispositions 
such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, boot camps, 
and shock incarceration.
4. Fines. Fines can be levied by judges in addition to 
incarceration and probation or independently of 
other forms of punishment. When a fine is the 
only punishment, it usually reflects the judge’s 
belief that the offender is not a threat to the 
community and does not need to be imprisoned 
or supervised. In some instances, mostly involv-
ing drug offenders, a judge can order the seizure 
of an offender’s property, such as his or her home.
oTHER foRms of PunisHmEnT Whereas fines are payable to the government, restitu-
tion and community service are seen as reparations to the injured party or to the com-
munity. Restitution (see page 256) is a direct payment to the victim or victims of a crime. 
Community service consists of “good works”—such as cleaning up highway litter or 
tutoring disadvantaged youths—that benefit the entire community. As we saw earlier 
in this chapter, when the offender has committed a less serious crime, many judges are 
turning to restorative justice to provide a remedy. At the heart of restorative justice is 
the apology. So, for example, a judge in Texas required a teenager who had vandalized 
thirteen schools to go to each school and apologize to the students and faculty.
 
In some jurisdictions, judges have a great deal of discretionary power and can 
impose sentences that do not fall into any predetermined category. This “creative 
 sentencing,” as it is sometimes called, has produced some interesting results. Teenagers 
who violate noise ordinances in Fort Lupton, Colorado, have been required to spend 
Friday nights in a courtroom listening to Barry Manilow, opera, and the “Barney” theme 
song. A judge in Painesville, Ohio, ordered a man who had stolen from a Salvation Army 
kettle to pass twenty-four hours as a homeless person. In Broward County, Florida, a man 
who shoved his wife was sentenced to “take her to Red Lobster,” go bowling with her, and 
then undergo marriage counseling.20 Though these types of punishments are often ridi-
culed, many judges see them as a viable alternative to incarceration for less dangerous 
offenders.
THE sEnTEnCing PRoCEss
The decision of how to punish a wrongdoer is the end result of what Yale Law School 
professor Kate Stith and federal appeals court judge José A. Cabranes call the  “sentencing 
ritual.”21 The two main participants in this ritual are the judge and the defendant, but 
prosecutors, defense attorneys, and probation officers also play a role in the proceedings. 
Individualized justice requires that the judge consider all the relevant circumstances 
in making sentencing decisions. Therefore, judicial discretion is often tantamount to 
informed discretion—without the aid of the other members of the courtroom work group, 
the judge would not have sufficient information to make the proper sentencing choice.
THE PREsEnTEnCE invEsTigATivE REPoRT For judges operating under various states’ inde-
terminate sentencing guidelines, information in the presentence investigative report is 
a valuable component of the sentencing ritual. Compiled by a probation officer, the report 
After Jason Householder, 
left, and John Stockum were 
convicted of criminal damaging 
for throwing beer bottles at a 
car, municipal court judge David 
Hostetler of Coshocton, Ohio, 
gave them a choice: jail time 
or a walk down Main Street in 
women’s clothing. As you can 
see, they chose the dresses. 
What reasons might a judge 
have for handing down this sort 
of “creative” sentence? 
AP Photo/Dante Smith/Coshocton Tribune
Presentence Investigative 
Report An investigative report 
on an offender’s background that 
assists a judge in determining 
the proper sentence.
Teaching Tip: Provide students 
with examples of other “creative” 
sentences (many examples are 
available online). What do they 
think of these sentences? Are they 
appropriate or are they meant only to 
demean or embarrass offenders? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
describes the crime in question, notes the suffering of any victims, and lists the defendant’s 
prior offenses (as well as any alleged but uncharged criminal activity). The report also 
contains a range of personal data such as family background, work history, education, and 
community activities—information that is not admissible as evidence during trial. In put-
ting together the presentence investigative report, the probation officer is supposed to gain 
a “feel” for the defendant and communicate these impressions of the offender to the judge.
 
The report also includes a sentencing recommendation. In the past, this aspect has 
been criticized as giving probation officers too much power in the sentencing process, 
because less diligent judges would simply rely on the recommendation in determining 
punishment.22 Consequently, many jurisdictions have moved to limit the influence of the 
presentence investigative report.
THE PRosECuToR AnD DEfEnsE ATToRnEy To a certain extent, the adversary process does 
not end when the guilt of the defendant has been established. Both the prosecutor and the 
defense attorney are interviewed in the process of preparing the presentence investigative 
report, and both will try to present a version of the facts consistent with their own sentenc-
ing goals. The defense attorney in particular has a duty to make sure that the information 
contained in the report is accurate and not prejudicial toward his or her client. Depending 
on the norms of any particular courtroom work group, prosecutors and defense attorneys 
may petition the judge directly for certain sentences. 
 
Note that this process is not always adversarial. In some instances the prosecutor will 
advocate leniency and may join the defense attorney in requesting a short term of imprison-
ment, probation, or some form of intermediate sanction.23
sEnTEnCing AnD THE juRy Juries also play an important role in the sentencing process. 
As we will see later in the chapter, it is the jury, and not the judge, who generally decides 
whether a convict eligible for the death penalty will in fact be executed. Additionally, 
six states—Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia—allow juries, 
rather than judges, to make the sentencing decision even when the death penalty is not 
an option. In these states, the judge gives the jury instructions on the range of penalties 
available, and then the jury makes the final decision.24 
 
Juries have traditionally been assigned a relatively small role in felony sentencing, 
largely out of concern that jurors’ lack of experience and legal expertise leaves them 
unprepared for the task. When sentencing by juries is allowed, the practice is popular 
with prosecutors because jurors are more likely than judges to give harsh sentences, 
particularly for drug crimes, sexual assault, and theft.25
fACToRs of sEnTEnCing
The sentencing ritual strongly lends itself to the concept of individualized justice. With 
inputs—sometimes conflicting—from the prosecutor, attorney, and probation officer, 
the judge can be reasonably sure of getting the “full picture” of the crime and the crimi-
nal. In making the final decision, however, most judges consider two factors above all 
others: the seriousness of the crime and any mitigating or aggravating circumstances.
THE sERiousnEss of THE CRimE As would be expected, the gravity of the crime is the 
primary factor in a judge’s sentencing decision. The more serious the crime, the harsher 
the punishment—society demands no less. Each judge has her or his own methods of 
determining the seriousness of the offense. Many judges simply consider the “conviction 
offense,” basing their sentence on the crime for which the defendant was convicted. 
State who has 
input into the 
sentencing 
decision and 
list the factors 
that determine 
a sentence.
Learning  
objective 4
Group Activity: Provide students 
with a sample presentence 
investigation. In small groups, 
have them read the PSI and then 
determine, as a group, what type of 
sentence they would impose if they 
were the judge in that particular case.  
Be sure to have them articulate why 
they selected this particular sentence.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   261
 
Other judges—some mandated by statute—focus instead on the “real offense” in 
determining the punishment. The “real offense” is based on the actual behavior of the 
defendant, regardless of the official conviction. For example, through a plea bargain, a 
defendant may plead guilty to simple assault when in fact he hit his victim in the face with 
a baseball bat. A judge, after reading the presentence investigative report, could decide 
to sentence the defendant as if he had committed aggravated assault, which is the “real” 
offense. Although many prosecutors and defense attorneys are opposed to “real offense” 
procedures, which can render a plea bargain meaningless, there is a growing belief in 
criminal justice circles that they bring a measure of fairness to the sentencing decision.26
miTigATing AnD AggRAvATing CiRCumsTAnCEs When deciding the severity of punishment, 
judges and juries are often required to evaluate the mitigating and aggravating  circumstances 
surrounding the case. Mitigating circumstances are those circumstances, such as the fact 
that the defendant was coerced into committing the crime, that allow a lighter sentence to 
be handed down. In contrast, aggravating circumstances, such as a prior record, blatant 
disregard for the safety of others, or the use of a weapon, can lead a judge or jury to inflict  
a harsher penalty than might otherwise be warranted. (See Figure 9.3 below for a list of com-
mon aggravating and mitigating circumstances.)
 
In 2011, for example, twenty-year-old Colton Harris-Moore pleaded guilty to thirty-
three charges ranging from burglary to identity theft in a Coupeville, Washington, 
court. In providing mitigating circumstances for their client’s behavior, Harris-Moore’s 
defense attorneys focused on his troubled upbringing by a cruel, alcoholic mother who 
went for long stretches without feeding her son. Also, a psychiatrist for the defense 
testified that Harris-Moore’s mother drank heavily while pregnant, probably affecting 
his mental development.  Judge Vicki Churchill sentenced Harris-Moore to seven years 
and three months in prison, well below the punishment requested by prosecutors. “We 
cannot excuse people because of their upbringing,” said Churchill, “but we can recog-
nize that that upbringing has some effect.”27
“Real Offense” The actual 
offense committed, as opposed 
to the charge levied by a 
prosecutor as the result of a 
plea bargain. 
Mitigating Circumstances  
Any circumstances 
accompanying the commission 
of a crime that may justify a 
lighter sentence. 
Aggravating Circumstances  
Any circumstances 
accompanying the commission of 
a crime that may justify a harsher 
sentence. 
FIGURE 9.3 Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances
Aggravating Circumstances
Mitigating Circumstances
•   An offense involved multiple participants, and the offender was 
the leader of the group. 
•   A victim was particularly vulnerable.
•   A victim was treated with particular cruelty for which an offender 
should be held responsible.
•   The offense involved injury or threatened violence to others and 
was committed to gratify an offender's desire for pleasure or 
excitement.
•   The degree of bodily harm caused, attempted, threatened, or 
foreseen by an offender was substantially greater than average for 
the given offense.
•   The degree of economic harm caused, attempted, threatened, or 
foreseen by an offender was substantially greater than average for 
the given offense.
•   The amount of contraband materials possessed by the offender 
or under the offender's control was substantially greater than 
average for the given offense.
•   An offender acted under strong provocation, or other 
circumstances in the relationship between the offender and the 
victim make the offender's behavior less serious and therefore less 
deserving of punishment.
•   An offender played a minor or passive role in the offense or 
participated under circumstances of coercion or duress.
•   An offender, because of youth or physical impairment, lacked 
substantial capacity for judgment when the offense was 
committed.
Source: American Bar Association.
Photodisc
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
juDiCiAL PHiLosoPHy Most states spell out mitigating and aggravating circumstances in 
statutes, but there is room for judicial discretion in applying the law to particular cases. 
Judges are not uniform, or even consistent, in their opinions of which circumstances are 
mitigating or aggravating. One judge may believe that a fourteen-year-old is not fully 
responsible for her or his actions, while another may believe that teenagers should be 
treated as adults by criminal courts. Those judges who support rehabilitative theories 
of criminal justice have been found to give more lenient sentences than those who 
subscribe to theories of deterrence and incapacitation.28 Furthermore, judges can have 
different philosophies with regard to different crimes, handing down, for example, harsh 
penalties for domestic abusers while showing leniency toward drug offenders.
SeLFaSSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 280.
____________ sentences set a minimum and a maximum amount of time a convict 
must spend in prison, whereas ____________ sentences reflect the exact length of 
incapacitation, minus reductions for ____________ ____________ , or behaving well. 
Judges often rely on information contained in the ____________ ____________ report 
when making sentencing decisions. The primary factor in the sentencing process is 
the ____________ of the crime for which the defendant was convicted. ____________ 
circumstances allow a lighter sentence to be handed down, while ____________ 
circumstances can lead to the imposition of a harsher penalty. 
inConsisTEnCiEs in sEnTEnCing
For some, the natural differences in judicial philosophies, when combined with a lack 
of institutional control, raise important questions. Why should a bank robber in South 
Carolina and a bank robber in Michigan receive different sentences? Even federal indeter-
minate sentencing guidelines seem overly vague: a bank robber can receive a prison term 
from one day to twenty years, depending almost entirely on the judge.29 Furthermore, if 
judges have freedom to use their discretion, do they not also have the freedom to misuse it?
 
Purported improper judicial discretion is often the first reason given for two phe-
nomena that plague the criminal justice system: sentencing disparity and  sentencing 
 discrimination. Although the two terms are often used interchangeably, they describe 
different statistical occurrences—the causes of which are open to debate.
sEnTEnCing DisPARiTy
Justice would seem to demand that those who commit similar crimes should receive 
similar punishments. Sentencing disparity occurs when this expectation is not met in 
one of three ways:
1. Criminals receive similar sentences for different crimes of unequal seriousness.
2. Criminals receive different sentences for similar crimes.
3. Mitigating or aggravating circumstances have a disproportionate effect on sen-
tences. Prosecutors, for example, reward drug dealers who inform on their 
associates with lesser sentences. As a result, low-level drug sellers, who have no 
information to trade for reduced sentences, often spend more time in prison than 
their better-informed bosses.30
 
Most of the blame for sentencing disparities is placed at the feet of the judicial 
profession. Even with the restrictive presence of the sentencing reforms we will discuss 
Sentencing Disparity A 
situation in which those 
convicted of similar crimes do 
not receive similar sentences. 
Explain some 
of the reasons 
why sentencing 
reform has 
occurred.
Learning  
objective 5
Technology Tip: Have students go 
online to determine the particular 
aggravating and mitigating 
circumstances recognized in their 
home states. Then, have them find 
an example of these circumstances 
being used in a real-life sentencing 
decision.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   263
shortly, judges have a great deal of influence over the sentencing outcome, whether they 
are making the decision themselves or instructing the jury on how to do so. Like other 
members of the criminal justice system, judges are individuals, and their discretionary 
sentencing decisions reflect that individuality. 
 
For wrongdoers, the amount of time spent in prison often depends as much on 
where the crime was committed as on the crime itself. A comparison of the sentences for 
drug trafficking reveals that someone convicted of the crime in the Northern District of 
California faces an average of 79 months in prison, whereas a similar offender in north-
ern Iowa can expect an average of 148 months.31 
 
The average sentences imposed in the Fourth Circuit, which includes North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia, are consistently harsher than 
those in the Ninth Circuit, comprising most of the western states: 57 months longer 
for firearms violations and 28 months longer for all offenses.32 Such disparities can be 
attributed to a number of different factors, including local attitudes toward crime and 
available financial resources to cover the expenses of incarceration. Also, because of dif-
ferent sentencing guidelines, which we will discuss later in the chapter, the punishment 
for the same crime in federal and state courts can be dramatically different. Figure 9.4 
below shows the sentencing disparities for certain crimes in the two systems.
sEnTEnCing DisCRiminATion
Sentencing discrimination occurs when disparities can be attributed to extralegal 
variables such as the defendant’s gender, race, or economic standing. 
RACE AnD sEnTEnCing At first glance, racial discrimination would seem to be ram-
pant in sentencing practices. Research by Cassia Spohn of Arizona State University 
and David Holleran of the College of New Jersey suggests that minorities pay a 
 “punishment penalty” when it comes to sentencing.33 In Chicago, Spohn and Holleran 
Sentencing Discrimination  
A situation in which the length 
of a sentence appears to be 
influenced by a defendant’s 
race, gender, economic status, 
or other factor not directly 
related to the crime he or she 
committed. 
Crime
Murder
Sexual assault
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Burglary
Motor vehicle theft
Drug trafficking
Drug possession
Average Maximum Sentence
(in Months)  
State Court 
Federal Court
0
50
100
150
200
250
FIGURE 9.4 Average Maximum Sentences for Selected Crimes  
in State and Federal Courts
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2006—Statistical Tables (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2009), Table 1.6, page 9.
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to find an example of 
two defendants found guilty of 
similar crimes but given dissimilar 
sentences. Ask students to explain 
some possible reasons for the 
sentencing disparity in these two 
cases.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
found that convicted African Americans were 
12.1 percent and convicted Hispanics were 
15.3 percent more likely to go to prison than 
convicted whites. In Miami, Hispanics were 
10.3  percent more likely to be imprisoned 
than either blacks or whites.34 Nationwide, 
about 43 percent of all inmates in state and 
federal prisons are African American,35 even 
though members of that minority group make 
up only about 13 percent of the country’s pop-
ulation and represent approximately 28 per- 
cent of those arrested.36
 
Interestingly, Spohn and Holleran found 
that the rate of imprisonment rose signifi-
cantly for minorities who were young and 
unemployed. This led them to conclude that 
the disparities between races were not the 
result of “conscious” discrimination on the 
part of the sentencing judges. Rather, faced with limited time to make decisions and 
limited information about the offenders, the judges would resort to stereotypes, consid-
ering not just race, but age and unemployment as well.37 Another study found that older 
judges and judges who were members of minority groups in Pennsylvania were less likely 
to send offenders to prison, regardless of their race.38 Such research findings have been 
used to support the argument in favor of diversity among judges, discussed in Chapter 7.
WomEn AnD sEnTEnCing Few would argue that race or ethnicity should be a factor in 
sentencing decisions—the system should be “color-blind.” Does the same principle apply 
to women? In other words, should the system be “gender-blind” as well—at least on a 
policy level? Congress answered that question in the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, 
which emphasized the ideal of gender-neutral sentencing.39 In practice, however, this 
has not occurred. Women who are convicted of crimes are less likely to go to prison 
than men, and those who are incarcerated tend to serve shorter sentences. According to 
government data, on average, a woman receives a sentence that is twenty-nine months 
shorter than that of a man for a violent crime and nine months shorter for a property 
crime.40 One study attributes these differences to the elements of female criminality: in 
property crimes, women are usually accessories, and in violent crimes, women are usu-
ally reacting to physical abuse. In both situations, the mitigating circumstances lead to 
lesser punishment.41
 
Other evidence also suggests that a chivalry effect, or the idea that women should 
be treated more leniently than men, plays a large role in sentencing decisions. Several 
self-reported studies have shown that judges may treat female defendants more “gently” 
than males and that judges are influenced by mitigating factors such as marital status and 
family background with women that they would ignore with men.42 In certain situations, 
however, a woman’s gender can work against her. Several years ago, Florida prosecutors 
asked that Emose Oceant receive eighteen years in prison for a child abuse conviction.  
Instead, circuit judge Margaret Steinbeck sentenced Oceant, who had whipped her seven 
children with boards, belts, and wire hangers, to thirty years behind bars. According to 
Keith Crew, a professor of sociology and criminology at the University of Northern Iowa, 
defendants who are seen as bad mothers often “get the hammer” from judges and juries.43
Antwain Black, shown here 
celebrating with his mother, 
was one of thousands of federal 
inmates serving time for crack 
cocaine–related crimes given an 
early release in 2011. Because 
about 80 percent of federal 
crack defendants are African 
American, the harsh mandatory 
sentences from crimes involving 
that drug were widely criticized 
for being unfair. How does the 
appearance of discrimination—
whether intended or not—harm 
the legitimacy of the criminal 
justice system?
AP Photo/Seth Perlman 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   265
SeLFaSSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 280.
Sentencing ____________ occurs when similar crimes are punished with dissimilar 
sentences, while sentencing ____________ is the result of judicial consideration of 
extralegal variables such as the defendant’s race or gender.
sEnTEnCing REfoRm
Judicial discretion, then, appears to be a double-edged sword. Although it allows judges to 
impose a wide variety of sentences to fit specific criminal situations, it appears to fail to 
rein in a judge’s subjective biases, which can lead to disparity and perhaps discrimination. 
Critics of judicial discretion believe that its costs (the lack of equality) outweigh its ben-
efits (providing individualized justice). As Columbia law professor John C. Coffee noted:
If we wish the sentencing judge to treat “like cases alike,” a more inappropriate technique for 
the presentation could hardly be found than one that stresses a novelistic portrayal of each 
offender and thereby overloads the decisionmaker in a welter of detail.44
In other words, Professor Coffee feels that judges are given too much information in the 
sentencing process, making it impossible for them to be consistent in their decisions. 
It follows that limiting judicial discretion would not only simplify the process but also 
lessen the opportunity for disparity or discrimination. Since the 1970s, this  attitude 
has spread through state and federal legislatures, causing more extensive changes in 
sentencing procedures than in almost any other area of the American criminal justice 
system over that time period. 
sEnTEnCing guiDELinEs
In an effort to eliminate the inequities of disparity by removing judicial bias from the 
sentencing process, many states and the federal government have turned to sentencing 
guidelines, which require judges to dispense legislatively determined sentences based 
on factors such as the seriousness of the crime and the offender’s prior record.
sTATE sEnTEnCing guiDELinEs In 1978, Minnesota became the first state to create a 
Sentencing Guidelines Commission with a mandate to construct and monitor the use 
of a determinate sentencing structure. The Minnesota Commission left no doubt as to 
the philosophical justification for the new sentencing statutes, stating unconditionally 
that retribution was its primary goal.45 Today, about twenty states employ some form of 
sentencing guidelines with similar goals.
 
In general, these guidelines remove discretionary power from state judges by turning 
sentencing into a mathematical exercise. Members of the courtroom work group are guided 
by a grid, which helps them determine the proper sentence. Figure 9.5 on the following 
page shows a portion of the grid established by the Massachusetts sentencing commission. 
As in the grids used by most states, one axis ranks the type of crime, while the other refers 
to the offender’s criminal history. In the grid for Massachusetts, the red boxes indicate the 
 “incarceration zone.” A prison sentence is required for crimes in this zone.  The yellow boxes 
delineate a “discretionary zone,” in which the judge can decide between incarceration or 
intermediate sanctions, which you will learn about in the next chapter.46 
fEDERAL sEnTEnCing guiDELinEs In 1984, Congress passed the Sentencing Reform Act 
(SRA),47 paving the way for federal sentencing guidelines that went into effect three 
Sentencing Guidelines  
Legislatively determined 
guidelines that judges are 
required to follow when 
sentencing those convicted of 
specific crimes.
Teaching Tip: Provide handouts (if 
possible) of your state’s sentencing 
guidelines. If not available, or too 
lengthy, Pennsylvania has a useful 
one-page sentencing grid that is good 
for instructional purposes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
years later. Similar in many respects to the state guidelines, the SRA also eliminated 
parole for federal prisoners and severely limited early release from prison due to good 
behavior.48 The impact of the SRA and the state guidelines has been dramatic. Sentences 
have become harsher—by the middle of the first decade of the 2000s, the average federal 
prison sentence was fifty months, more than twice as long as in 1984.49 Furthermore, 
much of the discretion in sentencing has shifted from the judge to the prosecutor.
 
Because the prosecutor chooses the criminal charge, she or he can, in effect, pres-
ent the judge with the range of sentences. Defendants and their defense attorneys realize 
this and are more likely to agree to a plea bargain, which is, after all, a “deal” with the 
prosecutor.50
juDiCiAL DEPARTuREs Even in their haste to limit a judge’s power, legislators realized that 
sentencing guidelines could not be expected to cover every possible criminal situation. 
Therefore, both state and federal sentencing guidelines allow an “escape hatch” of limited 
judicial discretion known as a departure. 
Department Downward Judges in Massachusetts can “depart” from the above grid if a 
case involves mitigating or aggravating circumstances.51 Furthermore, the United States 
Supreme Court has upheld federal judges’ freedom to similarly deviate from the federal 
guidelines.52 So, for example, federal judge Jack Weinstein acted properly when, in 2010, 
he overturned a twenty-year sentence for child pornography, ruling that “unless applied 
with care,” the federal requirements “can lead to unreasonable sentences.”53 As we noted 
in the opening to this chapter, federal judges often react this way to child pornography 
punishments.  Indeed, they depart downward about 40 percent of the time in child por-
nography cases—more often than in cases involving any other offense.54
Increasing Inconsistency Much to the regret of supporters of sentencing reform, a 
series of Supreme Court decisions handed down midway though the first decade of 
the 2000s held that federal sentencing guidelines were advisory only.55 It appears that 
A
No/Minor Record
B
Moderate Record
C
Serious Record
D
Violent/Repetitive
E
Serious Violent
Sentencing Guidelines Grid
6
5
Criminal History Scale
Manslaughter (Involuntary)
Armed Robbery (No Gun)
A&B DW* (Significant Injury)
Unarmed Robbery
Unarmed Burglary
Stalking in Violation of Order
Larceny ($50,000 and over)
Sentence Range
Illustrative Offenses
Level
40–60 Months
45–67 Months
50–75 Months
60–90 Months
80–120 Months
12–36 Months
IS-IV
IS-III
IS-II
24–36 Months
IS-IV
IS-III
IS-II
36–54 Months
48–72 Months
60–90 Months
*A&B DW = Assault and Battery, Dangerous Weapon
The numbers in each cell represent the range from which the judge selects the maximum sentence (Not More Than).
The minimum sentence (Not Less Than) is two-thirds of the maximum sentence and constitutes the initial parole 
   eligibility date.
Intermediate Sanction Levels
IS-IV 
24-Hour Restriction
IS-III 
Daily Accountability
IS-II 
Standard Supervision  
FIGURE 9.5 A Portion of Massachusetts Sentencing Guidelines
Departure A stipulation 
in many federal and state 
sentencing guidelines that 
allows a judge to adjust his or 
her sentencing decision based 
on the special circumstances of 
a particular case. 
www.mass.gov/courts/formsandguidelines/sentencing/grid.html
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the federal sentencing 
guidelines at www.ussc.gov/
Guidelines/2011_guidelines/index 
.cfm. Is there anything in these 
guidelines that surprises them or that 
they find unfair? Why?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

federal judges have taken advantage of the freedom to deviate from those guidelines. 
A 2012 study by the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse found widespread 
sentencing disparities in federal courts, particularly in drug, weapons, and white-collar 
cases.56  Furthermore, the U.S. Sentencing Commission reports that racial disparity in 
federal courts is again on the rise, with African American male defendants receiving 
sentences of about 20 percent greater length than white males who have been convicted 
of similar offenses.57
mAnDAToRy sEnTEnCing guiDELinEs
In an attempt to close even the limited loophole of judicial discretion offered by departures, 
politicians (often urged on by their constituents) have passed sentencing laws even more 
contrary to the idea of individualized justice. These mandatory  (minimum) sentencing 
guidelines further limit a judge’s power to deviate from determinate sentencing laws by 
setting firm standards for certain crimes. Forty-six states have mandatory sentencing laws 
for crimes such as selling illegal drugs, driving under the influence of alcohol, and com-
mitting any crime with a dangerous weapon. In Alabama, for example, any person caught 
selling illegal drugs must spend at least two years in prison, with five years added to the 
sentence if the sale takes place within three miles of a school or public housing.58 Similarly, 
Congress has set mandatory minimum sentences for more than one hundred crimes, 
mostly drug offenses. 
 
As might be expected, such laws are often unpopular with judges.  After being forced 
to send a defendant to prison for fifty-five years for selling marijuana and illegally pos-
sessing a handgun, U.S. district judge Paul Cassell called the sentence “unjust, cruel, and 
irrational.”59
HAbiTuAL offEnDERs Habitual offender laws are a form of mandatory sentencing that 
has become increasingly popular over the past several decades. Also known as “three-
strikes-and-you’re-out” laws, these statutes require that any person convicted of a third 
felony must serve a lengthy prison sentence. The crime does not have to be of a violent or 
dangerous nature. Under Washington’s habitual offender law, for example, a  “persistent 
offender” is automatically sentenced to life even if the third felony offense happens to 
be “vehicular assault” (an automobile accident that causes injury), unarmed robbery, or 
attempted arson, among other lesser felonies.60 Today, twenty-six states and the federal 
government employ “three-strikes” statutes, with varying degrees of severity. 
“THREE sTRikEs” in CouRT The United States 
Supreme Court paved the way for these three-
strikes laws when it ruled in Rummel v. Estelle 
(1980)61 that Texas’s habitual offender statute did 
not constitute “cruel and unusual punishment” 
under the Eighth Amendment. Basically, the Court 
gave each state the freedom to legislate such laws in 
the manner that it deems proper. 
 
Twenty-three years later, in Lockyer v. Andrade 
(2003),62 the Court upheld California’s three-strikes 
law. The California statute allows prosecutors to 
seek penalties up to life imprisonment without 
parole on conviction of any third felony, including 
for nonviolent crimes. Leandro Andrade received 
Mandatory Sentencing 
Guidelines Statutorily 
determined punishments that 
must be applied to those who 
are convicted of specific crimes.
Habitual Offender Laws  
Statutes that require lengthy 
prison sentences for those 
who are convicted of multiple 
felonies. 
on August 16, 2010, Gregory 
Taylor, right, wipes away 
tears following a judge’s 
decision that he be set free 
after spending thirteen years 
in prison. Taylor was serving 
a potential life sentence for 
stealing food from a Los 
Angeles church—his “third 
strike” under California law. 
Why might prosecutors seek 
such a harsh sentence for a 
seemingly minor crime? 
AP Photo/Anne Cusack, Pool
C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   267
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 3 on page 
280, which asks them to think 
about the lessened amount of 
discretion that judges have since 
the implementation of sentencing 
guidelines. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
fifty years in prison for stealing $153 worth of videotapes, his fourth felony conviction. A 
federal appeals court overturned the sentence, agreeing with Andrade’s attorneys that it 
met the definition of cruel and unusual punishment.63
 
In a bitterly divided 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court reversed. Justice Sandra Day 
O’Connor, writing for the majority, stated that the sentence was not so  “objectively” 
unreasonable that it violated the Constitution.64 In his dissent, Justice David H. Souter 
countered that “[i]f Andrade’s sentence is not grossly disproportionate, the principle has 
no meaning.”65 Basically, the justices who upheld the law said that if the California leg-
islature—and by extension the California voters—felt that the law was reasonable, then 
the judicial branch was in no position to disagree. 
viCTim imPACT EviDEnCE
The final piece of the sentencing puzzle involves victims and victims’ families. As was 
mentioned in Chapter 2, crime victims traditionally were banished to the peripheries 
of the criminal justice system. This situation has changed dramatically with the emer-
gence of the victims’ rights movement over the past few decades. Victims are now given 
the opportunity to testify—in person or through written testimony—during sentencing 
hearings about the suffering they experienced as the result of the crime. These victim 
impact statements (VISs) have proved extremely controversial, however, and even the 
Supreme Court has had a difficult time determining whether they cause more harm than 
good.
bALAnCing THE PRoCEss Every state and federal government has some form of vic-
tim impact legislation. In general, these laws allow a victim (or victims) to tell his or 
her “side of the story” to the sentencing body, be it a judge, jury, or parole officer. In 
nonhomicide cases, the victim can personally describe the physical, financial, and 
emotional impact of the crime. When the charge is murder or manslaughter, relatives 
or friends can give personal details about the victim and describe the effects of her 
or his death. In almost all instances, the goal of the VIS is to increase the harshness 
of the sentence.
 
Most of the debate surrounding VISs centers on their use in the sentencing phases 
of death penalty cases. Supporters point out that the defendant has always been allowed 
to present character evidence in the hopes of dissuading a judge or jury from capital 
punishment. According to some, a VIS balances the equation by giving survivors a voice 
in the process. Presenting a VIS is also said to have psychological benefits for victims, 
who are no longer forced to sit in silence as decisions that affect their lives are made 
by others.66 Finally, on a purely practical level, a VIS may help judges and juries make 
informed sentencing decisions by providing them with an understanding of all of the 
consequences of the crime. 
THE Risks of viCTim EviDEnCE Opponents of the use of VISs claim that they interject 
dangerously prejudicial evidence into the sentencing process, which should be gov-
erned by reason, not emotion. The inflammatory nature of VISs, they say, may distract 
judges and juries from the facts of the case—the only proper basis for a sentence.67 In 
fact, research has shown that hearing victim impact evidence makes jurors more likely 
to impose the death penalty.68  The Supreme Court, however, has given its approval to 
the use of VISs, allowing judges to decide whether the statements are admissible on a 
case-by-case basis just as they do with any other type of evidence.69
Victim Impact Statement 
(VIS) A statement to the 
sentencing body (judge, jury, 
or parole board) in which the 
victim is given the opportunity 
to describe how the crime has 
affected her or him.
Identify the 
arguments for 
and against 
the use of 
victim impact 
statements 
during 
sentencing 
hearings.
Learning  
objective 6
Technology Tip: Have students visit 
the Web site of the National Center 
for Victims of Crime (www.ncvc.org) 
to learn more about victim’s rights, 
victim advocacy, and victim impact 
statements.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   269
SeLFaSSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 280.
With the aim of limiting judicial discretion, many states and the federal government have 
enacted sentencing ____________. These laws have greatly ____________ the length of 
prison sentences in the United States. The trend toward longer prison terms has also 
been influenced by ____________ - ____________ laws, a form of mandatory sentencing 
that requires increased punishment for a person convicted of multiple felonies. 
CAPiTAL PunisHmEnT— 
THE uLTimATE sEnTEnCE
“You do not know how hard it is to let a human being die,” Abraham Lincoln (1809–
1865) once said, “when you feel that a stroke of your pen will save him.” Despite 
these misgivings, during his four years in office Lincoln approved the execution of 
267 soldiers, including those who had slept at their posts.70 Our sixteenth president’s 
ambivalence toward capital punishment is reflected in America’s continuing struggle 
to reconcile the penalty of death with the morals and values of society. Capital punish-
ment has played a role in sentencing since the earliest days of the Republic and—hav-
ing survived a brief period of abolition between 1972 and 1976—continues to garner 
public support. 
 
Still, few topics in the criminal justice system inspire such heated debate. Death 
penalty opponents such as legal expert Stephen Bright wonder whether “there comes 
a time when a society gets beyond some of the more primitive forms of punishment.”71 
Critics point out that only twenty-three of the world’s countries still employ the death 
penalty, and that the United States is the only Western democracy that continues the 
practice. Critics also claim that a process whose subjects are chosen by “luck and money 
and race” cannot serve the interests of justice.72 Proponents believe that the death pen-
alty serves as the ultimate deterrent for violent criminal behavior and that the criminals 
who are put to death are the “worst of the worst” and deserve their fate.
 
Today, about 3,200 convicts are living on “death row” in American prisons, meaning 
they have been sentenced to death and are awaiting execution. In the 1940s, as many as  
two hundred people were put to death in the United States in one year. As Figure 9.6 on 
page 271 shows, the most recent high-water mark was ninety-eight in 1999. Despite declines 
since then, states and the federal government are still executing convicts at a rate not seen 
in six decades. Consequently, the questions that surround the death penalty—Is it fair? 
Is it humane? Does it deter crime?—will continue to mobilize both its supporters and its 
 detractors.
mETHoDs of ExECuTion 
In its early years, when the United States adopted the practice of capital punishment 
from England, it also adopted English methods, which included drawing and quarter-
ing and boiling the convict alive.  By the nineteenth century, these techniques had been 
deemed “barbaric” and were replaced by hanging.  Indeed, the history of capital punish-
ment in America is marked by attempts to make the act more humane. The 1890s saw 
the introduction of electrocution as a less painful method of execution than hanging, and 
in 1890 in Auburn Prison, New York, William Kemmler became the first American to die 
in an electric chair. 
Capital Punishment The 
use of the death penalty to 
punish wrongdoers for certain 
crimes. 
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students prepare arguments 
for or against the death penalty. (It 
may be helpful for them to fill out a 
short questionnaire asking them to 
organize their thoughts on the death 
penalty prior to doing this.) Once 
each group has constructed its 
arguments, have the class debate 
the death penalty. You can also 
divide students into groups based 
on their support or rejection of 
capital punishment, and then have 
them argue the opposite position.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 
The “chair” remained the primary form of execution until 1977, when Oklahoma 
became the first state to adopt lethal injection. Today, this method dominates executions 
in all thirty-three states that employ the death penalty. In the lethal injection process, 
the condemned convict is given a sedative, followed by a combination of deadly drugs 
administered intravenously. Sixteen states authorize at least two different methods of 
execution, meaning that electrocution (nine states), lethal gas (three states), hanging 
(three states), and the firing squad (two states) are still used on rare occasions.73
THE DEATH PEnALTy AnD THE suPREmE CouRT
The United States Supreme Court’s attitude toward the death penalty has been shaped by 
two decisions made more than a century ago.  First, in 1890, the Court established that 
as long as they are not carried out in an “inhuman” or “barbarous” fashion, executions 
are not forbidden by the Eighth Amendment.74 Since that case, the Court has never ruled 
that any method of execution is unconstitutionally “cruel and unusual.”
f A s T f A C T s
nATionAL viCTim ADvoCATE,  
job DEsCRiPTion:
•  Provide direct support, advocacy, 
and short-term crisis counseling 
to crime victims.
WHAT kinD of TRAining  
is REquiRED?
• Bachelor’s degree in criminal 
justice, social work/psychology, 
or related field.
• A minimum of two years’ 
experience in the criminal justice 
system, one year of which must 
have involved direct services 
with victims
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
•  $29,000 – $44,000
CareerS in CJ
Anne SeyMour 
nAtionAl VictiM AdVocAte
The aspect of my job that I enjoy the most is my direct work with crime victims and 
survivors. These are people who have been severely traumatized by pain and suffering 
and loss, and I consider it a true honor to be able to assist them. I’ll never forget the 
day I met a young survivor who had been 
abducted, beaten within an inch of her life, 
raped, and then left to die in the forest. This 
young woman became one of my closest 
friends, and I helped her to speak out in her 
state and at the national level. Every time she does so, she has a powerful impact 
on our society. So my help in turning a victim/survivor into a stellar victim advocate/
activist began on the day I met her, and it continues.
Victim advocacy is one of the most exciting and rewarding careers you could 
ever embark on, though it is not one that you should get into because of the 
money. (Few victim advocates become rich doing this work!) Every day is unique and 
different, reflecting the people I assist and the colleagues with whom I interact. I am 
never, ever bored and never will be. AND I go to bed every single day knowing that 
I have done at least one thing—and often many more than one!—to promote social 
justice and to help someone who is hurting. It’s an amazing feeling!
Social Media career tip  
Social media technologies are about connecting and sharing information—which 
means privacy is an important issue. Make sure you understand who can see the 
material you post and how you can control it. Facebook has numerous privacy 
settings, for example, as does Google+.
Courtesy Anne Seymour
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students 
to consider that no method of 
execution has ever been found 
unconstitutional. Under what 
circumstances might the United 
States Supreme Court find a 
method of capital punishment to be 
“cruel and unusual”?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   271
 
Then, in Weems v. United States (1910),75 the Supreme Court made a ruling that fur-
ther clarified the meaning of “cruel and unusual” as defined by the Eighth Amendment, 
though the facts of the case did not involve capital punishment. The defendant had been 
sentenced to fifteen years of hard labor, a heavy fine, and a number of other penalties 
for the relatively minor crime of falsifying official records. The Court overturned the 
sentence, ruling that the penalty was too harsh considering the nature of the offense. 
Ultimately, in the Weems decision, the Court set three important precedents concerning 
sentencing:
1. Cruel and unusual punishment is defined by the changing norms and standards of 
society and therefore is not based on historical interpretations.
2. Courts may decide whether a punishment is unnecessarily cruel with regard to 
physical pain.
3. Courts may decide whether a punishment is unnecessarily cruel with regard to 
psychological pain.76
REfoRming THE DEATH PEnALTy In the 1960s, the Supreme Court became increasingly con-
cerned about what it saw as serious flaws in the way the states administered capital punish-
ment. Finally, in 1967, the Court put a moratorium on executions until it could “clean up” 
the process. The chance to do so came with the Furman v. Georgia case, decided in 1972.77 
The Bifurcated Process In its Furman decision, by a 5–4 margin, the Supreme Court 
essentially held that the death penalty, as administered by the states, violated the Eighth 
Amendment. Justice Potter Stewart was particularly eloquent in his concurring opinion, 
stating that the sentence of death was so arbitrary as to be comparable to “being struck 
by lightning.”78 Although the Furman ruling invalidated the death penalty for more than 
six hundred offenders on death row at the time, it also provided the states with a window 
to make the process less arbitrary, therefore bringing their death penalty statutes up to 
constitutional standards.
 
The result was a two-stage, or bifurcated, procedure for capital cases. In the first stage, 
a jury determines the guilt or innocence of the defendant for a crime that has, by state stat-
ute, been determined to be punishable by death. If the defendant is found guilty, the jury 
reconvenes in the second stage and considers all aggravating and mitigating factors to decide 
 Prisoners Executed under Civil Authority
100
80
60
40
20
0
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
0
1
0
2
0
1
2
5
21
18
18
25
11
16
23
14
31
38
31
56
45
64
68
98
85
66
71
64
59 60
53
41
37
52
46 43
FIGURE 9.6 Executions in the United States, 1976 to 2011
Source: Death Penalty Information Center.
Identify the 
two stages 
that make up 
the bifurcated 
process of 
death penalty 
sentencing.
Learning  
objective7
Teaching Tip: Incorporate 
information about your state’s 
policies regarding the death penalty 
into your lecture or presentation. 
Students will be interested to learn 
the history of the death penalty in 
your state, how often it has been 
carried out, how many convicts are 
on death row, political debate on the 
subject in the state legislature, and 
so on.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
whether the death sentence is in fact warranted. (See Mastering Concepts—The Bifurcated 
Death Penalty Process below.) Therefore, even if a jury finds the defendant guilty of a crime, 
such as first degree murder, that may be punishable by death, in the second stage it can decide 
that the circumstances surrounding the crime justify only a punishment of life in prison. 
Court Approval The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Georgia’s new bifurcated process 
in 1976, stating that the process removed the ability of a court to “wantonly and freak-
ishly impose the death penalty.”79 The Court upheld similar procedures in Texas and 
Florida, establishing a model for all states to follow that would assure them protection 
from lawsuits based on Eighth Amendment grounds. On January 17, 1977, Gary Gilmore 
became the first American executed (by Utah) under the new laws, and today thirty-three 
states and the federal government have capital punishment laws based on the bifurcated 
process. (Note that state governments are responsible for almost all executions in this 
country. The federal government has carried out only three death sentences since 1963.)
THE juRy’s RoLE The Supreme Court reaffirmed the important role of the jury in death 
penalties in Ring v. Arizona (2002).80 The case involved Arizona’s bifurcated process: after 
MaSTeringCOnCePTS
tHE BIFURCAtED DEAtH PEnAlty PRoCESS
Stage 1
The Criminal Trial Phase
If found NOT guilty or 
guilty of a lesser offense: 
No Death Penalty
If found guilty of a 
capital offense:  
Move to Stage 2
Stage 2
Sentencing Hearing Phase
Jury decides: Do the circumstances 
surrounding the crime justify the death 
penalty?
If YES  
Execution
If NO:  
Life in prison with or 
without parole
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 4 on page 280, 
which asks them to think about the 
states that allow judges to overrule 
a jury’s recommendation regarding 
capital punishment. What do 
students think of this policy?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   273
the jury determined a defendant’s guilt or innocence, it would be dismissed, and the judge 
alone would decide whether execution was warranted. The Court found that this proce-
dure violated the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial, ruling that juries must 
be involved in both stages of the bifurcated process. The decision invalidated death penalty 
laws in Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, and Nebraska, forcing legislatures in those 
states to hastily revamp their procedures. 
 
Some states still allow for a measure of judicial discretion in capital punishment 
decisions. In Alabama, Delaware, and Florida, the jury only recommends a sentence of 
death or life in prison. If the judge feels that the sentence is unreasonable, he or she can 
override the jury. In 2011, for example, an Alabama jury voted unanimously that Iraq War 
veteran Courtney Lockhart should spend his life in prison for kidnapping and murdering 
college freshman Lauren Burk. Nonetheless, Lee County circuit judge Jacob Walker, not-
ing that the jury was unaware of the defendant’s extensive criminal history, overrode its 
recommendation and sentenced Lockhart to death.
miTigATing CiRCumsTAnCEs Several mitigating circumstances will prevent a defen-
dant found guilty of first degree murder from receiving the death penalty. In 1986, the 
United States Supreme Court held that the Constitution prohibits the execution of a 
person who is insane.81 Sixteen years later, in Atkins v. Virginia (2002),82 the Court simi-
larly ended the death penalty for mentally handicapped defendants. This later decision 
underscored the continuing importance of the Weems test (see page 271). In 1989, the 
Court had rejected the arguments that the execution of a mentally handicapped person 
was “cruel and unusual” under the Eighth Amendment.83 At the time, only two states 
barred execution of the mentally handicapped. Thirteen years later, eighteen states had 
such laws, and the Court decided that this increased number reflected “changing norms 
and standards of society.” 
 
Following the Atkins case, many observers, including four Supreme Court justices, 
hoped that the same reasoning would be applied to the question of whether convicts 
who committed the relevant crime when they were juveniles may be executed. These 
hopes were realized in 2005 when the Court issued its Roper v. Simmons decision, which 
effectively ended the execution of those who committed crimes as 
juveniles.84 As in the Atkins case, the Court relied on the “evolving 
standards of decency” test, noting that a majority of the states, as well 
as every other civilized nation, prohibited the execution of offenders 
who committed their crimes before the age of eighteen. The Roper 
ruling required that seventy-two convicted murderers in twelve states 
be resentenced and took the death penalty “off the table” for dozens of 
pending cases in which prosecutors were seeking capital punishment 
for juvenile criminal acts.
sTiLL CRuEL AnD unusuAL?
As noted earlier, lethal injection is the dominant form of execution 
in this country. Most states employ the same three-drug process. 
First, the sedative sodium thiopental is administered to deaden pain. 
Then pancuronium bromide, a paralytic, immobilizes the prisoner. 
Finally, a dose of potassium chloride stops the heart. Members of the 
law enforcement and medical communities have long claimed that, 
if performed correctly, this procedure kills the individual quickly and 
painlessly. Many others, however, contend that the second drug—the 
In January 2012, sixteen-
year-old Robert C. Richardson 
was charged with fatally 
shooting his father at their 
home in Harford County, 
Maryland. Why did the U.S. 
Supreme Court make juvenile 
murder defendants such as 
Richardson ineligible for the 
death penalty?
Harford County Sheriff’s Office
Discussion Tip: Up until 2008, six 
states allowed the death penalty for 
certain sex crimes, mostly involving 
minors. That year, the United States 
Supreme Court found these laws 
unconstitutional because they were 
not proportionate to the crime. 
Do students agree with this Court 
decision? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
paralytic—masks any outward signs of distress and thus keeps observers from know-
ing whether the inmate suffers extreme pain before death.85 
 
In 2007, two convicted murderers in Kentucky asked the United States Supreme 
Court to invalidate the state’s lethal injection procedure because of the possibility that 
it inflicted undetectable suffering. Nearly all of the scheduled executions in the United 
States were placed on hold while the Court deliberated this issue. In 2008, the Court 
ruled in Baze v. Rees that the mere possibility of pain “does not establish the sort of 
‘ objectively intolerable risk of harm’ that qualifies as cruel and unusual” punishment.86 
(See the feature Landmark Cases—Baze v. Rees on the facing page.) Although executions 
resumed shortly after the Baze decision, the states that employ the death penalty faced 
another challenge when the only American producer of sodium thiopental—the first 
drug used in the cocktail—stopped its production. 
 
By 2011, ten of these states had replaced sodium thiopental in their three-step 
processes with a similar sedative called pentobarbital, commonly used in this country to 
euthanize animals. In addition, Ohio now uses a single, very strong dose of pentobarbital 
to carry out the death penalty.
DEbATing THE sEnTEnCE of DEATH
Of the topics covered in this textbook, few inspire such passionate argument as the death 
penalty. Many advocates believe that execution is “just deserts” for those who commit 
heinous crimes. In the words of sociologist Ernest van den Haag, death is the “only fit-
ting retribution for murder that I can think of. ”87 Opponents worry that retribution is 
simply another word for vengeance and that “the use of the death penalty by the state 
will increase the acceptance of revenge in our society and will give official sanction to a 
climate of violence.”88 As the debate over capital punishment continues, it tends to focus 
on several key issues: deterrence, fallibility, arbitrariness, and discrimination.
DETERREnCE Those advocates of the death penalty who wish to show that the practice 
benefits society often turn to the idea of deterrence. In other words, they believe that by 
executing convicted criminals, the criminal justice system discourages potential crimi-
nals from committing similar violent acts. Several reports released in the 2000s claim 
that each convict executed deters between three and eighteen future homicides.89 “I 
oppose the death penalty,” says Naci Mocan, an economics professor at Louisiana State 
University. “But my results show that the death penalty [has a deterrent effect]—what am 
I going to do, hide them?”90
 
The main problem with studies that support the death penalty, say its critics, is 
that there are too few executions carried out in the United States each year to ade-
quately  determine their impact.91 Furthermore, each study that “proves” the deterrent 
effect of the death penalty seems be matched by one that “disproves” the same prem-
ise.92 In the end, the deterrence debate follows a familiar pattern. Opponents of the 
death penalty claim that murderers rarely consider the consequences of their act, and 
therefore it makes no difference whether capital punishment exists or not. Proponents 
counter that this proves the death penalty’s deterrent value, because if the murder-
ers had considered the possibility of execution, they would not have committed their 
crimes.
fALLibiLiTy In a sense, capital punishment acts as the ultimate deterrent by rendering 
those executed incapable of committing further crimes.  Incapacitation as a justification 
Describe the 
main issues 
of the death 
penalty 
debate.
Learning  
objective 8
Social Media and CJ 
The Web sites of the Death 
Penalty Information Center 
and Pro Death Penalty 
provide opposing views 
on capital punishment. 
To access their Facebook 
pages, visit the Criminal 
Justice CourseMate at 
cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links 
for this chapter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   275
for the death penalty, though, rests on two debatable assumptions: (1) every convicted 
murderer is likely to recidivate, and (2) the criminal justice system is infallible. In other 
words, the system never convicts someone who is actually not guilty. 
 
As of yet, conclusive evidence that an innocent person has been executed in the 
United States has not been accepted by any American court. According to the Death 
Penalty Information Center, however, between 1973, when the Supreme Court had 
temporarily suspended capital punishment, and August 2012, 140 American men and 
women who had been convicted of capital crimes and sentenced to death—though not 
executed—were later found to be innocent. Over that same time period, about 1,300 
executions took place, meaning that for every nine convicts put to death during that 
period, about one death row inmate has been found innocent.93
Ralph Baze shot and killed two Powell County sheriff’s 
deputies. Ralph Bowling murdered Tina and Eddie Earley 
in Lexington. For their crimes, the state of Kentucky 
decided that the two men would be put to death. Baze’s 
and Bowling’s lawyers, however, challenged their clients’ 
executions on the ground that Kentucky’s method of lethal 
injection—the three-drug “cocktail” described on page 
273—was unreliable and inflicted “unnecessary pain.” After 
the Kentucky Supreme Court rejected this argument, the 
United States Supreme Court agreed to hear the inmates’ 
appeal. The Court’s decision was eagerly awaited, as 
state governments and courts had placed more than forty 
executions by lethal injection on hold pending the ruling.
Baze v. Rees
United States Supreme Court
553 U.S. 35 (2008)
www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/baze-v-rees
in tHe WordS oF tHe court...
CHIEF JUStICE RoBERtS, MAJoRIty oPInIon
* * * *
We begin with the principle, settled by Gregg, that capital 
punishment is constitutional. It necessarily follows that 
there must be a means of carrying it out. Some risk of pain 
is inherent in any method of execution—no matter how 
humane.
 
Our cases recognize that subjecting individuals to a 
risk of future harm—not simply actually inflicting pain—can 
qualify as cruel and unusual punishment. To establish that 
such exposure violates the Eighth Amendment, however, 
the conditions presenting the risk must be “sure or very 
likely to cause serious illness and needless suffering,” and 
give rise to “sufficiently imminent dangers.”
* * * *
 
In applying these standards to the facts of this case, we 
note at the outset that it is difficult to regard a practice as 
“objectively intolerable” when it is in fact widely tolerated. 
Thirty-six States that sanction capital punishment have 
adopted lethal injection as the preferred method of execution. 
* * * This broad consensus goes not just to the method of 
execution, but also to the specific three-drug combination 
used by Kentucky. Thirty States, as well as the Federal 
Government, use a series of sodium thiopental, pancuronium 
bromide, and potassium chloride, in varying amounts.
decision 
The Court found that the pain caused by any mode of 
execution, be it accidental or “an inescapable cause of 
death,” does not trigger Eighth Amendment protections 
against “cruel and unusual punishment.” In essence, the 
Court said that this form of lethal injection, though perhaps 
not perfect, was acceptable. It therefore upheld the 
decision of the Kentucky Supreme Court.
For criticAl AnAlySiS
Do you agree that it would be unreasonable to expect 
corrections officials to provide death row inmates with a 
completely painless mode of execution? If a less painful 
alternative to the three-drug “cocktail” becomes readily 
available, should the Court require states to use it?  
Explain your answers.
LanDMark CAsEs: baze v. Rees
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
ARbiTRARinEss As noted earlier, one of the reasons it is so difficult to determine the 
deterrent effect of the death penalty is that it is rarely meted out. Despite the bifurcated 
process required by the Supreme Court’s Furman ruling (see pages 271–272), a significant 
amount of arbitrariness appears to remain in the system. Only 2 percent of all defendants 
convicted of murder are sentenced to death, and, as we have seen, relatively few of those 
on death row are ever executed.94
 
The chances of a defendant in a capital trial being sentenced to death seem to 
depend heavily on, as we have seen, the quality of the defense counsel and the jurisdic-
tion where the crime was committed. As Figure 9.7 below shows, a convict’s likelihood 
of being executed is strongly influenced by geography. Five states (Florida, Missouri, 
Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia) account for about two-thirds of all executions, while 
seventeen states and the District of Columbia do not provide for capital punishment 
within their borders. Thus, a person on trial for first degree murder in Idaho has a much 
better chance of avoiding execution than someone who has committed the same crime 
in Texas. 
DisCRiminAToRy EffECT Whether or not capital punishment is imposed arbitrarily, 
some observers claim that it is not done without bias. A disproportionate number of 
those executed since 1976—just over one-third—have been African American, and today 
42 percent of all inmates on death row are black.95 Another set of statistics also continues 
to be problematic: in 252 cases involving interracial murders in which the defendant was 
executed between 1976 and March 2012, the defendant was African American and the 
victim was white.  Over that same time period, only 18 cases involved a white defendant 
and a black victim.96
States with the death penalty
States without the death penalty
TX
477
NMa
1
AZ
30
NE
12
CA
13
OR
2
WA
5
ID
2
Utah
7
SD
1
MN
WI
MO
68
ILb
12
IN
20
OH
46
PA 3
NY*
MT
3
KS*
OK
96
LA
28
AR
27
MS
15
AL
55
GA
52
TN  6
SC
43
NC
43
VA 
109
KY
3  
FL
71
CO
1
WY
1
NE
3
WV
ME  
MA
HI
AK
IA
ND
RI
CTc 1
NJ 
DE 15
MD 5
D.C. 
VT
NH* 
MI
*Jurisdictions with no executions since 1976
a Repealed the use of the death penalty in 2009
b Repealed the use of the death penalty in 2011
c Repealed the use of the death penalty in 2012
FIGURE 9.7 Executions by State, 1976–2011
Source: Death Penalty Information Center.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   277
 
Practically, these numbers have had little impact on the mechanics of the death 
penalty. In McCleskey v. Kemp (1987),97 the Supreme Court made it very difficult to prove 
discriminatory intent in capital punishment based on statistics alone. Several years ago, 
however, North Carolina did pass the Racial Justice Act, which allows death row inmates 
to challenge their sentences on the ground that their race played a significant role in 
the proceedings.98 In 2012, Marcus Robinson became the first death row inmate to take 
advantage of the new law by successfully claiming that state prosecutors discriminated 
against blacks in selecting the jury for his capital trial.  A state judge changed Robinson’s 
sentence to life in prison without parole.
THE immEDiATE fuTuRE of THE DEATH PEnALTy
As Figure 9.6 on page 271 made clear, the number of executions carried out each year in 
the United States has decreased dramatically since 1999. Other statistics also indicate a 
decline in death penalty activity. In 2011, only 78 people were sentenced to death, com-
pared with 277 in 1999.99
REAsons foR THE DECLinE in ExECuTions We have already addressed some of the rea-
sons for the diminishing presence of executions in the criminal justice system. With its 
earlier decisions in the Atkins (2002) and Roper (2005) cases, the United States Supreme 
Court removed the possibility that hundreds of mentally handicapped and juvenile 
offenders could be sentenced to death. Furthermore, nearly all of the states that allow 
for the death penalty now permit juries to impose a sentence of life in prison without 
parole as an alternative to death. In Texas, the number of death sentences imposed each 
year dropped by about 50 percent after jurors were given the life-without-parole option 
in 2005, a trend that has been mirrored throughout the United States.100
 
Financial considerations are also starting to color the capital punishment picture. 
Because of the costs of intensive investigations, extensive voir dire (see pages 231–232), 
and lengthy appellate reviews, pursuing the death penalty can be very expensive for state 
In September 2011, the state 
of Georgia executed Troy 
Davis for murdering an off-duty 
police officer twenty-two years 
earlier. Many people, including 
these protestors at Davis’s 
funeral in Savannah, doubted 
that Davis was guilty of the 
crime. Why is the question of 
whether an innocent defendant 
has ever been executed so 
important for the death penalty 
debate?
AP Photo/Stephen Morton
Technology Tip: Have students go 
online to research North Carolina’s 
Racial Justice Act and the facts of 
the Marcus Robinson case. Do they 
think this law is necessary? Is it fair? 
Do they agree that Robinson was 
discriminated against during the 
sentencing process?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
taxpayers. A recent study by the Urban Institute found that the average death penalty 
trial costs a state $2 million more than a murder trial in which capital punishment is not 
sought.101 Taking all of the system’s costs into account, Florida spends $24 million per 
execution, and California spends an extraordinary $250 million per execution.102 As state 
budgets come under increased pressure, officials are looking at capital punishment as an 
area of potential savings.
ConTinuED suPPoRT foR THE DEATH PEnALTy In November 2011, Governor John 
Kitzhaber of Oregon called his state’s capital punishment system “compromised and 
inequitable” and announced that no more executions would take place as long as he was 
in office.103 Earlier that year, Illinois became the third state since 2007 to end capital pun-
ishment, along with New Jersey and New Mexico. Then, in 2012, Connecticut followed 
suit. Does this mean society’s “standards of decency” are changing to the point where the 
death sentence is in danger of being completely abolished in the United States? Probably 
not. Despite its decisions in the 2000s, the Supreme Court has shown no interest in hold-
ing that the death penalty itself is unconstitutional. In addition to its Baze decision (see 
page 275), in 2007 the Court made it easier for prosecutors to seek the death penalty by 
allowing them to remove potential jurors who express reservations about the practice.104
 
Although public support for the death penalty has been steadily dropping since the 
mid-1990s, one poll taken in 2011 showed that 61 percent of Americans still favor the 
practice.105 (That percentage does, however, drop to about 50 percent when the choice 
is between execution and a sentence of life in prison without parole.)106 Another poll 
found that 58 percent of the respondents favored an official moratorium on executions 
nationwide to consider the problem of wrongful death sentences.107 In the 2000s, then, 
Americans seem more interested in making the sentence of death fairer than in doing 
away with it altogether.
SeLFaSSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 280.
By a large margin, ____________ ____________ is the most widespread method of 
execution in the United States today. According to the United States Supreme Court’s 
Weems decision, “cruel and unusual punishment” under the Eighth Amendment is 
determined by the changing ____________ ____________ ____________ of society. 
Following the Weems  guidelines, in 2002 the Court barred the execution of the 
____________ ____________ , and in 2005 it prohibited the execution of persons who 
were ____________ at the time of their crime. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 
280. Do they think that states 
that abolish the death penalty 
are also eliminating an important 
bargaining chip for prosecutors 
trying to get plea bargains? If so, 
is this a positive or a negative 
development?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   279
ChaPTer SUMMary
List and contrast the four basic philo-
sophical reasons for sentencing criminals. 
(a) Retribution, (b) deterrence, (c) incapacita-
tion, and (d) rehabilitation. Under the principle of retributive 
justice, the severity of the punishment is in proportion to the 
severity of the crime. Punishment is an end in itself. In contrast, 
the deterrence approach seeks to prevent future crimes by set-
ting an example. Such punishment is based on its deterrent 
value and not necessarily on the severity of the crime. The inca-
pacitation theory of punishment simply argues that a criminal 
in prison cannot inflict further harm on society. In contrast, the 
rehabilitation theory believes that criminals can be rehabilitated 
in the appropriate prison environment. 
Contrast indeterminate with determi-
nate sentencing. Indeterminate sentenc-
ing follows from legislative penal codes 
that set minimum and maximum amounts of incarceration 
time. Determinate sentencing carries a fixed amount of time, 
although this may be reduced for “good time.” 
List the four primary forms of punish-
ment available to the judge. (a) Capital 
(death sentence), (b) imprisonment, (c) pro-
bation, and (d) fines.
State who has input into the sentencing 
decision and list the factors that deter-
mine a sentence. The prosecutor, defense 
attorney, probation officer, and judge provide inputs. The 
factors considered in sentencing are (a) the seriousness of 
the crime, (b) mitigating circumstances, (c) aggravating cir-
cumstances, and (d) judicial  philosophy. 
Explain some of the reasons why sen-
tencing reform has occurred. One reason 
is sentencing disparity, which is indicative 
of a situation in which those convicted of similar crimes 
receive dissimilar sentences (often due to a particular judge’s 
sentencing philosophy). Sentencing discrimination has also 
occurred on the basis of defendants’ gender, race, or eco-
nomic standing. 
Identify the arguments for and against 
the use of victim impact statements dur-
ing sentencing hearings. Proponents of 
victim impact statements believe that they allow victims to 
provide character evidence in the same manner as defen-
dants have always been allowed to do and that they give 
victims a therapeutic “voice” in the sentencing process. 
Opponents argue that the statements bring unacceptable 
levels of emotion into the courtroom and unfairly prejudice 
juries against defendants.
Identify the two stages that make up the 
bifurcated process of death penalty sen-
tencing. The first stage of the bifurcated 
process requires a jury to find the defendant guilty or not 
guilty of a crime that is punishable by execution. If the defen-
dant is found guilty, then, in the second stage, the jury recon-
venes to decide whether the death sentence is warranted.
Describe the main issues of the death 
penalty debate. Many of those who favor 
capital punishment believe that it is “just 
deserts” for the most violent of criminals. Those who oppose 
it see the act as little more than revenge. There is also dis-
agreement over whether the death penalty acts as a deter-
rent. The relatively high number of death row inmates who 
have been found innocent has raised questions about the fal-
libility of the process, while certain statistics seem to show 
that execution is rather arbitrary. Finally, many observers 
contend that capital punishment is administered unfairly 
with regard to members of minority groups.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QUeSTiOnS FOr CriTiCaL anaLySiS
1. Suppose that the U.S. Congress passed a new law that 
punished shoplifting with a mandatory eighty-five-year 
prison term. What would be the impact of the new law 
on shoplifting nationwide? Would such a harsh law be 
justified by its deterrent effect? What about imposing a 
similarly extreme punishment on a more serious crime—
a mandatory sentence of life in prison for, say, drunk driv-
ing? Would such a law be in society’s best interest? Why 
or why not?
2. Why are truth-in-sentencing laws generally popular 
among victims’ rights advocates? Why might these laws 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
not be so popular with prison administrators or govern-
ment officials charged with balancing a state budget?
3. One judge complained that thanks to sentencing guide-
lines, his role in the sentencing process was like “follow-
ing an elaborate cookbook.” Why would proponents of 
sentencing reform argue that this sort of restriction on 
judicial discretion is a positive development?
4. In Alabama, Delaware, and Florida, judges can over-
ride death penalty sentencing decisions made by juries. 
What are the arguments for and against giving judges 
this power? How might these three states be in conflict 
with the United States Supreme Court’s Ring decision, 
described on pages 272–273?
5. Some observers believe that by abolishing the death pen-
alty, officials in states such as Connecticut and Illinois 
have taken away an important bargaining chip for pros-
ecutors to use during plea bargaining. Why might this be 
the case? 
key TerMS
aggravating circumstances  261
capital punishment  269
departure  266
determinate sentencing  257
deterrence  254
“good time”  257
habitual offender laws  267
incapacitation  254
indeterminate sentencing  256
just deserts  253
mandatory sentencing 
 guidelines  267
mitigating circumstances  261
presentence investigative report  259
“real offense”  261
rehabilitation  255
restitution  256
restorative justice  256
retribution  253
sentencing discrimination  263
sentencing disparity  262
sentencing guidelines  265
truth-in-sentencing laws  257
victim impact statement (VIS)  268
SeLF aSSeSSMenT anSwer key
Page 256: i. retribution; ii. deterrence; iii. incapacitation; 
iv. rehabilitation
Page 262: i. Indeterminate; ii. determinate; iii. good time; 
iv. presentence investigative; v. seriousness;  
vi. Mitigating; vii. aggravating
Page 265: i. disparity; ii. discrimination
Page 269: i. guidelines; ii. increased; iii. three-strikes/
habitual offender
Page 278: i. lethal injection; ii. norms and standards;  
iii. mentally handicapped; iv. juveniles/minors
COUrSeMaTe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
nOTeS
 1. Erica Goode, “Life Sentence for Possession 
of Child Pornography Spurs Debate over 
Severity,” New York Times (November 5, 
2011), A9.
 2. Philip Jenkins, Beyond Tolerance: Child 
Pornography on the Internet (New York: 
New York University Press, 2001); and Max 
Taylor and Ethel Quayle, Child Pornography: 
An Internet Crime (New York: Brunner-
Routledge, 2003).
 3. Michael L. Bourke and Andres E. Hernandez, 
“The ‘Butner Study’ Redux: A Report on the 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9 :  P u n i s H m E n T  A n d  s E n T E n C i n g   281
Incidence of Hands-On Child Victimization 
by Child Pornography Offenders,” Journal of 
Family Violence (2009), 183–191.
 4. Ibid., 188.
 5. David Yellen, “Just Deserts and Lenient 
Prosecutors: The Flawed Case for Real 
Offense Sentencing,” Northwestern University 
Law Review 91 (Summer 1997), 1434.
 6. Herbert L. Packer, “Justification for Criminal 
Punishment,” in The Limits of Criminal 
Sanction (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1968), 36–37.
 7. Harold Pepinsky and Paul Jesilow, Myths 
That Cause Crime (Cabin John, MD: Seven 
Locks Press, 1984).
 8. Brian Forst, “Prosecution and Sentencing,” 
in Crime, ed. James Q. Wilson and Joan 
Petersilia (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1995), 
376.
 9. James Q. Wilson, Thinking about Crime (New 
York: Basic Books, 1975), 235.
 10. Isaac Ehrlich, “Participation in Illegitimate 
Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical 
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy 
81 (May/June 1973), 521–564.
 11. Steven Levitt, “The Effect of Prison 
Population Size on Crime Rates,” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 111 (May 1996), 319. 
 12. Avinash Singh Bhati, An Information Theoretic 
Method for Estimating the Number of Crimes 
Averted by Incapacitation (Washington, D.C.: 
Urban Institute, July 2007), 18–33.
 13. Todd Clear, Harm in Punishment (Boston: 
Northeastern University Press, 1980).
 14. Robert J. Meadows and Julie Kuehnel, Evil 
Minds: Understanding and Responding to 
Violent Predators (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005), 256–258.
 15. Heather Strang and Lawrence W. Sherman, 
“Repairing 
the 
Harm: 
Victims 
and 
Restorative Justice,” Utah Law Review (2003), 
15, 18, 20–25.
 16. Russell E. Farbiarz, “Victim-Offender 
Mediation,” Michigan State University Journal 
of Medicine & Law (Summer 2008), 367.
 17. Gregory W. O’Reilly, “Truth-in-Sentencing: 
Illinois Adds Yet Another Layer of ‘Reform’ 
to Its Complicated Code of Corrections,” 
Loyola University of Chicago Law Journal 
(Summer 1996), 986, 999–1000.
 18. Marc Mauer, “The Truth about Truth-in-
Sentencing,” Corrections Today (February 1, 
1996), 1–8.
 19. Paul W. Keve, Crime Control and Justice in 
America: Searching for Facts and Answers 
(Chicago: American Library Association, 
1995), 77.
 20. Danielle A. Alvarez, “Flowers, Dinner, 
Bowling—and 
Counseling—Ordered 
by Broward Judge in Domestic Case,” 
Sunsentinel.com (February 7, 2012), at arti-
cles.sun-sentinel.com/2012-02-07/news/
fl-flowers-food-bowling-20120207_1_
red-lobster-broward-judge-judge-john-
jay-hurley.
 21. Kate Stith and José A. Cabranes, “Judging 
under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines,” 
Northwestern University Law Review 91 
(Summer 1997), 1247.
 22. Mark M. Lanier and Claud H. Miller III, 
“Attitudes and Practices of Federal Probation 
Officers towards Pre-Plea/Trial Investigative 
Report Policy,” Crime & Delinquency 41 (July 
1995), 365–366.
 23. Stith and Cabranes, 1247.
 24. Nancy J. King and Rosevelt L. Noble, “Felony 
Jury Sentencing in Practice: A Three-State 
Study,” Vanderbilt Law Review (2004), 1986.
 25. Jena Iontcheva, “Jury Sentencing as 
Democratic Practice,” Virginia Law Review 
(April 2003), 325.
 26. Julie R. O’Sullivan, “In Defense of the U.S. 
Sentencing Guidelines Modified Real-
Offense System,” Northwestern University 
Law Review 91 (1997), 1342.
 27. Quoted in Isolde Raftery, “‘Barefoot Bandit’ 
Gets Prison for Stealing from Neighbors,” 
New York Times (December 17, 2011), A12.
 28. Brian 
Forst 
and 
Charles 
Wellford, 
“Punishment and Sentencing: Developing 
Sentencing Guidelines Empirically from 
Principles of Punishment,” Rutgers Law 
Review 33 (1981).
 29. 18 U.S.C. Section 2113(a) (1994).
 30. Bob Barr and Eric Sterling, “The War on Drugs: 
Fighting Crime or Wasting Time?” American 
Criminal Law Review (Fall 2001), 1545.
 31. United States Sentencing Commission, 
“Statistical Information Packet, Fiscal Year 
2009, Northern District of California,” Table 
7, at www.ussc.gov/Data_and_Statistics/
Federal_Sentencing_Statistics/State_
District_Circuit/JP2009.htm; and “Statistical 
Information Packet, Fiscal Year 2009, Northern 
District of Iowa,” Table 7, at www.ussc.gov/
Data_and_Statistics/Federal_Sentencing_
Statistics/State_District_Circuit/2009/
ian09.pdf.
 32. United States Sentencing Commission, 
“Statistical Information Packet, Fiscal 
Year 2009, Fourth Circuit,” Table 7, at 
www.ussc.gov/Data_and_Statistics/
Federal_Sentencing_Statistics/State_
District_Circuit/2009/4c09.pdf; 
and 
“Statistical Information Packet, Fiscal 
Year 2009, Ninth Circuit,” Table 7, at www.
ussc.gov/Data_and_Statistics/Federal_
Sentencing_Statistics/State_District_
Circuit/2009/9c09.pdf.
 33. Cassia Spohn and David Holleran, “The 
Imprisonment Penalty Paid by Young, 
Unemployed Black and Hispanic Male 
Offenders,” Criminology 35 (2000), 281.
 34. Ibid., 297.
 35. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison Inmates 
at 
Midyear 
2009—Statistical 
Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, June 2010), Table 16, page 19.
 36. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the 
United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, 2012), at www.fbi.gov/
about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2011/
crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/table-43.
 37. Spohn and Holleran, 301.
 38. Brian Johnson, “The Multilevel Context of 
Criminal Sentencing: Integrating Judge- and 
County-Level Influences,” Criminology (May 
2006), 259–298.
 39. 28 U.S.C. Section 991 (1984).
 40. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Sentences 
in State Courts, 2006—Statistical Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2009), Table 3.5, page 20.
 41. Clarice Feinman, Women in the Criminal 
Justice System, 3d ed. (Westport, CT: Praeger, 
1994), 35.
 42. Darrell Steffensmeier, John Kramer, and 
Cathy Streifel, “Gender and Imprisonment 
Decisions,” Criminology 31 (1993), 411.
 43. Quoted in Kareem Fahim and Karen Zraick, 
“Seeing Failure of Mother as Factor in 
Sentencing,” New York Times (November 17, 
2008), A24.
 44. John C. Coffee, “Repressed Issues of 
Sentencing,” Georgetown Law Journal 66 
(1978), 987.
 45. J. S. Bainbridge, Jr., “The Return of 
Retribution,” ABA Journal (May 1985), 63.
 46. The 
Massachusetts 
Court 
System, 
“Introduction: Sentencing Guidelines,” at 
www.mass.gov/courts/formsandguide 
lines/sentencing/step1.html#step1.
 47. Pub. L. No. 98-473, 98 Stat. 1987, codified as 
amended at 18 U.S.C. Sections 3551–3742 
and 28 U.S.C. Sections 991–998 (1988).
 48. Julia L. Black, “The Constitutionality 
of Federal Sentences Imposed under 
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 after 
Mistretta v. United States,” Iowa Law Review 
75 (March 1990), 767.
 49. Fifteen Years of Guidelines Sentencing: An 
Assessment of How Well the Federal Criminal 
Justice System Is Achieving the Goals of 
Sentencing Reform (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Sentencing Commission, November 2004), 
46.
 50. Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael D. 
Reisig, American Corrections, 7th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Thomson Wadsworth, 2006), 86.
 51. Neal B. Kauder and Brian J. Ostrom, 
State Sentencing Guidelines: Profiles and 
Continuum (Williamsburg, VA: National 
Center for State Courts, 2008), 15.
 52. United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005); 
Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38 (2007); 
and Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U.S. 85 
(2007).
 53. Quoted in A. G. Sulzberger, “Defiant Judge 
Takes on Child Pornography Laws,” New York 
Times (May 22, 2010), A1.
 54. Tim McGlone, “Leniency Often Granted in 
Child Porn Cases,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, 
VA) (January 16, 2011), at hamptonroads.
com/2011/01/leniency-often-granted-
porn-cases.
 55. Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004); 
United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005); 
and Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38 (2007).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282   C R i m i n A L  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 56. Transactional 
Records 
Access 
Clearinghouse, “Wide Variations Seen in 
Federal Sentencing” (March 5, 2012), at trac.
syr.edu/whatsnew/email.120305.html.
 57. Demographic 
Differences 
in 
Federal 
Sentencing Practices: An Update of the 
Booker Report’s Multivariate Regression 
Analysis (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Sentencing 
Commission, March 2010), C-3.
 58. Alabama Code 1975 Section 20–2–79.
 59. Quoted in Melinda Rogers, “Reluctant Utah 
Judge Orders Man to 57 Years in Prison 
for Gang Robberies,” Salt Lake Tribune 
(December 15, 2011), at www.sltrib.com/
sltrib/mobile/53124012-90/maumau-
prison-angelos-court.html.csp.
 60. Washington Revised Code Annotated 
Section 9.94A.030.
 61. 445 U.S. 263 (1980).
 62. 538 U.S. 63 (2003).
 63. Lockyer v. Andrade, 270 F.3d 743 (9th Cir. 
2001).
 64. Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U.S. 63, 76 (2003).
 65. Ibid., 83.
 66. Edna Erez, “Victim Voice, Impact Statements, 
and Sentencing: Integrating Restorative 
Justice and Therapeutic Jurisprudence 
Principles in Adversarial Proceedings,” 
Criminal Law Bulletin (September/October 
2004), 495.
 67. Bryan Myers and Edith Greene, “Prejudicial 
Nature of Impact Statements,” Psychology, 
Public Policy, and Law (December 2004), 493.
 68. Ray Paternoster and Jerome Deise, “A Heavy 
Thumb on the Scale: The Effect of Victim 
Impact Evidence on Capital Decision 
Making,” Criminology (February 2011),  
129–161.
 69. Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808 (1991).
 70. Walter Berns, “Abraham Lincoln (Book 
Review),” Commentary (January 1, 1996), 70.
 71. Comments made at the Georgetown Law 
Center, “The Modern View of Capital 
Punishment,” American Criminal Law Review 
34 (Summer 1997), 1353.
 72. David Bruck, quoted in Bill Rankin, “Fairness 
of the Death Penalty Is Still on Trial,” Atlanta 
Constitution-Journal (July 29, 1997), A13.
 73. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Capital 
Punishment, 2010 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, December 
2011), 2.
 74. In re Kemmler, 136 U.S. 447 (1890).
 75. 217 U.S. 349 (1910).
 76. Pamela S. Nagy, “Hang by the Neck until 
Dead: The Resurgence of Cruel and Unusual 
Punishment in the 1990s,” Pacific Law 
Journal 26 (October 1994), 85.
 77. 408 U.S. 238 (1972).
 78. 408 U.S. 309 (1972) (Stewart, concurring).
 79. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976).
 80. 536 U.S. 584 (2002).
 81. Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399, 422 (1986).
 82. 536 U.S. 304 (2002).
 83. Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989).
 84. 543 U.S. 551 (2005).
 85. Baze v. Rees, 217 S.W.3d 207 (Ky. 2006).
 86. 553 U.S. 35 (2008).
 87. Ernest van den Haag, “The Ultimate 
Punishment: A Defense,” Harvard Law 
Review 99 (1986), 1669.
 88. The Death Penalty: The Religious Community 
Calls for Abolition (pamphlet published by 
the National Coalition to Abolish the Death 
Penalty and the National Interreligious Task 
Force on Criminal Justice, 1988), 48.
 89. Hashem Dezhbakhsh, Paul H. Rubin, 
and Joanna M. Shepherd, “Does Capital 
Punishment Have a Deterrent Effect? New 
Evidence from Postmoratorium Panel Data,” 
American Law and Economics Review 5 
(2003), 344–376; H. Naci Mocan and R. Kaj 
Gittings, “Getting Off Death Row: Commuted 
Sentences and the Deterrent Effect of Capital 
Punishment,” Journal of Law and Economics 
46 (2003), 453–478; Joanna M. Shepherd, 
“Deterrence versus Brutalization: Capital 
Punishment’s Differing Impact among 
States,” Michigan Law Review 104 (2005), 
203–255; and Paul R. Zimmerman, “State 
Executions, Deterrence, and the Incidence 
of Murder,” Journal of Applied Economics 7 
(2005), 163–193.
 90. Quoted in Robert Tanner, “Studies Say 
Death Penalty Deters Crime,” Associated 
Press (June 10, 2007).
 91. Richard Berk, “Can’t Tell: Comments on 
‘Does the Death Penalty Save Lives?’” 
Criminology and Public Policy (November 
2009), 845–851.
 92. John J. Donohue and Justin Wolfers, “Uses 
and Abuses of Empirical Evidence in the 
Death Penalty Debate,” Stanford Law Review 
58 (2005), 791–845.
 93. Death 
Penalty 
Information 
Center, 
“Innocence and the Death Penalty,” at www.
deathpenaltyinfo.org/innocence-and-
death-penalty.
 94. Adam Liptak, “Geography and the Machinery 
of Death,” New York Times (February 5, 2007), 
A10.
 95. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Capital 
Punishment, 
2010—Statistical 
Tables 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2011), Table 4, page 8, 
and Table 13, page 17.
 96. Death Penalty Information Center, “National 
Statistics on the Death Penalty and Race,” at 
www.deathpenaltyinfo.org/race-death-
row-inmates-executed-1976#defend.
 97. 481 U.S. 279 (1987).
 98. North Carolina General Statute Section 15A-
2010 (2009).
 99. Death Penalty Information Center, “The 
Death Penalty in 2011: Year End Report,” 
at 
www.deathpenaltyinfo.org/docu-
ments/2011__Year__End.pdf.
 100. David McCord, “What’s Messing with Texas 
Death Sentences?” Texas Tech Law Review 
(Winter 2011), 601–608.
 101. Cited in “Saving Lives and Money,” The 
Economist (March 14, 2009), 32.
 102. Mary Kate Cary, “The Case against the 
Death Penalty,” U.S. News Weekly (March 25, 
2011), 13.
 103. Jonathan J. Cooper, “Oregon Governor 
Bans Death Penalty,” Chicago Sun-Times 
(November 24, 2011), 27.
 104. Uttecht v. Brown, 551 U.S. 1 (2007).
 105. Gallup, “In U.S., Support for Death Penalty 
Falls to 39-Year Low” (October 13, 2011), at 
www.gallup.com/poll/150089/Support-
Death-Penalty-Falls-Year-Low.aspx.
 106. Gallup, “In U.S. 64% Support Death Penalty 
in Cases of Murder” (November 8, 2010), at 
www.gallup.com/poll/144284/support-
death-penalty-cases-murder.aspx.
 107. Richard C. Dieter, A Crisis of Confidence: 
Americans’ 
Doubts 
about 
the 
Death 
Penalty (Washington, D.C.: Death Penalty 
Information Center, June 2007), 5, 9.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   285
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1   Explain the justifications for community-based corrections 
programs.
2   Explain several alternative sentencing arrangements that 
combine probation with incarceration.
3  Specify the conditions under which an offender is most 
likely to be denied probation.
4   Describe the three general categories of conditions placed 
on a probationer. 
5   Explain the three stages of probation revocation.
6   List the five sentencing options for a judge besides 
imprisonment and probation. 
7   Contrast day reporting centers with intensive supervision 
probation.
8   List the three levels of home monitoring.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary on 
pages 303 and 304 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Probation  
 and  
Intermediate  
 
Sanctions
285
Los Angeles County Probation Department
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• The Justification for  
Community Corrections
• Probation: Doing Time  
in the Community
• Intermediate Sanctions
• The Paradox of Community 
Corrections
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
M
ythri Jayarman, Catherine Schaible’s defense attorney, was satisfied with the 
outcome of her client’s trial. “I think it was a fair sentence,” she said. “The 
most important thing is the safety of the [Schaibles’] children.”1 Prosecutor 
Joanne Pescatore agreed: “Like the judge said, they are not criminals, they don’t have 
records, they have seven kids to take care of.”2 In this case, then, the members of the 
courtroom work group felt that imprisonment made little sense, given that the Schaibles 
were not hardened criminals and their children would have suffered greatly by their 
parents’ absence. 
 
In such situations, the criminal justice system often relies on community corrections 
as a punishment option. Community corrections cover a wide variety of alternative sen-
tences in which offenders are allowed to serve their terms under supervision without going 
to jail or prison. Probation is not only the most common form of community supervision in 
the United States but also the country’s most common sentence. Along with Herbert and 
Catherine Schaible, about 4 million American adults are presently on probation.3  
 
In this chapter, we will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of probation and 
of other forms of community corrections called intermediate sanctions, which include 
intensive probation, boot camps, day reporting centers, and home confinement. Given 
the growing scarcity of resources for prisons and jails, policy decisions made today con-
A TRiAL of FaIth
When two-year-old Kent Schaible came down with 
what seemed to be a bad cold, his parents did not take 
the boy to the doctor. Instead, Herbert and Catherine 
followed the teachings of their fundamentalist church, 
which instructs its members to avoid traditional medicine 
and place their faith in the healing power of God. 
For nearly two weeks, as Kent suffered from chest 
congestion, a sore throat, and diarrhea, the Schaibles 
prayed fervently for their son’s recovery. After the young 
boy died, Herbert told a Philadelphia social worker, “We 
tried to fight the devil, but in the end the devil won.”
Others saw the situation in a different light. A 
medical examiner ruled Kent’s death a homicide, 
noting that the bacterial pneumonia from which 
he was suffering could have been alleviated with 
basic medical care. Prosecutors charged Herbert 
and Catherine with involuntary manslaughter and 
child endangerment. “You have to take care of 
your children. It’s not enough to pray for them,” 
said Philadelphia assistant district attorney Joanne 
Pescatore during the Schaibles’ criminal trial. “You 
also have to give them care when they need it.” A 
jury agreed and found the couple guilty of causing 
Kent’s death.
Under Pennsylvania law, common pleas court 
judge Carolyn Engel Temin could have sentenced 
both Herbert and Catherine to a maximum of 
seventeen years behind bars for their crimes. In 
February 2011, however, taking into account the 
Schaibles’ lack of criminal records and the fact that 
they still had seven other children to care for, the 
judge decided against incarceration. Instead, she 
sentenced the couple to ten years of probation each, 
during which time they would be required to set up 
regular medical exams for each of their children and 
consult a doctor at any sign of sickness. Should the 
Schaibles violate these conditions, they could be sent 
to prison.
Herbert and 
Catherine 
Schaible were 
sentenced to 
probation after 
being found 
guilty of 
causing their 
son’s death.
AP Photo/Philadelphia Police Department
Community Corrections  
The correctional supervision of 
offenders in the community as 
an alternative to sending them 
to prison or jail.
Discussion Tip: Ask students if 
they agree with the judge in the 
Schaibles’ trial. Did the Schaibles 
deserve only probation, or should 
they have received a harsher 
sentence for not seeking medical 
treatment for their child? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   287
cerning these alternative punishments will affect the criminal justice system for decades 
to come.
THE jusTifiCATion  
foR CommuniTy CoRRECTions
In the court of popular opinion, retribution and crime control take precedence over  
community-based correctional programs. America, says University of Minnesota law 
professor Michael Tonry, is preoccupied with the “absolute severity of punishment” and 
the “widespread view that only imprisonment counts.”4 Mandatory sentencing guidelines 
and “three-strikes” laws are theoretically the opposite of community-based corrections.5 
To a certain degree, correctional programs that are administered in the community are 
considered a less severe, and therefore a less worthy, alternative to imprisonment.
REinTEgRATion
Supporters of probation and intermediate sanctions reject such views as not only 
shortsighted but also contradictory to the aims of the corrections system. A very small 
percentage of all convicted offenders have committed crimes that warrant life impris-
onment or capital punishment. At some point, most will return to the community. 
Consequently, according to one group of experts, the task of the corrections system 
includes building or rebuilding solid ties between the offender and the community, inte-
grating or reintegrating the offender into community life—restoring family ties, obtaining 
employment and an education, securing in the larger sense a place for the offender in the 
routine functioning of society.6
Some studies have shown higher recidivism rates for offenders who are subjected to 
prison culture, and a frequent justification of community-based corrections is that they 
help to reintegrate the offender into society.
 
Reintegration has a strong theoretical basis in rehabilitative theories of punish-
ment. An offender is generally considered to be “rehabilitated” when he or she no longer 
represents a threat to other members of the community and therefore is believed to be 
fit to live in that community. In the context of this chapter and the two that follow, it will 
also be helpful to see reintegration as a process through which corrections officials such 
as probation and parole officers provide the offender with incentives to follow the rules 
of society. These incentives can be positive, such as enrolling the offender in a drug treat-
ment program. They can also be negative—in particular, the threat of return to prison or 
jail for failure to comply.  
 
In all instances, corrections system professionals must carefully balance the needs 
of the individual offender against the rights of law-abiding members of the community.
DivERsion
Another justification for community- based corrections, based on practical consid-
erations, is diversion. As you are already aware, many criminal offenses fall into the 
category of “petty,” and it is well-nigh impossible, as well as unnecessary, to imprison 
every offender for every offense. Community-based corrections are an important means 
of diverting criminals to alternative modes of punishment so that scarce incarceration 
resources are consumed by only the most dangerous criminals. In his “strainer” analogy, 
corrections expert Paul H. Hahn likens this process to the workings of a kitchen strainer. 
With each “shake” of the corrections “strainer,” the less serious offenders are diverted 
Reintegration A goal of 
corrections that focuses on 
preparing the offender for 
a return to the community 
unmarred by further criminal 
behavior.
Diversion In the context of 
corrections, a strategy to divert 
those offenders who qualify 
away from prison and jail and 
toward community-based 
sanctions.
Explain the 
justifications 
for community-
based 
corrections 
programs.
Learning  
objective1
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
describe what they believe it means 
for an offender to be “rehabilitated.”  
What do students think are the best 
strategies to rehabilitate offenders 
so that they can reintegrate back 
into the community?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
from incarceration. At the end, only the most serious 
convicts remain to be sent to prison.7
 
The diversionary role of community-based punish-
ments has become more pronounced as prisons and 
jails have filled up over the past three decades. In fact, 
probationers now account for about 60 percent of all 
adults in the American corrections system. According 
to the U.S. Department of Justice, on any single day, 
almost 2 percent of all adults in this country are under 
probation supervision.8
THE “Low-CosT ALTERnATivE”
Not all of the recent expansion of community correc-
tions can be attributed to accep tance of its theoretical 
underpinnings. Many politicians and criminal justice 
officials who do not look favorably on ideas such as 
reintegration and diversion have embraced programs to keep nonviolent offenders out 
of prison. The reason is simple: economics. The cost of constructing and maintaining 
prisons and jails, as well as housing and caring for inmates, has placed a great deal of 
pressure on corrections budgets across the country. Indeed, to cut incarceration costs, 
state prisons are taking such steps as installing windmills and solar panels to save energy 
and using medical students rather than physicians to provide less costly health care.9
 
Community corrections offer an enticing financial alternative to imprisonment. Data 
compiled by the Center for Economic and Policy Research suggest that for each nonviolent 
offender shifted from incarceration to community supervision, the federal government 
saves about $22,7000, and state governments save about $23,200.10 It is not surprising that 
the majority of states have passed community corrections legislation aimed at moving 
offenders from their cells into the community.11 In Texas, corrections officials estimate that 
programs designed to increase the use of probation and intermediate sanctions have saved 
the state nearly $450 million in prison costs.12 Officials can also require community-based 
criminals to pay the bill for their own supervision. In Oklahoma, probationers pay a $40 
monthly fee to cover part of the costs of their supervision.13
SELFaSSESSMENt
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 305.
The three basic justifications for community corrections are (1) ____________ , which 
focuses on building or rebuilding the offender’s ties with the community;  
(2) ____________ , a strategy that attempts to allocate scarce jail and prison space to only 
the most dangerous criminals; and (3) ______________ considerations, as community 
corrections are generally ____________ expensive than incarceration. 
PRobATion: Doing  
TimE in THE CommuniTy 
Not everyone was satisfied with the sentences given to Herbert and Catherine Schaible, 
described at the opening of this chapter. Critics pointed out that “faith-based  neglect” is 
not a recognized defense for criminal behavior, and parents who involuntarily injure or 
kill their children for nonreligious reasons are often punished with prison terms.14 Still, 
In Dallas, street prostitutes 
such as the two shown here are 
often treated as crime victims 
and offered access to treatment 
and rehabilitation programs. 
How might society benefit if 
such offenders are kept out 
of jail or prison through these 
kinds of diversion programs? 
AP Photo/LM Otero, File
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to explore the use of 
community corrections in their 
home states. How much do these 
programs cost per offender?  How 
much do they save? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   289
Judge Carolyn Engel Temin hardly broke new ground by choosing probation 
for the Schaibles. A system that initially provided judges with the discretion 
to show leniency to first-time, minor offenders increasingly allows those 
who have committed serious crimes to avoid incarceration. Fifty percent 
of probationers in this country have been convicted of a felony, and about 
770,000 have been found guilty of a violent crime such as assault or rape.15
 
As Figure 10.1 alongside shows, probation is the most common form of 
punishment in the United States. Although it is administered differently in vari-
ous jurisdictions, probation can be generally defined as 
the legal status of an offender who, after being convicted of a crime, has been directed 
by the sentencing court to remain in the community under the supervision of a 
probation service for a designated period of time and subject to certain conditions 
imposed by the court or by law.16
(As you read this chapter, keep in mind the distinction between probation 
and parole. Although they sound similar and both involve community super-
vision of offenders, there are differences. Probation is a sentence handed 
down by a judge following conviction and usually does not include incarcera-
tion. Parole, as will be explained in detail in Chapter 12, is a form of condi-
tional release from prison.)
sEnTEnCing CHoiCEs AnD PRobATion
Probation is basically an arrangement between sentencing authorities and the offender. 
In traditional probation, the offender agrees to comply with certain terms for a specified 
amount of time in return for serving the sentence in the community. One of the primary 
benefits for the offender, besides not getting sent to a correctional facility, is that the 
length of the probationary period is usually considerably shorter than the length of a 
prison term (see Figure 10.2 on the following page). 
 
The traditional form of probation is not the only arrangement that can be made. 
A judge can hand down a suspended sentence, under which a defendant who has 
been convicted and sentenced to be incarcerated is not required to serve the sentence. 
Instead, the judge puts the offender on notice, keeping open the option of reinstating 
the original sentence and sending the offender to prison or jail if he or she reoffends.  In 
practice, suspended sentences are quite similar to probation.
ALTERnATivE sEnTEnCing ARRAngEmEnTs Judges can also combine probation with 
incarceration. Such sentencing arrangements include the following:
• 
 Split sentences. In split sentence probation, also known as shock probation, the 
offender is sentenced to a specific amount of time in prison or jail, to be followed 
by a period of probation. 
• 
 Shock incarceration. In this arrangement, an offender is sentenced to prison or 
jail with the understanding that after a period of time, she or he may petition the 
court to be released on probation. (Shock incarceration is discussed more fully 
later in the chapter.)
• 
 Intermittent incarceration. With intermittent incarceration, the offender spends 
a certain amount of time each week, usually during the weekend, in a jail, work-
house, or other government institution.
Split sentences are popular with judges, as they combine the “treatment” aspects 
of probation with the “punishment” aspects of incarceration. According to the U.S. 
Probation A criminal 
sanction in which a convict 
is allowed to remain in the 
community rather than be 
imprisoned. 
Suspended Sentence A 
judicially imposed condition in 
which an offender is sentenced 
after being convicted of a 
crime, but is not required to 
begin serving the sentence 
immediately. 
Split Sentence Probation  
A sentence that consists of 
incarceration in a prison or jail, 
followed by a probationary 
period in the community.
Probation
57%
Parole
11%
Jail
11%
Prison
21%
FIGURE 10.1  Probation in 
American Corrections
As you can see, the majority of convicts 
under the control of the American 
corrections system are on probation.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional Population in 
the United States, 2010 (  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2011), Table 1, page 3.
Explain several 
alternative 
sentencing 
arrangements 
that combine 
probation with 
incarceration.
Learning  
objective2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Department of Justice, about a fifth of all probationers are also sentenced to some form 
of incarceration.17
ELigibiLiTy foR PRobATion Not every offender is eligible for probation. In Bell County, 
Texas, for example, juries can recommend probation only for assessed prison sentences 
of ten years or less. Generally, research has shown that offenders are most likely to be 
denied probation if they:
• 
Are convicted on multiple charges.
• 
Were on probation or parole at the time of the arrest.
• 
Have two or more prior convictions.
• 
Are addicted to narcotics.
• 
Seriously injured the victim of the crime.
• 
Used a weapon during the commission of the crime.18
 
As noted earlier, about half of all probationers have been found guilty of a misde-
meanor, and about half have been found guilty of a felony.19 As might be expected, the 
chances of a felon being sentenced to probation are highly dependent on the seriousness 
of the crime he or she has committed. Only one in five felons on probation has been con-
victed of a violent crime.20
ConDiTions of PRobATion
A judge may decide to impose certain conditions as part of a probation sentence. These 
conditions represent a “contract” between the judge and the offender, in which the lat-
ter agrees that if she or he does not follow certain rules, probation may be revoked (see 
Figure 10.3 on the facing page). The probation officer usually recommends the condi-
tions of probation, but judges also have the power to set any terms they believe to be 
FIGURE 10.2 Average Length of Sentence: Prison versus Probation
As you can see, the average probation sentence is shorter than the average prison 
sentence for most crimes.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2006—Statistical Tables (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2009), Table 1.3.
Average Maximum Sentence (in months)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Murder
Sexual assault
Robbery
Aggravated assault
Burglary
Drug possession
Drug trafficking
39
Time on probation
Time in prison
Specify the 
conditions 
under which 
an offender 
is most likely 
to be denied 
probation.
Learning  
objective 3
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 1 on page 304, 
which asks them to think about the 
dual purposes of probation.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
critique the probation denial factors 
listed in the text. Do they agree 
that each one of these factors 
should necessarily disqualify an 
offender from being sentenced to 
probation? What kind of offenders 
do students think would do well on 
probation?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   291
necessary. As we saw at the beginning 
of this chapter, Judge Carolyn Engel 
Temin imposed several conditions on 
the Schaibles, requiring that the couple 
make their seven children available to 
physicians on a regular basis.
PRinCiPLEs of PRobATion A judge’s per-
sonal philosophy is often reflected in the 
probation conditions that he or she creates 
for probationers. In In re Quirk (1997),21 
for example, the Louisiana Supreme Court 
upheld the ability of a trial judge to impose 
church attendance as a condition of proba-
tion. Although judges have a great deal of 
discretion in setting the conditions of pro-
bation, they do operate under several guid-
ing principles. First, the conditions must be 
related to the dual purposes of probation, 
which most federal and state courts define 
as (1) the rehabilitation of the probationer 
and (2) the protection of the community. 
Second, the conditions must not violate 
the U.S. Constitution, as probationers are 
generally entitled to the same constitu-
tional rights as other prisoners.22
 
Of course, probationers do give up 
certain constitutional rights when they 
consent to the terms of probation. Most 
probationers, for example, agree to spot 
checks of their homes for contraband 
such as drugs or weapons, and they there-
fore have a diminished expectation of 
privacy.
 
In United States v. Knights (2001),23 
the United States Supreme Court upheld the actions of deputy sheriffs in Napa County, 
California, who searched a probationer’s home without a warrant or probable cause. 
The unanimous decision was based on the premise that because those on probation are 
more likely to commit crimes, law enforcement agents “may therefore justifiably focus 
on probationers in a way that [they do] not on the ordinary citizen.”24
TyPEs of ConDiTions Obviously, probationers who break the law are very likely to have 
their probation revoked. Other, less serious infractions may also result in revocation. The 
conditions placed on a probationer fall into three general categories: 
• 
Standard conditions, which are imposed on all probationers. These include 
reporting regularly to the probation officer, notifying the agency of any change of 
address, not leaving the jurisdiction without permission, and remaining employed.
• 
Punitive conditions, which usually reflect the seriousness of the offense and are 
intended to increase the punishment of the offender. Such conditions include 
UniTeD STaTeS DiSTriCT CoUrT  
for The  
DiSTriCT of ColUmbia
To:   _________________________ No. 84-417
Address: 1440 N St., N.W., #10, Wash., D.C.
In accordance with authority conferred by the United States Probation Law, you have been placed 
on probation this date, January 25, 2013, for a period of one year by the Hon. Thomas F. Hogan 
United States District Judge, sitting in and for this District Court at Washington, D.C.
ConDiTionS of probaTion
It is the order of the Court that you shall comply with the following conditions of probation:
(1)-You shall refrain from violation of any law (federal, state, and local). You shall get in touch 
immediately with your probation officer if arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer.
(2)-You shall associate only with law-abiding persons and maintain reasonable hours.
(3)-You shall work regularly at a lawful occupation and support your legal dependents, if any, to 
the best of your ability. When out of work you shall notify your probation officer at once. You shall 
consult him prior to job changes.
(4)-You shall not leave the judicial district without permission of the probation officer.
(5)-You shall notify your probation officer immediately of any change in your place of residence.
(6)-You shall follow the probation officer’s instructions.
(7)-You shall report to the probation officer as directed.
(8)-You shall not possess a firearm (handgun or rifle) for any reason.
The special conditions ordered by the Court are as follows:
     Imposition of sentence suspended, one year probation, Fine of $75 on each count.
I understand that the Court may change the conditions of probation, reduce or extend the period of 
probation, and at any time during the probation period or within the maximum probation period of 
5 years permitted by law, may issue a warrant and revoke probation for a violation occurring during 
the probation period.
I have read or had read to me the above conditions of probation. I fully understand them and I will  
abide by them.
____________________________________________________  Date ______________
Probationer
You will report as follows: __________________________ as directed by your Probation Officer
____________________________________________________  Date ______________ 
U.S. Probation Officer
FIGURE 10.3 Conditions of Probation
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
fines, community service, restitution, drug testing, and home confinement (dis-
cussed later).
• 
Treatment conditions, which are imposed to reverse patterns of self-destructive 
behavior. Data show that more than 40 percent of probationers were required to 
undergo drug or alcohol treatment as part of their sentences, and an additional 
18 percent were ordered to seek other kinds of treatment, such as anger-control 
therapy.25 
 
Some observers feel that judges often impose overly restrictive probation conditions 
that no person, much less one who has exhibited antisocial tendencies, could meet. Citing 
prohibitions on drinking liquor, gambling, and associating with “undesirables,” as well as 
requirements such as meeting early curfews, the late University of Delaware professor  
Carl Klockars claimed that if probation rules were taken 
 seriously, “very few probationers would complete their terms 
without violation.”26 
 
As more than six out of ten federal probationers do 
complete their terms successfully, Klockars’s statement sug-
gests one of two scenarios. Either probation officers are 
unable to determine that violations are taking place, or they 
routinely decide not to report minor probation violations. 
Perhaps the officers realize that violating probationers for 
every single “slip-up” is unrealistic and would add to the 
already significant problem of prison overcrowding.
THE suPERvisoRy RoLE of THE PRobATion offiCER
The probation officer has two basic roles. The first is investigative and consists of com-
piling the presentence investigative report, which was discussed in Chapter 9. The sec-
ond is supervisory and begins as soon as the offender has been sentenced to probation. 
In smaller probation agencies, individual officers perform both tasks. In larger jurisdic-
tions, the trend has been toward separating the responsibilities, with investigating officers 
handling the presentence investigation and line officers concentrating on supervision.
 
Supervisory policies vary and are often a reflection of whether the authority 
to administer probation services is decentralized (under local, judicial control) or 
 centralized (under state, administrative control). In any circumstance, however, certain 
basic principles of supervision apply. Starting with a preliminary interview, the proba-
tion officer establishes a relationship with the offender. This relationship is based on the 
mutual goal of both parties: the successful completion of the probationary period. Just 
because the line officer and the offender have the same goal, however, does not neces-
sarily mean that cooperation will be a feature of probation. 
THE usE of AuTHoRiTy The ideal probation officer–offender relationship is based on 
trust. In reality, this trust often does not exist. Any incentive an offender might have to be 
completely truthful with a line officer is marred by one simple fact: self-reported wrong-
doing can be used to revoke probation. Even probation officers whose primary mission is 
to rehabilitate are under institutional pressure to punish their clients for violating condi-
tions of probation. One officer deals with this situation by telling his clients 
 that I’m here to help them, to get them a job, and whatever else I can do. But I tell them too 
that I have a family to support and that if they get too far off track, I can’t afford to put my 
job on the line for them. I’m going to have to violate them.27
Describe the 
three general 
categories 
of conditions 
placed on a 
probationer.
Learning  
objective 4
“I try to get in the field two to 
three nights a week to see my 
offenders. It’s really the only way 
to stop trouble before it happens. 
Otherwise, it’s a free-for-all.”
— Kevin Dudley,  
Salt Lake City probation officer 
Social Media and CJ 
Probation Officers provides 
constant tweeting news 
about probation officers 
and probation departments.  
To access this Twitter page 
online, visit the Criminal 
Justice CourseMate at 
cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links 
for this chapter.
Discussion Tip: Do students agree 
with Carl Klockars’ assertion that 
relatively few probationers would 
complete their probation without 
violation if all probation rules were 
taken seriously? Why or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   293
 
In the absence of trust, most probation 
officers rely on their authority to guide an 
offender successfully through the sentence. 
An officer’s authority, or ability to influence a 
person’s actions without resorting to force, is 
based partially on her or his power to revoke 
probation. It also reflects her or his ability 
to impose a number of lesser sanctions. For 
example, if a probationer fails to attend a 
required alcohol treatment program, the officer 
can send him or her to a “lockup,” or detention 
center, overnight. To be successful, a probation 
officer must establish this authority early in 
the relationship, because it is the primary tool 
for persuading the probationer to behave in a 
manner acceptable to the community.28
THE CAsELoAD DiLEmmA Even the most balanced, “firm but fair” approach to proba-
tion can be defeated by the problem of excessive caseloads. A caseload is the number of 
clients a probation officer is responsible for at any one time. Heavy probation caseloads 
seem inevitable: unlike a prison cell, a probation officer can always take “just one more” 
client. Furthermore, the ideal caseload size is very difficult to determine because differ-
ent offenders require different levels of supervision.29
 
The consequences of disproportionate probation officer–probationer ratios are 
self-evident, however. When burdened with large caseloads, probation officers find it 
practically impossible to rigorously enforce the conditions imposed on their clients. Lack 
of surveillance leads to lack of control, which can undermine the very basis of a proba-
tionary system. Chicago sex offender Acurie Collier violated the terms of his probation at 
least forty times before sexually assaulting a thirteen-year-old girl several years ago. The 
Chicago probation department’s sex offender unit had four probation officers overseeing 
130 cases at the time—considered a low workload by city standards.30
REvoCATion of PRobATion
The probation period can end in one of two ways. Either the probationer successfully 
fulfills the conditions of the sentence, or the probationer misbehaves and probation 
is revoked, resulting in a prison or jail term. The decision of whether to revoke after a 
technical violation—such as failing to report a change of address or testing positive for 
drug use—is often a judgment call by the probation officer and therefore the focus of 
controversy. (See the feature You Be the Probation Officer—A Judgment Call on the follow-
ing page to learn more about the issues surrounding revocation.)
 
As we have seen, probationers do not always enjoy the same protections under the U.S. 
Constitution as other members of society. The United States Supreme Court has not stripped 
these offenders of all rights, however. In Mempa v. Rhay (1967),31 the Court ruled that proba-
tioners were entitled to an attorney during the revocation process. Then, in Morrissey v. Brewer 
(1972) and Gagnon v. Scarpelli (1973),32 the Court established a three-stage procedure by which 
the “limited” due process rights of probationers must be protected in potential revocation 
situations: 
• 
Preliminary hearing. In this court appearance, the facts of the violation or arrest 
are presented, and a “disinterested person” (often a judge) determines whether 
Authority The power 
designated to an agent of the 
law over a person who has 
broken the law.
Caseload The number of 
individual probationers or 
parolees under the supervision 
of a probation or parole officer.
Technical Violation An 
action taken by a probationer 
that, although not criminal, 
breaks the terms of probation 
as designated by the court.
A Washington, D.C., probation 
officer makes phone curfew 
checks while her partner 
watches. Why is trust so often 
difficult to achieve between 
probation officers and 
offenders?
Mark Gail/Washington Post/Getty Images
Explain the 
three stages 
of probation 
revocation.
Learning  
objective5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

probable cause for revoking probation exists. This hearing can be waived by the 
probationer.
• 
Revocation hearing. During this hearing, the probation agency presents evidence 
to support its claim of violation, and the probationer can attempt to refute this 
evidence. The probationer has the right to know the charges being brought 
against him or her. Furthermore, probationers can testify on their own behalf and 
present witnesses in their favor, as well as confront and cross-examine adverse 
witnesses. A “neutral and detached” body must hear the evidence and rule on the 
validity of the proposed revocation.
• 
Revocation sentencing. If the presiding body rules against the probationer, then 
the judge must decide whether to impose incarceration and for what length of 
time. In a revocation hearing dealing with technical violations, the judge will often 
reimpose probation with stricter terms or intermediate sanctions.
In effect, this is a “bare-bones” approach to due process. Most of the rules of evidence 
that govern regular trials do not apply to revocation hearings. Probation officers are 
not, for example, required to read offenders their Miranda rights before question-
ing them about crimes they may have committed during probation. In Minnesota v. 
Murphy (1984),33 the Supreme Court ruled that a meeting between probation officer 
thE FaCtS Your client, Alain, was convicted of selling drugs and given a split sentence—
three years in prison and three years on probation. You meet Alain for the first time two days 
after his release, and you are immediately concerned about his mental health. His mother 
confirms your worries, telling you that Alain needs help. You refer him to a psychiatric 
hospital, but the officials there determine that he “does not require mental health treatment 
at this time.” Several weeks later, Alain’s mother tells you that he is staying out late at night 
and “hanging out with the wrong crowd,” both violations of his probation agreement. After 
he tests positive for marijuana, you warn Alain that after one more violation, you will revoke 
his probation and send him back to prison. He tells you that he is “feeling agitated” and 
“having intermittent rage.” You refer him to a substance abuse and mental health treatment 
facility, where he tests positive for marijuana once again.
thE Law For any number of reasons, but particularly for the failed drug tests, you can start 
revocation proceedings against Alain. These proceedings will almost certainly conclude with 
his return to prison.
YOur DECISION On the one hand, Alain has violated the terms of his probation agreement 
numerous times. On the other hand, he has been convicted of only one crime—a drug 
violation—and you have no evidence that he is behaving violently or poses a danger to 
himself or others. Furthermore, Alain has strong family support and is willing to enter 
treatment for his drug problems. Do Alain’s technical violations cause you to begin the 
revocation process? Why or why not?
[To see how a Fairfield County, Connecticut, probation officer dealt with a similar situation, go to Example 10.1 in Appendix B.]
YOu BE thE PrOBatION OFFICEr
A Judgment Call
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
294   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Teaching Tip: If possible, have 
a probation officer visit your 
class to talk with students about 
her or his job requirements and 
responsibilities, difficulties that 
probationers face, the revocation 
process, and other probation-
related topics.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   295
and client does not equal custody and, therefore, the Fifth Amendment protection 
against self-incrimination does not apply, either.
nEw moDELs of PRobATion
In their efforts to cut the costs and caseloads associated with corrections, a number 
of jurisdictions are experimenting with new models of probation. Hawaii’s Office of 
the Attorney General, for example, operates Hawaii’s Opportunity Probation with 
Enforcement (HOPE) program under the “swift and certain” principle. The rules of HOPE 
are simple. Each substance abuse probationer must call the courthouse every day to 
learn if she or he is required to come in for urine tests for drugs, or urinalysis. If drugs are 
found in the probationer’s system during one of these frequent tests, a short jail term—
one to two weeks—is automatically served. HOPE has resulted in large reductions in 
positive drugs tests by probationers, and its 1,500 participants are significantly less likely 
to be rearrested than those not in the program.34
 
In 2000, with the approval of a ballot initiative, California embarked on an even 
more ambitious undertaking. The Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act changed 
the state penal code to mandate probation for any first- or second-time drug offender 
arrested for a crime involving personal use.35 As a condition of probation, the offender 
must complete a yearlong drug treatment program followed by six months of aftercare. 
A study by researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles found that, in the five 
years following the law’s passage, the number of drug possession–related prison admis-
sions in California decreased by 30 percent. During that same period, the state saved 
nearly $3,000 per year for each probationer in treatment rather than behind bars.36
SELFaSSESSMENt
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 305.
Offenders sentenced to probation serve their sentence in the ____________ under the 
supervision of a ____________ ____________ . If a probationer commits a ____________ 
____________ by failing to follow the ____________ of his or her probation, it may be 
revoked. If revocation occurs, the offender will be sent to ____________ . 
inTERmEDiATE sAnCTions
Many observers feel that the most widely used sentencing options—imprisonment and 
probation—fail to reflect the immense diversity of crimes and criminals. Intermediate 
sanctions provide a number of additional sentencing options for those wrongdoers 
who require stricter supervision than that supplied by probation, but for whom impris-
onment would be unduly harsh and counterproductive.37 The intermediate sanctions 
discussed in this section are designed to match the specific punishment and treat-
ment of an individual offender with a corrections program that reflects that offender’s  
situation.
 
Dozens of different variations of intermediate sanctions are handed down each 
year. To cover the spectrum succinctly, two general categories of such sanctions will be 
discussed in this section: those administered primarily by the courts and those admin-
istered primarily by corrections departments, including day reporting centers, intensive 
supervision probation, shock incarceration, and home confinement. Remember that 
none of these sanctions are exclusive. They are often combined with imprisonment and 
probation, and with each other.
Intermediate Sanctions  
Sanctions that are more 
restrictive than probation 
and less restrictive than 
imprisonment.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 2 on page 304, 
which asks them to analyze the 
success of Hawaii’s HOPE program.  
Discussion Tip: Inform your 
students that many law 
enforcement and victim’s rights 
groups were against California’s 
Substance Abuse and Crime 
Prevention Act. Have them 
brainstorm possible reasons behind 
such opposition.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
juDiCiALLy ADminisTERED sAnCTions
The lack of sentencing options is most frustrating for the person who, in the majority of 
cases, does the sentencing—the judge. Consequently, when judges are given the discretion 
to “color” a punishment with intermediate sanctions, they will often do so. In addition to 
imprisonment and probation, a judge has five sentencing options:
1. Fines.
2. Community service.
3. Restitution.
4. Pretrial diversion programs.
5. Forfeiture.
Fines, community service, and restitution were discussed in Chapter 9. In the context of 
intermediate sanctions, it is important to remember that these punishments are gener-
f A s T f A C T s
LEAD PRobATion offiCER,  
job DEsCRiPTion:
•  Work with offenders or clients 
who have been sentenced to 
probation.
•   Work with the courts. Investigate 
backgrounds, write presentence 
reports, and recommend 
sentences.
wHAT kinD of TRAining  
is REquiRED?
•  Bachelor’s degree in criminal 
justice, social work/psychology, 
or related field.
• Must be at least 21 years of age, 
have no felony convictions, 
and have strong writing and 
interview skills. Experience in 
multicultural outreach a plus.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
•  $31,500 – $51,500
CarEErS IN CJ
Peggy McCarthy 
LeaD Probation oFFiCer
The best thing about my job is that every day is different. I may be in court first thing 
in the morning, and then in my office meeting with defendants or developing case 
plans. In the afternoon, I may be at the jail taking statements for court reports or out 
in the field seeing my defendants. If I work a late shift, I may be visiting counseling 
agencies or talking to collateral sources or doing surveillance. I may be organizing a 
search on a defendant’s home or making an arrest. I may be working with the police 
to solve crimes or locate absconders. Or I may simply be completing administrative 
duties like filing or returning phone calls to defendants and/or their family members. 
Anything can happen at any time, and I have to be ready to respond. If a probation 
officer gets bored, something is wrong.
I take a great deal of pride in assisting defendants with the difficult task of 
making positive change in their lives. The rewards may be few and far between, 
but when a defendant with a history of substance abuse stays clean and sober for a 
year, when a gang-affiliated defendant secures a job and no longer associates with 
negative peers, or when a defendant who admittedly never liked school obtains a 
GED or diploma, that is when I realize that what I’m doing day in and day out is 100 
percent worthwhile.
Social Media Career tip  
Manage your online reputation—or someone else will do it for you. Monitor your 
profile using tools such as iSearch, Pipl, and ZabaSearch. Check BoardTracker, 
BoardReader, and Omgili for information on what people are saying about you on 
message boards.
Courtesy Peggy McCarthy
List the five 
sentencing 
options for a 
judge besides 
imprisonment 
and probation.
Learning  
objective 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   297
ally combined with incarceration or probation. For that reason, some critics feel the 
retributive or deterrent impact of such punishments is severely limited. Many European 
countries, in contrast, rely heavily on fines as the sole sanctions for a variety of crimes. 
(See the feature Comparative Criminal Justice—Swedish Day-Fines on the following page.)
PRETRiAL DivERsion PRogRAms Not every criminal violation requires the courtroom 
process. Consequently, some judges have the discretion to order an offender into a  
pretrial diversion program during the preliminary hearing. (Prosecutors can also offer 
an offender the opportunity to join such a program in return for reducing or dropping the 
initial charges.) These programs represent an “interruption” of the criminal proceedings 
and are generally reserved for young or first-time offenders who have been arrested on 
charges of illegal drug use, child or spousal abuse, or sexual misconduct. Pretrial diversion 
programs usually include extensive counseling, often in a treatment center. If the offender 
successfully follows the conditions of the program, the criminal charges are dropped. 
PRobLEm-soLving CouRTs In many instances, judges have found opportunities to divert 
low-level offenders by presiding over problem-solving courts. In these comparatively infor-
mal courtrooms, judges attempt to address problems such as drug addiction, mental ill-
ness, and homelessness that often lead to the eventual rearrest of the offender.38 
Drug Courts About three thousand problem-solving courts are operating in the United 
States. Although these specialized courts cover a wide variety of subjects, from domestic 
violence to juvenile crime to mental illness, the most common problem-solving courts 
are drug courts. Although the specific procedures of drug courts vary widely from juris-
diction to jurisdiction, most follow a general pattern. Either after arrest or on convic-
tion, the offender is given the option of entering a drug court program or continuing 
through the standard courtroom process. Those who choose the former come under the 
supervision of a judge who will oversee a mixture of treatment and sanctions designed 
to cure their addiction. When offenders successfully complete the program, the drug 
court rewards them by dropping all charges against them. Drug courts operate on the 
assumption that when a criminal addict’s drug use is reduced, his or her drug-fueled 
criminal activity will also decline.
Growing Influence Research shows that drug courts reduce the probably of contin-
ued drug abuse and, consequently, lead to a significant reduction in recidivism rates of 
participants when compared with nonparticipants.39 As a result of this kind of success, 
problem-solving principles are moving beyond specialty courts into mainstream crimi-
nal courts, allowing judges to insert principles of restorative justice, which we discussed 
in Chapter 9, into their diversion efforts.  
 
For example, more judges are taking advantage of community dispute resolution  
centers to move certain misdemeanors and minor criminal matters out of the court sys-
tem completely. At these centers, specialists help the parties engaged in a dispute—such 
as one involving vandalism or noise complaints—by mediating, or negotiating, a satisfac-
tory outcome for both sides. In 2011, New York judges, prosecutors, and police officers 
referred more than 3,100 criminal cases to community dispute resolution centers, thus 
diverting the participants from the formal court system.40
foRfEiTuRE In 1970, Congress passed the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt 
Organizations Act (RICO) in an attempt to prevent the use of legitimate business enter-
prises as shields for organized crime.41 As amended, RICO and other statutes give judges 
Pretrial Diversion Program  
An alternative to trial offered 
by a judge or prosecutor, in 
which the offender agrees 
to participate in a specified 
counseling or treatment program 
in return for withdrawal of the 
charges.
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Web site of the 
National Association of Drug Court 
Professionals (NADCP) to learn 
more about drug courts across the 
United States.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the ability to implement forfeiture proceedings in certain criminal cases. Forfeiture is a 
process by which the government seizes property gained from or used in criminal activ-
ity. For example, if a person is convicted for smuggling cocaine into the United States 
from South America, a judge can order the seizure of not only the narcotics but also the 
speedboat the offender used to deliver the drugs to a pickup point off the coast of South 
Florida. In Bennis v. Michigan (1996),42 the Supreme Court ruled that a person’s home or 
car could be forfeited even though the owner was unaware that the property was con-
nected to illegal activity.
 
Once property is forfeited, the government has several options. It can sell the prop-
erty, with the proceeds going to the state and/or federal law enforcement agencies involved 
in the seizure. Alternatively, the government agency can use the property directly in further 
crime-fighting efforts or award it to a third party, such as an informant. Forfeiture is finan-
cially rewarding—the U.S. Marshals Service manages nearly $4 billion worth of contraband 
and property impounded from alleged criminals. Each year, the agency shares about $580 
million of these funds with state and local law enforcement agencies, with an additional 
$345 million going to crime victims.43
SwEDISh DaY-FINES  
Few ideals are cherished as highly in 
our criminal justice system as is equality. 
Most Americans take it for granted that 
individuals guilty of identical crimes should face identical 
punishments. From an economic perspective, however, 
this emphasis on equality renders our system decidedly 
unequal. Take two citizens, one a millionaire investment 
banker and the other a checkout clerk earning the minimum 
wage. Driving home from work one afternoon, each is 
caught by a traffic officer doing 80 miles per hour in a 
55-mile-per-hour zone. The fine for this offense is $150. This 
amount, though equal for both, has different consequences: 
it represents mere pocket change for the investment 
banker, but a significant chunk out of the checkout clerk’s 
weekly paycheck. 
Restricted by a “tariff system” that sets specific amounts 
for specific crimes, regardless of the financial situation of the 
convict, American judges often refrain from using fines as 
a primary sanction. They either assume that poor offenders 
cannot pay the fine or worry that a fine will allow wealthier 
offenders to “buy” their way out of a punishment.
Paying for Crime
In searching for a way to make fines more effective 
sanctions, many reformers have seized on the concept of 
the “day-fine,” as practiced in Sweden and several other 
European countries. In this system, which was established 
nearly a century ago, the fine amount is linked to the 
monetary value of the offender’s daily income. Depending 
on the seriousness of the crime, a Swedish offender will 
be sentenced to 1 to 120 day-fines or, as combined 
punishment for multiple crimes, up to 200 day-fines. 
For each day-fine unit assessed, the offender is 
required to pay one-thousandth of her or his annual gross 
income (minus a deduction for basic living expenses, 
as determined by the Prosecutor General’s Office) to 
the court. Consequently, the day-fine system not only 
reflects the degree of the crime but also ensures that the 
economic burden will be equal for those with different 
incomes.
Swedish police and prosecutors can levy day-fines 
without court involvement. As a result, plea bargaining is 
nonexistent, and more than 80 percent of all offenders are 
sentenced to intermediate sanctions without a trial. The 
remaining cases receive full trials, with an acquittal rate of 
only 6 percent, compared with roughly 32 percent in the 
United States.
For CritiCal analysis Do you think a day-fine 
system would be feasible in the United States? Why might 
it be difficult to implement in this country?
COMParatIvE CRiminAL jusTiCE
Forfeiture The process by 
which the government seizes 
private property attached to 
criminal activity.
Teaching Tip: Create a “day-fine” 
scenario to illustrate for students 
how such fines work. 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
consider some of the unintended 
consequences of asset forfeiture. 
How might the practice encourage 
law enforcement agencies to 
behave unethically?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   299
DAy REPoRTing CEnTERs
First used in Great Britain, day reporting centers (DRCs) are mainly tools to reduce jail 
and prison overcrowding. Although the offenders are allowed to live in the community 
rather than jail or prison, they must spend all or part of each day at a reporting center. 
In general, being sentenced to a DRC is an extreme form of supervision. With offenders 
under a single roof, they are much more easily monitored and controlled. 
 
DRCs are instruments of rehabilitation as well. They often feature treatment pro-
grams for drug and alcohol abusers and provide counseling for a number of psychologi-
cal problems, such as depression and anger management. Many of those found guilty in 
the Roanoke (Virginia) Drug Court, for example, are ordered to participate in a yearlong 
day reporting program. At the center, offenders meet with probation officers, submit to 
urine tests, and attend counseling and education programs, such as parenting and life-
skills classes. After the year has passed, if the offender has completed the program to the 
satisfaction of the judge and has found employment, the charges will be dropped.44
inTEnsivE suPERvision PRobATion
Over the past several decades, a number of jurisdictions have turned to intensive 
supervision probation (ISP) to solve the problems associated with burdensome 
caseloads we discussed earlier in the chapter. ISP offers a more restrictive alternative 
to regular probation, with higher levels of face-to-face contact between offenders and 
officers and frequent modes of control such as urine tests for drugs. In New Jersey, for 
example, ISP officers have caseloads of only 20 offenders (compared with 115 for other 
probation officers in the state) and are provided with additional resources to help them 
keep tabs on their charges.45 Different jurisdictions have different methods of determin-
ing who is eligible for ISP, but a majority of states limit ISP to offenders who do not have 
prior probation violations.
 
The main goal of ISP is to provide prisonlike control of offenders while keeping 
them out of prison. Critics of ISP believe that it “causes” high failure rates, as more 
supervision increases the chances that an offender will be caught breaking conditions 
of probation.46 A recent comparison of ISP with DRCs, however, found the intensive 
supervision of ISP to be more effective.  In the six months following termination of the 
program, DRC participants were more likely to be convicted for a new offense and to test 
positive for drugs than their ISP counterparts.  The study suggests that when combined 
with services such as outpatient drug treatment and educational training, ISP can be 
effective in producing low rates of recidivism.47
sHoCk inCARCERATion
As the name suggests, shock incarceration is designed to “shock” criminals into com-
pliance with the law. Following conviction, the offender is first sentenced to a prison or 
jail term. Then, usually within ninety days, he or she is released and resentenced to pro-
bation. The theory behind shock incarceration is that by getting a taste of the brutalities 
of the daily prison grind, the offender will be shocked into a crime-free existence.
 
In the past, shock incarceration was targeted primarily toward youthful, first-time 
offenders who were thought to be more likely to be “scared straight” by a short stint behind 
bars. Recent data show, however, that 20 percent of all adults sentenced to probation spend 
some time in jail or prison before being released into the community.48 Critics of shock 
incarceration are dismayed by this trend. They argue that the practice needlessly disrupts 
Day Reporting Center 
(DRC)  A community-based 
corrections center to which 
offenders report on a daily basis 
for treatment, education, and 
rehabilitation.
Intensive Supervision 
Probation (ISP) A 
punishment-oriented form of 
probation in which the offender 
is placed under stricter and 
more frequent surveillance and 
control than in conventional 
probation by probation officers 
with limited caseloads.
Shock Incarceration A 
short period of incarceration 
that is designed to deter 
further criminal activity by 
“shocking” the offender with 
the hardships of imprisonment.
Contrast day 
reporting 
centers with 
intensive 
supervision 
probation.
Learning  
objective7
Teaching Tip: Show students this 
short clip, which describes how 
a day reporting center in Georgia 
operates: www.dcor.state.ga.us/
newsroom/Videolibrary/ 
Video_DrC.htm.
Technology Tip: Have students 
watch the original Scared Straight 
documentary, which can be found 
on YouTube.
Teaching Tip: Show students 
clips of the new Scared Straight 
television show, Beyond 
Scared Straight, to illustrate the 
contemporary version of this 
program. 
Group activity: In small groups, 
have students debate the use 
of scared straight programs. Do 
they believe these programs are 
effective? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the lives of low-level offenders 
who would not otherwise be eligi-
ble for incarceration and exposes 
them to the mental and physical 
hardships of prison life (which 
we will discuss in Chapter  12).49 
Furthermore, there is little evi-
dence that shock probationers 
fare any better than regular pro-
bationers when it comes to recidi-
vism rates.50
 
The boot camp is a varia-
tion on traditional shock incar-
ceration. Instead of spending the 
“shock” period of incarceration 
in prison or jail, offenders are 
sent to a boot camp. Modeled 
on military basic training, these camps are generally located within prisons and jails, 
though some can be found in the community. The programs emphasize strict discipline, 
manual labor, and physical training. They are designed to instill self-responsibility and 
self-respect in participants, thereby lessening the chances that they will return to a life 
of crime. More recently, boot camps have also emphasized rehabilitation, incorporating 
such components as drug and alcohol treatment programs, anger-management courses, 
and vocational training.51
HomE ConfinEmEnT AnD ELECTRoniC moniToRing
Various forms of home confinement—in which offenders serve their sentences not in a 
government institution but at home—have existed for centuries. Home confinement has 
often served, and continues to serve, as a method of political control used by totalitarian 
regimes to isolate and silence dissidents. For purposes of general law enforcement, home 
confinement was impractical until relatively recently. After all, one could not expect 
offenders to keep their  promises to stay at home, and the personnel costs of guarding 
them were prohibitive. In the 1980s, however, with the advent of electronic monitoring, 
or using technology to guard the prisoner, home confinement became more viable. Today, 
all fifty states and the federal government have home monitoring programs with about 
130,000 offenders participating at any one time.52
THE LEvELs of HomE moniToRing Home monitoring has three general levels of restriction:
1. Curfew, which requires offenders to be in their homes at specific hours each day, 
usually at night.
2. Home detention, which requires that offenders remain home at all times, with 
exceptions being made for education, employment, counseling, or other specified 
activities such as the purchase of food or, in some instances, attendance at reli-
gious ceremonies.
3. Home incarceration, which requires the offender to remain home at all times, save 
for medical emergencies.
 
Under ideal circumstances, home confinement serves many of the goals of interme-
diate sanctions. It protects the community. It saves public funds and space in correctional 
Home Confinement A 
community-based sanction 
in which offenders serve their 
terms of incarceration in their 
homes.
Electronic Monitoring A 
technique of probation 
supervision in which the 
offender’s whereabouts are 
kept under surveillance by an 
electronic device.
Inmates engage in morning 
calisthenics at the Impact 
Incarceration Program in 
Illinois. In theory, why would 
boot camps like this one 
benefit first-time nonviolent 
offenders more than a jail or 
prison sentence? 
Journal Courier/The Image Works Image
List the three 
levels of home 
monitoring.
Learning  
objective 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

facilities by keeping convicts out of institutional incarceration. It 
meets public expectations of punishment for criminals. Uniquely, 
home confinement also recognizes that convicts, despite their 
crimes, play important roles in the community, and it allows 
them to continue in those roles. An offender, for example, may be 
given permission to leave confinement to care for elderly parents.
 
Home confinement is also lauded for giving sentencing offi-
cials the freedom to match the punishment with the needs of the 
offender. In Missouri, for instance, the conditions of detention for 
a musician required him to remain at home during the day, but 
allowed him to continue his career at night. In addition, he was 
obligated to make antidrug statements before each performance, 
to be verified by the manager at the club where he appeared.
TyPEs of ELECTRoniC moniToRing According to some reports, 
the inspiration for electronic monitoring was a Spider-Man comic book in which the hero 
was trailed by the use of an electronic device on his arm. In 1979, a New Mexico judge 
named Jack Love, having read the comic, convinced an executive at Honeywell, Inc., to 
begin developing similar technology to supervise convicts.53
 
Two major types of electronic monitoring have grown out of Love’s initial concept. 
The first is a “programmed contact” program, in which the offender is contacted peri-
odically by telephone or beeper to verify his or her whereabouts. Verification is obtained 
via a computer that uses voice or visual identification techniques or by requiring the 
offender to enter a code in an electronic box when called. The second is a “continu-
ously signaling” device, worn around the convict’s wrist, ankle, or neck. A transmitter 
in the device sends out a continuous signal to a “receiver-dialer” device located in the 
offender’s dwelling. If the receiver device does not detect a signal from the transmitter, it 
informs a central computer, and the police are notified.54
Offenders who are confined 
to their homes are often 
monitored by electronic 
devices like this one, which 
fits around the ankle. What 
are some of the benefits of 
electronic monitoring as an 
intermediate sanction?
Damon Higgins/ZUMA Press/Newscom
C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   301
After Henry L. Murray committed a series of robberies in the Gainesville, Florida, area, 
he fled north into Georgia.  Murray may have felt he was beyond the reach of the law, 
but Georgia authorities soon found him, thanks in large part to the global positioning 
system (GPS) device strapped to his ankle. GPS technology is a form of tracking 
technology that relies on twenty-four military satellites orbiting thousands of miles above 
the earth. The satellites transmit signals to each other and to a receiver on the ground, 
allowing a monitoring station to determine the location of a receiving device to within a 
few feet. GPS provides a much more precise level of supervision than regular electronic 
monitoring. A probationer like Murray wears a transmitter, similar to a traditional 
electronic monitor, around her or his ankle or wrist. This transmitter communicates with 
a portable tracking device, a small box that uses the military satellites to determine the 
probationer’s movements.
(Continued)
AP Photo/Suchat Pederson
CJ&TECHnoLogy 
Global Positioning System (GPS) 
Group activity: In small groups, 
have students explore the various 
types of electronic monitoring 
strategies. Which do they think is 
most effective? Why? What new 
innovations have been introduced 
in electronic monitoring?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
wiDEning THE nET
As mentioned above, most of the convicts chosen for intermediate sanctions are low-risk 
offenders. From the point of view of the corrections official doing the choosing, this makes 
sense. Such offenders are less likely to commit crimes and attract negative publicity. This 
selection strategy, however, appears to invalidate one of the primary reasons intermediate 
sanctions exist: to reduce prison and jail populations. If most of the offenders in interme-
diate sanctions programs would otherwise have received probation, then the effect on 
these populations is nullified. Indeed, studies have shown this to be the case.55
 
At the same time, intermediate sanctions broaden the reach of the corrections 
system. In other words, they increase rather than decrease the amount of control the 
state exerts over the individual. Suppose a person is arrested for a misdemeanor such 
as shoplifting and, under normal circumstances, would receive probation. With access 
to intermediate sanctions, the judge may add a period of home confinement to the sen-
tence. Critics contend that such practices widen the net of the corrections system by 
augmenting the number of citizens who are under the control and surveillance of the 
state and also strengthen the net by increasing the government’s power to intervene in 
the lives of its citizens.56 Technological advances—such as the GPS devices mentioned 
above—will only accelerate the trend.  
SELFaSSESSMENt
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 305.
Judicially administered sanctions include fines, restitution, and ____________ , a process 
in which the government seizes property connected to illegal activity. Offenders may also 
be sentenced to spend part of their time at ____________ ____________ ____________ ,  
where they receive treatment and are more easily ____________ by corrections officials. 
____________ ____________ , or militaristic programs designed to instill self-responsibility, 
are a form of ____________ incarceration. Home confinement, another intermediate 
sanction, has become more effective in recent years thanks to technology known as 
____________ ____________. 
GPS technology can be used either “actively” to constantly monitor the subject’s 
whereabouts, or “passively” to ensure that the offender remains within the confines 
of a limited area determined by a judge or probation officer. Inclusion and exclusion 
zones are also important to GPS supervision. Inclusion zones are areas, such as a 
home or workplace, where the offender is expected to be at certain times. Exclusion 
zones are areas such as parks, playgrounds, and schools, where the offender is not 
permitted to go. GPS-linked computers can alert officials immediately when an exclusion 
zone has been breached and can create a computerized record of the probationer’s 
movements for review at a later time. Despite the benefits of this technology, it is rarely 
implemented. According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, only about eight thousand 
offenders are currently being tracked by GPS.
thinKing about gPS: How could GPS technology be used to ensure that 
a convicted sex offender complies with a judge’s order to stay away from areas where 
large numbers of children are present? 
Widen the Net The criticism 
that intermediate sanctions 
designed to divert offenders 
from prison actually increase 
the number of citizens who 
are under the control and 
surveillance of the American 
corrections system.
Teaching Tip: Inform students 
about the high number of  
“nonviolation” alerts that occur 
with GPS monitoring systems, 
usually due to loss of a satellite 
signal. How might a high incidence 
of nonviolation alerts impact 
a probation agency’s attitude 
concerning GPS monitoring?
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 304, 
which asks them to think about 
widening the net of criminal justice 
system control. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   303
THE PARADox of  
CommuniTy CoRRECTions
Community-based corrections programs provide benefits, 
including cost savings, treatment options, and the ability 
to divert hundreds of thousands of nonviolent wrongdoers 
from prisons and jails. Still, this aspect of American correc-
tions does suffer from a basic paradox: the more effectively 
offenders are controlled, the more likely they are to be 
caught violating the terms of their release. As you may have 
noticed, the community supervision programs discussed in 
this chapter are evaluated according to rates of recidivism 
and revocation, with low levels of each reflecting a success-
ful program. Increased control and surveillance, however, 
will necessarily raise the level of violations, thus increasing 
the probability that any single violation will be discovered. Therefore, as factors such as 
the number of conditions placed on probationers and the technological proficiency of 
electronic monitoring devices increase, so, too, will the number of offenders who fail to 
meet the conditions of their community-based punishment. 
One observer calls this the “quicksand” effect of increased surveillance. Instead 
of helping offenders leave the corrections system, increased surveillance pulls them 
more deeply into it.57 According to researchers Barbara Sims of Penn State University–
Harrisburg and Mark Jones of East Carolina University, the quicksand effect can be 
quite strong. In a study of North Carolina corrections data, Sims and Jones found that 
26 percent of the probationers whose probation terms were revoked had been guilty of 
violations such as failing a single drug test. The researchers believe this strategy is overly 
punitive—anybody who has tried to quit smoking is aware of the difficulties of breaking 
an addiction.58
Ryan LeVin, center, surrenders 
to authorities in Crest Hill, 
Illinois, on June 13, 2011, 
after pleading guilty in the hit-
and-run deaths of two British 
businessmen. For his crimes, a 
judge sentenced LeVin to two 
years of house arrest, ten years 
of probation, and 1,000 hours 
of community service. Do you 
think community corrections 
are appropriate for crimes that 
involve serious injury or loss of 
life? Why or why not?
Zbigniew Bzdak/MCT/Landov
ChaPtEr SuMMarY
Explain the justifications for community- 
based  corrections programs. One justifi-
cation involves reintegration of the offender 
into society. Reintegration restores family ties, encourages 
employment and education, and secures a place for the of-
fender in the routine functioning of society. Other justifica-
tions involve diversion and cost savings. By diverting criminals 
to alternative modes of punishment, further overcrowding of 
jail and prison facilities can be avoided, as can the costs of in-
carcerating the offenders. 
Explain several alternative sentencing  
arrangements that combine probation 
with incarceration. With a suspended sen-
tence, a convicted offender is not required to serve the sen-
tence, but the judge has the option of reinstating the sentence 
if the person reoffends. In addition, there are three other 
general types of sentencing arrangements: (a) split sentence 
probation, in which the judge specifies a certain time in jail 
or prison followed by a certain time on probation; (b) shock 
incarceration, in which a judge sentences an offender to be in-
carcerated but allows that person to petition the court to be 
released on probation; and (c) intermittent incarceration, in 
which an offender spends a certain amount of time each week 
in jail or in a halfway house or another government institution. 
Specify the conditions under which an 
offender is most likely to be denied pro-
bation. The offender (a) has been convicted 
of multiple charges, (b) was on probation or parole when  
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
arrested, (c) has two or more prior convictions, (d) is addict-
ed to narcotics, (e) seriously injured the victim of the crime, 
or (f) used a weapon while committing the crime.
Describe the three general categories 
of conditions placed on a probationer.  
(a) Standard conditions, such as requiring 
that the probationer notify the agency of a change of address, 
not leave the jurisdiction without permission, and remain 
employed; (b) punitive conditions, such as restitution, com-
munity service, and home confinement; and (c) treatment 
conditions, such as required drug or alcohol treatment.
Explain the three stages of probation  
revocation. (a) The preliminary hearing, 
usually before a judge, during which the 
facts of the probation violation are presented; (b) the revoca-
tion hearing, during which the probation agency presents its 
claims of violation and the probationer has an opportunity 
to refute them; and (c) revocation sentencing, during which 
a judge decides what to do with the probationer convicted of 
violating the terms of probation. 
List the five sentencing options for a judge 
besides imprisonment and probation. 
(a) Fines, (b) community service, (c) restitu-
tion, (d) pretrial diversion programs, and (e) forfeiture.
Contrast day reporting centers with inten-
sive supervision probation. In a day report-
ing center, the offender is allowed to remain 
in the community, but must spend all or part of each day at 
the reporting center. While at the center, offenders meet with 
probation officers, submit to drug tests, and attend counseling 
and education programs. With intensive supervision probation 
(ISP), more restrictions are imposed, and there is more face-to-
face contact between offenders and probation officers.  
List the three levels of home monitoring. 
(a) Curfew, which requires that the offender 
be at home during specified hours; (b) home 
detention, which requires that the offender be at home ex-
cept for education, employment, and counseling; and (c) 
home incarceration, which requires that the offender be at 
home at all times except for medical emergencies.
QuEStIONS FOr CrItICaL aNaLYSIS
1. What are the dual purposes of probation (see page 291)? 
Which is more important? Why?
2. Review our discussion of Hawaii’s Opportunity Probation 
with Enforcement (HOPE) program on page 295. What 
might explain why second violations of the urine tests are 
rare?
3. Review our discussion of California’s Substance Abuse 
and Crime Prevention Act on page 295. The program 
has had one unintended consequence: in its first four  
years, drug arrests in California increased significantly. 
Before 2000, these rates had been falling. How might the 
new law have contributed to this increase in drug crime?
4. Why might probationers or those subjected to interme-
diate sanctions want to limit their social media activity? 
Give an example of a circumstance in which a Facebook 
posting could cause probation to be revoked.
5. In your own words, explain what the phrase “widening 
the net” means. What might be some of the unintended 
consequences of increasing the number of offenders who 
are supervised by corrections officers in the community?
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
KEY tErMS
authority  293
caseload  293
community corrections  286
day reporting center (DRC)  299
diversion  287
electronic monitoring  300
forfeiture  298
home confinement  300
intensive supervision  probation 
(ISP)  299
intermediate sanctions  295
pretrial diversion program  297
probation  289
reintegration  287
shock incarceration  299
split sentence probation  289
suspended sentence  289
technical violation  293
widen the net  302
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0 :  P R o b A T i o n  A n d  i n T E R m E d i A T E  S A n C T i o n S   305
SELF aSSESSMENt aNSwEr KEY
Page 288: i. reintegration; ii. diversion; iii. cost; iv. less
Page 295: i. community; ii. probation officer;  
iii. technical violation; iv. conditions; v. prison/jail
Page 302: i. forfeiture; ii. day reporting centers;  
iii. supervised; iv. Boot camps; v. shock; vi. electronic 
monitoring
COurSEMatE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
NOtES
 1. Quoted in Mensah M. Dean, “Parents Get 
Probation for Using Prayer to Cure Ill Son, 2, 
Who Died,” Philadelphia Daily News (February 
3, 2011), 4.
 2. Ibid.
 3. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, December 
2011), 1.
 4. Michael Tonry, Sentencing Matters (New York: 
Oxford Press, 1996), 28.
 5. Todd Clear and Anthony Braga, “Community 
Corrections,” in Crime, ed. James Q. Wilson 
and Joan Petersilia (San Francisco: ICS Press, 
1995), 444.
 6. Corrections Task Force of the President’s 
Commission on Law Enforcement and 
Administration of Justice (1967).
 7. Paul H. Hahn, Emerging Criminal Justice: Three 
Pillars for a Proactive Justice System (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1998), 106–108.
 8. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, Table 1, page 3.
 9. “Cutting Costs: How States Are Addressing 
Corrections Budget Shortfalls,” Corrections 
Directions (December 2008), 6.
10. John Schmitt, Kris Warner, and Sarika Gupta, 
The High Budgetary Cost of Incarceration 
(Washington, D.C.: Center for Economic and 
Policy Research, June 2010), Table 4, page 11.
11. Mary Shilton, “Community Corrections Acts 
by State,” at centerforcommunitycorrections 
.org/?page_id=78.
12. Lisa Falkenberg, “Austin Deserves Credit 
Here,” Houston Chronicle (April 14, 2011), B1.
13. Nathan Koppel, “Probation Pays Bills for 
Prosecutors,” Wall Street Journal (February 12, 
2012), A2.
14. Jonathan Turley, “No Justice: Suffer the Little 
Children,” Tulsa World (November 22, 2009), G3.
15. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, Appendix 
table 5, page 33.
16. Paul W. Keve, Crime Control and Justice 
in America (Chicago: American Library 
Association, 1995), 183.
17. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, Appendix 
table 3, page 31.
18. Joan Petersilia and Susan Turner, Prison ver-
sus Probation in California: Implications for 
Crime and Offender Recidivism (Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation, 1986).
19. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, Appendix 
table 5, page 33.
20. Ibid.
21. 705 So.2d 172 (La. 1997).
22. Neil P. Cohen and James J. Gobert, The Law of 
Probation and Parole (Colorado Springs, CO: 
Shepard’s/McGraw-Hill, 1983), Section 5.01, 
183–184; Section 5.03, 191–192.
23. 534 U.S. 112 (2001).
24. Ibid., 113.
25. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Substance Abuse 
and Treatment for Adults on Probation, 1995 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
March 1998), 11.
26. Carl B. Klockars, Jr., “A Theory of Probation 
Supervision,” Journal of Criminal Law, 
Criminology, and Police Science 63 (1972), 
550–557.
27. Ibid., 551.
28. Hahn, 116–118.
29. Matthew T. DeMichele, Probation and Parole’s 
Growing Caseloads and Workload Allocation: 
Strategies for Managerial Decision Making 
(Lexington, KY: American Probation and 
Parole Association, May 2007).
30. Jason Meisner, “Probation Officer Sued in Rape 
Case,” Chicago Tribune (January 27, 2011), 7.
31. 389 U.S. 128 (1967).
32. Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471 (1972); and 
Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778 (1973).
33. 465 U.S. 420 (1984).
34. Angela Hawkins and Mark Kleiman, Managing 
Drug Involved Probationers and Swift and 
Certain Sanctions: Evaluating Hawaii’s HOPE 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2009), 4.
35. California Penal Code Sections 1210, 1210.1 
(West Supp. 2004); and California Health and 
Safety Code Sections 11999.4–11999.13 (West 
Supp. 2004).
36. Douglas Longshore, Angela Hawken, Darren 
Urada, and M. Douglas Anglin, Evaluation 
of the Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention 
Act: SACPA Cost-Analysis Report (First and 
Second Years) (Los Angeles: UCLA Integrated 
Substance Abuse Programs, 2006), 5.
37. Norval Morris and Michael Tonry, Between 
Prison and Probation: Intermediate Punishments 
in a Rational Sentencing System (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1990).
38. Robert V. Wolf, Principles of Problem 
Solving Justice (New York: Center for Court 
Innovation, 2007), 1.
39. Shelli B. Rossman et al., The Multi-Site 
Adult Drug Court Evaluation: Executive 
Summary (Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 
November 2011), 5; and Studies Show Courts 
Reduce Recidivism, but DOJ Could Enhance 
Future Performance Measure Revision Efforts 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accounting 
Office, December 2011), 19–24.
40. Community 
Dispute 
Resolution 
Centers 
Program: Annual Report 2010–2011 (New 
York: New York State Unified Court System, 
February 2012), 14.
41. 18 U.S.C. Sections 1961–1968.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306   C R i m i n A L  J U S T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
42. 516 U.S. 442 (1996).
43. David Ashenfelter, “Police Gain Millions from 
Forfeited Assets,” Detroit Free Press (February 
27, 2012), A3.
44. Model State Drug Court Legislation Commit-
tee, Model State Drug Court Legislation: Model 
Drug Offender Accountability and Treatment 
Act (Alexandria, VA: National Drug Court 
Institute, May 2004), 42.
45. Kate Coscarelli, “A Model Program for Model 
Prisoners,” (Newark) Star Ledger (February 24, 
2004), 25.
46. Joan Petersilia and Susan Turner, “Intensive 
Probation and Parole,” Crime and Justice 17 
(1993), 281–335.
47. Douglas J. Boyle et al., Outcomes of a 
Randomized Trial of an Intensive Community 
Corrections Program—Day Reporting Center—
for Parolees, final report for the National 
Institute of Justice (October 2011), 3–4.
48. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, Appendix 
table 3, page 31.
49. Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael 
D. Reisig, American Corrections, 7th ed. 
(Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth, 2006).
50. Ted Palmer, “Programmatic and Non-
programmatic 
Aspects 
of 
Successful 
Intervention: New Directions for Research,” 
Crime and Delinquency (1995), 100–131.
51. Dale Parent, Correctional Boot Camps: 
Lessons from a Decade of Research 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, June 2003), 6.
52. Robert S. Gable, “Left to Their Own Devices: 
Should Manufacturers of Offender Monitoring 
Equipment Be Liable for Design Defect?” 
University of Illinois Journal of Law, Technology, 
and Policy (Fall 2009), 334.
53. Josh Kurtz, “New Growth in a Captive Market,” 
New York Times (December 31, 1989), 12.
54. Edna Erez, Peter R. Ibarra, and Norman A. 
Lurie, “Electronic Monitoring of Domestic 
Violence Cases—A Study of Two Bilateral 
Programs,” Federal Probation (June 2004), 
15–20.
55. Michael Tonry and Mary Lynch, “Intermediate 
Sanctions,” in Crime and Justice, vol. 20, ed. 
Michael Tonry (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1996), 99.
56. Dennis Palumbo, Mary Clifford, and Zoann 
K. Snyder-Joy, “From Net Widening to 
Intermediate Sanctions: The Transformation 
of Alternatives to Incarceration from 
Benevolence to Malevolence,” in Smart 
Sentencing: The Emergence of Intermediate 
Sanctions, ed. James M. Byrne, Arthur Lurigio, 
and Joan Petersilia (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 
1992), 231.
57. Keve, 207.
58. Barbara Sims and Mark Jones, “Predicting 
Success or Failure on Probation: Factors 
Associated with Felony Probation Outcomes,” 
Crime and Delinquency (July 1997), 314–327.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   309
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Contrast the Pennsylvania and the New York penitentiary 
theories of the 1800s.
2  List the factors that have caused the prison population to 
grow dramatically in the last several decades.
3  Describe the formal prison management system.
4  List and briefly explain the four types of prisons.
5  List the reasons why private prisons can often be run more 
cheaply than public ones.
6  Summarize the distinction between jails and prisons, and 
indicate the importance of jails in the American corrections 
system.
7  Explain how jails are administered.
8  Indicate some of the consequences of our high rates of 
incarceration.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 331 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Prisons  
and Jails
309
David Madison/Getty Images
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• A Short History of American 
Prisons
• Inmate Population Trends
• Prison Organization  
and Management
• The Emergence of  
Private Prisons
• Jails
• The Consequences of Our  
High Rates of Incarceration
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
P
lans to “do something” aside, the American corrections system remains a colos-
sal institution.  Besides the nearly 5 million people under community supervi-
sion discussed in the last chapter, our prisons and jails hold nearly 2.3 million 
inmates—about one of every hundred adults.1 The United States locks up six times 
as many of its citizens as Canada does, and seven times as many as most European 
democracies.
 
Throughout this textbook, we have discussed many of the social and political fac-
tors that help explain this situation, often referred to as “mass incarceration.” In this 
chapter and the next, we turn our attention to the incarceration system itself. This 
chapter focuses on the history and organizational structures of prisons (which gener-
ally hold those who have committed serious felonies and are serving long sentences) 
and jails (which generally hold, for short periods of time, those who have committed 
less serious felonies and misdemeanors, and those awaiting trial). Although the two 
terms are often used interchangeably, they refer to two very different institutions, 
each with its own place in the criminal justice system and its own set of problems and 
challenges.
THE WAkE-uP Call
California correctional authorities called the bunks—
often stacked three high and jammed into day rooms, 
gyms, and any other available spaces—“nontraditional 
beds.” Inmates had another name for their sleeping 
berths, crammed together so that there was no room 
to stand between them: “bad beds.” Whatever the 
terminology, images of these tight living quarters have 
become a symbol of overcrowding in the California 
prison system, which, at its worst, had 162,000 inmates 
living in facilities designed to hold 80,000. “It’s an 
unacceptable working environment for everyone,” said 
a former state corrections official. “It leads to greater 
violence, more staff overtime, and a total inability to deal 
with health care and mental illness issues.”
In May 2011, the United States Supreme Court 
agreed, ordering California to reduce its prison 
population by more than 30,000 inmates. Columnist 
Cal Thomas hailed the Court’s decision as a “wake up 
call” for a “broken” American prison system. Besides 
California, a number of other states have heard the 
alarm. A month after the Court’s ruling, New York 
announced plans to close seven prisons, eliminating 
3,800 unused beds and saving state taxpayers nearly 
$200 million. Michigan had already shuttered five 
prisons, and numerous jurisdictions have taken steps 
to remove nonviolent inmates from their corrections 
systems.
As a consequence of these types of policies, in 
2010, the total U.S. prison population declined for 
the first time in nearly four decades. To be sure, this 
decline was very small—about 0.6 percent—and does 
little to threaten America’s title as “the globe’s leading 
incarcerator.” Still, the fact that many state politicians 
are willing to accept policies that reduce the number of 
people in prison represents a sea change in the nation’s 
corrections strategy. According to Georgia governor 
Nathan Day, “We’re at a point 
in time where the necessity for 
doing something has gotten 
so big that to . . . pretend the 
problem does not exist is not 
responsible government.” 
Overcrowding at California 
prisons such as the 
Institution for Men in 
Chino resulted in a U.S. 
Supreme Court order 
to reduce state inmate 
populations.
Monica Almeida/New York Times/Redux
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
whether they think that the 
California prison system should be 
permitted to use “nontraditional” 
beds. Then, ask them to list and 
describe the problems most likely 
to arise in correctional institutions 
plagued by overcrowding. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   311
A sHoRT HisToRy of AmERiCAn PRisons
Today, we view prisons as instruments of punishment. The loss of freedom imposed on 
inmates is society’s retribution for the crimes they have committed. This has not always 
been the function of incarceration. The prisons of eighteenth-century England, known 
as “bridewells” after London’s Bridewell Palace, actually had little to do with punishment. 
These facilities were mainly used to hold debtors or those awaiting trial, execution, or 
banishment from the community. (In many ways, as will be made clear, these facilities 
resembled the modern jail.) English courts generally imposed one of two sanctions on con-
victed felons: they turned them loose, or they executed them.2 To be sure, most felons were 
released, pardoned either by the court or the clergy after receiving a whipping or a branding. 
 
The correctional system in the American colonies differed very little from that of 
the motherland. If anything, colonial administrators were more likely to use corporal 
punishment than their English counterparts, and the death penalty was not uncommon 
in early America. The one dissenter was William Penn, who adopted the “Great Law” in 
Pennsylvania in 1682. Based on Quaker ideals of humanity and rehabilitation, this crimi-
nal code forbade the use of torture and mutilation as forms of punishment. 
 
Instead, felons were ordered to pay restitution of property or goods to their victims. 
If the offenders did not have sufficient property to make restitution, they were placed in 
a prison, which was primarily a “workhouse.”3 The death penalty was still allowed under 
the “Great Law,” but only in cases of premeditated murder. Penn proved to be an excep-
tion, however, and the path to reform was much slower in the colonies than in England.
WALnuT sTREET PRison: THE fiRsT PEniTEnTiARy
On William Penn’s death in 1718, the “Great Law” was rescinded in favor of a harsher 
criminal code, similar to those of the other colonies. At the time of the American 
Revolution, however, the Quakers were instrumental in the first broad swing of the incar-
ceration pendulum from punishment to rehabilitation. In 1776, Pennsylvania passed 
legislation ordering that offenders be reformed through treatment and discipline rather 
than simply beaten or executed.4 Several states, including Massachusetts and New York, 
quickly followed Pennsylvania’s example. 
 
Pennsylvania continued its reformist ways by opening the country’s first 
 penitentiary in a wing of Philadelphia’s Walnut Street Jail in 1790. The penitentiary 
operated on the assumption that silence and labor provided the best hope of rehabilitat-
ing the criminal spirit. Remaining silent would force the prisoners to think about their 
crimes, and eventually the weight of conscience would lead to repentance. At the same 
time, enforced labor would attack the problem of idleness—regarded as the main cause 
of crime by experts of the time.5 Consequently, inmates at Walnut Street were isolated 
from one another in solitary rooms and kept busy with constant menial chores.
 
Eventually, the penitentiary at Walnut Street succumbed to the same problems that 
continue to plague institutions of confinement: overcrowding and excessive costs. As 
an influx of inmates forced more than one person to be housed in a room, maintaining 
silence became nearly impossible. By the early 1800s, officials could not find work for all 
of the convicts, so many were left idle.
THE gREAT PEniTEnTiARy RivALRy:  
PEnnsyLvAniA vERsus nEW yoRk
The apparent lack of success at Walnut Street did little to dampen enthusiasm for the 
penitentiary concept. Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, a number of 
Penitentiary An early form 
of correctional facility that 
emphasized separating inmates 
from society and from each 
other.
Contrast the 
Pennsylvania 
and the New 
York penitentiary 
theories of the 
1800s.
Learning  
objective1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
states reacted to prison overcrowding by constructing new penitentiaries. Each state 
tended to have its own peculiar twist on the roles of silence and labor, and two such sys-
tems—those of Pennsylvania and New York—emerged to shape the debate over the most 
effective way to run a prison.
THE PEnnsyLvAniA sysTEm After the failure of Walnut Street, Pennsylvania constructed 
two new prisons: the Western Penitentiary near Pittsburgh (opened in 1826) and the 
Eastern Penitentiary in Cherry Hill, near Philadelphia (1829). The Pennsylvania system 
took the concept of silence as a virtue to new extremes. Based on the idea of separate 
confinement, these penitentiaries were constructed with back-to-back cells facing 
outward from the center. (See Figure 11.1 below for the layout of the original Eastern 
Penitentiary.) To protect each inmate from the corrupting influence of the others, pris-
oners worked, slept, and ate alone in their cells. Their only contact with other human 
beings came in the form of religious instruction from a visiting clergyman or prison 
official.6
THE nEW yoRk sysTEm If Pennsylvania’s prisons were designed to transform wrong-
doers into honest citizens, those in New York focused on obedience. When New York’s 
Newgate Prison (built in 1791) became overcrowded, the state authorized the con-
struction of Auburn Prison, which opened in 1816. Auburn initially operated under 
many of the same assumptions that guided the penitentiary at Walnut Street. Solitary 
confinement, however, seemed to lead to an inordinate amount of sickness, insanity, 
and even suicide among inmates, and it was abandoned in 1822. Nine years later, Elam 
Lynds became warden at Auburn and instilled the congregate system, also known as 
the Auburn system. Like Pennsylvania’s separate confinement system, the congregate 
system was based on silence and labor. At Auburn, however, inmates worked and ate 
together, with silence enforced by prison guards.7
 
If either state can be said to have “won” the debate, it 
was New York. The Auburn system proved more popular, and 
a majority of the new prisons built in the United States in the 
1800s followed New York’s lead, though mainly for economic 
reasons rather than philosophical ones. New York’s penitentia-
ries were cheaper to build because they did not require so much 
space. Furthermore, inmates in New York were employed in 
workshops, whereas those in Pennsylvania toiled alone in their 
cells. Consequently, the Auburn system was better positioned 
to exploit prison labor in the early years of widespread factory 
production.
THE REfoRmERs And THE PRogREssivEs
The Auburn system did not go unchallenged. In the 1870s, a group 
of reformers argued that fixed sentences, imposed silence, and 
isolation did nothing to improve prisoners. These critics proposed 
that penal institutions should offer the promise of early release as 
a prime tool for rehabilitation. Echoing the views of the Quakers 
a century earlier, the reformers presented an ideology that would 
heavily influence American corrections for the next century.
 
This “new penology” was put into practice at New York’s 
Elmira Reformatory in 1876 (see the photo on facing page). At 
Separate Confinement A 
nineteenth-century penitentiary 
system in which inmates were 
kept separate from one another 
at all times, with daily activities 
taking place in individual cells.
Congregate System A 
nineteenth-century penitentiary 
system in which inmates were 
kept in separate cells during 
the night but worked together 
in the daytime under a code of 
enforced silence.
FIGURE 11.1 The Eastern Penintentiary
As you can see, the Eastern Penitentiary was designed 
in the form of a “wagon wheel,” known today as the 
radial style. The back-to-back cells in each “spoke” 
of the wheel faced outward from the center to limit 
contact between inmates. What was the primary goal 
of this design?
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students chart and discuss 
the main operating principles of the 
Pennsylvania and New York prison 
systems. Which of these principles, 
if any, do the students believe are 
still relevant for prison operations 
today?
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Web site of the Eastern 
State Penitentiary to learn more 
about the penitentiary and how it is 
being used today. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   313
Elmira, good behavior was rewarded by 
early release, and misbehavior was pun-
ished with extended time under a three-
grade system of classification. On entering 
the institution, the offender was assigned a 
grade of 2. If the inmate followed the rules 
and completed work and school assign-
ments, after six months he was moved up 
to grade 1, the necessary grade for release. 
If, however, the inmate broke institutional 
rules, he was lowered to grade 3. A grade 3 
inmate needed to behave properly for three 
months before he could return to grade 2 
and begin to work back toward grade 1 and 
eventual release.8
 
Although other penal institutions did 
not adopt the Elmira model, its theories 
came into prominence in the early part 
of the twentieth century thanks to the 
efforts of reformers who allied themselves with the burgeoning Progressive movement 
in American politics. The Progressives believed that criminal behavior was caused by 
social, economic, and biological factors and, therefore, a corrections system should have 
a goal of treatment, not punishment. Consequently, they trumpeted a medical model 
for prisons, which held that institutions should offer a variety of programs and therapies 
to cure inmates of their “ills,” whatever the root causes. The Progressives were largely 
responsible for the spread of indeterminate sentences (Chapter 9), probation (Chapter 10), 
intermediate sanctions (Chapter 10), and parole (Chapter 12) in state corrections sys-
tems from 1900–1950.
THE REAssERTion of PunisHmEnT
Even though the Progressives had a great influence on the corrections system as a whole, 
their theories had little impact on the prisons themselves. Many of these facilities had 
been constructed in the 1800s and were impervious to change. More important, prison 
administrators usually did not agree with the Progressives and their followers, so the 
day-to-day lives of most inmates varied little from the congregate system of Auburn 
Prison.
 
Academic attitudes began to shift toward the prison administrators in the mid-
1960s. Then, in 1974, the publication of Robert Martinson’s famous “What Works?” essay 
provided opponents of the medical model with statistical evidence that rehabilitation 
efforts did nothing to lower recidivism rates.9 This is not to say that Martinson’s find-
ings went unchallenged. A number of critics argued that rehabilitative programs could 
be successful.10 In fact, Martinson himself retracted most of his claims in a little-noticed 
article published five years after his initial report.11 Attempts by Martinson and others 
to “set the record straight” went largely unnoticed, however, as crime rose sharply in the 
early 1970s. This trend led many criminologists and politicians to champion “get tough” 
measures to deal with criminals they now considered “incurable.” 
 
By the end of the 1980s, the legislative, judicial, and administrative strategies that 
we have discussed throughout this text had positioned the United States for an explosion 
in inmate populations and prison construction unparalleled in the nation’s history. 
Inmates of the Elmira 
Reformatory in New York 
attend a presentation at the 
prison auditorium. To what 
extent do you believe that 
treatment should be a part of 
the incarceration of criminals? 
Corbis
Medical Model A model 
of corrections in which the 
psychological and biological 
roots of an inmate’s criminal 
behavior are identified and 
treated.
Teaching Tip: Have students read 
Martinson’s report from the 1970s. 
Alternatively, incorporate parts of 
the report into your presentation or 
lecture.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
SElFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 332.
In the early 1800s, Pennsylvania’s ____________ confinement strategy and New York’s 
____________ system were the two dominant methods of managing prisons in the United 
States. Both were based on ____________ and labor, but New York’s system proved 
more popular because its institutions were ____________ to construct and exploited 
the demand for prison ____________. In the second half of the century, the Progressive 
movement rejected both systems and introduced the ____________ model for prisons, 
which focused on rehabilitation rather than punishment. 
inmATE PoPuLATion TREnds
The number of Americans in prison or jail has more than tripled since 1985 (see 
Figure 11.2 below). To a large degree, this dramatic growth is a consequence of the penal 
harm movement.12 Characterized by “get tough” ideologies in sentencing and punish-
ment, this movement has been particularly influential when it comes to the “war” on 
drugs. Indeed, much of the growth in the number of Americans behind bars can be 
attributed to the enhancement and stricter enforcement of the nation’s drug laws.
fACToRs in PRison PoPuLATion gRoWTH
There are more people in prison and jail for drug offenses today than there were for all 
offenses in the early 1970s.13 In 1980, about 19,000 drug offenders were incarcerated in 
state prisons and 4,800 drug offenders were in federal prisons. Thirty years later, state 
prisons held about 256,000 inmates who had been arrested for drug offenses, and the 
number of drug offenders in federal prisons had risen to more than 97,400 (representing 
just over half of all inmates in federal facilities).14
FIGURE 11.2 The Inmate Population of the United States
The total number of inmates in the United States rose from 744,208 in 1985 to about 
2.24 million in 2011.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice.
Year
1985 1990
1995
2000
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
2005
Total Inmates in Custody (x1,000)
2010
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short written 
assignment, ask students to identify 
the top three reasons they believe 
the prison population has risen so 
dramatically since the 1970s. Then, 
have them share their reasons with 
the class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   315
 
Other reasons for the growth in incarcerated populations include the following:
• 
Increased probability of incarceration. Simply stated, the chance of someone who 
is arrested going to prison today is much greater than it was thirty years ago. Most 
of this growth took place in the 1980s, when the likelihood of incarceration in a 
state prison after arrest increased fivefold for drug offenses, threefold for weapons 
offenses, and twofold for crimes such as sexual assault, burglary, auto theft, and 
larceny.15 For federal crimes, the proportion of convicted defendants being sent to 
prison rose from 64 percent in 1980 to 86 percent in 2011.16
• 
Inmates serving more time for each crime. In Chapter 9, we discussed a number of 
“get tough” sentencing laws passed in reaction to the crime wave of the 1970s and 
1980s. These measures, including sentencing guidelines (see page 265), mandatory 
minimum sentences (see page 267), and truth-in-sentencing laws (see page 257), 
have significantly increased the length of prison terms in the United States.17 In 
California, for example, before the Supreme Court’s ruling discussed in the opening 
of this chapter,18 a quarter of the inmate population had been sentenced under the 
state’s “three-strikes” law, and these inmates’ terms were nine years longer because 
of that legislation.19 Furthermore, 140,000 prisoners—roughly one in eleven—are 
sentenced to life in American prisons with no chance of release.20
• 
Federal prison growth. Thanks in part to federal sentencing policy, the federal 
prison system is now the largest in the country, with nearly 210,000 inmates. In 
fact, since 1995 the federal prison population has more than doubled, whereas 
state prison populations have grown by “only” 24 percent.21 Besides the increase 
in federal drug offenders already mentioned, this growth can be attributed to 
efforts by Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush to federalize gun posses-
sion crimes. From 1995 to 2003, the number of inmates sent to federal prisons 
for weapons violations jumped by 120 percent.22 Furthermore, between 1995 and 
2010, immigration law offenders behind bars increased by nearly 600 percent 
(3,612 to 21,377).23 As a result of this trend, a third of all federal inmates are now 
Hispanic.24
• 
 Rising incarceration rates of women. In 1981, 14,000 women were prisoners in 
federal and state institutions. By 2010, the number had grown to about 113,000. 
Women still account for only 7 percent of all prisoners nationwide, but their rates 
of imprisonment are growing more rapidly 
than those of men.25
THE CosTs of inCARCERATion
The escalation in the U.S. prison population has 
been accompanied by increased costs.  Today, the 
states together spend nearly $40 billion a year 
to operate their corrections systems—up from  
$12 billion in 1987. Twelve states allocate in excess 
of $1 billion a year for corrections-related services, 
often spending more on prisons than on education 
or health care.26 Regardless of the Supreme Court’s 
order to California to reduce its inmate population 
discussed earlier in the chapter, the state has had 
no choice but to cut corrections costs. Several years 
ago, it had a $20 billion budget deficit and was 
spending $10 billion a year on its prisons.27 Arizona, 
Several Hispanic inmates 
await health screening at the 
Val Verde Correctional Facility 
in Del Rio, Texas. What factor is 
most responsible for the surge 
in the number of Hispanics 
incarcerated by the federal 
government? 
Tom Pennington/MCT/Newscom
List the 
factors that 
have caused 
the prison 
population 
to grow 
dramatically in 
the last several 
decades.
Learning  
objective2
Technology Tip: Have students 
go online to determine the cost 
of incarcerating one inmate for 
one year in their homes state’s 
corrections system.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
which faces a similar problem, has decided to charge $25 for family and friend visits to 
inmates in its prison system to help make up its $1.6 billion budget deficit.28
dECARCERATion
For most states looking to cut corrections costs, the focus has been on decarceration, 
or the reduction of inmate populations. As recently as 2007, one expert lamented the 
unwillingness of corrections authorities to decarcerate, calling the strategy “practically 
virgin territory.”29 This is no longer the case, as the high cost of imprisonment has caused 
policymakers to consider a number of different methods to reduce the number of people 
in prison.  
 
In general, decarceration relies on three strategies:
1. Decreasing the probability that nonviolent offenders will be sentenced to prison.
2. Increasing the rate of release of nonviolent offenders from prison.
3. Decreasing the rate of imprisonment for probation and parole violators.30
Many states have adopted one or more of these approaches. For instance, several years 
ago, Texas decided not to expand its corrections system in response to projected inmate 
overcrowding. Instead, state officials diverted nonviolent offenders into drug treatment 
and expanded reentry programs (discussed in the next chapter) designed to keep recently 
released inmates from recidivating. By 2011, the state prison system was operating suf-
ficiently under capacity that, for the first time in its history, Texas closed a prison.31 
 
Overall, in 2010, state prison releases exceeded prison admissions, with half of 
the states reducing their prison populations.32 (To better understand the possible con-
sequences of decarceration on crime rates, see the feature Myth versus Reality—Does 
Putting Criminals in Prison Reduce Crime? on the facing page.)
SElFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 332.
Of all the factors in the growth of the prison population in the last several decades, 
stricter enforcement of the nation’s ____________ laws has had the greatest impact. 
Other factors contributing to this growth include (1) increased probability of 
____________ , (2) increased ____________ of time served in prison, (3) the growth of the 
____________ prison system, and (4) rising incarceration rates of ____________ . 
PRison oRgAnizATion And mAnAgEmEnT
The United States has a dual prison system that parallels its dual court system, which 
we discussed in Chapter 7. The Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) currently operates about 
one hundred confinement facilities, ranging from prisons to immigration detention cen-
ters to community corrections institutions.33 In the federal corrections system, a national 
director, appointed by the president, oversees six regional directors and a staff of over 
35,000 employees. All fifty states also operate state prisons, which number over 1,700 
and make up more than 90 percent of the country’s correctional facilities.34 Governors 
are responsible for the organization and operation of state corrections systems, which 
vary widely based on each state’s geography, demographics (population characteristics), 
and political culture.
 
Generally, those offenders sentenced in federal court for breaking federal law serve 
their time in federal prisons, and those offenders sentenced in state court for breaking 
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons Web site to learn more 
about the prison system operated 
by the federal government.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   317
state law serve their time in state prisons. As you can see in Figure 11.3 on the following 
page, federal prisons hold relatively few violent felons, because relatively few federal laws 
involve violent crime. At the same time, federal prisons are much more likely to hold 
public order offenders, a group that includes violators of federal immigration law.
PRison AdminisTRATion
Whether the federal government or a state government operates a prison, its administra-
tors have the same general goals, summarized by sociologist Charles Logan as follows:
The mission of a prison is to keep prisoners—to keep them in, keep them safe, keep them 
in line, keep them healthy, and keep them busy—and to do it with fairness, without undue 
suffering and as efficiently as possible.35
 
Considering the environment of a prison—an enclosed world inhabited by people 
who are generally violent and angry and would rather be anywhere else—Logan’s mis-
sion statement is somewhat unrealistic. A prison staff must supervise the daily routines 
of hundreds or thousands of inmates, a duty that includes providing them with meals, 
education, vocational programs, and different forms of leisure. The smooth operation 
of this supervision is made more difficult—if not, at times, impossible—by budgetary 
restrictions, overcrowding, and continual inmate turnover. 
   
Since the early 1990s, violent crime rates in the United 
States have been stable or declining. Yet, during the same 
period, as Figure 11.2 on page 314 shows, the rate at which 
Americans are imprisoned has climbed precipitously. The 
correlation between these two trends is the subject of much 
discussion among crime experts.
The MyTh Crime falls when the prison population rises.  
This can be attributed to the effects of deterrence and 
incapacitation, theories of punishment we discussed in 
Chapter 9. First, the threat of prison deters would-be 
criminals from committing crimes. Second, a prison inmate 
is incapable of committing crimes because he or she has 
been separated from the community.
The RealiTy  Numerous statistical examples discredit 
a direct, sustained link between decreased crime rates 
and increased prison populations. Canada, for example, 
experienced a decline in crime rates similar to the United 
States in the 1990s without any national increase in 
incarceration levels. Furthermore, by one measurement, 
New York City has seen crime decrease by a remarkable 80 
percent since the early 1990s. Yet, during the 2000s, the 
city has been locking up fewer people than it was at the 
height of its late-1980s crime wave. 
According to one theory, massive incarceration 
accounted for about a quarter of the crime drop of the 
1990s, as many of the most violent offenders were removed 
from society and remain behind bars. Since then, however, 
a large percentage of new prison admissions have been 
drug law offenders and probation/parole violators. The 
data tell us that removing these sorts of criminals from the 
community has a relatively limited effect on violent and 
property crime rates. In fact, their absence from their homes 
may even contribute to criminal activity. As we discussed 
in Chapter 2, many criminologists believe that widespread 
family disruption greatly increases the incidence of crime in a 
community. 
Additionally, some experts believe that prisons are 
“schools of crime” that “teach” low-level offenders to be 
habitual criminals. If this is true, many inmates are more likely 
to commit crimes after their release from prison than they 
would have been if they had never been incarcerated in the 
first place.
FOR CRiTiCal aNalySiS  How might the new trend of 
decarceration give criminologists a chance to test theories 
regarding the correlation between incarceration levels and 
crime rates?
MYTH vs. REALITY
does Putting Criminals  
in Prison Reduce Crime?
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After reading the 
“Myth vs. Reality” feature on 
this page, have students consider 
the possibility that high prison 
populations actually do lead directly 
to lower crime rates. What are the 
strengths and weaknesses of this 
assertion?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
foRmAL PRison mAnAgEmEnT In some respects, the management structure of a prison 
is similar to that of a police department, as discussed in Chapter 4. Both systems rely on 
a hierarchical (top-down) chain of command to increase personal responsibility. Both 
assign different employees to specific tasks, though prison managers have much more 
direct control over their subordinates than do police managers. The main difference is 
that police departments have a continuity of purpose that is sometimes lacking in prison 
organizations. All members of a police force are, at least theoretically, working to reduce 
crime and apprehend criminals. In a prison, this continuity is less evident. An employee 
in the prison laundry service and one who works in the visiting center have little in 
common. In some instances, employees may even have cross-purposes: a prison guard 
may want to punish an inmate, while a counselor in the treatment center may want to 
rehabilitate her or him.
 
Consequently, a strong hierarchy is crucial for any prison management team that 
hopes to meet Charles Logan’s expectations. As Figure 11.4 on the facing page shows, 
the  warden (also known as a superintendent) is ultimately responsible for the opera-
tion of a prison. He or she oversees deputy wardens, who in turn manage the various 
organizational lines of the institution. The custodial employees, who deal directly with 
the inmates and make up more than half of a prison’s staff, operate under a militaristic 
hierarchy, with a line of command passing from the deputy warden to the captain to the 
correctional officer.
govERning PRisons The implications of prison mismanagement can be severe. While 
studying a series of prison riots, sociologists Bert Useem and Peter Kimball found that 
breakdown in managerial control commonly preceded such acts of mass violence.36 
During the 1970s, for example, conditions at the State Penitentiary in New Mexico dete-
riorated significantly. Inmates were increasingly the targets of random and harsh treat-
ment at the hands of the prison staff, while at the same time a reduction in structured 
activities left prison life “painfully boring.”37 The result, in 1980, was one of the most 
violent prison riots in the nation’s history.
State Prison Inmates
Offenses
Violent
Property
Public Order
Drug
Other
Federal Prison Inmates
FIGURE 11.3 Types of Offenses of Federal and State Prison Inmates
As the comparison below shows, state prisoners are most likely to have been convicted of violent crimes, while 
federal prisoners are most likely to have been convicted of drug and public order offenses.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, December 2011), Appendix table 16a, page 28;  
and Appendix table 18, page 30.
Describe the 
formal prison 
management 
system.
Learning  
objective 3
Warden The prison official 
who is ultimately responsible 
for the organization and 
performance of a correctional 
facility.
Teaching Tip: Discuss the Attica 
Prison riot that took place in the 
1970s, and show students this  
clip, which includes interviews  
with inmates who were 
incarcerated in Attica at the time 
of the riot: www.youtube.com/
watch?v=J4or4JH_q6c.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   319
TyPEs of PRisons
One of the most important aspects of prison administration occurs soon after a defen-
dant has been convicted of a crime.  In this classification process, administrators deter-
mine what sort of correctional facility provides the best “fit” for each individual convict.  
In general, prison administrators rely on three criteria for classification purposes:
1. The seriousness of the crime committed.
2. The risk of future criminal or violent conduct.
3. The need for treatment and rehabilitation programs.38
In the federal prison system, this need to classify—and separate—different kinds of offend-
ers has led to six different levels of correctional facilities.  Inmates in level 1 facilities are 
usually nonviolent and require the least amount of security, while inmates in level 6 facilities 
are the most dangerous and require the harshest security measures. (Many states also use 
the six-level system, an example of which can be seen in Figure 11.5 on the following page.) 
To simplify matters, most observers refer to correctional facilities as being one of three 
levels—minimum, medium, or maximum. A fourth level—the  supermaximum-security 
prison, known as the  “supermax”—is relatively rare and extremely controversial due to its 
hyperharsh methods of punishing and controlling the most dangerous prisoners.
mAximum-sECuRiTy PRisons In a certain sense, the classification of prisoners today 
owes a debt to the three-grade system developed at the Elmira Reformatory, discussed 
earlier in the chapter. Once wrongdoers enter a corrections facility, they are constantly 
graded on behavior. Those who serve “good time,” as we have seen, are often rewarded 
with early release. Those who compile extensive misconduct records are usually housed, 
along with violent and repeat offenders, in maximum-security prisons. The names 
of these institutions—Folsom, San Quentin, Sing Sing, Attica—conjure up foreboding 
images of concrete and steel jungles, with good reason.
 
Maximum-security prisons are designed with full attention to security and surveil-
lance. In these institutions, inmates’ lives are strictly controlled and programmed to keep 
them from escaping or from harming themselves or the prison staff. About a quarter of 
the prisons in the United States are classified as maximum security, and these institu-
tions house about a third of the country’s prisoners.
Warden
Deputy Warden:
Custody
Deputy Warden:
Management
1. Security
2. Guard Forces
3. Training
4. Safety
5. Prisoner Discipline
6. Investigations
7. Visiting Schedules
1. Budget
2. Accounting
3. Purchasing
4. Warehouse
5. Commissary
6. Food Service
7. Clothing and Laundry
8. Grounds Maintenance
1. Budget
2. Accounting
3. Purchasing
4. Warehouse
5. Commissary
6. Food Service
7. Clothing and Laundry
8. Grounds Maintenance
Deputy Warden:
Programs
1. Treatment Programs
2. Medical Services
3. Mental Health
4. Recreation
5. Classification
6. Volunteers
7. Religious Services
Deputy Warden:
Industry and Agriculture
1. Prison Work Programs
2. Prison Farm Programs
FIGURE 11.4  Organizational Chart for a Typical Correctional Facility
List and briefly 
explain the four 
types of prisons.
Learning  
objective 4
Classification The process 
through which prison officials 
determine which correctional 
facility is best suited to the 
individual offender.
Maximum-Security Prison  
A correctional institution 
designed and organized 
to control and discipline 
dangerous felons, as well as 
prevent escape.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
The Design Maximum-security prisons tend to be large—holding more than a thousand 
inmates—and they have similar features. The entire operation is usually surrounded by 
concrete walls that stand twenty to thirty feet high and have also been sunk deep into the 
ground to deter tunnel escapes. Fences reinforced with razor-ribbon barbed wire that 
can be electrically charged may supplement these barriers. The prison walls are studded 
with watchtowers, from which guards armed with shotguns and rifles survey the move-
ment of prisoners below. Inmates live in cells, most of them with similar dimensions to 
those found in the I-Max maximum-security prison for women in Topeka, Kansas: eight 
feet by fourteen feet with cinder block walls.39 The space contains bunks, a toilet, a sink, 
and possibly a cabinet or closet. 
 
Cells are located in rows of cell blocks, each of which forms its own security unit, set 
off by a series of gates and bars. Most prisons, whether they were built using the radial 
design (see page 312) or other designs that resemble large courtyards or telephone poles, 
have cell blocks that open into sprawling prison exercise yards. The “prison of the future,” 
however, rejects this layout.  Instead, it relies on a podular design, as evident at the Two 
Rivers Correctional Institution in Umatilla, Oregon. 
 
At Two Rivers, which opened in 2007, fourteen housing pods contain ninety-six 
inmates each. Each unit has its own yard, so inmates rarely, if ever, interact with mem-
bers of other pods.  This design gives administrators the flexibility to, for example, place 
violent criminals in pod A and white-collar criminals in pod B without worrying about 
mixing the two different security levels.40
Security Measures Within maximum-security prisons, inmates’ lives are dominated 
by security measures. Whenever they move from one area of the prison to another, they 
do so in groups and under the watchful eye of armed correctional officers. Television 
FIGURE 11.5  Security Levels of Correctional Facilities in Virginia
The security levels of correctional facilities in Virginia are graded from level 1 to level 6. As you can see, level 1 facilities are 
for those inmates who pose the least amount of risk to fellow inmates, staff members, and themselves. Level 6 facilities are 
for those who are considered the most dangerous by the Virginia Department of Corrections.
Source: Virginia Department of Corrections.
LEVEL 1 - LOW
No ﬁrst or second degree murder, robbery, sex-related crime, 
kidnapping/abduction, felonious assault (current or prior), 
ﬂight/escape history, carjacking, or malicious wounding. No 
disruptive behavior.
disruptive behavior.
LEVEL 1 - HIGH
No ﬁrst or second degree murder, robbery, sex-related crime, 
kidnapping/abduction, felonious assault (current or prior), 
ﬂight/escape history. No disruptive behavior for at least past 
24 months.
24 months.
LEVEL 2
For initial assignment only. No escape history for past 5 years. No 
disruptive behavior for at least past 24 months prior to transfer to 
any less secure facility.
LEVEL 3
Single, multiple, and life+ sentences.*  Must have served 20
consecutive years on sentence. No disruptive behavior for at least
past 24 months prior to transfer to any less secure facility.
LEVEL 4
Single, multiple, and life+ sentences. No disruptive behavior for at
least past 24 months prior to transfer to any less secure facility.
LEVEL 5
Same as level 4 except with fewer opportunities to participate in
programs and jobs, fewer visitation and phone access privileges, 
and less freedom of movement within the facility. No disruptive 
behavior for at least past 24 months prior to transfer to any less 
secure facility.
LEVEL 6
Single, multiple, and life+ sentences. Proﬁle of inmates: disruptive,
assaultive, severe behavior problems, predatory-type behavior,
escape risk. No disruptive behavior for at least past 24 months 
prior to transfer to any less secure facility.
* "Life +" means a life sentence plus extra years in case of an early release.
Eddie Green/iStockphoto
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students create a chart that 
describes the differences among 
the four types of prisons (supermax, 
maximum-security, medium-security, 
and minimum-security.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   321
surveillance cameras may be used to monitor their every 
move, even when sleeping, showering, or using the toilet. 
They are subject to frequent pat-downs or strip searches 
at the guards’ discretion. Constant “head counts” ensure 
that every inmate is where he or she should be. Tower 
guards—many of whom have orders to shoot to kill in the 
case of a disturbance or escape attempt—constantly look 
down on the inmates as they move around outdoor areas 
of the facility.
suPERmAx PRisons About thirty states and the fed-
eral BOP operate supermax (short for supermaximum-
security) prisons, which are supposedly reserved for the 
“worst of the worst” of America’s corrections population. 
Most of the inmates in these facilities are deemed high 
risks to commit murder behind bars—about a quarter of 
the occupants of the BOP’s U.S. Penitentiary Administrative Maximum (ADX) in Florence, 
Colorado, have killed other prisoners or assaulted correctional officers elsewhere. In addi-
tion, a growing number are either high-profile individuals who would be at constant risk 
of attack in a general prison population or convicted terrorists. For instance, supermax 
prisons are presently housing Faisal Shahzad, who attempted to detonate a bomb in New 
York City’s Times Square in 2010, Ted “the Unabomber” Kaczynski, and Terry Nichols, who 
was involved in the bombing of a federal office building in Oklahoma City in 1995.
 
The main purpose of a supermax prison is to strictly control the inmates’ move-
ment, thereby limiting (or eliminating) situations that could lead to breakdowns in dis-
cipline. The conditions at California’s Security Housing Unit (SHU) at Pelican Bay State 
Prison are representative of most supermax institutions. Prisoners are confined to their 
one-person cells for twenty-two and a half hours each day under video camera surveil-
lance. They receive meals through a slot in the door. The cells measure eight by ten feet 
in size and are windowless. No decorations of any kind are permitted on the walls.41 For 
the most part, supermax prisons operate in a state of perpetual lockdown, in which 
all inmates are confined to their cells and social activities such as meals, recreational 
sports, and treatment programs are nonexistent.
mEdium- And minimum-sECuRiTy PRisons Medium-security prisons hold about 45 
percent of the prison population and minimum-security prisons 20 percent. Inmates at 
medium-security prisons have for the most part committed less serious crimes than 
those housed in maximum-security prisons and are not considered high risks for escap-
ing or causing harm. Consequently, medium-security institutions are not designed for 
control to the same extent as  maximum- security prisons and have a more relaxed atmo-
sphere. These facilities also offer more educational and treatment programs and allow 
for more contact between inmates. Medium-security prisons are rarely walled, relying 
instead on high fences. Prisoners have more freedom of movement within the structures, 
and the levels of surveillance are much lower. Living quarters are less restrictive as well—
many of the newer medium-security prisons provide dormitory housing.
 
A minimum-security prison seems at first glance to be more like a college 
campus than an incarceration facility. Most of the inmates at these institutions are 
first-time offenders who are nonviolent and well behaved. A high percentage are white-
collar criminals. Indeed, inmates are often transferred to minimum-security prisons 
Supermax Prison A 
correctional facility reserved 
for those inmates who 
have extensive records of 
misconduct in maximum-
security prisons.
Lockdown A disciplinary 
action taken by prison officials 
in which all inmates are 
ordered to their quarters and 
nonessential prison activities 
are suspended.
Medium-Security Prison  
A correctional institution 
that houses less dangerous 
inmates and therefore uses less 
restrictive measures to prevent 
violence and escapes.
Minimum-Security Prison  
A correctional institution 
designed to allow inmates, 
most of whom pose low security 
risks, a great deal of freedom of 
movement and contact with the 
outside world.
What security measures can 
you identify from this photo of 
a cell block at Arizona State 
Prison in Florence?
AP Photo/Matt York
Teaching Tip: Show students the  
60 Minutes report on supermax 
prisons from 2009, “Supermax:  
A Clean Version of Hell,” which 
features interviews with staff and 
former inmates of the federal 
supermax prison in Florence, 
Colorado.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
as a reward for good behavior in other facilities. Therefore, security measures are lax 
compared with even medium-security prisons. Unlike medium-security institutions, 
minimum-security prisons do not have armed guards. Prisoners are provided with ame-
nities such as television sets and computers in their rooms. They also enjoy freedom of 
movement and are allowed off prison grounds for educational or employment purposes 
to a much greater extent than those held in more restrictive facilities. 
 
Some critics have likened minimum-security prisons to “country clubs,” but in the 
corrections system, everything is relative. A  minimum- security prison may seem like 
a vacation spot when compared with the horrors of Sing Sing, but it still represents a 
restriction of personal freedom and separates the inmate from the outside world.
SElFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 332.
The management of a prison is hierarchical, with the ____________ (also known as a 
superintendent) at the top of the power structure. ____________ is a crucial component 
of prison management, as it determines the security requirements needed to safely 
incarcerate each individual offender. Those offenders who have been convicted of violent 
crimes and repeat offenders are most likely to be sent to ____________-security prisons. 
If a prisoner assaults another inmate or a correctional officer, prison officials may decide 
to transfer him or her to a ____________ prison. 
THE EmERgEnCE of PRivATE PRisons
In addition to all the other pressures placed on wardens and other prison administrators, 
these individuals must operate within a budget assigned to them by an overseeing gov-
ernmental agency. Today, the great majority of all prisons are under the control of federal 
and state governments, but government-run prisons have not always been the rule. In 
the 1800s, a number of correctional facilities existed outside the purview of the state.  
In fact, the entire Texas prison system was privately operated from 1872 to the late 1880s. 
For most of the twentieth century, however,  private prisons, or prisons run by private 
business firms to make a profit, could not be found in the United States.
 
That is certainly not the case today. With corrections exhibiting all appearances 
of, in the words of one observer, “a recession-proof industry,” the American business 
community has eagerly entered the market. Fourteen private corrections firms operate 
more than two hundred facilities across the United States. The two largest corrections 
companies, Corrections Corporation of America (CCA) and the GEO Group, Inc., have 
contracted with both state governments and the federal BOP to supervise more than 
100,000 inmates. By 2010, private penal institutions housed nearly 130,000 inmates, rep-
resenting 8 percent of all prisoners in the state and federal corrections systems.42
WHy PRivATizE?
It would be a mistake to automatically assume that private prisons are less expensive to 
run than public ones. Nevertheless, the incentive to privatize is primarily financial. 
CosT EffiCiEnCy In the 1980s and 1990s, a number of states and cities reduced operating 
costs by transferring government-run services such as garbage collection and road main-
tenance to the private sector. Similarly, private prisons can often be run more cheaply 
and efficiently than public ones for the following reasons:
Private Prisons Correctional 
facilities operated by private 
corporations instead of the 
government and, therefore, 
reliant on profits for survival.
List the reasons 
why private 
prisons can 
often be run 
more cheaply 
than public 
ones.
Learning  
objective 5
Teaching Tip: If possible, take 
students on a tour of a correctional 
facility. Afterwards, have them write 
a reaction paper that details what 
they expected prior to the tour and 
whether their expectations were 
met. What were some of the most 
significant observations they made 
during the tour? 
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
debate the use of supermax and 
private prisons. Do they believe 
that these facilities are in the best 
interests of society?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   323
• 
Labor costs. The wages of public employees account for nearly two-thirds of a 
government-run prison’s operating expenses. Although private corrections firms 
pay base salaries comparable to those enjoyed by public prison employees, their 
nonunionized staffs receive lower levels of overtime pay, workers’ compensation 
claims, sick leave, and health-care insurance.
• 
Competitive bidding. Because of the profit motive, private corrections firms have 
an incentive to buy goods and services at the lowest possible price.
• 
Less red tape. Private corrections firms are not part of the government bureau-
cracy and therefore do not have to contend with the massive amount of paper-
work that can clog government organizations.43
 
In 2005, the National Institute of Justice released the results of a five-year study 
comparing low-security public and private prisons in California. The government agency 
CaREERS IN CJ
BeRRy laRSON 
PRiSON WaRdeN
Before I began my career as a correctional officer for the Arizona Department of 
Corrections, I had several people question my desire to work inside a prison. Why 
would I want to stick myself somewhere so unpleasant and stressful? While at the 
training academy, however, we were taught that “approach determines response.”  
I found that to be very true during my time as a correctional officer. It is all about the 
way you carry yourself and the way you relate to the inmates. An inmate can tell if 
you are trying to be someone you are not. They can also tell if you are afraid. I never 
had to use physical force once in all the time I was a correctional officer—officer 
presence and nonverbal/verbal communication is usually sufficient to handle any 
situation, as long as you keep control of your emotions.
As warden of the Arizona State Prison Complex–Lewis, my duties include 
touring the units; attending special events such as inmate graduations for GED 
and vocational programs; managing emergency situations such as power outages, 
fights and assaults, and staff injuries; and eradicating all criminal activity from the 
facility. Many, if not most, of our inmates came to us in pretty bad shape—little or no 
education, a substance abuse history, or mental health or behavioral issues. These 
young men have spent their lives watching television and playing video games and 
simply do not have the skills to be successful in life. We try to remedy the situation 
by providing them with educational and vocational programs and “life-skills” classes 
that promote civil and productive behavior.
Social Media Career Tip  
Regularly reevaluate your social media tools and the methods you use to keep up to 
date in your fields of interest. If you are still using the same tools as a year ago, you 
probably aren’t keeping up with the latest developments in Internet technology.
Photo Courtesy of Berry Larson
f A s T f A C T s
PRison WARdEn, job dEsCRiPTion:
•  A prison warden is the chief 
managing officer of an adult 
correctional institution.
WHAT kind of TRAining  
is REquiREd?
•  Bachelor’s degree in criminal 
justice, corrections, law 
enforcement, or a related field.
• One or more years of work 
experience in the management of 
a major division of a correctional 
institution.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
•  $42,000–$95,000 (depending on 
size of institution and geographic 
region)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
found that private facilities cost taxpayers between 
6 and 10 percent less than public ones.44 More recent 
research conducted at Vanderbilt University found 
that each state saved about $15 million annually 
when they supplemented their corrections systems 
with privately managed institutions.45
ovERCRoWding And ouTsouRCing  Private pris-
ons are becoming increasingly attractive to state 
governments faced with the competing pressures 
of tight budgets and overcrowded corrections facili-
ties. Lacking the funds to alleviate overcrowding 
by building more prisons, state officials are turn-
ing to the private institutions for help. Often, the 
private prison is out of state, which leads to the  
“outsourcing” of inmates. Hawaii, for example, 
sends about one-third of its 6,000 inmates to pri-
vate prisons in Arizona.46 Over the past several 
years, California has alleviated its chronic over-
crowding problems by sending more than 10,000 
inmates to private institutions in Arizona, Colorado, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, 
Montana, and Oklahoma.47
THE ARgumEnT AgAinsT PRivATE PRisons
The assertion that private prisons offer economic benefits is not universally accepted. A 
number of studies have found that private prisons are no more cost-effective than public 
ones.48 Furthermore, opponents of private prisons worry that despite the assurances 
of corporate executives, private corrections companies will “cut corners” to save costs, 
denying inmates important security guarantees in the process. 
sAfETy ConCERns Criticism of private prisons might be justified by the anecdotal 
evidence. Certainly, these institutions have been the setting for a number of violent 
incidents over the past several years. In 2010, Hanni Elabed was severely beaten by 
another inmate at the Idaho Correctional Center (ICC), operated by CCA. Eight minutes 
passed before guards finally intervened to save Elabed, who was left permanently brain 
damaged. As part of the resulting lawsuit, a former employee said, “It is clear to me that 
ICC was more interested in making a profit than reducing prisoner violence.”49 In 2012, 
another CCA facility experienced a riot that ended with the death of a correctional offi-
cer and twenty other injuries.  During this disturbance at the Adams County Correctional 
Center in Natchez, Mississippi, three hundred inmates used broomsticks and other 
homemade weapons to control the facility for nearly eight hours.50
 
Apart from anecdotal evidence, various studies have also uncovered patterns of 
misbehavior at private prisons. For example, officials from the BOP discovered higher 
levels of serious inmate violence and drug abuse at California’s Taft Correctional 
Institute, operated by the GEO Group, than at three similar government-run prisons.51 In 
addition, research conducted by Curtis R. Blakely of the University of South Alabama and 
Vic W. Bumphus of the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga found that a prisoner in 
a private correctional facility was twice as likely to be assaulted by a fellow inmate as a 
prisoner in a public one.52
The Saguaro Correctional 
Facility in Eloy, Arizona—
privately operated by the 
Corrections Corporation of 
America—has been criticized 
for only accepting inmates who 
are in relatively good health. If 
true, why would this strategy 
make financial sense for private 
prisons?
Monica Almeida/New York Times/Redux 
Pictures
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 3 on page 331, 
which asks them to critique private 
prisons.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   325
PHiLosoPHiCAL ConCERns Other critics see private prisons as inherently unjust, even if 
they do save tax dollars or provide enhanced services. These observers believe that correc-
tions is not simply another industry, like garbage collection or road maintenance, and that 
only the government has the authority to punish wrongdoers. In the words of John DiIulio:
It is precisely because corrections involves the deprivation of liberty, precisely because it 
involves the legally sanctioned exercise of coercion by some citizens over others, that it must 
remain wholly within public hands.53
 
Critics of private correctional facilities also believe that private prisons are consti-
tutionally problematic, offering Article I of the U.S. Constitution as support. That passage 
states that “legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United 
States.” These powers include the authority to define penal codes and to determine the 
punishments that will be handed out for breaking federal law. Therefore, a strict inter-
pretation of the Constitution appears to prohibit the passing of this authority from the 
federal government to a private company.54
THE fuTuRE of PRivATizATion  
in THE CoRRECTions indusTRy
In February 2012, Florida’s senate narrowly defeated a bill that would have privatized 
the state’s entire corrections system.55 The vote seemed to bode ill for what was once 
considered a recession-proof industry. Indeed, with more states reducing their prison 
populations, as we noted earlier, the growth of private prisons has stagnated. In an 
effort to find new avenues of business, CCA recently sent a letter to forty-eight states in 
which the company offered to purchase unwanted public prisons. So far, only one state 
has taken this step: in 2011, Ohio sold the Lake Erie Correctional Institution to CCA for 
nearly $73 million.56
 
Still, most experts see continued profitability for private prisons, for two reasons. 
First, as we have noted, shrinking budgets have forced states to look for less costly alter-
natives to housing inmates in public prisons. Second, as the number of federal prisoners 
increases, the BOP has turned to private prisons to expand its capacity. Between 2000 
and 2010, the number of federal inmates in private prisons more than doubled, from 
about 15,500 to about 34,000.57 The current emphasis on imprisoning violators of immi-
gration law seems likely to ensure that this trend will continue. 
SElFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 332.
The incentive for using private prisons is primarily ____________ . Prison officials also feel 
pressure to send inmates to private prisons to alleviate ____________ of public correctional 
facilities. Critics of private prisons claim that as a result of their cost-cutting measures, 
inmates are denied important ____________ guarantees and thus may be put in physical 
danger. The industry’s future seems assured, however, largely because of increased demand 
for prison beds for immigration law violators on the part of the ____________ government. 
jAiLs
Although prisons and prison issues dominate the public discourse on corrections, there is 
an argument to be made that jails are the dominant penal institutions in the United States. 
In general, a prison is a facility designed to house people convicted of felonies for lengthy 
Summarize 
the distinction 
between jails 
and prisons, 
and indicate 
the importance 
of jails in the 
American 
corrections 
system.
Learning  
objective6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
periods of time, while a jail is authorized to hold pretrial detainees and offenders who  
have committed misdemeanors. On any given day, about 750,000 inmates are in jail in 
this country, and jails admit almost 13 million persons over the course of an entire year.58 
Nevertheless, jail funding is often a low priority for budget-conscious local governments, 
leading to severe overcrowding and other dismal conditions.
 
Many observers see this negligence as having far-reaching consequences for crimi-
nal justice. Jail is often the first contact that citizens have with the corrections system. It 
is at this point that treatment and counseling have the best chance to deter future crimi-
nal behavior.59 By failing to take advantage of this opportunity, says Professor Franklin 
Zimring of the University of California at Berkeley School of Law, corrections officials 
have created a situation in which “today’s jail folk are tomorrow’s prisoners.”60 (To better 
understand the role that these two correctional institutions play in the criminal justice 
system, see Mastering Concepts—The Main Differences between Prisons and Jails below.)
THE jAiL PoPuLATion
Like those making up state prison populations, jail inmates are overwhelmingly young 
male adults.  About 45 percent of jail inmates are white, 38 percent are African American, 
and 16 percent are Hispanic.  The main difference between state prison and jail inmates 
involves their criminal activity.61 As Figure 11.6 on the facing page shows, jail inmates 
are more likely to have been convicted of nonviolent crimes than their counterparts in 
state prison.
PRETRiAL dETAinEEs A significant number of those detained in jails technically are not pris-
oners. They are pretrial detainees who have been arrested by the police and, for a variety 
of reasons that we discussed in Chapter 8, are unable to post bail. 
 
Pretrial detainees are, in many ways, walking legal contradictions. According to 
the U.S. Constitution, they are innocent until proved guilty. At the same time, by being 
incarcerated while awaiting trial, they are denied a number of personal freedoms and 
are subjected to the poor conditions of many jails. In Bell v. Wolfish (1979), the Supreme 
Court rejected the notion that this situation is inherently unfair by refusing to give pre-
trial detainees greater legal protections than sentenced jail inmates have.62 In essence, 
the Court recognized that treating pretrial detainees differently from convicted jail 
inmates would place too much of a burden on corrections officials and was therefore 
impractical.63
Jail A facility, usually operated 
by the county government, 
used to hold persons awaiting 
trial or those who have been 
found guilty of misdemeanors.
Pretrial Detainees  
Individuals who cannot post 
bail after arrest and are 
therefore forced to spend 
the time prior to their trial 
incarcerated in jail.
THE mAIn dIFFEREnCES bETWEEn PRISOnS And jAILS
Prisons
jails
MaSTERINGCONCEPTS
1.
. . . are operated by the federal and state governments.
. . . are operated by county and city governments.
2.
. . . hold inmates who may have lived quite far away before 
being arrested.
. . . hold mostly inmates from the local community. 
3.
. . . house only those who have been convicted of a crime.
. . . house those who are awaiting trial or have recently been 
arrested, in addition to convicts.
4. 
. . . generally hold inmates who have been found guilty of 
serious crimes and received sentences of longer than one 
year.
. . . generally hold inmates who have been found guilty of minor 
crimes and are serving sentences of less than a year. 
5.
. . . often offer a wide variety of rehabilitation and educa-
tional programs for long-term prisoners.
. . . due to smaller budgets, tend to focus only on the necessities of 
safety, food, and clothing.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 4 on page 331, 
which asks them to consider the 
plight of pretrial detainees.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   327
sEnTEnCEd jAiL inmATEs According to the U.S. Department of Justice, about 40 percent 
of those in jail have been convicted of their current charges.64 In other words, they have 
been found guilty of a crime, usually a misdemeanor, and sentenced to time in jail. The 
typical jail term lasts between thirty and ninety days, and rarely does a prisoner spend 
more than one year in jail for any single crime. Often, a judge will credit the length of time 
the convict has spent in detention waiting for trial—known as time served—toward his 
or her sentence. This practice acknowledges two realities of jails:
1. Terms are generally too short to allow the prisoner to gain any benefit (that is, 
rehabilitation) from the jail’s often limited or nonexistent treatment facilities. 
Therefore, the jail term can serve no purpose except to punish the wrongdoer. 
(Judges who believe jail time can serve purposes of deterrence and incapacitation 
may not agree with this line of reasoning.)
2. Jails are chronically overcrowded, and judges need to clear space for new offenders.
oTHER jAiL inmATEs Pretrial detainees and those convicted of misdemeanors make up 
the majority of the jail population. Jail inmates also include probation and parole viola-
tors, the mentally ill, juveniles awaiting transfer to juvenile authorities, and immigration 
law violators being held for the federal government.  Increasingly, jails are also called on 
to handle the overflow from state prisons. To comply with the Supreme Court’s order to 
reduce its prison population, California corrections officials plan to divert an estimated 
75,000 inmates from its prisons to its jails by 2015.65
THE soCioLogy of jAiL According to sociologist John Irwin, the unofficial purpose of a 
jail is to manage society’s “rabble,” so called because
[they] are not well integrated into conventional society, they are not members of conven-
tional social organizations, they have few ties to conventional social networks, and they are 
carriers of unconventional values and beliefs.66
In Irwin’s opinion, rabble who act violently are arrested and sent to prison. The jail is 
reserved for merely offensive rabble, whose primary threat to society lies in their failure 
to conform to its behavioral norms. Nearly seven out of ten jail inmates, for example, are 
State Prison Inmates
Offenses
Violent
Property
Public order
Drug
Other
Jail Inmates
FIGURE 11.6 Types of Offenses of Prison and jail Inmates
As the comparison below shows, jail inmates are more likely to have been convicted of nonviolent crimes than 
state prisoners.  This underscores the main function of jails: to house less serious offenders for a relatively 
short period of time.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, December 2011), Appendix table 16a, page 28; and Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, July 2004), 1.
Time Served The period of 
time a person denied bail (or 
unable to pay it) has spent in 
jail prior to her or his trial.
Social Media and CJ 
The Los Angeles County 
Sheriff’s department 
operates the largest jail in 
the United States.  To access 
its Facebook page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

dependent on or abuse alcohol or drugs.67 This concept of rabble has been used by some 
critics of American corrections to explain the disproportionate number of poor and 
minority groups who may be found in the nation’s jails at any time.
jAiL AdminisTRATion
Of the nearly 3,370 jails in the United States, more than 2,700 are operated on a county 
level by an elected sheriff. Most of the remainder are under the control of municipalities, 
although six state governments (Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,  Rhode Island, 
and Vermont) manage jails. The capacity of jails varies widely. The Los Angeles County 
Men’s Central Jail holds nearly 7,000 people, but jails that large are the exception rather 
than the rule. Almost two-thirds of all jails in this country house fewer than 50 inmates.68
 
With their more complex and diverse populations, jails are often more difficult to 
manage than prisons.  Jails hold people who have never been incarcerated before, people 
under the influence of drugs or alcohol at the time of their arrival, the mentally ill, and 
people who exhibit a range of violent behavior—from nonexistent to extreme—that only 
adds to the unpredictable atmosphere.69 Still, as troublesome as they may be, jails can 
be politically useful for sheriffs. A sheriff has the power to appoint a jail administrator, 
or deputy sheriff, to oversee the day-to-day operations of the facility. The sheriff can also 
hire other staff members, such as deputy jailers. 
 
The sheriff may award these jobs to people who helped her or him get elected, and 
in return, jail staffers can prove helpful to the sheriff in future elections. Furthermore, 
as the feature A Question of Ethics—Canvas Incarceration below shows, jail management 
can provide an important platform for a sheriff with a particular political agenda.
nEW-gEnERATion jAiLs
For most of the nation’s history, the architecture of a jail was secondary to its 
purpose of keeping inmates safely locked away. Consequently, most jails in the 
Explain how 
jails are 
administered.
Learning  
objective 7
THE SITUaTION Like many newly elected sheriffs, Joe 
Arpaio had a problem. The Maricopa County (Arizona) Jail, 
now his responsibility, was severely overcrowded. At the same 
time, he did not have the funds to construct a new jail. To 
create space, Arpaio came up with a novel, and controversial, 
solution. He built a “tent city” about five miles southwest of 
downtown Phoenix and placed a thousand inmates in it. 
 
Lacking air conditioning, the tented jail quickly drew 
attention for its sweltering heat, particularly during the 
summer, when desert temperatures routinely reach 110 
degrees. Arpaio has taken other steps to make his canvas 
incarceration compound particularly uncomfortable. The 
average meal there costs less than 40 cents and features 
items such as green bologna. Cigarettes, soft drinks, and 
coffee are prohibited. Almost no entertainment is available, 
save for the Disney Channel and the Weather Channel. 
For clothing, Arpaio provides striped uniforms and pink 
underwear.  
THE ETHICal DIlEMMa As far as “Sheriff Joe” is 
concerned, there is no ethical dilemma concerning his 
treatment of the inmates in the tent jail. “Most wardens just run 
the jails. I use them to fight crime,” he says. “I want to make it 
so tough nobody will come back.”
WHaT IS THE SOlUTION? Arpaio’s methods have been 
widely criticized as inhumane and, at times, unconstitutional.  
During Arpaio’s two decades as sheriff, Maricopa County 
taxpayers have paid at least $30 million as a result of 
lawsuits brought because of inmate mistreatment. In 2012, 
he and his office faced charges in federal court for unfairly 
targeting Latinos for stops, questioning, and detention.  
 
What do you think of Arpaio’s approach to jail 
management? Is it unethical to make life so unpleasant for 
these offenders? As you answer, remember that most jail 
inmates are low-level criminals serving short sentences, 
probation violators, or individuals awaiting trial.
A quEsTion of ETHICS: Canvas Incarceration
328   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Teaching Tip: Have a jail 
administrator come to class 
to discuss with students the 
challenges of running a jail and the 
differences between jail and prison.  
Teaching Tip: Show students 
a video clip from YouTube that 
takes a closer look at Joe Arpaio’s 
philosophies, preferably one that 
features interviews with Arpaio and 
the inmates in his jails. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

United States continue to resemble those from the days of the Walnut Street Jail 
in Philadelphia. In this traditional, or linear, design, jail cells are located along a 
 corridor. To supervise the inmates while they are in their cells, custodial officers 
must walk up and down the corridor, so the number of prisoners they can see at any 
one time is severely limited. With this limited supervision, inmates can more easily 
break institutional rules. 
PoduLAR dEsign In the 1970s, planners at the Bureau of Federal Prisons decided 
to upgrade the traditional jail design with the goal of improving conditions for both 
the staff and the inmates. The result was the new-generation jail, which differs sig-
nificantly from its predecessors.70 The layout of the new facilities makes it easier for  
the staff to monitor cell-confined inmates. The basic structure of the new-generation 
jail is based on a podular design. Each “pod” contains “living units” for individual 
prisoners. These units, instead of lining up along a straight corridor, are often situated 
in a triangle so that a staff member in the center of the triangle has visual access to 
nearly all the cells. 
 
Daily activities such as eating and showering take place in the pod, which also 
has an outdoor exercise area. Treatment facilities are also located in the pod, allowing 
greater access for the inmates. During the day, inmates stay out in the open and are 
allowed back in their cells only when given permission. The officer locks the door to the 
cells from his or her control terminal.
diRECT suPERvision APPRoACH The podular design also enables a new-generation jail 
to be managed using a direct supervision approach.71 One or more jail officers are 
stationed in the living area of the pod and are therefore in constant interaction with all 
prisoners in that particular pod. Some new-generation jails even provide a desk in the 
center of the living area, which sends a very different message to the prisoners than the 
traditional control booth (see the photo below). Theoretically, jail officials who have 
constant contact with inmates will be able to stem misconduct quickly and efficiently 
and will also be able to recognize “danger signs” from individual inmates and stop out-
bursts before they occur. (As noted earlier in the 
chapter, corrections officials are using aspects 
of podular design when building new prisons, 
for many of the same reasons that the trend has 
been popular in jails.)
SElFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on 
page 332.
A significant number of the people in jail are not 
prisoners, but rather ____________ ____________ 
who are unable to post bail and await trial. 
About 40 percent have been ____________ 
of their current charges, meaning that the jail 
sentence is punishment for a crime—usually 
a ____________ and not a felony. Most jails 
are operated on a local level by the county 
____________. 
How does the layout of this 
direct supervision jail differ 
from that of the maximum 
security prison pictured on 
page 321? What do these 
differences tell you about the 
security precautions needed 
for jail inmates as opposed to 
prison inmates?
Photo courtesy Bergen County Sheriff’s Office, 
Bergen, NJ
New-Generation Jail A 
jail that is distinguished 
architecturally by a design 
that encourages interaction 
between inmates and jailers 
and that offers greater 
opportunities for treatment.
Direct Supervision 
Approach A process of 
prison and jail administration in 
which correctional officers are 
in continuous physical contact  
with inmates during the day.
C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   329
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE ConsEquEnCEs of  
ouR HigH RATEs of inCARCERATion
For many observers, especially those who support the crime control theory of criminal 
justice, America’s high rate of incarceration has contributed significantly to the drop in 
the country’s crime rates.72 At the heart of this belief is the fact, which we discussed in 
Chapter 2, that most crimes are committed by a relatively small group of repeat offend-
ers. Several studies have tried to corroborate this viewpoint, with varying results—esti-
mates of the number of crimes committed each year by habitual offenders range from 3 
to 187.73 If one accepts the higher estimate, each year a repeat offender spends in prison 
prevents a significant number of criminal acts.
 
Criminologists, however, note the negative consequences of America’s immense 
prison and jail population. For one, incarceration can have severe social consequences 
for communities and the families that make up those communities. About 1.7 million 
minor children—one in 43—have a parent in prison, putting them at greater risk of 
suffering financial hardship and reduced supervision and discipline.74 As a result of the 
deterioration of the family structure, children of inmates are at a higher risk than their 
peers for antisocial behavior and mental health problems.75 
 
Our high rates of incarceration also deny one of the basic rights of American 
democracy—the right to vote—to about 5.3 million Americans with criminal records.76 
A number of states and the federal government disenfranchise, or take the ability to vote 
away from, those convicted of felonies. This has a disproportionate impact on minority 
groups, weakening their voice in the democratic debate. Today, African American males 
are incarcerated at a rate seven times that of white males and almost three times that 
of Hispanic males.77 With more black men behind bars 
than enrolled in the nation’s colleges and universities, 
Marc Mauer of the Sentencing Project believes that the 
“ripple effect on their communities and on the next gen-
eration of kids, growing up with their fathers in prison, 
will certainly be with us for at least a  generation.”78
 
Whether our incarceration situation is “good” or 
“bad” depends to a large extent on one’s personal phi-
losophy. In the end, it is difficult to do a definitive cost-
benefit analysis for each person incarcerated, weighing 
the benefits of preventing crimes that might (or might 
not) have been committed by an inmate against the 
costs to the convict’s family and society. One thing that 
can be stated with some certainty is that even with the 
growing interest in decarceration described earlier in 
the chapter, the American prison system will remain 
one of the largest in the world for the foreseeable future.
A mother and child wait 
outside the Donald W. W. 
Wyatt Detention Facility in 
Central Falls, Rhode Island. 
What are the possible 
consequences of having a 
parent behind bars for the 
affected children and for 
American society as a whole? 
Suzanne DeChillo/New York Times/Redux
Indicate 
some of the 
consequences 
of our high 
rates of 
incarceration.
Learning  
objective 8
Discussion Tip: In a short writing 
assignment, ask students to list 
what they believe to be the most 
significant consequences of our 
high incarceration rates. Then have 
students share these reasons with 
the class.  
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 332, 
which asks students to consider 
voting limits placed on many 
convicts.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   331
CHaPTER SUMMaRY
Contrast the Pennsylvania and the New 
York  penitentiary theories of the 1800s. 
Basically, the Pennsylvania system imposed 
total silence on its prisoners. Based on the concept of sep-
arate confinement, penitentiaries were constructed with 
back-to-back cells facing both outward and inward. Prison-
ers worked, slept, and ate alone in their cells. In contrast, 
New York used the congregate system: silence was imposed, 
but inmates worked and ate together. 
List the factors that have caused the pris-
on population to grow dramatically in 
the last several decades. (a) The enhance-
ment and stricter enforcement of the nation’s drug laws; (b) 
increased probability of incarceration; (c) inmates serving 
more time for each crime; (d) federal prison growth; and  
(e) rising incarceration rates for women.
Describe the formal prison management 
system. A formal system is militaristic, with 
a hierarchical (top-down) chain of command; 
the warden (or superintendent) is on top, then deputy wardens, 
and last, custodial employees. 
List and briefly explain the four types of 
prisons. (a) Maximum-security prisons, 
which are designed mainly with security and 
surveillance in mind. Such  prisons are usually large and con-
sist of cell blocks, each of which is set off by a series of gates and 
bars. (b) Medium-security prisons, which offer considerably 
more educational and treatment programs and allow more 
contact between inmates. Such prisons are usually surround-
ed by high fences rather than by walls. (c) Minimum-security 
prisons, which permit prisoners to have television sets and 
computers and often allow prisoners to leave the grounds for 
educational and employment purposes. (d) Supermaximum-
security (supermax) prisons, in which prisoners are confined 
to one-person cells for up to twenty-two and a half hours per 
day under constant video camera surveillance. 
List the reasons why private prisons can 
often be run more cheaply than public 
ones. (a) Labor costs are lower because pri-
vate prison employees are nonunionized and receive lower 
levels of overtime pay, sick leave, and health care. (b) Com-
petitive bidding allows the operators of private prisons to 
buy goods and services at the lowest possible prices. (c) 
There is less red tape in a private prison facility.
Summarize the distinction between jails 
and prisons, and indicate the impor-
tance of jails in the American  corrections 
system. Generally, a prison is for those convicted of felonies 
who will serve lengthy periods of incarceration, whereas a 
jail is for those who have been convicted of misdemeanors 
and will serve less than a year of incarceration. Jails also 
hold individuals awaiting trial, juveniles awaiting transfer 
to juvenile authorities, probation and parole violators, and 
the mentally ill.  In any given year, approximately 13 million 
people are admitted to jails, and therefore jails often provide 
the best chance for treatment or counseling that may deter 
future criminal behavior by these low-level offenders.
Explain how jails are administered. Most 
jails are operated at the county level by an 
elected sheriff, although about 20 percent 
are under the control of municipalities and six states man-
age jails themselves. Sheriffs appoint jail administrators 
(deputy sheriffs), as well as deputy jailers. 
Indicate some of the consequences of 
our high rates of incarceration. Some 
people believe that the reduction in the 
country’s crime rate is a direct result of increased incarcera-
tion rates. Others believe that high incarceration rates are 
having increasingly negative social consequences, such as 
financial hardships, reduced supervision and discipline of 
children, and a general deterioration of the family structure 
when one parent is in prison. 
QUESTIONS FOR CRITICal aNalYSIS
1. What might be some of the negative consequences of 
widespread decarceration in the United States?
2. Supermax prisons operate in a state of perpetual lock-
down (see page 321). Why might a warden institute a 
lockdown in a maximum-security prison?
3. Do you agree with the argument that private prisons are 
inherently injust, no matter what costs they may save 
taxpayers? Why or why not?
4. Why have pretrial detainees (see page 326) been 
called “walking legal contradictions”? What are the  
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332   C R i M i n A l  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
practical reasons why pretrial detainees will continue 
to be housed in jails prior to trial, regardless of whether 
their incarceration presents any constitutional irregu-
larities?
5. What are the arguments for and against taking away the 
ability to vote from those Americans convicted of com-
mitting a crime? What is your opinion of this form of 
disenfranchisement?
KEY TERMS
classification  319
congregate system  312
direct supervision approach  329
jail  326
lockdown  321
maximum-security prison  319
medical model  313
medium-security prison  321
minimum-security prison  321
new-generation jails  329
penitentiary  311
pretrial detainees  326
private prisons  322
separate confinement  312
supermax prison  321
time served  327
warden  318
SElF aSSESSMENT aNSWER KEY
Page 314: i. separate; ii. congregate; iii. silence;  
iv. cheaper; v. labor; vi. medical
Page 316: i. drug; ii. incarceration/imprisonment;  
iii. length; iv. federal; v. women
Page 322: i. warden; ii. Classification; iii. maximum;  
iv. supermax
Page 325: i. financial; ii. overcrowding; iii. security/safety; 
iv. federal
Page 329: i. pretrial detainees; ii. convicted;  
iii. misdemeanor; iv. sheriff
COURSEMaTE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
NOTES
 1. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional 
Population in the United States, 2010 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2011), 1–3.
 2. James M. Beattie, Crime and the Courts in 
England, 1660–1800 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1986), 506–507.
 3. Samuel Walker, Popular Justice (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1980), 11.
 4. Michael Meranze, Laboratories of Virtue: 
Punishment, Revolution, and Authority in 
Philadelphia, 1760–1835 (Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1996), 55.
 5. Negley K. Teeters, The Cradle of the Penitentiary: 
The Walnut Street Jail at Philadelphia, 1773–
1835 (Philadelphia: Pennsylvania Prison 
Society, 1955), 30.
 6. Negley K. Teeters and John D. Shearer, The 
Prison at Philadelphia’s Cherry Hill (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1957), 142–143.
 7. Henry Calvin Mohler, “Convict Labor 
Policies,” Journal of the American Institute 
of Criminal Law and Criminology 15 (1925), 
556–557.
 8. Zebulon Brockway, Fifty Years of Prison Service 
(Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith, 1969), 400–401.
 9. Robert Martinson, “What Works? Questions 
and Answers about Prison Reform,” Public 
Interest 35 (Spring 1974), 22.
10. See Ted Palmer, “Martinson Revisited,” 
Journal of Research on Crime and Delinquency 
(1975), 133; and Paul Gendreau and Bob 
Ross, “Effective Correctional Treatment: 
Bibliotherapy for Cynics,” Crime & Delinquency 
25 (1979), 499.
11. Robert Martinson, “New Findings, New Views: 
A Note of Caution Regarding Sentencing 
Reform,” Hofstra Law Review 7 (1979), 243.
12. Cheryl L. Jonson, Francis T. Cullen, and 
Edward J. Latessa, “Cracks in the Penal 
Harm Movement: Evidence from the Field,” 
Criminology & Public Policy (August 2008), 423.
13. Steven D. Levitt, “Understanding Why Crime 
Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors That Explain 
the Decline and Six That Do Not,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives (Winter 2004), 177.
14. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2011), Appendix table 16a, page 28; 
and Appendix table 18, page 30.
15. Allen J. Beck, “Growth, Change, and Stability 
in the U.S. Prison Population, 1980–1995,” 
Corrections Management Quarterly (Spring 
1997), 9–10.
16. Bureau 
of 
Justice 
Statistics, 
“Criminal 
Defendants Sentenced in U.S. District Courts,” 
Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics Online, 
Table 5.23.10, at www.albany.edu/source-
book/pdf/t52322010.pdf; and United States 
Courts, 
“U.S. 
District 
Courts—Criminal 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 1 :  P R i s o n s  A n d  J A i l s   333
Defendants Sentenced after Conviction, by 
Offense, during the 12-Month Period Ending 
September 30, 2011,” at www.uscourts.gov/
uscourts/Statistics/JudicialBusiness/2011/
appendices/D05Sep11.wwwwww.
17. Joan Petersilia, “Beyond the Prison Bubble,” 
Wilson Quarterly (Winter 2011), 27.
18. Brown v. Plata, 563 U.S. ____ (2011).
19. California State Auditor, Inmates Sentenced 
under the Three Strikes Law and a Small 
Number of Inmates Receiving Specialty Care 
Represent Significant Costs (Sacramento, CA: 
Bureau of State Audits, May 2011), 1.
20. Marc Mauer and David Cole, “Five Myths 
about Americans in Prison,” Washington Post 
(June 17, 2011), at www.washingtonpost.
com/opinions/five-myths-about-incarcer-
ation/2011/06/13/AGfIWvYH_story.html.
21. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison and 
Jail Inmates, 1995 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, August 1996), 1; and 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 
Appendix table 1, page 14.
22. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2005 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
November 2006), Table 14, page 10.
23. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 
Appendix table 18, page 30.
24. Federal Bureau of Prisons, “Quick Facts about 
the Bureau of Prisons” (February, 2012), at 
www.bop.gov/news/quick.jsp.
25. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 
Appendix table 5, page 20; and Appendix table 
7, page 22.
26. Christian Henrichson and Ruth Delaney, The 
Price of Prisons: What Incarceration Costs 
Taxpayers (New York: Center for Sentencing 
and Corrections, January 2012), 6, 8.
27. Rosemary Gartner, Anthony N. Doob, 
Franklin E. Zimring, “The Past as Prologue? 
Decarceration in California Then and Now,” 
Criminology & Public Policy (May 2011), 292.
28. Erica Goode, “Inmate Visits Now Carry Added 
Cost in Arizona,” New York Times (September 
5, 2011), A10.
29. James B. Jacobs, “Finding Alternatives to the 
Carceral State,” Social Research (Summer 
2007), 695.
30. Gartner, Doob, and Zimring, 294–296.
31. Charlie Savage, “Trend to Lighten Harsh 
Sentences Catches on in Conservative States,” 
New York Times (August 13, 2011), A12.
32. Bureau of Justice Statistics, “U.S. Correctional 
Population Declined for Second Consecutive 
Year,” December 15, 2011, at bjs.ojp.usdoj.
gov/content/pub/press/p10cpus10pr.cfm.
33. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State 
and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2005 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
October 2008), 2.
34. Ibid.
35. Charles H. Logan, “Well Kept: Comparing 
Quality of Confinement in a Public and Private 
Prison,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 
83 (1992), 580.
36. Bert Useem and Peter Kimball, Stages of Siege: 
U.S. Prison Riots, 1971–1986 (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1989).
37. Bert Useem, “Disorganization and the 
New Mexico Prison Riot of 1980,” American 
Sociology Review 50 (1985), 685.
38. Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael D. 
Reisig, American Corrections, 9th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2010), 162.
39. Tony Izzo, “I-Max Awaits Green,” Kansas City 
Star (May 26, 1996), A1.
40. Douglas Page, “The Prison of the Future,” Law 
Enforcement Technology (January 2012), 11–13.
41. Charles A. Pettigrew, “Technology and 
the Eighth Amendment: The Problem of 
Supermax Prisons,” North Carolina Journal of 
Law and Technology (Fall 2002), 195.
42. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 7.
43. “A Tale of Two Systems: Cost, Quality, and 
Accountability in Private Prisons,” Harvard 
Law Review (May 2002), 1872.
44. Douglas C. McDonald and Kenneth Carlson, 
Contracting for Imprisonment in the Federal 
Prison System: Cost and Performance of 
the Privately Operated Taft Correctional 
Institution (Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, 
Inc., October 2005), vii.
45. Vanderbilt University Law School, “New Study 
Shows Benefits of Having Privately and Publicly 
Managed Prisons in the Same State” (November 
25, 2008), at law.vanderbilt.edu/article-
search/article-detail/index.aspx?nid=213.
46. Nelson Daranciang, “Isle Inmates Brought 
Home,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser (January 28, 
2011), A3.
47. John Tunison, “Baldwin Prisoners Will Be 
Classified Medium Security,” Grand Rapids 
(MI) Press (December 11, 2010), A4.
48. “Behind the Bars: Experts Question Benefits 
of Private Prisons,” Kentucky Courier Journal 
(July 5, 2010), at www.courier-journal.
com/article/20100705/NEWS01/7050312/
Behind-Bars-Experts-question-benefits-
private-prisons.
49. Quoted in Scott Cohn, “Private Prison Industry 
Grows Despite Critics,” cnbc.com (October 
18, 
2011), 
at 
today.msnbc.msn.com/
id/44936562/ns/today-today_news/t/
private-prison-industry-grows-despite-
critics/#.T3DqUHheGlI.
50. Robbie Brown, “Mississippi Prison on 
Lockdown after Guard Dies,” New York Times 
(May 23, 2012), A12.
51. Harley G. Lappin et al., Evaluation of the 
Taft Demonstration Project: Performance 
of a Private-Sector Prison and the BOP 
(Washington, D.C.: Federal Bureau of Prisons, 
2005), 57–59.
52. Curtis R. Blakely and Vic W. Bumphus, 
“Private and Public Sector Prisons,” Federal 
Probation (June 2004), 27.
53. John DiIulio, “Prisons, Profits, and the Public 
Good: The Privatization of Corrections,” in 
Criminal Justice Center Bulletin (Huntsville, 
TX: Sam Houston State University, 1986).
54. Ira P. Robbins, “Privatization of Prisons, 
Privatization of Corrections: Defining the 
Issues,” Vanderbilt Law Review 40 (1987), 823.
55. Steve Bousquet, “Nine Defectors Sink Private 
Prison Plan,” Tampa Bay Times (February 15, 
2012), 1A.
56. Chris Kirkham, “Private Prison Corporation 
Offers Cash in Exchange for State Prisons,” 
Huffington Post (February 14, 2012), at www.
huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/14/private-
prisons-buying-state-prisons_n_1272143.
html.
57. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 
Appendix table 19, page 30.
58. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates at 
Midyear 2010—Statistical Tables (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2011), 1–2.
59. Arthur Wallenstein, “Jail Crowding: Bringing 
the Issue to the Corrections Center Stage,” 
Corrections Today (December 1996), 76–81.
60. Quoted in Fox Butterfield, “ ‘Defying Gravity,’ 
Inmate Population Climbs,” New York Times 
(January 19, 1998), A10.
61. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates at 
Midyear 2010—Statistical Tables, Table 6, page 7.
62. 441 U.S. 520 (1979).
63. Ibid., at 546.
64. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates at 
Midyear 2010—Statistical Tables, Table 7, page 8.
65. Vauhini Vara and Bobby White, “County Jails 
Prepare for Extra Guests,” Wall Street Journal 
(August 10, 2011), A4.
66. John Irwin, The Jail: Managing the Underclass 
in American Society (Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press, 1985), 2.
67. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Substance 
Dependence, Abuse, and Treatment of Jail 
Inmates, 2002 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, July 2005), 1.
68. Bureau 
of 
Justice 
Statistics, 
Bulletin 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
May 2004), 10.
69. Philip L. Reichel, Corrections: Philosophies, 
Practices, and Procedures, 2d ed. (Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon, 2001), 283.
70. R. L. Miller, “New Generation Justice Facilities: 
The Case for Direct Supervision,” Architectural 
Technology 12 (1985), 6–7.
71. David Bogard, Virginia A. Hutchinson, and 
Vicci Persons, Direct Supervision Jails: The 
Role of the Administrator (Washington, D.C.: 
National Institute of Corrections, February 
2010), 1–2.
72. Dan Seligman, “Lock ’Em Up,” Forbes (May 23, 
2005), 216–217.
73. Franklin E. Zimring and Gordon Hawkins, 
Incapacitation: Penal Confinement and 
the Restraint of Crime (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1995), 38, 40, 145.
74. Sarah Schirmer, Ashley Nellis, and Marc Mauer, 
Incarcerated Parents and Their Children (The 
Sentencing Project, February 2009), 2.
75. Sara Wakefield and Christopher Wildeman, 
“Mass Imprisonment and Racial Disparities in 
Childhood Behavioral Problems,” Criminology 
and Public Policy (August 2011), 803–808.
76. The 
Sentencing 
Project, 
“Felony 
Dis-
enfranchisement,” 
at 
www.sentencing 
project.org/IssueAreaHome.aspx?IssueID=4.
77. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010, 
Appendix table 14, page 27.
78. Quoted in Fox Butterfield, “Study Finds 2.6% 
Increase in U.S. Prison Population,” New York 
Times (July 28, 2003), A8.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   335
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Explain the concept of prison as a total institution.
2  Indicate some of the reasons for violent behavior in prisons.
3  List and briefly explain the six general job categories 
among correctional officers.
4  Describe the hands-off doctrine of prisoner law and indicate 
two standards used to determine if prisoners’ rights have 
been violated.
5  Contrast probation, parole, expiration release, pardon,  
and furlough.
6  Describe typical conditions of parole.
7  Explain the goal of prisoner reentry programs.
8  Indicate typical conditions for release for a paroled child 
molester.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary on 
pages 360 and 361 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Behind  
 Bars
The Life of an Inmate
335
Halfdark/Getty Images
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Prison Culture
• Correctional Officers  
and Discipline
• Inside a Women’s Prison
• Parole and Release  
from Prison
• Reentry into Society
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
I
n “Folsom Prison Blues,” country singer Johnny Cash told the story of a murderer who 
laments, “I know I can’t be free,” as he hears the whistle of a train passing outside 
his cell window.1 Most inmates, however, will at some point “be free,” following their 
release from incarceration. The Delancey Street Foundation, a self-supporting rehabili-
tation program headquartered in San Francisco, about two hours south of Folsom State 
Prison, helps released prisoners adjust to their newfound freedom. The foundation offers 
ex-convicts a place to live, job training, and employment at one of the businesses owned 
by the group. Roderick Davis, who has worked at the Delancey Street Restaurant for 
more than ten years since his release from prison, credits Delancey Street with accepting 
him despite “all the horrible and terrible things I’ve done in my life.” He adds, “Nobody 
judged me because I did those things.”2
 
In this chapter, we will look at the life of the imprisoned convict, starting with the 
realities of an existence behind bars and finishing with the challenges of returning to free 
society. Along the way, we will discuss violence in prison, correctional officers, women’s 
prisons, the mechanics of release, and several other issues that are at the forefront of the 
TRiPLE Fray
On December 7, 2011, a riot involving about 150 
maximum-security inmates broke out in the exercise 
yard of C-Facility at California State Prison near 
Sacramento, also known as New Folsom. After pepper 
spray and rubber bullets failed to stop the brawl, 
correctional officers fired actual bullets into the mass 
of convicts, ten of whom were eventually sent to the 
hospital. Although such outbreaks are relatively rare 
in most American prisons, New Folsom and its nearby 
counterpart—“old” Folsom State Prison— recently 
have been plagued by mass violence. In May 2011, 
six New Folsom inmates were injured during a riot 
in the exercise yard of B-Facility. Then, on March 6, 
2012, a battle broke out among seventy inmates at 
old Folsom.
Coincidentally, the first New Folsom disturbance 
took place just two days after the United States 
Supreme Court ordered California corrections officials 
to reduce overcrowding in state prisons, as discussed 
in the previous chapter. At the time of the incident, 
New Folsom housed more than 2,800 inmates even 
though it was designed to hold only 1,800. 
According to one old Folsom inmate, the daily 
frustrations born of such congestion are the main 
reason for eruptions of violence. “Imagine you have 
to wait in line to relieve yourself or take a shower,” 
he says, and “then watching someone crowd his 
way in.” Adding to the discomfort is a “no frills” 
movement in public policy and prison management 
that has succeeded in removing all amenities from 
inmates’ lives. Many state prisons ban weightlifting, 
televisions, radios, adult magazines, and conjugal 
visits. All states and the federal government have 
limited smoking in their correctional facilities, and 
some institutions feed their inmates an unpleasant 
concoction of nondairy cheese, powdered milk, 
tomato paste, and dehydrated potato flakes known 
as nutraloaf. As one observer puts it, today’s penal 
institutions are often characterized by “grindingly 
dull routine interrupted by occasional flashes of 
violence and brutality.”
To stop a December 
2011 riot at the 
California State 
Prison near 
Sacramento, 
correctional officers 
handcuffed 
more than one 
hundred inmates, 
including the 
twelve shown 
here.
KCRA-TV, All Rights Reserved
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
debate whether amenities such 
as radios, adult magazines, and 
weightlifting should be provided 
to prison inmates. What are the 
pros and cons of offering these 
benefits? How, for example, might 
such diversions lessen the amount 
of inmate violence in a prison? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   337
American corrections system today. To start, we must understand the forces that shape 
prison culture and how those forces affect the overall operation of the correctional facility.
PRison CuLTuRE
Any institution, whether a school, a bank, or a police department, has an organizational 
culture—a set of values that help the people in the organization understand what actions 
are acceptable and what actions are unacceptable. According to a theory put forth by the 
influential sociologist Erving Goffman, prison cultures are unique because prisons are 
total institutions that encompass every aspect of an inmate’s life. Unlike a student or 
a bank teller, a prisoner cannot leave the institution or have any meaningful interaction 
with outside communities. Others arrange every aspect of daily life, and all prisoners are 
required to follow this schedule in the same manner.3
 
Inmates develop their own argot, or language (see Figure 12.1 below). They create 
their own economy, which, in the absence of currency, is based on the barter of valued 
items such as food, contraband, and sexual favors. They establish methods of deter-
mining power, many of which, as we shall see, involve violence. Isolated and heavily 
regulated, prisoners create a social existence that is, out of both necessity and design, 
separate from the outside world.
AdAPTing To PRison soCiETy
On arriving at prison, each convict attends an orientation session and receives a “Resident’s 
Handbook.” The handbook provides information such as meal and official count times, 
disciplinary regulations, and visitation guidelines. The norms and values of the prison 
society, however, cannot be communicated by the staff or learned from a handbook. As 
first described by Donald Clemmer in his classic 1940 work, The Prison Community, the 
process of prisonization—or adaptation to the prison culture—advances as the inmate 
gradually understands what constitutes acceptable behavior in the institution. For the 
most part, such behavior is defined not by prison officials but by other inmates.4
 
In studying prisonization, criminologists have focused on two areas: how prisoners 
change their behavior to adapt to life behind bars, and how life behind bars has changed 
because of inmate behavior. Sociologist John Irwin has identified several patterns of 
inmate behavior, each one driven by the inmate’s personality and values:
Total Institution An 
institution, such as a prison, 
that provides all of the 
necessities for existence 
to those who live within its 
boundaries. 
Prisonization The 
socialization process through 
which a new inmate learns the 
accepted norms and values of 
the prison culture.
Explain the 
concept of 
a prison as a 
total institution.
Learning  
objective1
Source: www.insideprison.com/glossary.asp.
FIGURE 12.1 Prison Slang
Ace Another word for “dollar.”
Bang A fight to the death, or shoot to kill.
Base head A cocaine addict.
B.G. “Baby gangster,” or someone who has 
never shot another person.
Booty bandit An incarcerated sexual 
predator who preys on weaker inmates,  
called “punks.”
Bug A correctional staff member, such as a 
psychiatrist, who is deemed untrustworthy or 
unreliable.
Bumpin’ titties Fighting.
Catch cold To get killed.
Chiva Heroin.
Dancing on the blacktop Getting  
stabbed.
Diddler Child molester or pedophile.
Green light Prison gang term for a  
contract killing.
Hacks Correctional officers.
Jug-up Mealtime.
Lugger An inmate who smuggles in and 
possesses illegal substances.
Punk An inmate subject to rape,  
usually more submissive than most  
inmates.
Ride with To perform favors, including sexual 
favors, for a convict in return for protection or 
prison-store goods.
Shank Knife.
Tits-up An inmate who has died.
Topped Committed suicide.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
1. Professional criminals adapt to prison by “doing time.” In other words, they fol-
low the rules and generally do whatever is necessary to speed up their release and 
return to freedom.
2. Some convicts, mostly state-raised youths or those frequently incarcerated in juve-
nile detention centers, are more comfortable inside prison than outside. These 
inmates serve time by “jailing,” or establishing themselves in the power structure 
of prison culture.
3. Other inmates take advantage of prison resources such as libraries or drug treat-
ment programs by “gleaning,” or working to improve themselves to prepare for a 
return to society.
4. Finally, “disorganized” criminals exist on the fringes of prison society. These 
inmates may have mental impairments or low levels of intelligence and find it 
impossible to adapt to prison culture on any level.5
The process of categorizing prisoners has a theoretical basis, but it serves a practical 
purpose as well, allowing administrators to reasonably predict how different inmates 
will act in certain situations. An inmate who is “doing time” generally does not present 
the same security risk as one who is “jailing.”
WHo is in PRison?
The culture of any prison is heavily influenced by its inmates. Their values, beliefs, and 
experiences will be reflected in the social order that exists behind bars. As we noted in the 
last chapter, the past three decades have seen incarceration rates of women and minority 
groups rise sharply. Furthermore, the arrest patterns of inmates have changed over that 
time period. A prisoner today is much more likely to have been incarcerated on a drug 
charge or immigration violation than was the case in the 1980s. Today’s inmate is also 
more likely to behave violently behind bars—a situation that will be addressed shortly.
An Aging inmATE PoPuLATion In recent years, the most significant demographic change 
in the prison population involves age. Although the majority of inmates are still under 
thirty-four years old, the number of state and federal prisoners over the age of fifty-five 
has increased dramatically since 1995, from 32,600 to 119,000.6 Several factors have con-
tributed to this upsurge, including “get tough on crime” measures that impose mandatory 
sentences (discussed in Chapter 9), high rates of recidivism, higher levels of murder and 
sex crimes committed by older offenders, and the aging of the U.S. population as a whole.7
 
Given that older inmates will experience more health-related problems, prisons and 
jails are now housing more people with medical issues than in the past. Poor health is 
the cause of nine of every ten deaths of inmates in state prisons, with heart disease and 
cancer accounting for nearly half of these fatalities.8 About 40 percent of state and federal 
prisoners suffer from at least one form of illness other than a cold, the most common ail-
ments being arthritis, hypertension, tuberculosis, and asthma.9 Not surprisingly, correc-
tions budgets are straining under the financial pressures caused by the health-care needs 
of aging inmates. According to the American Civil Liberties Union, it costs three times as 
much to house an elderly inmate as a younger one.10 (The feature A Question of Ethics—The 
Million-Dollar Man on page 340 addresses the issue of whether the government is obligat-
ted to provide criminals with expensive medical care at taxpayers’ expense.)
mEnTAL iLLnEss bEHind bARs Another factor in rising correctional health-care costs 
is the high incidence of mental illness in American prisons and jails. During the 1950s 
and 1960s, nearly 600,000 mental patients lived in public hospitals, often against their 
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics “Total Correctional 
Population” Web page to learn 
more about the inmate population 
in the United States. 
Teaching Tip: Show your class the 
PBS Frontline documentary, “The 
Released”, which follows inmates 
who have mental illnesses after 
they are released from prison.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

will. A series of scandals spotlighting the poor medical services and 
horrendous living conditions in these institutions led to their clo-
sure and the elimination of much of the nation’s state-run mental 
health infrastructure.11 Many mentally ill people now receive no 
supervision whatsoever, and some inevitably commit deviant or 
criminal acts.
 
As a result, in the words of criminal justice experts Katherine 
Stuart van Wormer and Clemens Bartollas, jails and prison have 
become “the dumping grounds for people whose bizarre behavior 
lands them behind bars.”12 Nationwide, 60 percent of jail inmates 
and 56 percent of state prisoners suffer from some form of mental 
illness.13 For reasons that should become clear over the course of 
this chapter, correctional facilities are not designed to foster mental 
well-being, and, indeed, inmates with mental illnesses often find 
that their problems are exacerbated by the prison environment.14
REHAbiLiTATion And PRison PRogRAms
In Chapter 9, we saw that rehabilitation is one of the basic theoreti-
cal justifications for punishment. Prison programs, which include 
any organized activities designed to foster rehabilitation, benefit 
inmates in several ways. On a basic level, these programs get pris-
oners out of their cells and alleviate the boredom that marks prison and jail life. The 
programs also help inmates improve their health and skills, giving them a better chance 
of reintegration into society after release. Consequently, nearly every federal and state 
prison in the United States offers some form of rehabilitation.15
 
The primary goal of rehabilitation programs, from an administrative standpoint, is 
to reduce recidivism. Research does demonstrate that offenders who earn a high school 
equivalency diploma behind bars are more likely to find employment after release, and 
therefore are less likely to be rearrested. Prison drug treatment programs can also be 
beneficial, reducing the probability of relapse in the “real world.”16 Given their budget 
constraints, however, prison systems are often forced to limit their vocational, educa-
tional, and treatment programs. Many inmates suffering from mental illness would ben-
efit from medication and twenty-four-hour psychiatric care. Yet these services are quite 
rare behind bars, mostly due to their high costs.17
vioLEnCE in PRison CuLTuRE
Until the 1970s, prison culture emphasized “noninterference” and did not support inmate-
on-inmate violence. Prison “elders” would themselves punish any of their peers who 
showed a proclivity toward assaulting fellow inmates. Today, in contrast, violence is used 
to establish the prisoner hierarchy by separating the powerful from the weak. Humboldt 
State University’s Lee H. Bowker has identified several other reasons for violent behavior:
• 
 It provides a deterrent against being victimized, as a reputation for violence may 
eliminate an inmate as a target of assault.
• 
 It enhances self-image in an environment that does not respect other attri butes, 
such as intelligence.
• 
 In the case of rape, it gives sexual relief.
• 
 It serves as a means of acquiring material goods through extortion or outright 
robbery.18
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   339
Prison Programs  
Organized activities for inmates 
that are designed to improve 
their physical and mental 
health, provide them with 
vocational skills, or simply keep 
them busy while incarcerated.
Why is it beneficial for 
prisoners such as these two 
Colorado state inmates, seen 
working on mannequin heads 
during a cosmetology class, to 
receive job training while still 
incarcerated? 
AP Photo/Daily Record, Jeff Shane
Indicate some of 
the reasons for 
violent behavior 
in prisons.
Learning  
objective2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
The deprivation model can be used to explain the high level of prison violence. 
According to this model, the stressful and oppressive conditions of prison life lead to 
aggressive behavior on the part of inmates. Prison researcher Stephen C. Light found that 
when conditions such as overcrowding worsen, inmate misconduct often increases.19 In 
these circumstances, the violent behavior may not have any express purpose—it may just 
be a means of relieving tension.
LEvELs of PRison vioLEnCE Simply put, prisons and jails are dangerous places to live.  
Each year, federal correctional officers are subjected to about eighty assaults and 1,500 
less-serious attacks such as pushing and shoving.20 About five inmates in state prisons 
and twenty-one inmates in local jails are killed by fellow inmates each year.21 (Note that 
this homicide rate is lower than the national average.) As many as 216,000 inmate-on-
inmate sexual assaults take place annually, a number that is certainly artificially low 
because of reluctance on the part of both prisoners and correctional officials to report 
rapes to authorities.22 With nothing but time on their hands, prisoners have been known 
to fashion deadly weapons out of everyday items. During the New Folsom riot discussed 
at the beginning of the chapter, inmates attacked each other with contraband razors and 
sharpened toothbrushes.  
RioTs As we pointed out earlier, riots—defined as situations in which a number of prison-
ers are beyond institutional control—are relatively rare. Researchers have addressed the 
seeming randomness of these incidents by turning to the concept of relative deprivation. 
This theory focuses on the gap between what is expected in any given living environment 
and the realities of that environment. Criminologist Peter C. Kratcoski has argued that 
because prisoners enjoy such meager privileges to begin with, any further deprivation 
can spark disorder.23 A number of prison experts have noted that collective violence often 
Deprivation Model A 
theory that inmate aggression 
is the result of the frustration 
inmates feel at being deprived 
of freedom, consumer goods, 
sex, and other staples of life 
outside the institution.
Relative Deprivation The 
theory that inmate aggression 
is caused when freedoms and 
services that the inmate has 
come to accept as normal are 
decreased or eliminated.
THE SITUaTION Prisoner X is serving fourteen years 
in a California prison for robbery. He has fallen ill, and 
only a heart transplant will save his life. Although many 
Americans who need organ transplants cannot afford such 
an expensive procedure, the California Department of 
Corrections is considering whether to spend more than  
$1 million for Prisoner X’s operation and recovery.
THE ETHICaL DILEMMa At the time Prisoner X fell ill, 
more than 4,100 names were on the national waiting list 
for a new heart. Many California taxpayers—who would 
ultimately pay for Prisoner X’s operation—were outraged 
that a convicted criminal could receive a new heart before 
other, law-abiding patients. In 1976, however, the United 
States Supreme Court ruled that prisoners have a right to 
“adequate” medical care, which has been interpreted to 
mean the same level of care they would receive if they were 
not behind bars. According to Michael A. Grodin, director of 
medical ethics at the Boston University School of Medicine 
and Public Health, “[B]ecause someone is incarcerated, we 
have a higher obligation to provide them with health care 
because we have deprived them of their liberty.” As the 
wife of a patient who was below Prisoner X on the heart 
transplant waiting list put it, “Since when is it unethical to 
save someone’s life?”
WHaT IS THE SOLUTION? A number of states do not 
provide their prisoners with organ transplants or will do so 
only if the prisoner can pay for the operation. What should 
California do with Prisoner X?* What options do state prison 
officials have if they decide not to cover the costs of the 
transplant? Would it be ethical to release Prisoner X or 
any other inmate simply to avoid the burden of his or her 
medical bills?
*In the actual case, California did provide Prisoner X with a new 
heart, but his body rejected the transplanted organ, and he died 
within a year.
A QuEsTion of ETHICS: The Million-Dollar Man
340   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
what they believe are the 
reasons inmates engage in prison 
violence. Do students accept 
the explanations offered by the 
deprivation and relative deprivation 
models? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   341
occurs in response to heightened measures of security 
at corrections facilities.24 Thus, such violence may be the 
angry response to an additional reduction in freedom for 
inmates, who enjoy very little freedom to begin with.
issuEs of RACE And ETHniCiTy
Race plays a major role in prison life, and prison violence 
is often an outlet for racial tension. As prison populations 
have changed over the past three decades, with African 
Americans and Hispanics becoming the majority in 
many penal institutions, issues of race and ethnicity have 
become increasingly important to prison administrators 
and researchers. Leo Carroll, professor of sociology at the 
University of Rhode Island, has written extensively about 
how today’s prisoners are divided into hostile groups, with 
race determining nearly every aspect of an inmate’s life, including friends, job assign-
ments, and cell location.25 Carroll’s research has also shown how minority groups in 
prison have seized on race to help form their prison identities.26 
PRison gAngs In many instances, racial and ethnic identification is the primary focus 
of the prison gang—a clique of inmates who join together in an organizational struc-
ture. Gang affiliation is often the cause of inmate-on-inmate violence. Folsom State 
Prison, discussed in the opening of this chapter, is plagued by various gangs such as the 
Mexican Mafia, composed of U.S.-born inmates of Mexican descent, and their enemies, a 
spin-off organization called La Nuestra Familia.
 
In part, the prison gang is a natural result of life in the modern prison. As one expert 
says of these gangs:
Their members have done in prison what many people do elsewhere when they feel person-
ally powerless, threatened, and vulnerable. They align themselves with others, organize to 
fight back, and enhance their own status and control through their connection to a more 
powerful group.27
In addition to their important role in the social structure of correctional facilities, prison 
gangs participate in a wide range of illegal economic activities within these institutions, 
including prostitution, drug selling, gambling, and loan sharking. A study released in 
2011 by Alan J. Drury and Matt DeLisi of Iowa State University found that gang members 
were more likely to be involved in prison misconduct than those offenders who had been 
convicted of murder.28
THE PREvALEnCE of PRison gAngs Recent research places the rate of gang membership 
at 11.7 percent in federal prisons, 13.4 percent in state prisons, and 15.6 percent in jails.29 
When the National Gang Crime Research Center surveyed prison administrators, how-
ever, almost 95 percent said that gang recruitment took place at their institutions, so the 
overall prevalence of gangs is probably much higher.30 Los Angeles correctional officials 
believe that eight out of every ten inmates in their city jails are gang affiliated. Although 
the stereotypical gang is composed of African Americans or Hispanics, the majority of large 
prisons also have white, or “Aryan,” gangs. One of the largest federal capital prosecutions in 
U.S. history, involving thirty-two counts of murder, focused on a major prison gang known 
as the Aryan Brotherhood. 
A correctional official displays 
a set of homemade knives, 
also known as shivs, made by 
inmates at Attica Correctional 
Facility in Attica, New York. What 
are some of the reasons why 
violence flourishes behind bars? 
AP Photo/David Duprey
Prison Gang A group of 
inmates who band together 
within the corrections system to 
engage in social and criminal 
activities.
Technology Tip: Have students 
go to the Florida Department of 
Corrections’ “Gang and Security 
Threat Group Awareness” Web 
page to learn more about several 
prevalent prison gangs.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
SELFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 361.
Prison culture is different from the cultures of schools or workplaces because prison 
is a ____________ ____________ that dominates every aspect of the inmate’s life. 
In recent decades, the prison culture has been affected by the increased average 
____________ of inmates, which has led to higher ____________-____________ costs 
for corrections systems. Some researchers rely on the ____________ model, which 
focuses on the stressful and oppressive conditions of incarceration, to explain 
general prison violence. The concept of ____________ ____________ , based on the 
gap between an inmate’s expectations and reality, is used to explain the conditions 
that lead to prison riots. 
CoRRECTionAL offiCERs  
And disCiPLinE
Ideally, the presence of correctional officers—the standard term used to describe prison 
guards—has the effect of lessening violence in American correctional institutions. 
Practically speaking, this is indeed the case. Without correctional officers, the prison 
would be a place of anarchy. But in the highly regulated, oppressive environment of the 
prison, correctional officers must use the threat of violence, if not actual violence, to 
instill discipline and keep order. Thus, the relationship between prison staff and inmates 
is marked by mutual distrust. Consider the two following statements, the first made by a 
correctional officer and the second by a prisoner:
[My job is to] protect, feed, and try to educate scum who raped and brutalized women and 
 
 children . . . who, if I turn my back, 
will go into their cell, wrap a blan-
ket around their cellmate’s legs, and 
threaten to beat or rape him if he 
doesn’t give sex, carry contraband, 
or fork over radios, money, or other 
goods willingly. And they’ll stick a 
shank in me tomorrow if they think 
they can get away with it.31
 
 The pigs in the state and federal prisons  
. . . treat me so violently, I cannot 
possibly imagine a time I could ever 
have anything but the deepest, ach-
ing, searing hatred for them. I can’t 
begin to tell you what they do to me. 
If I were weaker by a hair, they would 
destroy me.32
It may be difficult for an outsider to 
understand the emotions that fuel such 
sentiments. French philosopher Michel 
Foucault (1926–1984) pointed out that 
discipline, both in prison and in the 
general community, is a means of social 
organization as well as punishment.33 
In high-security prisons, 
correctional officers such as 
these two at the supermax 
prison in Tamms, Illinois, 
monitor even the most 
mundane of inmate activities, 
including working, exercising, 
eating, and showering. How 
might this constant surveillance 
contribute to tension between 
correctional officers and 
prisoners? 
John Smierciak/MCT/Landov
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   343
Discipline is imposed when a person behaves in a manner that is contrary to the 
values of the dominant social group. Correctional officers and inmates have different 
concepts of the ideal structure of prison society, and, as the two quotations just cited 
demonstrate, this conflict generates intense feelings of fear and hatred, which often 
lead to violence. 
RAnk And duTiEs of CoRRECTionAL offiCERs
After local officials shut down the Montague County (Texas) Jail several years ago 
because it had become something of an “Animal House” behind bars, much of the blame 
fell on the correctional staff. Security at the facility had become lax, to put it mildly. With 
little interference, inmates were allowed to have sex with their girlfriends, bring in com-
fortable furniture from home, take drugs, and chat on cell phones. 
 
To avoid such problems, correctional facilities generally provide their employ-
ees with clearly delineated ranks and duties. The custodial staff at most prisons, for 
example, is organized according to four general ranks—captain, lieutenant, sergeant, 
and officer. In keeping with the militaristic model, captains are primarily administra-
tors who deal directly with the warden on custodial issues. Lieutenants are the discipli-
narians of the prison, responsible for policing and transporting the inmates. Sergeants 
oversee platoons of officers in specific parts of the prison, such as various cell blocks or 
work spaces.
 
Lucien X. Lombardo, professor of sociology and criminal justice at Old Dominion 
University, has identified six general job categories among correctional officers:34
1. Block officers. These employees supervise cell blocks containing as many as sev-
eral hundred inmates, as well as the correctional officers on block guard duty. In 
general, the block officer is responsible for the well-being of the inmates. She or 
he makes sure the inmates do not harm themselves or other prisoners and also 
acts as something of a camp counselor, dispensing advice and seeing that inmates 
understand and follow the rules of the facility.
2.  Work detail supervisors. In many penal institutions, the inmates work in the caf-
eteria, the prison store, the laundry, and other areas. Work detail supervisors over-
see small groups of inmates as they perform their tasks.
3. Industrial shop and school officers. These officers perform maintenance and secu-
rity functions in workshop and educational programs. Their primary responsibil-
ity is to make sure that inmates are on time for these programs and do not cause 
any disturbances during the sessions.
4. Yard officers. Officers who work the prison yard usually have the least seniority, 
befitting the assignment’s reputation as dangerous and stressful. These officers 
must be constantly on alert for breaches in prison discipline or regulations in the 
relatively unstructured environment of the prison yard.
5. Tower guards. These officers spend their entire shifts, which usually last eight 
hours, in isolated, silent posts high above the grounds of the facility. Although 
their only means of communication are walkie-talkies or cellular devices, the 
safety benefits of the position can outweigh the loneliness that comes with 
the job.
6. Administrative building assignments. Officers who hold these positions provide 
security at prison gates, oversee visitation procedures, act as liaisons for civil-
ians, and handle administrative tasks such as processing the paperwork when an 
inmate is transferred from another institution.
List and briefly 
explain the 
six general 
job categories 
among 
correctional 
officers.
Learning  
objective3
Teaching Tip: Have a correctional 
officer visit class to speak to 
students about her or his job 
responsibilities, qualifications, and 
the particular challenges of a career 
in the field of corrections.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
disCiPLinE
As Erving Goffman noted in his essay on the “total institution,” in the general society 
adults are rarely placed in a position where they are “punished” as a child would be.35 
Therefore, the strict disciplinary measures imposed on prisoners come as something of 
a shock and can provoke strong defensive reactions. Correctional officers who must deal 
with these responses often find that disciplining inmates is the most difficult and stress-
ful aspect of their job.
sAnCTioning PRisonERs As men tioned earlier, one of the first things that an inmate 
receives on entering a correctional facility is a manual that details the rules of the prison 
or jail, along with the punishment that will result from rule violations. These handbooks 
can be quite lengthy—running one hundred pages in some instances—and specific. Not 
only will a prison manual prohibit obvious misconduct such as violent or sexual activity, 
gambling, and possession of drugs or currency, but it also addresses matters of daily life 
such as personal hygiene, dress codes, and conduct during meals.
 
Correctional officers enforce the prison rules in much the same way that a high-
way patrol officer enforces traffic regulations. For a minor violation, the inmate may be 
“let off easy” with a verbal warning. More serious infractions will result in a “ticket,” or 
a report forwarded to the institution’s disciplinary committee.36 The disciplinary com-
Technology has added significantly to correctional officers’ ability to keep prisons safe 
and orderly. Walk-through metal detectors and X-ray body scanners, for example, 
can detect weapons or other contraband hidden on the body of an inmate. The most 
promising new technology in this field, however, relies on radio frequency identification 
(RFID). About the size of two grains of rice, an RFID tag consists of a glass capsule that 
contains a computer chip, a tiny copper antenna, and an electrical device known as 
a “capacitor” that transmits the data in the chip to an outside scanner. In the prison 
context, RFID works as a high-tech head count: inmates wear bracelets tagged with the 
microchips while correctional officers wear small RFID devices resembling pagers. 
 
Guided by a series of radio transmitters and receivers, the system is able to 
pinpoint the location of inmates and guards within twenty feet. Every two seconds, radio 
signals “search out” the location of each inmate and guard, and relay this information 
to a central computer. On a grid of the prison, an inmate shows up as a yellow dot and 
a correctional officer as a blue dot. Many RFID systems also store all movements in a 
database for future reference. “[RFID] completely revolutionizes a prison because you 
know where everyone is—not approximately but exactly where they are,” remarked an 
official at the National Institute of Justice.
THINKING ABOUT RFID TRACKING: Review the discussion of crime 
mapping and “hot spots” on pages 139–141 in Chapter 5. Drawing on your knowledge 
of crime-mapping technology, discuss how RFID technology can reduce violence and 
other misconduct such as drug sales in prisons.
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Tracking Inmates
Black Creek/TSI PRISM
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After students read 
the “CJ & Technology” feature on 
this page, have them brainstorm 
some of the privacy issues raised 
by the use of RFID chips in 
inmates.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

mittee generally includes several correctional officers and, in some instances, outside 
citizens or even inmates. Although, as we shall see, the United States Supreme Court has 
ruled that an inmate must be given a “fair hearing” before being disciplined,37 in reality 
he or she has very little ability to challenge the committee’s decision. 
soLiTARy ConfinEmEnT Depending on the seriousness of the violation, sanctions can 
range from a loss of privileges in regard to family members to the extreme unpleasant-
ness of solitary confinement. Although conditions may vary, in general this term refers 
to the confinement of an inmate alone in a small cell with minimal environmental 
stimulation or social interaction.  In the past, solitary confinement was primarily a disci-
plinary tool.  Today, however, prison officials use it as a form of preventive detention for 
inmates, such as gang members, who are deemed a security risk to themselves or oth-
ers.38 According to estimates, approximately 4.5 percent of the American prison popula-
tion—about 60,000 inmates—are in solitary confinement at any given time.39
usE of foRCE Generally, courts have been unwilling to put too many restrictions on 
the use of force by correctional officers. As we saw with police officers in Chapter 5, cor-
rectional officers are also given great leeway to use their experience to determine when 
force is warranted. In Whitley v. Albers (1986),40 the Supreme Court held that the use of 
force by prison officials violates an inmate’s Eighth Amendment protections only if the 
force amounts to “the unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain.” Excessive force can 
be considered “necessary” if the legitimate security interests of the penal institution are 
at stake. Consequently, an appeals court ruled that when officers at a Maryland prison 
formed an “extraction team” to remove the leader of a riot from his cell, beating him in 
the process, the use of force was justified given the  situation.41
 
The judicial system has not, however, given correctional officers total freedom 
of discretion to apply force. In Hudson v. McMillan (1992),42 the Supreme Court ruled 
that minor injuries suffered by a convict at the hands of a correctional officer following 
an argument did violate the inmate’s rights, because there was no security concern at 
the time of the incident. In other words, the issue is not how much force was used, but 
whether the officer used the force as part of a good faith effort to restore discipline or 
acted “maliciously and sadistically” to cause harm. This “malicious and sadistic” stan-
dard has been difficult for aggrieved prisoners to meet: in the ten years following the 
Hudson decision, only about 20 percent of excessive force lawsuits against correctional 
officials were  successful.43
fEmALE CoRRECTionAL offiCERs
Security concerns were the main reason why, for many years, prison administrators 
refused to hire women as correctional officers in men’s prisons. The consensus was that 
women were not physically strong enough to subdue violent male inmates and that their 
mere presence in the predominantly masculine prison world would cause disciplinary 
breakdowns.44 As a result, in the 1970s a number of women brought lawsuits against 
state corrections systems, claiming that they were being discriminated against on the 
basis of their gender. For the most part, these legal actions were successful in opening 
the doors to men’s prisons for female correctional officers (and vice versa).45 Today, more 
than 150,000 women work in correctional facilities, many of them in constant close con-
tact with male inmates.46
 
As it turns out, female correctional officers have proved just as effective as their 
male counterparts in maintaining discipline in men’s prisons.47 Furthermore, evidence 
Solitary Confinement The 
isolation of an inmate in 
a separate cell, either as 
punishment or to remove the 
inmate from the general prison 
population for security reasons.
Social Media and CJ 
CorrectionsOne.com bills 
itself as the “#1 Resource” 
for America’s correctional 
officers.  To access the 
site’s Twitter Web page, 
which provides a near 
constant flow of corrections 
information, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   345
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Solitary Watch Web 
site to learn more about the use of 
solitary confinement in the United 
States.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
shows that women prison staff can have a calming 
influence on male inmates, thus lowering levels of 
prison violence.48 The primary problem caused by 
women working in male prisons, it seems, involves 
sexual misconduct. According to the federal gov-
ernment, nearly 60 percent of prison staff mem-
bers who engage in sexual misconduct are female, 
suggesting a disturbing amount of consensual sex 
with inmates.49
PRoTECTing PRisonERs’ RigHTs
The general attitude of the law toward inmates is 
summed up by the Thirteenth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution:
 
 Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except 
as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted, shall exist within the 
United States.
In other words, inmates do not have the same guaranteed rights as other Americans. For 
most of the nation’s history, courts have followed the spirit of this amendment by apply-
ing the “hands-off” doctrine of prisoner law. This (unwritten) doctrine assumes that the 
care of inmates should be left to prison officials and that it is not the place of judges to 
intervene in penal administrative matters. 
 
At the same time, the United States Supreme Court has stated that “[t]here is no iron 
curtain between the Constitution and the prisons of this country.”50 Consequently, like so 
many other areas of the criminal  justice system, the treatment of prisoners is based on a bal-
ancing act—here, between the rights of prisoners and the security needs of the correctional 
institutions.  Of course, as just noted, inmates do not have the same civil rights as do other 
members of society.  In 1984, for example, the Supreme Court ruled that arbitrary searches of 
prison cells are allowed under the Fourth Amendment because inmates have no reasonable 
expectation of privacy.51 (See page 171 in Chapter 6 for a review of the privacy expectation.)
THE “dELibERATE indiffEREnCE” sTAndARd As for those constitutional rights that 
inmates do retain, in 1976 the Supreme Court established the “deliberate indifference” 
standard. In the case in question, Estelle v. Gamble,52 an inmate had claimed to be the vic-
tim of medical malpractice. In his majority opinion, Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote that 
prison officials violated a convict’s Eighth Amendment rights if they “deliberately” failed 
to provide him or her with necessary medical care. At the time, the decision was hailed as 
a victory for prisoners’ rights, and it continues to ensure that a certain level of health care 
is provided. Defining “deliberate” has proved difficult, however. Does it mean that prison 
officials “should have known” that an inmate was placed in harm’s way, or does it mean 
that officials purposefully placed the inmate in that position?  
 
The Supreme Court seems to have taken the latter position. In Wilson v. Seiter (1991),53 
for example, inmate Pearly L. Wilson filed a lawsuit alleging that certain conditions of his 
confinement were cruel and unusual. These conditions included overcrowding, excessive 
noise, inadequate temperature control and ventilation, and unsanitary bathroom and din-
ing facilities. The Court ruled against Wilson, stating that he had failed to prove that these 
conditions, even if they existed, were the result of “deliberate indifference” on the part of 
prison officials.
“Hands-Off” Doctrine The 
unwritten judicial policy that 
favors noninterference by the 
courts in the administration of 
prisons and jails.
“Deliberate Indifference”  
The standard for violation of an 
inmate’s Eighth Amendment 
rights, requiring that prison 
officials be aware of harmful 
conditions in a correctional 
institution and fail to take steps 
to remedy those conditions.
About a quarter of the security 
staff at Sing Sing Correctional 
Facility in Ossining, New York—
shown here—are women. What 
are some of the challenges 
that face female correctional 
officers who work in a men’s 
maximum security prison?
Susan Farley/New York Times/Redux Pictures
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   347
“idEnTifiAbLE HumAn nEEds” In its Wilson decision, the Supreme Court created the 
“identifiable human needs” standard for determining Eighth Amendment violations. 
The Court asserted that a prisoner must show that the institution has denied her or 
him a basic need such as food, warmth, or exercise.54 The Court mentioned only these 
three needs, however, forcing the lower courts to determine for themselves what other 
needs, if any, fall into this category. The Court’s 2011 ruling in Brown v. Plata regard-
ing the California corrections system, discussed in the previous chapter, seems to have 
expanded the identifiable human needs standard.  Essentially, the Court found that severe 
overcrowding in California state prisons denied inmates satisfactory levels of mental 
and physical health care and therefore amounted to unconstitutional cruel and unusual 
punishment.55
THE fiRsT AmEndmEnT in PRison The First Amendment reads, in part, that the federal 
government “shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting 
the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech.” In the 1970s, the prisoners’ 
rights movement forced open the “iron curtain” to allow the First Amendment behind 
bars. In 1974, for example, the Supreme Court held that prison officials can censor inmate 
mail only if doing so is necessary to maintain prison security.56 The decade also saw court 
decisions protecting inmates’ access to group worship, instruction by clergy, special 
dietary requirements, religious publications, and other aspects of both mainstream and 
nonmainstream religions.57 
 
Judges will limit some of these protections when an obvious security interest is at 
stake. In 2010, for example, a Pennsylvania prison was allowed to continue banning reli-
gious headscarves because of legitimate concerns that the scarves could be used to con-
ceal drugs or strangle someone.58 In general, however, the judicial system’s commitment to 
freedom of speech and religion behind bars remains strong. (This commitment may have 
a particularly dangerous side effect, as you can see in the feature Anti-Terrorism in Action—
Prislam on the following page.)
SELFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 361.
Correctional officers known as ____________ ____________ are responsible for the daily 
well-being of the inmates in their cells. Perhaps the most stressful and important aspect 
of a correctional officer’s job is enforcing ____________ among the inmates. To do so, the 
officers may use force when a ____________ security interest is being served. Courts will 
not, however, accept any force that is “____________ and sadistic.” To prove that prison 
officials violated the ____________ Amendment’s prohibitions against cruel and unusual 
punishment, the inmate must first show that the officials acted with “____________ 
indifference” in taking or not taking an action. 
insidE A WomEn’s PRison
When the first women’s prison in the United States opened in 1839 on the grounds of 
New York’s Sing Sing institution, the focus was on rehabilitation. Prisoners were pre-
pared for a return to society with classes on reading, knitting, and sewing. Early women’s 
reformatories had few locks or bars, and several included nurseries for the inmates’ 
young children. Today, the situation is dramatically different. “Women’s institutions are 
literally men’s institutions, only we pull out the urinals,” remarks Meda Chesney-Lind, a 
“Identifiable Human 
Needs” The basic human 
necessities that correctional 
facilities are required by the 
Constitution to provide to 
inmates. 
Describe the 
hands-off 
doctrine of 
prisoner law and 
indicate two 
standards used 
to determine 
if prisoners’ 
rights have been 
violated.
Learning  
objective4
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students create a list of 
“identifiable human needs” that 
they feel should be afforded to 
prison inmates. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
criminologist at the University of Hawaii.59 Given the different circumstances surround-
ing male and female incarceration, this uniformity can have serious consequences for 
the women imprisoned in this country.
CHARACTERisTiCs of fEmALE inmATEs
Male inmates outnumber female inmates by approximately nine to one, and there are 
only about a hundred women’s correctional facilities in the United States. Consequently, 
most research concerning the American corrections system focuses on male inmates 
and men’s prisons. Enough data exist, however, to provide a useful portrait of women 
behind bars. Female inmates are typically low income and undereducated, and have a 
history of unemployment. Like male inmates, female prisoners are disproportionately 
African American, although the percentage of white female inmates has increased over 
the past two decades. Female offenders are much less likely than male offenders to have 
committed a violent offense. Most are incarcerated for a nonviolent drug or property 
crime (see Figure 12.2 on the facing page).
Islam is the fastest-growing religion in the American prison 
system. According to one U.S. Justice Department study, 
about 30,000 to 40,000 federal prisoners convert to Islam 
each year. For the vast majority of inmates who choose 
“Prislam,” as correctional officials have come to call the 
practice, the conversion is not political. Rather, the religion 
acts as a stabilizing force in their lives, helping them 
break the destructive patterns that caused them to be 
incarcerated in the first place. 
From time to time, however, Prislam finds itself tainted 
by the specter of radical Islamic terrorism. In May 2009, 
for example, four Muslim men were accused of planning 
to bomb synagogues and shoot down military aircraft 
with Stinger missiles in the New York City area. Two of the 
plotters—Laguerre Payen and Onta Williams—are believed 
to have converted while in prison. Also, about a decade ago 
the Islamic terrorist group Jam’yyat Al-Islam Al Saheeh (JIS), 
which was formed in Sacramento’s Folsom Prison, launched a 
conspiracy to “kill infidels” in Southern California. Additionally, 
both Richard Reid, the “shoe bomber” who attempted to blow 
up an international flight in 2001, and José Padilla, convicted in 
2007 of aiding terrorists, were prison converts to Islam.
PEOPLE SHOULD BE WORRIED
Many American Muslims discount the connection between 
Islamic inmates and terrorist activity. If a radical prisoner 
with terrorist tendencies is “an unreformed sociopath who 
happens to be a Muslim, [then] Islam is not to be blamed 
for his condition,” says Iman Talib Abdur-Rashid, a chaplain 
in the New York City prison system. 
Still, the Federal Bureau of Prisons is taking steps to 
prevent the radicalization of federal inmates, including 
monitoring religious meetings and screening written 
religious materials. The worry is that the degradations and 
frustrations of prison life will drive unstable prisoners toward 
terrorism. “People should be worried about us. People in 
prison feel there is no way out,” says Jehmahl, a murderer 
who converted to Islam while behind bars and subsequently 
joined JIS. “This is not so much about Islam. I’m radical. 
Radical means that you’re holding no foundation. That’s 
what the suicide bombers do. There’s nothing but God left 
so let’s go find a bomb.”
FOR CRITICAL ANALYSIS  The United States Supreme 
Court has held that prisoners retain a constitutional 
right to religious freedom. At the same time, prison 
administrators may regulate religious activities for security 
reasons. What steps do you think correctional officials 
should take to limit the spread of Islamic extremism in the 
nation’s prisons?  
AnTi-TERRoRism IN aCTION
PRISLAm
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students answer “Questions 
for Critical Analysis” number 3 
on page 361, which asks them to 
consider the drawbacks of having 
male correctional officers pat down 
and strip-search female inmates. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   349
 
The single factor that most distinguishes female prisoners from their male counter-
parts is a history of physical or sexual abuse. A self-reported study conducted by the 
 federal government indicates that 55 percent of female jail inmates have been abused 
at some point in their lives, compared with only 13 percent of male jail inmates.60 Fifty-
seven percent of women in state prisons and 40 percent of women in federal prisons 
report some form of past abuse—both figures are significantly higher than those for male 
prisoners.61 Health experts believe that these levels of abuse are related to the significant 
amount of drug and/or alcohol addiction that plagues the female prison population, as 
well as to the mental illness problems that such addictions can cause or exacerbate.62
THE moTHERHood PRobLEm
Drug and alcohol use within a women’s prison can be a function of the anger and depres-
sion many inmates experience due to being separated from their children. An estimated 
seven out of every ten female prisoners have at least one minor child. About 150,000 
American children have a mother who is under correctional supervision.63 Given the 
scarcity of women’s correctional facilities, inmates are often housed at great distances 
from their children. One study found that almost two-thirds of women in federal prison 
are more than five hundred miles from their homes.64
 
Further research indicates that an inmate who serves her sentence more than fifty 
miles from her residence is much less likely to receive phone calls or personal visits from 
family members. For most inmates and their families, the costs of “staying in touch” are 
too high.65 This kind of separation can have serious consequences for the children of 
inmates. When a father goes to prison, his children are likely to live with their mother. 
When a mother is incarcerated, however, her children are likely to live with other relatives 
or, in about 11 percent of the cases, be sent to foster care.66 Only six states—California, 
Indiana, Nebraska, New York, Ohio, and Washington—provide facilities where inmates 
and their infant children can live together, and even in these facilities nursery privileges 
generally end once the child is eighteen months old.
THE CuLTuRE of WomEn’s PRisons
After spending five years visiting female inmates in the Massachusetts Correctional 
Institution (MCI) at Framingham, journalist Cristina Rathbone observed that the 
Local Jails
Violent
Property
Public order
Drug
Offenses
Federal Prisons
State Prisons
18%
32%
29%
21%
34%
30%
28%
8%
9%
22%
64%
5%
FIGURE 12.2 Offenses of Women in Jail and Prison
Sources: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice, 3d ed. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2003), 
Table 6.56, page 519; Bureau of Justice Statistics, Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, July 
2004), Table 4, page 4; and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, December 
2011), Appendix table 17a, page 29.
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
if, given the negative social 
consequences of sending mothers 
to prison, judges and juries should 
consider “motherhood” as a 
mitigating circumstance during 
sentencing.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
medium-security facility seemed “more like a 
high school than a prison.”67 The prisoners were 
older and tougher than high school girls, but 
they still divided into cliques, with the “lifers” 
at the top of the hierarchy and “untouchables” 
such as child abusers at the bottom. Unlike in 
men’s prisons, where the underground econ-
omy revolves around drugs and weapons, at 
MCI-Framingham the most treasured contra-
band items are clothing, food, and makeup.68  
 
Although both men’s and women’s pris-
ons are organized with the same goals of con-
trol and discipline, the cultures within the two 
institutions are generally very different. As we 
have seen, male prison society operates pri-
marily on the basis of power. Deprived of the 
benefits of freedom, male prisoners tend to create a violent environment that bears little 
relation to life on the outside.69 In contrast, researchers have found that women prisoners 
prefer to re-create their outside identities by forming social networks that resemble the tra-
ditional family structure.70 In these pseudofamilies, inmates often play specific roles, with 
the more experienced convicts acting as “mothers” to younger, inexperienced “daughters.” 
As one observer noted, the younger women rely on their “moms” for emotional support, 
companionship, loans, and even discipline.71  
SELFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 362.
The majority of female inmates are members of ____________ groups who have been 
arrested for nonviolent ____________ or property crimes. On admission to a correctional 
facility, women report much higher levels of physical and sexual ____________ than their 
male counterparts, and female inmates often suffer from depression because they are 
separated from their ____________ . 
PARoLE And RELEAsE fRom PRison
At any given time, more than 840,000 Americans are living in the community on parole, 
or the conditional release of a prisoner after a portion of his or her sentence has been 
served. Parole allows the corrections system to continue to supervise an offender who is 
no longer incarcerated. As long as parolees follow the conditions of their parole, they are 
allowed to finish their terms outside the prison. If parolees break the terms of their early 
release, however, they face the risk of being returned to a penal institution.
 
Parole is based on three concepts:72
1. Grace. The prisoner has no right to be given an early release, but the government 
has granted her or him that privilege.
2. Contract of consent. The government and the parolee enter into an arrangement 
whereby the latter agrees to abide by certain conditions in return for continued 
freedom.
3. Custody. Technically, though no longer incarcerated, the parolee is still the respon-
sibility of the state. Parole is an extension of corrections. (The phonetic and 
Female inmates at the 
Women’s Eastern Reception, 
Diagnostic and Correctional 
Center in Vandalia, Missouri, 
visit with their daughters and 
granddaughters. Why is it 
difficult for many mothers 
behind bars to see their 
children? 
AP Photo/Whitney Curtis
Parole The conditional 
release of an inmate before his 
or her sentence has expired. 
Teaching Tip: Prison nursery 
programs are a growing trend in 
women’s prisons. Share information 
about these programs with your 
students to illustrate how women’s 
prisons are attempting to alleviate 
the stress caused by the separation 
of female inmates from their 
children.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   351
administrative similarities between probation and parole can be confusing. See 
Mastering Concepts—Probation versus Parole below for clarification.)
 
Because of good-time credits and parole, most prisoners do not serve their entire 
sentence in prison. In fact, the average felon serves only about half of the term handed 
down by the court.
disCRETionARy RELEAsE
As you may recall from Chapter 9, corrections systems are classified by sentencing proce-
dure—indeterminate or determinate. Indeterminate sentencing occurs when the legisla-
ture sets a range of punishments for particular crimes, and the judge and the parole board 
exercise discretion in determining the actual length of the prison term. For that reason, 
states with indeterminate sentencing are said to have systems of  discretionary release. 
Until the mid-1970s, all states and the federal government operated in this manner.
ELigibiLiTy foR PARoLE Under indeterminate sentencing, parole is not a right but a 
privilege. This is a crucial point, as it establishes the terms of the relationship between 
the inmate and the corrections authorities during the parole process. In Greenholtz v. 
Inmates of the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex (1979),73 the Supreme Court 
ruled that inmates do not have a constitutionally protected right to expect parole, 
thereby giving states the freedom to set their own standards for determining parole 
eligibility. 
 
Not all convicts are eligible for parole. As we saw in Chapter 9, offenders who have 
committed the most serious crimes often receive life sentences without the possibility 
MaSTErINGCONCEPTS
PROBATION VERSUS PAROLE
Probation and parole have many aspects in common. In fact, probation and parole are so similar that many jurisdictions combine them into a 
single agency. There are, however, some important distinctions between the two systems, as noted below. 
 
PROBATION 
PAROLE
Basic Definition
Timing
Authority
Characteristics of Offenders 
An alternative to imprisonment in which a 
person who has been convicted of a crime 
is allowed to serve his or her sentence in the 
community subject to certain conditions and 
supervision by a probation officer.
The offender is sentenced to a probationary 
term in place of a prison or jail term. If the 
offender breaks the conditions of probation, 
he or she is sent to prison or jail. Therefore, 
probation generally occurs before 
imprisonment.
Probation is under the domain of the 
judiciary. A judge decides whether to 
sentence a convict to probation, and a judge 
determines whether a probation violation 
warrants revocation and incarceration.
As a number of studies have shown, 
probationers are normally less involved 
in the criminal lifestyle. Most of them are 
first-time offenders who have committed 
nonviolent crimes.
An early release from a correctional facility, 
in which the convicted offender is given 
the chance to spend the remainder of her 
or his sentence under supervision in the 
community.
Parole is a form of early release. Therefore, 
parole occurs after an offender has spent 
time behind bars.
Parole often falls under the domain of 
the parole board. This administrative body 
determines whether the prisoner qualifies for 
early release and the conditions under which 
the parole must be served. 
Many parolees have spent months or even 
years in prison and, besides abiding by 
conditions of parole, must make the difficult 
transition to “life on the outside.”
Discretionary Release The 
release of an inmate into a 
community supervision  
program at the discretion of  
the parole board within limits 
set by state or federal law.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
of early release. In general, life without parole is reserved for those who have committed 
first degree murder or are defined by statute as habitual offenders. Also, officials can set 
conditions for parole eligibility. In 2011, for example, Mississippi governor Haley Barbour 
agreed to the conditional release of sisters Jamie and Gladys Scott, who were both serv-
ing life sentences for armed robbery, if Gladys would donate a kidney to Jamie.
PARoLE PRoCEduREs A convict does not apply for parole.  Rather, different jurisdictions 
have different procedures for determining discretionary release dates. In many states, 
the offender is eligible for discretionary release at the end of her or his minimum sen-
tence minus good-time credits (see page 257).  For instance, in 2012, Michael Claudy was 
sentenced to five to ten years in prison for harassing female students at Shippensburg 
University in Pennsylvania. This means that he will become eligible for parole after serv-
ing five years, less good time.  In other states, parole eligibility is measured at either one-
third or one-half of the maximum sentence, or it is a matter of discretion for the parole 
authorities.
 
In most, but not all, states, the responsibility for making the parole decision falls 
to the parole board, whose members are generally appointed by the governor. Most 
parole boards are small, made up of three to seven members. In many jurisdictions, 
board members’ terms are limited to between four and six years. The requirements for 
board members vary. Nearly half the states have no prerequisites, while others require 
a bachelor’s degree or some expertise in the field of criminal justice. 
THE PARoLE dECision Parole boards use a number of criteria to determine whether the 
convict should be given discretionary release. These criteria include the nature of the under-
lying offense, any prior criminal record, the inmate’s behavior behind bars, and the attitude 
of the victim or the victim’s family. In a system that uses discretionary parole, the actual 
release decision is made at a parole grant hearing. During this hearing, the entire board 
or a subcommittee reviews relevant information on the convict. Sometimes, but not always, 
the offender is interviewed. Because the board members have only limited knowledge of 
each offender, key players in the case are often notified in advance of the parole hearing and 
asked to provide comments and recommendations. These participants include the sentenc-
ing judge, the attorneys at the trial, the victims, and the victim’s family, and any law enforce-
ment officers who may be involved. After these preparations, the typical parole hearing itself 
is very short—usually lasting just a few minutes.
 
As parole has become a more important tool for decarceration, as discussed 
in the previous chapter, corrections authorities are making greater efforts to ensure 
that the process does not endanger the community. Each of Michigan’s approximately 
43,000 state prisoners, for example, is subjected to an annual evaluation to deter-
mine her or his “risk potential.” As this numerical score improves, so do the inmate’s 
chances for parole.  State corrections officials are highly motivated to succeed in find-
ing potential parolees: parole supervision costs about $2,130 a year, compared with 
about $34,000 a year for an offender in state prison.74
PARoLE dEniAL If parole is denied, the entire process is replayed at the next “action 
date,” which depends on the nature of the offender’s crimes and all relevant laws. In 
2012, for example, Mark David Chapman was denied parole for the seventh time. Three 
decades earlier, Chapman had been convicted of murder for fatally shooting musician 
John Lennon in New York City and sentenced to twenty years to life in prison. Although 
Chapman had not had an infraction behind bars since 1994, the three parole board 
Parole Board A body of 
appointed civilians that decides 
whether a convict should be 
granted conditional release 
before the end of his or her 
sentence.
Parole Grant Hearing A 
hearing in which the 
entire parole board or a 
subcommittee reviews 
information, meets the 
offender, and hears testimony 
from relevant witnesses to 
determine whether to grant 
parole.
Teaching Tip: Provide students 
with examples of inmates who 
are up for parole release. Include 
all appropriate and relevant 
information about the inmate 
and his or her history, and have 
students act as parole board 
members. Have students articulate 
their rationale for release or denial 
of parole.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

members told him that they still had concerns “about the disregard you displayed for the 
norms of our society and the sanctity of human life.”75 Chapman’s chances for release are 
also hurt by the continuing wishes of Yoko Ono, Lennon’s widow, that parole be denied. 
(See the feature You Be the Parole Board Member—Cause for Compassion? below to learn 
more about the process of discretionary release.)
PARoLE guidELinEs 
Nearly twenty states have moved away from discretionary release systems to procedures 
that provide for mandatory release. Under mandatory release, offenders leave prison 
only when their prison terms have expired, minus adjustments for good time. No parole 
board is involved in this type of release, which is designed to eliminate discretion from 
the process.
 
Instead, in mandatory release, corrections officials rely on parole guidelines to 
determine the early release date. Similar to sentencing guidelines (see Chapter 9), parole 
guidelines determine a potential parolee’s risk of recidivism using a mathematical equa-
tion. Under this system, inmates and corrections authorities know the presumptive 
parole date soon after the inmate enters prison. So long as the offender does not experi-
ence any disciplinary or other problems while incarcerated, he or she can be fairly sure 
of the time of release.76
Mandatory Release  
Release from prison that 
occurs when an offender has 
served the full length of his 
or her sentence, minus any 
adjustments for good time. 
Parole Guidelines  
Standards that are used in the 
parole process to measure the 
risk that a potential parolee will 
recidivate.
THE SITUaTION Thirty-seven years ago, Susan was convicted of first degree murder and 
sentenced to life in prison for taking part in a grisly killing spree in Los Angeles. Over the 
course of two days, Susan and her accomplices killed seven people. Susan stabbed one of 
the victims—a pregnant woman—sixteen times and wrote the word “PIG” on a door using 
another woman’s blood. During her trial, Susan testified that “I was stoned, man, stoned on 
acid” at the time of her crimes. Now sixty-one years old, Susan is before your parole board, 
requesting release from prison. For most of her time behind bars, she has been a model 
prisoner, and she has apologized numerous times for her wrongdoing. Furthermore, her left 
leg has been amputated, the left side of her body is paralyzed, and she has been diagnosed 
with terminal brain cancer.
THE LaW You have a great deal of discretion in determining whether a prisoner should be 
paroled. Some of the factors you should consider are the threat the prisoner would pose to 
the community if released, the nature of the offense, and the level of remorse. In addition, 
California allows for “compassionate release” when an inmate is “terminally ill.”
yOUr DECISION Susan obviously poses no threat to the community and is a viable 
candidate for compassionate release. Should she be set free on parole? Or are some crimes 
so horrific that the convict should never be given parole, no matter what the circumstances? 
Explain your vote.
[To see how a California parole board voted in a similar situation, go to Example 12.1 in Appendix B.]
yOU BE THE ParOLE  
BOarD MEMBEr
Cause for Compassion?
Rasmus Rasmusson/iStockphoto/Photodisc/Shutterstock/James Stadl/iStockphoto
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   353
Teaching Tip: Have a parole officer 
visit class to speak to students 
about the difficulties of the job, as 
well as his or her responsibilities, 
qualifications, and educational 
requirements.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
PARoLE suPERvision
The term parole has two meanings. The first, as we have seen, refers to the establishment 
of a release date. The second relates to the continuing supervision of convicted felons 
after they have been released from prison. Whether paroled through discretionary or 
mandatory release procedures, all parolees are subject to supervision.
CondiTions of PARoLE Many of the procedures and issues of parole supervision are 
similar to those of probation supervision. Like probationers, parolees who are granted 
parole are placed under the supervision of parole officers and required to follow certain 
conditions. Some of these conditions are fairly uniform. All parolees, for example, must 
comply with the law, and they are generally responsible for reporting to their parole 
officer at certain intervals. The frequency of these visits, along with the other terms of 
parole, is spelled out in the parole contract, which sets out the agreement between the 
state and the paroled offender. Under the terms of the contract, the state agrees to con-
ditionally release the inmate, and the future parolee agrees that her or his conditional 
release will last only as long as she or he abides by the contract.
 
Each jurisdiction has its own standard parole contract, although the parole board can 
add specific provisions if it sees the need (see Figure 12.3 below). Besides common restric-
tions, such as no illegal drug use, no association with known felons, and no change of address 
without notifying authorities, parolees have on occasion been ordered to lose weight and 
even to undergo chemical castration. Professional football player Michael Vick, who spent 
eighteen months in federal prison from 2007–2009 for running a pit bull–fighting operation 
in Virginia, was prohibited from owning a dog as a condition of his early release.
PARoLE REvoCATion If convicts follow the conditions of their parole until the  maximum 
expiration date, or the date on which their sentence ends, then they are discharged from 
supervision. A large number—about one-quarter—return to incarceration before their 
maximum expiration date, most because they were convicted of a new offense or had 
their parole revoked.77 Parole  revocation is similar in many aspects to probation revo-
cation. If the parolee commits a new crime, then a return to prison is very likely. 
 
If, however, the individual breaks a condition of parole, known as a technical viola-
tion, the parole authorities have discretion as to whether revocation proceedings should 
be initiated. An example of a technical violation would be failure to report a change in 
address to parole authorities. A number of states, including Michigan, Missouri, and New 
York, have taken steps to avoid reincarcerating parolees for technical violations as part 
of continuing efforts to reduce prison populations.78
PARoLE And duE PRoCEss Until the early 1970s, parole officers had the power to arbi-
trarily revoke parole status for technical violations. A parolee who was returned to prison 
had little or no recourse. In Morrissey v. Brewer (1972),79 the Supreme Court changed this 
Parole Contract An 
agreement between the 
state and the offender that 
establishes the conditions of 
parole.
Parole Revocation When a 
parolee breaks the conditions 
of parole, the process of 
withdrawing parole and 
returning the person to prison.
Describe 
typical 
conditions  
of parole.
Learning  
objective 6
Source: West Virginia Division of Corrections.
FIGURE 12.3 Standard Conditions of Parole
The parolee must do the following:
 • Stay within a certain area.
 • Obtain permission before changing residence or employment.
 • Obtain and maintain employment.
 • Maintain acceptable, nonthreatening behavior.
 • Not possess firearms or weapons.
 • Report any arrest within twenty-four hours.
 • Not use illegal drugs or alcohol or enter drinking establishments.
 • Not break any state or local laws.
 • Allow contacts by parole officers at home or employment without 
obstruction.
 • Submit to search of person, residence, or motor vehicle at any 
time by parole officers.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
ask students to review the list 
of standard parole conditions 
shown in Figure 12.3. Are there 
any additional conditions they feel 
should be included on the list? Do 
they consider any of the conditions 
unreasonable or unnecessary? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

by holding that a parolee has a “liberty interest” in remaining on parole. In other words, 
before parolees can be deprived of their liberty, they must be afforded a measure of due 
process at a parole revocation hearing.
 
Although this hearing does not provide the same due process protections as a 
criminal trial, the parolee does have the right to be notified of the charges, to pre sent 
witnesses, to speak in his or her defense, and to question any hostile witnesses (so long 
as such questioning would not place them in danger). In the first stage of the hearing, 
the parole board determines whether there is probable cause that a violation occurred. 
Then, the board decides whether to return the parolee to prison.
oTHER TyPEs of PRison RELEAsE
The vast majority of all inmates leaving prison—about 80 percent—do so through one 
of the parole mechanisms discussed in the chapter. Of the remaining 20 percent, most 
are given an expiration release.80 Also known as “maxing out,” expiration release occurs 
when an inmate has served the maximum amount of time on the initial sentence, 
minus reductions for good-time credits, and is not subjected to community supervision. 
Another, quite rare unconditional release is a pardon, a form of executive clemency. The 
president (on the federal level) and the governor (on the state level) can grant a pardon, 
or forgive a convict’s criminal punishment. 
 
Most states have a board of pardons—affiliated with the parole board—that makes 
recommendations to the governor in cases in which it believes a pardon is warranted. 
Most pardons involve obvious miscarriages of justice, though sometimes a governor 
will pardon an individual to remove the stain of conviction from her or his criminal 
record. 
 
Certain temporary releases also exist. Some inmates, who qualify by exhibiting 
good behavior and generally proving that they do not represent a risk to society, are 
allowed to leave the prison on furlough for a certain amount of time, usually between a 
day and a week. At times, a furlough is granted because of a family emergency, such as a 
funeral. Furloughs can be particularly helpful for an inmate who is nearing release and 
can use them to ease the readjustment period  Finally, probation release occurs following 
a short period of incarceration at the back end of shock probation, which we discussed in 
Chapter 10.  Generally, however, as you have seen, probationers experience community 
supervision in place of a prison term.
SELFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 362.
Parole refers to the ____________ release of an 
inmate from prison before the end of his or her 
____________ . In jurisdictions that have systems of 
discretionary release, a ____________ ____________ 
makes the parole decision. In contrast, with a 
____________ release, the inmate will not leave 
prison until her or his sentence has expired, 
minus good-time credits. Once an inmate has 
been released from prison, the terms of his or her 
release are spelled out in a parole ____________ , 
and a ____________ violation of these terms or, 
especially, the commission of a new crime will 
almost certainly result in a return to prison. 
Expiration Release The 
release of an inmate from 
prison at the end of his or her 
sentence without any further 
correctional supervision.
Pardon An act of executive 
clemency that overturns a 
conviction and erases mention 
of the crime from the person’s 
criminal record.
Furlough Temporary release 
from a prison for purposes 
of vocational or educational 
training, to ease the shock of 
release, or for personal reasons.
On April 27, 2012, a parole 
board in Deer Lodge, Montana, 
rejected eighty-one-year-old 
Don Nichols’s request for early 
release. Nichols is spending 
eighty-five years behind bars 
for kidnapping biathlete Kari 
Swenson in 1984 to be a wife 
for his son. Why might a judge 
hand down a sentence with 
a “max out” date that is well 
beyond the defendant’s life 
expectancy?
AP Photo/Matt Gouras
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   355
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
REEnTRy inTo soCiETy
David Pederson had spent nearly half of his thirty-one years behind bars for various 
crimes when he was released, probably for the last time, in July 2011.  Four months later, 
Pederson was again in prison, having gone on a “vicious, vile reign of terror”81 through 
the Pacific Northwest that claimed at least four murder victims, including his father.
Ex-inmates such as Pederson and the troubles they bring with them present a crucial chal-
lenge for the criminal justice system. Each year, more than 700,000 persons leave prison 
and return to the community. What steps can be taken to lessen the possibility that these 
ex-convicts will continue to harm society following their release? 
 
Efforts to answer that question have focused on programs that help inmates make 
the transition from prison to the  outside. In past years, these programs would have 
come under the general heading of  “rehabilitation,” but today corrections officials and 
criminologists refer to them as part of the strategy of prisoner reentry. The concept of 
reentry has come to mean many things to many people. For our purposes, keep in mind 
the words of Joan Petersilia of the University of California at Irvine, who defines  reentry 
as encompassing “all  activities and programming conducted to prepare ex-convicts to 
return safely to the community and to live as law abiding  citizens.”82 In other words, 
whereas rehab is focused on the individual offender, reentry encompasses the released 
convict’s relationship with society.
bARRiERs To REEnTRy
Perhaps the largest obstacle to successful prisoner reentry is the simple truth that life 
behind bars is very different from life on the outside. As one inmate explains, the “rules” 
of prison survival are hardly compatible with good citizenship:
An unexpected smile could mean trouble. A man in uniform was not a friend. Being kind 
was a weakness. Viciousness and recklessness were to be respected and admired.83
The prison environment also insulates inmates. They are not required to make the day-
to-day decisions that characterize a normal existence beyond prison bars. Depending on 
the length of incarceration, a released inmate must adjust to an array of economic, tech-
nological, and social changes that took place while she or he was behind bars. Common 
acts such as using an ATM or smartphone may be completely alien to someone who has 
just completed a long prison term.
CHALLEngEs of RELEAsE Other obstacles hamper reentry efforts. Housing can be diffi-
cult to secure, as many private property owners refuse to rent to someone with a crimi-
nal record, and federal and state laws restrict public housing options for ex-convicts. A 
criminal past also limits the ability to find employment, as does the lack of job skills of 
someone who has spent a significant portion of his or her life in prison. Felix Mata, who 
works with ex-convicts in Baltimore, Maryland, estimates that the average male pris-
oner returning to that city has only $50 in his pocket and owes $8,000 in child support. 
Furthermore, these men generally have no means of transportation, no place to live, and 
no ability to gain employment. At best, most ex-prisoners can expect to earn no more 
than $10,000 annually the first few years after being released.84
 
These economic barriers can be complicated by the physical and mental condition of 
the freed convict. We discussed the high incidence of substance abuse among prisoners and 
the health-care needs of aging inmates earlier in this chapter. In addition, one study con-
cluded that as many as one in five Americans leaving jail or prison is seriously mentally ill.85
Prisoner Reentry A 
corrections strategy designed 
to prepare inmates for a 
successful return to the 
community and to reduce their 
criminal activity after release.
Explain 
the goal 
of prisoner 
reentry 
programs.
Learning  
objective 7
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the National Institute of 
Justice’s “Reentry Into Society” 
Web page to learn more about 
prisoner reentry.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   357
THE THREAT of RELAPsE All of these problems conspire to make suc-
cessful reentry difficult to achieve. Perhaps it is not surprising that 
research conducted by the Pew Center on the States found that 43 
percent of ex-prisoners are back in prison or jail within three years 
of their release dates.86 These figures highlight the problem of recidi-
vism among those released from incarceration.
 
Even given the barriers to reentry we have discussed, these rates 
of recidivism seem improbably high. Regardless of their ability to find 
a job or housing, many ex-convicts are fated to run afoul of the crimi-
nal justice system. Psychologists Edward Zamble and Vernon Quinsey 
explain the phenomenon as a relapse process.87 Take the hypothetical example of an ex-
convict who gets in a minor automobile accident while driving to work one morning. The 
person in the other car gets out and starts yelling at the ex-convict, who “relapses” and 
reacts just as he would have in prison—by punching the other person in the face. The 
ex-convict is then convicted of assault and battery and given a harsh prison sentence 
because of his criminal record.
PRomoTing dEsisTAnCE
One ex-inmate compared the experience of being released to entering a “dark room, 
knowing that there are steps in front of you and waiting to fall.”88 The goal of reentry is to 
act as a flashlight for convicts by promoting desistance, a general term used to describe 
the continued abstinence from offending and the reintroduction of  offenders into soci-
ety. Preparation for reentry starts behind bars. In addition to the rehabilitation-oriented 
prison programs discussed earlier in the chapter, most correctional facilities offer “life 
skills” classes to inmates. This counseling covers topics such as finding and keeping a 
job, locating a residence, understanding family responsibilities, and budgeting. 
 
After release, however, former inmates often find it difficult to continue with edu-
cational programs and counseling as they struggle to readjust to life outside prison. 
More than two dozen reentry courts have been established in the United States to help 
offenders deal with this struggle. At the Santa Clara County (California) Reentry Court, 
for example, parolees who have committed technical violations get the opportunity to 
avoid reincarceration by taking court-ordered remedial action, usually drug treatment 
and increased contact with their parole officers.89
WoRk RELEAsE Work and lodging are crucial components of desistance. Corrections 
officials have several options in helping certain parolees—usually low-risk offenders—find 
employment and a place to live during the supervision period. Nearly a third of correctional 
facilities offer work release programs, in which prisoners nearing the end of their sen-
tences are given permission to work in the community.90 
HALfWAy HousE Inmates on work release must either return to the correctional facil-
ity in the evening or live in community residential facilities known as halfway houses. 
These facilities, also available to other parolees and those who have finished their sen-
tences, are often remodeled hotels or private homes. They provide a less institutional-
ized living environment than a prison or jail for a small number of offenders (usually 
between ten and twenty-five). Halfway houses can be tailored to the needs of the former 
inmate. Many communities, for example, offer substance-free transitional housing for 
those whose past criminal behavior was linked to drug or alcohol abuse.
Desistance The process 
through which criminal activity 
decreases and reintegration 
into society increases over a 
period of time.
Work Release Program  
Temporary release of convicts 
from prison for purposes of 
employment. The offenders 
may spend their days on the 
job but must return to the 
correctional facility at night and 
during the weekend.
Halfway House A 
community-based form of early 
release that places inmates in 
residential centers and allows 
them to reintegrate with 
society.
—Alissa, ex-inmate
“I don’t see prison as prison. 
I see prison as a cage. a dog 
cage, or monkey cage.  
It’s an animal cage, period.  
I refuse. I will not live my 
life like that anymore.”
Discussion Tip: What do students 
believe are the most difficult 
hurdles parolees must overcome 
to achieve successful reentry into 
society?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
THE sPECiAL CAsE of sEx offEndERs
Despite the beneficial impact of reentry efforts, one group of wrongdoers has consis-
tently been denied access to such programs: those convicted of sex crimes.  The eventual 
return of these offenders to society causes such high levels of community anxiety that 
the criminal justice system has not yet figured out what to do with them. (A Gallup poll 
found that 66 percent of the respondents were “very concerned” about child molesters, 
compared with 52 percent who expressed such concern about violent crime and 36 per-
cent about terrorism.91)
 
Part of the problem is that efforts to reform sex offenders have produced inconsistent 
results. In one of the few long-term studies of the issue, researchers found that sex offend-
ers who took part in therapy programs in California were actually more likely to reoffend 
than those who received no treatment whatsoever.92 Thus, corrections officials are caught 
f A s T f A C T s
HALfWAy HousE  
PRogRAm mAnAgER,  
job dEsCRiPTion:
•  Coordinate recreational, 
educational, and vocational 
counseling and other programs 
for residents.
• Maintain the security of the 
house and residents.
WHAT kind of TRAining  
is REQuiREd?
•  A bachelor’s degree or master’s 
degree in social work, career 
counseling, criminal justice, or 
psychology.
• Also helpful are internships, 
volunteer work with a halfway 
house, and community service 
work with an agency.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
•  $29,390–$45,552
CarEErS IN CJ
Julie Howe 
HAlFwAy House ProgrAm mAnAger
Early on in my career, I felt a bit intimidated by the clients simply because of my 
discomfort, not by their behavior. I started out very stern and learned later that it 
was better to start strong and to lighten up later rather than the reverse. The clients 
respect you more and know to take you seriously. My first client as a case manager 
was a real eye-opener. He was in his fifties, and I was in my early twenties. Earning 
his trust was quite a challenge. In the end he learned to respect me, and I learned 
different techniques when working with offenders.
 
My favorite part of my job is that I know that I have an impact on people’s lives. 
If I can assist someone to become sober, responsible, employed, and self-sufficient, 
I am also having an impact on the community and those whom my clients’ lives 
touch. I never get tired of hearing clients say thanks and knowing their lives are 
forever changed when they realize their potential and value. I also love that I have 
the opportunity to influence the behavior of others and shape their future. What an 
awesome responsibility!
social media Career Tip  
Don’t misrepresent facts or tell lies of omission online. Doing so in front of millions 
of online viewers virtually ensures you will be caught, and such untruths can fatally 
damage career possibilities.
Photo Courtesy of Julie Howe
Discussion Tip: Have students 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 361, 
which asks them to think about 
a total residency ban on sex 
offenders in an Iowa town. Is this 
ban appropriate? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

between public demands for protection from 
“these monsters” and the insistence of medi-
cal professionals that sex offenders represent 
a public health problem, albeit one without 
any ready solution. Not surprisingly, strate-
gies to control sex offenders on their release 
from prison have frustrated both the public 
and medical professionals.
sEx offEndER noTifiCATion LAWs In the 
summer of 1994, seven-year-old Megan Kanka 
of Hamilton Township, New Jersey, was raped 
and murdered by a twice-convicted pedophile 
(an adult sexually attracted to children). The 
offender had moved into her neighborhood 
after being released from prison on parole. 
The next year, in response to public outrage, 
the state passed a series of laws known col-
lectively as the New Jersey Sexual Offender Registration Act, or “Megan’s Law.”93 Today, all 
fifty states and the federal government have their own version of Megan’s Law, or a sex 
offender notification law, which requires local law authorities to alert the public when 
a sex offender has been released into the community. 
ACTivE And PAssivE noTifi CATion No two sex offender notification laws have exactly 
the same provisions, but all are designed with the goal of allowing the public to learn the 
identities of convicted sex offenders living in their midst. In general, the laws demand 
that a paroled sex offender notify local law enforcement authorities on taking up resi-
dence in a state. In Georgia, for example, paroled sex offenders are required to present 
themselves to both the local sheriff and the superintendent of the public school district 
where they plan to live.94 This registration process must be renewed every time the 
parolee changes his or her address. 
 
The authorities, in turn, notify the community of the sex offender’s presence 
through the use of one of two models. Under the “active” model, the authorities directly 
notify the community or community representatives. Traditionally, this notification has 
taken the form of bulletins or posters, distributed and posted within a certain distance 
from the offender’s home. Now, a number of states use e-mail alerts to fulfill notification 
obligations. In the “passive” model, information on sex offenders is made open and avail-
able for public scrutiny. All fifty states operate Web sites that provide citizens with data 
on registered sex offenders in their jurisdiction. 
CondiTions of RELEAsE  Generally, sex offenders are supervised by parole officers and 
are subject to the same threat of revocation as other parolees. Paroled child molesters 
usually have the following conditions of release:
•  Must have no contact with children under the age of sixteen.
•  Must continue psychiatric treatment.
•  Must receive permission from the parole officers to change residence.
•  Must stay a certain distance from schools or parks where children are present.
•  Cannot own toys that may be used to lure children.
•  Cannot have a job or participate in any activity that involves children.
Sex Offender Notification 
Law Legislation that requires 
law enforcement authorities to 
notify people when convicted 
sex offenders are released 
into their neighborhood or 
community.
Protests by relatives and 
friends of Donna Jou forced 
California state officials to 
delay the scheduled April 
2011 release of John Steven 
Burgess, a convicted sex 
offender who drugged and 
accidentally killed Jou four 
years earlier. Why might 
notification laws sometimes fail 
to protect the community from 
sex offenders such as Burgess? 
ZUMA Press/Newscom 
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   359
Indicate typical 
conditions for 
release for a 
paroled child 
molester.
Learning  
objective8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In addition, of course, they are required to register through the proper authorities. Today, 
more than 715,000 registered sex offenders live throughout the United States. Finally, 
more than half of the states and hundreds of municipalities have passed residency 
restrictions for convicted sex offenders. These laws ban sex offenders from living within 
a certain distance from places where children naturally congregate. In New Jersey, for 
example, “high-risk” offenders cannot take up residence within 3,000 feet of any school, 
park or campground, church, theater, bowling alley, library, or convenience store.95
SELFaSSESSMENT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 362.
Ex-convicts often struggle to succeed after being released from prison because their 
limited skills make it difficult to find ____________ . The resulting financial troubles 
hamper the offender’s ability to secure ____________ , which makes it more likely that 
he or she will recidivate. Corrections officials promote ____________ , or the process by 
which a former inmate stops committing crimes, by allowing certain low-risk offenders to 
live in ____________ houses, where they can receive specialized treatment. Sex offender 
____________ laws, also known as Megan’s laws, mandate that law enforcement officials 
must alert the public when a sex offender has moved into the community.
360   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
CHaPTEr SUMMary
Explain the concept of prison as a total 
institution. Although many people spend 
time in partial institutions—schools, com-
panies where they work, and religious orga nizations—only 
in prison is every aspect of an inmate’s life controlled, and 
that is why prisons are called total institutions. Every detail 
for every prisoner is fully prescribed and managed. 
Indicate some of the reasons for vio-
lent behavior in prisons. (a) To separate 
the powerful from the weak and establish 
a prisoner hierarchy; (b) to minimize one’s own probability 
of being a target of assault; (c) to enhance one’s self-image; 
(d) to obtain sexual relief; and (e) to obtain material goods 
through extortion or  robbery. 
List and briefly explain the six general job 
categories among correctional officers. 
(a) Block officers, who supervise cell blocks 
or are on block guard duty; (b) work detail supervisors, who 
oversee the cafeteria, prison store, and laundry, for example; 
(c) industrial shop and school officers, who generally oversee 
workshop and educational programs; (d) yard officers, who 
patrol the prison yard when prisoners are allowed there; (e) 
tower guards, who work in isolation; and (f) those who hold 
administrative building assignments, such as prison gate 
guards and overseers of visitation procedures. 
Describe the hands-off doctrine of pris-
oner law and indicate two standards 
used to determine if prisoners’ rights 
have been violated. The hands-off doctrine assumes that 
the care of prisoners should be left to prison officials and 
that it is not the place of judges to intervene. Nonetheless, 
the Supreme Court has created two standards to be used 
by the courts in determining whether a prisoner’s Eighth 
Amendment protections against cruel and unusual punish-
ment have been violated. Under the “deliberate indifference” 
standard, prisoners must show that prison officials were 
aware of harmful conditions at the facility but failed to rem-
edy them. Under the “identifiable human needs” standard, 
prisoners must show that they were denied a basic need such 
as food, warmth, or exercise. 
Contrast probation, parole, expiration 
release, pardon, and furlough. Probation 
is an alternative to incarceration. Parole is 
an early release program for those incarcerated. Expiration 
release occurs when the inmate has served the maximum time 
for her or his initial sentence minus good-time credits. A par-
don can be given only by the president or one of the fifty gov-
ernors. Furlough is a temporary release while in jail or prison.
Describe typical conditions of parole. 
Parolees must not use illegal drugs, not 
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Technology Tip: Have students go 
online to find their home state’s 
sex offender registry or, if not 
available, the sex offender registry 
of a neighboring state. Do students 
feel these registries are effective 
in protecting communities against 
sex offenders? What additional 
information might be included on 
these Web sites to better protect 
these communities?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

associate with known felons, not change their addresses 
without notifying authorities, and report to their parole offi-
cer at specified intervals. (These terms are usually set out in 
the parole contract.)
Explain the goal of prisoner reentry pro-
grams. Based on the ideals of rehabilitation, 
these programs have two main objectives: 
(a) to prepare a prisoner for a successful return to the com-
munity, and (b) to protect the community by reducing the 
chances that the ex-convict will continue her or his criminal 
activity after release from prison.
Indicate typical conditions for release 
for a paroled child molester. (a) Have 
no contact with children under the age of 
sixteen; (b) continue psychiatric treatment; (c) obtain per-
mission from a parole officer to change residence; (d) keep 
away from schools or parks where children are present;  
(e) cannot own toys that may be used to lure children; and 
(f) cannot have a job or participate in any activity that 
involves children.
QUESTIONS FOr CrITICaL aNaLySIS
1. The principle of least eligibility holds that inmates should 
not receive any benefits that are unavailable to the least 
advantaged members of outside society. Do you agree with 
the principle of least eligibility? If so, do you believe that 
prison programs such as substance abuse treatment and 
vocational training should be discontinued? Why or why 
not? If you disagree with the principle, how can you justify 
such programs beyond their benefits for individual inmates?  
Explain your answers.
2. In 2011, a Florida inmate sued the state corrections 
system, claiming that his soy-based diet was cruel and 
unusual punishment.  Under what circumstances, if any, 
do you think that unpleasant prison food can violate an 
inmate’s constitutional rights?
3. Do you agree with prison policies that prohibit male cor-
rectional officers from patting down and strip-searching 
female inmates? Why or why not? Under what circum-
stances might such policies be unrealistic?
4. In many jurisdictions, parolees can be stopped and 
searched by parole or police officers at any time, even if 
there is no probable cause that the parolee has commit-
ted a crime. What is the justification for such a policy? 
5. The town of Dyersville, Iowa, has one of the strictest 
residency requirements in the country: no sex offenders 
can live anywhere within its limits.  What is your opinion 
of this strategy?  How do you feel about residency laws in 
general?
C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   361
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
KEy TErMS
“deliberate indifference”  346
deprivation model  340
desistance  357
discretionary release  351
expiration release  355
furlough  355
halfway house  357
“hands-off” doctrine  346
“identifiable human needs”  347
mandatory release  353
pardon  355
parole  350
parole board  352
parole contract  354
parole grant hearing  352
parole guidelines  353
parole revocation  354
prison gang  341
prison programs  339
prisoner reentry  356
prisonization  337
relative deprivation  340
sex offender notification law  359
solitary confinement  345
total institution  337
work release program  357
SELF aSSESSMENT aNSWEr KEy
Page 342: i. total institution; ii. age; iii. health-care;  
iv. deprivation; v. relative deprivation
Page 347: i. block officers; ii. discipline; iii. legitimate;  
iv. malicious; v. Eighth; vi. deliberate
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

NOTES
 1. Johnny Cash, “Folsom Prison Blues” (Sun 
Records, 1955).
 2. Roderick Davis, “The Road from Prison to 
Rehabilitation,” New York Times (January 
21, 2011), at www.nytimes.com/interac-
tive/2011/01/22/opinion/20110122_
Fixes_Delancey.html?emc=eta1.
 3. Erving Goffman, “On the Characteristics of 
Total Institutions,” in Asylums: Essays on the 
Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other 
Inmates (New York: Doubleday, 1961), 6.
 4. Donald Clemmer, The Prison Community 
(Boston: Christopher, 1940).
 5. John Irwin, Prisons in Turmoil (Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1980), 67.
 6. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 
2003 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, November 2004), Table 10, page 8; and 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2010 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
December 2011), Appendix table 13, page 26.
 7. Old behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population 
in the United States (New York: Human Rights 
Watch, January 2012), 24–42.
 8. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison and Jail 
Deaths in Custody, 2000–2009—Statistical 
Tables (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, December 2011), 3.
 9. Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Medical Problems 
of Prisoners,” April 2008, “Highlights” and 
Table 2, at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/
mpp.pdf.
10. Nicholas K. Geranios, “Aging Inmates 
Straining State Prison System,” Associated 
Press (November 10, 2010).
11. Michael Vitiello, “Addressing the Special 
Problems of Mentally Ill Prisoners: A Small 
Piece of the Solution to Our Nation’s Prison 
Crisis,” Denver University Law Review (Fall 
2010), 57–62.
12. Katherine Stuart van Wormer and Clemens 
Bartollas, Women and the Criminal Justice 
System, 3d ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education, 2011), 143.
13. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mental Health 
Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
September 2006), 1.
14. William Kanapaux, “Guilty of Mental Illness,” 
Psychiatric Times (January 1, 2004), at www.
psychiatrictimes.com/forensic-psych/
content/article/10168/47631.
15. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State 
and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2005 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
October 2008), 6.
16. Joan Petersilia, “Beyond the Prison Bubble,” 
Wilson Quarterly (Winter 2011), 29.
17. Todd R. Clear, George F. Cole, and Michael 
D. Reisig, American Corrections, 9th ed. 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 
2011), 381.
18. Lee H. Bowker, Prison Victimization (New 
York: Elsevier, 1981), 31–33.
19. Stephen C. Light, “The Severity of Assaults on 
Prison Officers: A Contextual Analysis,” Social 
Science Quarterly 71 (1990), 267–284.
20. Federal Bureau of Prisons report, cited in Kevin 
Johnson, “Report Points to Prison Security 
Failures,” USA Today (June 8, 2009), 3A.
21. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison and Jail 
Deaths in Custody, 2000–2009, Table 1, page 5; 
and Table 13, page 16.
22. David Kaiser and Lovisa Stannow, “Prison 
Rape and the Government,” New York Review 
of Books (March 24, 2011), at www.nybooks.
com/articles/archives/2011/mar/24/
prison-rape-and-government.
23. Randy Martin and Sherwood Zimmerman, “A 
Typology of the Causes of Prison Riots and an 
Analytical Extension to the 1986 Virginia Riot,” 
Justice Quarterly 7 (1990), 711–737.
24. Bert Useem, “Disorganization and the 
New Mexico Prison Riot of 1980,” American 
Sociological Review 50 (1985), 677–688.
25. Leo Carroll, “Race, Ethnicity, and the 
Social Order of the Prison,” in The Pains of 
Imprisonment, ed. R. Johnson and H. Toch 
(Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1982).
26. Leo Carroll, Hacks, Blacks, and Cons: Race 
Relations in a Maximum-Security Prison 
(Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988), 78.
27. Craig Haney, “Psychology and the Limits of 
Prison Pain,” Psychology, Public Policy, and 
Law (December 1977), 499.
28. Alan J. Drury and Matt DeLisi, “Gangkill: An 
Exploratory Empirical Assessment of Gang 
Membership, Homicide Offending, and Prison 
Misconduct,” Crime & Delinquency (January 
2011), 130–146.
29. A Study of Gangs and Security Threat Groups in 
America’s Adult Prisons and Jails (Indianapolis: 
National Major Gang Task Force, 2002).
30. George W. Knox, The Problem of Gangs and 
Security Threat Groups (STGs) in American 
Prisons Today: Recent Research Findings from 
the 2004 Prison Gang Survey, available at www.
ngcrc.com/corr2006.html.
31. Quoted in John J. DiIulio, Jr., No Escape: The 
Future of American Corrections (New York: 
Basic Books, 1991), 268.
32. Jack Henry Abbott, In the Belly of the Beast 
(New York: Vintage Books, 1991), 54.
33. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The 
Birth of the Prison (New York: Pantheon Books, 
1977), 128.
34. Lucien X. Lombardo, Guards Imprisoned: 
Correctional Officers at Work (Cincinnati, OH: 
Anderson Publishing Co., 1989), 51–71.
35. Goffman, 7.
36. Clear, Cole, and Reisig, 333.
37. Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539 (1974).
38. Colin Dayan, “Barbarous Confinement,” New 
York Times (July 18, 2011), A19.
39. Camille Graham Camp and George M. Camp, 
eds., The Corrections Yearbook, 2000 (New York: 
Criminal Justice Yearbook, 2000), 26.
40. 475 U.S. 312 (1986).
41. Stanley v. Hejirika, 134 F.3d 629 (4th Cir. 1998).
42. 503 U.S. 1 (1992).
43. Darrell L. Ross, “Assessing Hudson v. McMillan 
Ten Years Later,” Criminal Law Bulletin 
(September/October 2004), 508.
44. Van Wormer and Bartollas, 387.
45. Cristina Rathbone, A World Apart: Women, 
Prison, and a Life behind Bars (New York: 
Random House, 2006), 46.
362   C R i m i n A L  J U s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Page 350: i. minority; ii. drug; iii. abuse; iv. children
Page 355: i. conditional; ii. sentence; iii. parole board;  
iv. mandatory; v. contract; vi. technical
Page 360: i. employment; ii. housing; iii. desistance;  
iv. halfway; v. notification
COUrSEMaTE
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2 :  B E H i n d  B A R s :  T H E  L i f E  o f  A n  i n m A T E   363
46. Carl Nink et al., Women Professionals in 
Corrections: A Growing Asset (Centerville, UT: 
MTC Institute, August 2008), 1.
47. Denise L. Jenne and Robert C. Kersting, 
“Aggression and Women Correctional Officers 
in Male Prisons,” Prison Journal (1996), 442–
460.
48. Nink et al., 8–9.
49. Matt Gouras, “Female Prison Guards Often 
Behind Sex Misconduct,” Associated Press 
(March 14, 2010).
50. Wolff v. McDonnell, 539.
51. Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517 (1984).
52. 429 U.S. 97 (1976).
53. 501 U.S. 294 (1991).
54. Wilson v. Seiter, 501 U.S. 294, 304 (1991).
55. 563 U.S. ___ (2011).
56. Procunier v. Martinez, 416 U.S. 396 (1974).
57. Cruz v. Beto, 405 U.S. 319 (1972); Gittlemacker v. 
Prasse, 428 F.2d 1 (3d Cir. 1970); and Kahane v. 
Carlson, 527 F.2d 492 (2d Cir. 1975).
58. Maryclaire Dale, “Court Says Pa. Prison Can 
Ban Muslim Scarf,” Associated Press (August 2, 
2010).
59. Quoted in Alexandra Marks, “Martha Checks 
in Today,” Seattle Times (October 8, 2004), A8.
60. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Profile of Jail 
Inmates, 2002 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Department of Justice, July 2004), 10.
61. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prior Abuse 
Reported by Inmates and Probationers 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
April 1999), 2.
62. Caught in the Net: The Impact of Drug Policies 
on Women and Families (Washington, D.C.: 
American Civil Liberties Union, 2004), 18–19.
63. Jessica Meyerson, Christa Otteson, and 
Krysten Lynn Ryba, Childhood Disrupted: 
Understanding the Features and Effects of 
Maternal Incarceration (St. Paul, MN: Wilder 
Research, November 2010), 1.
64. Kelly Bedard and Eric Helland, “Location of 
Women’s Prisons and the Deterrent Effect of 
‘Harder’ Time,” International Review of Law 
and Economics (June 2004), 152.
65. Ibid.
66. Sarah Schirmer, Ashley Nellis, and Marc 
Mauer, Incarcerated Parents and Their 
Children: Trends 1991–2007 (Washington, D.C.: 
The Sentencing Project, February 2009), 5.
67. Rathbone, 4.
68. Ibid., 158.
69. Van Wormer and Bartollas, 137–138.
70. Barbara Bloom and Meda Chesney-Lind, 
“Women in Prison,” in It’s a Crime: Women 
and Justice, 4th ed. Roslyn Muraskin (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007), 542–563.
71. Piper Kerman, Orange Is the New Black: My 
Year in a Women’s Prison (New York: Spiegal 
and Grau, 2011), 131.
72. Clear, Cole, and Reisig, 408.
73. 442 U.S. 1 (1979).
74. “Michigan Lets Prisoners Go—and Saves a 
Bundle,” Bloomberg Businessweek (December 
11, 2011), 16.
75. Quoted in “Chapman Strikes Out Again in 
Parole Bid,” Chicago Tribune (September 8, 
2010), 15.
76. Clear, Cole, and Reisig, 420–421.
77. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, November 
2011), Table 6, page 9.
78. Joseph Walker, “Rules May Help Parolees 
Avoid Jail for Small Errors,” New York Times 
(January 5, 2012), at cityroom.blogs.
nytimes.com/2012/01/05/rating-a-parol-
ees-risk-before-a-return-to-prison.
79. 408 U.S. 471 (1972).
80. Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Reentry Trends 
in the U.S.,” at bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/
reentry/releases.cfm.
81. Jonathan Cooper, “3rd Body Linked to 
Northwest Supremacists’ Alleged Crime 
Spree,” Associated Press (October 9, 2011).
82. Joan Petersilia, When Prisoners Come Home: 
Parole and Prisoner Reentry (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2003), 39.
83. Victor Hassine, Life without Parole: Living 
in Prison Today, ed. Thomas J. Bernard and 
Richard McCleary (Los Angeles: Roxbury 
Publishing Co., 1996), 12.
84. John H. Tyler and Jeffrey R. King, “Prison-Based 
Education and Reentry into the Mainstream 
Labor Market,” in Barriers to Reentry? The 
Labor Market for Released Prisoners in Post-
Industrial America, ed. Shawn D. Bushway, 
Michael A. Stoll, and David F. Weiman (New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2007), 237.
85. Ill Equipped: U.S. Prisons and Offenders with 
Mental Illness (New York: Human Rights 
Watch, 2003).
86. Pew Center on the States, State of Recidivism: 
The Revolving Door of America’s Prisons 
(Washington, D.C.: The Pew Charitable Trusts, 
April 2011), 2.
87. Edward Zamble and Vernon Quinsey, The 
Criminal Recidivism Process (Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
88. Quoted in Kevin Johnson, “After Years of 
Solitary, Freedom Is Hard to Grasp,” USA 
Today (June 9, 2005), 2A.
89. Dorothy Korber, “A Courtroom Unlike Any 
Other”: Santa Clara County’s Parolee Reentry 
Court Is a Case Study in Reducing Recidivism 
(Sacramento, CA: California Senate Office of 
Oversight and Outcomes, June 2011).
90. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State 
and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2005, Table 
6, page 5.
91. “The Greatest Fear,” The Economist (August 
26, 2006), 25.
92. Janice Marques, Mark Wiederanders, David 
Day, Craig Nelson, and Alice Ommeren, “Effects 
of a Relapse Prevention Program on Sexual 
Recidivism: Final Results from California’s Sex 
Offender Treatment and Evaluation Project 
(SOTEP),” Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research 
and Treatment (January 2005), 79–107.
93. New Jersey Revised Statute Section 2C:7-8(c) 
(1995).
94. Georgia Code Annotated Section 42-9-44.1(b)
(1).
95. New Jersey Statutes Annotated Section 2C: 
7–3.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   365
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Describe the child-saving movement and its relationship to 
the doctrine of parens patriae.
2  List the four major differences between juvenile courts and 
adult courts. 
3  Identify and briefly describe the single most important 
Supreme Court case with respect to juvenile justice. 
4  Describe the one variable that always correlates highly with 
juvenile crime rates.
5  Indicate some of the reasons why youths join gangs.
6  Describe the four primary stages of pretrial juvenile justice 
procedure. 
7  Explain the distinction between an adjudicatory hearing 
and a disposition hearing. 
8  List the four categories of residential treatment programs.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary on 
pages 389 and 390 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
The  Juvenile 
  Justice  
     System
365
Aaron Josefczyk/Reuters/Landov
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• The Evolution of American 
Juvenile Justice 
• Determining Delinquency 
Today
• Trends in Juvenile  
Delinquency
• Factors in Juvenile  
Delinquency
• First Contact: The Police and 
Pretrial Procedures
• Trying and Punishing Juveniles
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
O
mer Ninham’s lawyers pointed out that only about seventy inmates are pres-
ently serving life-without-parole sentences in the United States for murders 
committed when they were fourteen or younger. Thus, they claimed, there is a 
“national consensus” against such sentences. The Wisconsin Supreme Court countered 
that the punishment is rarely handed down because fourteen-year-olds rarely engage 
in the kind of “horrific and senseless” behavior for which Ninham was convicted.1 The 
Wisconsin justices did not, however, have the final word on this issue. In June 2012, the 
United States Supreme Court banned laws in about twenty states that required life-
without-parole sentences for juveniles such as Ninham who have been found guilty of 
committing murder.2  
 
While making its decision, the Supreme Court confronted the difficult question—
asked every time a young offender commits an “adultlike” act of violence—that lies at the 
heart of the juvenile justice debate. That is, should criminal acts by youths be given the 
same weight as those committed by adults, or should they be seen as “mistakes” that can 
be “corrected” by care and counseling? The American juvenile justice system generally 
operates as an uneasy compromise between “rehabilitation and punishment, treatment 
and custody.” In this chapter, we  will discuss the successes and failures of this compro-
THE End of InnOcence
Omer Ninham was fourteen years old when he 
and several friends saw young Zong Vang riding a 
bicycle in Green Bay, Wisconsin. “Let’s mess with this 
kid,” said thirteen-year-old Richard Crapeau, one of 
Ninham’s companions. Crapeau pulled Vang off his 
bike, and Ninham punched the smaller boy in the 
face. Vang then fled to the top of a nearby parking 
garage before Crapeau and Ninham caught up with 
him. Ninham grabbed Vang’s wrists and Crapeau held 
his ankles, and they swung Vang toward the edge of 
the building. With their friends urging them on, the 
two boys let go, hurling Vang to his death five stories 
below. Both Crapeau and Ninham were sentenced to 
life in prison for first degree murder, with one crucial 
difference: unlike Crapeau, Ninham was not given the 
opportunity for early release through parole. 
During Ninham’s sentencing, jurors were unmoved 
by testimony that he had suffered repeated physical 
and mental abuse at home and was drinking alcohol 
regularly by age ten. Nine years later, when Ninham 
was twenty-three, a prison psychologist noted that 
he had “grown into a thoughtful young man whose 
prognosis for successful reentry into the community, and 
absence of recidivism, is very good.” About that time, 
attorneys from the nonprofit Equal Justice Initiative took 
Ninham’s case to state court, arguing that a sentence 
of life without parole for a fourteen-year-old is “cruel 
and unusual” under the Eighth Amendment. “Children 
and adolescents are not adults in miniature,” Ninham’s 
lawyers argued. “Their youth makes them less capable 
to recognize the consequences of their decisions, yet 
more capable of extraordinary, positive growth as they 
develop into adults.” 
In May 2011, the Wisconsin Supreme Court rejected 
this argument and upheld Ninham’s life-without-parole 
sentence. “Under the circumstances of this case, 
Ninham’s punishment is severe, 
but not disproportionately so,” 
wrote state justice Anne Ziegler 
in her majority opinion.
Omer Ninham, convicted 
of first degree murder 
at fourteen years old, is 
serving a sentence of 
life-without-parole in the 
Wisconsin corrections 
system.
Courtesy Equal Justice Initiative/www.eji.org
Discussion Tip: After students read 
“The End of Innocence,” ask them 
their opinions of the Wisconsin 
Supreme Court’s decision regarding 
Omer Ninham. Do they believe 
that, under the circumstances, 
a fourteen-year-old should be 
sentenced to life in prison without 
parole?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   367
mise and examine the aspects of the juvenile justice system that differentiate it from the 
criminal justice system. 
THE EvoLuTion of  
AmERiCAn juvEniLE jusTiCE
In a recent poll, about 90 percent of Americans expressed the belief 
that rehabilitation and treatment for youthful offenders would help 
prevent them from committing future crimes.3 To a certain degree, 
such opinions reflect the founding principles of the American juve-
nile justice system. At the beginning of the 1800s, juvenile offenders 
were treated the same as adult offenders—they were judged by the 
same courts and sentenced to the same severe penalties. This situa-
tion began to change soon after, as urbanization and industrialization created an immi-
grant underclass that was, at least in the eyes of many reformers, predisposed to deviant 
activity. Certain members of the Progressive movement, known as the child savers, began 
to take steps to “save” children from these circumstances, introducing the idea of reha-
bilitating delinquents in the process.
THE CHiLd-sAving movEmEnT
In general, the child savers favored the doctrine of parens patriae, which holds that the 
state has not only a right but also a duty to care for children who are neglected, delin-
quent, or in some other way disadvantaged. Juvenile offenders, the child savers believed, 
required treatment, not punishment, and adherents were horrified at the thought of 
placing children in prisons with hardened adult criminals. In 1967, then Supreme Court 
justice Abe Fortas said of the child savers:
They believed that society’s role was not to ascertain whether the child was “guilty” or 
“innocent,” but “What is he, how has he become what he is, and what had best be done in 
his interest and in the interest of the state to save him from a downward career.” The child—
essentially good, as they saw it—was made “to feel that he is the object of [the government’s] 
care and solicitude,” not that he was under arrest or on trial.4
 
Child-saving organizations convinced local legislatures to pass laws that allowed 
them to take control of children who exhibited criminal tendencies or had been 
ne glected by their parents. To separate these children from the environment in which 
they were raised, the organizations created a number of institutions, the best known 
of which was New York’s House of Refuge. Opening in 1825, the House of Refuge imple-
mented many of the same reformist measures popular in the penitentiaries of the time, 
meaning that its charges were subjected to the healthful  influences of hard study and 
labor. Although the House of Refuge was criticized for its harsh discipline (which caused 
many boys to run away), similar institutions sprang up throughout the Northeast during 
the middle of the 1800s. 
THE iLLinois juvEniLE CouRT
The efforts of the child savers culminated with the passage of the Illinois Juvenile Court 
Act in 1899. The Illinois legislature created the first court specifically for juveniles, 
guided by the principles of parens patriae and based on the belief that children are not 
fully responsible for criminal conduct and are capable of being rehabilitated.5
Parens Patriae A doctrine 
that holds that the state has a 
responsibility to look after the 
well-being of children and to 
assume the role of parent if 
necessary.
Describe the 
child-saving 
movement and 
its relationship 
to the doctrine 
of parens 
patriae.
Learning  
objective1
“When our children make 
mistakes, are we going to 
lock them up and throw away  
the key?”
— Brian Gowdy,  
defense attorney
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In a short writing 
assignment, ask students to think 
about the philosophy of parens 
patriae. How much responsibility do 
they think the state should have in 
caring for children who have been 
neglected or are delinquent?  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 
The Illinois Juvenile Court and juvenile courts in other states that followed in its 
path were (and, in many cases, remain) drastically different from adult courts:
• 
 No juries. The matter was decided by judges who wore regular clothes instead 
of black robes and sat at a table with the other participants rather than behind 
a bench. Because the primary focus of the court was on the child and not the 
crime, the judge had wide discretion in disposing of each case.
• 
 Different terminology. To reduce the stigma of criminal proceedings, 
“petitions” were issued instead of “warrants.” The children were not 
 “defendants,” but “respondents,” and they were not “found guilty” but 
“adjudicated delinquent.”
• 
 No adversarial relationship. Instead of trying to determine guilt or innocence, the 
parties involved in the juvenile court worked together in the best interests of the 
child, with the emphasis on rehabilitation rather than punishment.
• 
 Confidentiality. To avoid “saddling” the child with a criminal past, juvenile court hear-
ings and records were kept sealed, and the proceedings were closed to the public.
By 1945, every state had a juvenile court system modeled after the first Illinois court. For 
the most part, these courts were able to operate without interference until the 1960s and 
the onset of the juvenile rights movement.
juvEniLE dELinquEnCy
After the first juvenile court was established in Illinois, the Chicago Bar Association 
described its purpose as, in part, to “exercise the same tender solicitude and care over its 
neglected wards that a wise and loving parent would exercise with reference to his [or 
her] own children under similar circumstances.”6 In other words, the state was given the 
responsibility of caring for those minors whose behavior seemed to show that they could 
not be controlled by their parents. As a result, many status  offenders found themselves 
in the early houses of refuge and continue to be placed in state-run facilities today. A 
status offense is an act that, if committed by a juvenile, is considered illegal and grounds 
for possible state custody. The same act, if committed by an adult, does not warrant law 
enforcement action. (See Figure 13.1 below for a list of the most common status offenses.)
 
In contrast, juvenile delinquency refers to conduct that would also be criminal if 
committed by an adult. According to federal law and the laws of most states, a juvenile 
delinquent is someone who has not yet reached his or her eighteenth birthday—the age 
of adult criminal responsibility—at the time of the offense in question. In two states (New 
York and North Carolina), persons aged sixteen and older are considered adults, and 
eleven other states confer adulthood on seventeen-year-olds for purposes of criminal 
law. Under certain circumstances, discussed later in this chapter, children under these 
ages can be tried in adult courts and incarcerated in adult prisons and jails. Remember 
that Omer Ninham was fourteen years old when he was convicted as an adult for the 
murder of Zong Vang, described on page 366. 
List the 
four major 
differences 
between 
juvenile courts 
and adult 
courts.
Learning  
objective 2
Status Offender A juvenile 
who has engaged in behavior 
deemed unacceptable for 
those under a certain statutorily 
determined age.
Juvenile Delinquency  
Behavior that is illegal under 
federal or state law that has 
been committed by a person 
who is under an age limit 
specified by statute.
FIGURE 13.1 Status Offenses
1. Smoking cigarettes
5. Running away from home
2. Drinking alcohol
6. Violating curfew
3. Being truant (skipping school)
7. Participating in sexual activity
4. Disobeying teachers
8. Using profane language
Teaching Tip: Be sure to mention 
that, for many, the American juvenile 
court system has moved away 
from its early treatment function 
and has become more of a punitive 
institution. Ask your students 
whether they agree with this shift in 
philosophy. Why or why not?
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Ask students to 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 1 on page 390, 
which asks them to think about the 
differences between status offenses 
and crimes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   369
ConsTiTuTionAL PRoTECTions  
And THE juvEniLE CouRT
Although the ideal of the juvenile court seemed to offer the 
“best of both worlds” for juvenile offenders, in reality the 
lack of procedural protections led to many children being 
arbitrarily punished not only for crimes, but for status 
offenses as well. Juvenile judges were treating all violators 
similarly, which led to many status offenders being incar-
cerated in the same institutions as violent delinquents. 
In response to a wave of lawsuits demanding due process 
rights for juveniles, the United States Supreme Court 
issued several rulings in the 1960s and 1970s that signifi-
cantly changed the juvenile justice system.
KEnT v. uniTEd sTATEs The first decision to extend due 
process rights to children in juvenile courts was Kent v. 
United States (1966).7 The case concerned sixteen-year-old 
Morris Kent, who had been arrested for breaking into a 
woman’s house, stealing her purse, and raping her. Because 
Kent was on juvenile probation, the state sought to transfer his trial for the crime to an 
adult court (a process to be discussed later in the chapter). 
 
Without giving any reasons for his decision, the juvenile judge consented to this judi-
cial waiver, and Kent was sentenced in the adult court to a thirty- to ninety-year prison 
term. The United States Supreme Court overturned the sentence, ruling that juveniles 
have a right to counsel and a hearing in any instance in which the juvenile judge is con-
sidering sending the case to an adult court. The Court stated that, in such cases, a child 
receives “the worst of both worlds,” getting neither the  “protections accorded to adults” 
nor the “solicitous care and regenerative treatment” offered in the juvenile system.8
in RE gAuLT The Kent decision provided the groundwork for In re Gault one year later. 
Considered by many the single most important case concerning juvenile justice, In re 
Gault involved a fifteen-year-old boy who was arrested for allegedly making a lewd phone 
call while on probation.9 (See the feature Landmark Cases: In re Gault on the following 
page.) In its decision, the Supreme Court held that juveniles are entitled to many of the 
same due process rights granted to adult offenders, including notice of charges, the right 
to counsel, the privilege against self-incrimination, and the right to confront and cross-
examine witnesses. 
oTHER imPoRTAnT CouRT dECisions Over the next ten years, the Supreme Court 
handed down three more important rulings on juvenile court procedure. The ruling in 
In re Winship (1970)10 required the government to prove “beyond a reasonable doubt” 
that a juvenile had committed an act of delinquency, raising the burden of proof from a 
“preponderance of the evidence.” In Breed v. Jones (1975),11 the Court held that the Fifth 
Amendment’s double jeopardy clause prevented a juvenile from being tried in an adult 
court for a crime that had already been adjudicated in juvenile court. In contrast, the 
decision in McKeiver v. Pennsylvania (1971)12 represented an instance in which the Court 
did not move the juvenile court further toward the adult model. In that case, the Court 
ruled that the Constitution did not give juveniles the right to a jury trial.
A Port Authority (New York) 
police officer speaks to a girl 
who has run away from her 
home. Why is leaving home 
considered a status offense 
and not a crime?
James Estrin/New York Times/Redux
Identfy and 
briefly describe 
the single most 
important 
Supreme 
Court case 
with respect to 
juvenile justice.
Learning  
objective3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 390.
At its inception, the American juvenile justice system was guided by the principles of 
____________ ____________ , which holds that the state has a responsibility to look after 
children when their parents cannot do so. In general, juveniles are involved in two types 
of wrongdoing: (1) acts that would not be crimes if committed by adults, or ____________ 
____________ , and (2) acts that would be crimes if committed by an adult, or juvenile 
____________ . 
In 1964, fifteen-year-old Gerald Gault and a friend were 
arrested for making lewd telephone calls to a neighbor in 
Gila County, Arizona. Gault, who was on probation, was 
placed under custody with no notice given to his parents. 
The juvenile court in his district held a series of informal 
hearings to determine Gault’s punishment. During these 
hearings, no records were kept, Gault was not afforded the 
right to counsel, and the complaining witness was never 
made available for questioning. At the close of the hearing, 
the judge sentenced Gault to remain in Arizona’s State 
Industrial School until the age of twenty-one. Gault’s lawyers 
challenged this punishment, arguing that the proceedings 
denied their client his due process rights. Eventually, the 
matter was taken up by the United States Supreme Court.
 
In re Gault
United States Supreme Court
387 U.S. 1 (1967)
supreme.justia.com/us/387/1/case.html
IN THE WORDS OF THE COURT...
JustIce FORtAs, mAjORIty OPINION
* * * *
From the inception of the juvenile court system, wide 
differences have been tolerated—indeed insisted upon—
between the procedural rights accorded to adults and those 
of juveniles. In practically all jurisdictions, there are rights 
granted to adults which are withheld from juveniles.
* * * *
Accordingly, the highest motives and most enlightened 
impulses led to a peculiar system for juveniles, unknown to 
our law in any comparable context. The constitutional and 
theoretical basis for this peculiar system is—to say the least—
debatable. And in practice, as we remarked in the Kent 
case, the results have not been entirely satisfactory. * * * The 
absence of substantive standards has not necessarily meant 
that children receive careful, compassionate, individualized 
treatment. The absence of procedural rules based upon 
constitutional principle has not always produced fair, efficient, 
and effective procedures. Departures from established 
principles of due process have frequently resulted not in 
enlightened procedure, but in arbitrariness.
* * * *
Ultimately, however, we confront the reality of that portion 
of the Juvenile Court process with which we deal in 
this case. A boy is charged with misconduct. The boy is 
committed to an institution where he may be restrained of 
liberty for years. * * * His world becomes a “building with 
whitewashed walls, regimented routine and institutional 
hours. . . .” Instead of mother and father and sisters and 
brothers and friends and classmates, his world is peopled 
by guards, custodians, state employees, and “delinquents” 
confined with him for anything from waywardness to rape 
and homicide. In view of this, it would be extraordinary if 
our Constitution did not require the procedural regularity 
and the exercise of care implied in the phrase “due 
process.” Under our Constitution, the condition of being a 
boy does not justify a kangaroo court.
Decision 
The Court held that juveniles facing a loss of liberty were 
entitled to the basic procedural safeguards afforded by the 
U.S. Constitution, including the right to counsel, the right 
to confront and cross-examine witnesses, and the privilege 
against self-incrimination. The decision marked a turning point 
in juvenile justice in this country: no longer would informality 
and paternalism be the guiding principles of juvenile courts. 
Instead, due process would dictate the adjudication process, 
much as in an adult court. 
FOR CRITICAL ANALYSIS
What might be some of the negative consequences of the 
In re Gault decision for juveniles charged with committing 
delinquent acts? Can you think of any reasons why juveniles 
should not receive the same due process protections as 
adult offenders?
LAnDMARK CAsEs: in Re gault
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students create a chart of the 
most important due process rights 
afforded to juveniles by the United 
States Supreme Court.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   371
dETERmining dELinquEnCy TodAy
In the eyes of many observers, the net effect of the Supreme Court decisions during the 
1966–1975 period was to move juvenile justice away from the ideals of the child savers. As 
a result of these decisions, many young offenders would find themselves in a formalized 
system that was often indistinguishable from its adult counterpart. Although the Court 
has recognized that minors charged with crimes possess certain constitutional rights, it 
has failed to dictate at what age these rights should be granted. Consequently, the legal 
status of children in the United States varies depending on where they live, with each state 
making its own policy decisions on the crucial questions of age and competency.
THE AgE quEsTion
On March 1, 2011, a twelve-year-old boy was playing with toy trucks and planes in the back-
yard of his family’s Burlington, Colorado, home. Minutes later, he fatally shot his parents, 
Charles and Marilyn Long, with a .357 Magnum revolver. In Chapter 3 (page 83), we saw 
that early American criminal law recognized infancy as a defense against criminal charges. 
At that time, on attaining fourteen years of age, a youth was considered an adult and 
treated accordingly by the criminal justice system. Today, as Figure 13.2 below shows, the 
majority of states, including Colorado, (as well as the District of Columbia), allow for the 
prosecution of juveniles under the age of thirteen as adults. Thus, Colorado officials had 
the option of prosecuting the Longs’ son for murder as an adult, despite his tender years.
 
Instead, despite the wishes of some Long family members, district attorney Robert E. 
Watson decided to keep the boy in the state’s juvenile justice system. “If you’re looking for 
an adult explanation for why this kid went from playing in dirt to commit murder you’ll 
never get one,” said Watson. “This lies in the mind of a very immature twelve-year-old.”13 
12–13 years old
10 years old
No age minimum
Texas
N.M.
Ariz.
Nev.
Calif.
Ore.
Wash.
Idaho
Utah
S.D.
Minn.
Wis.
Mo.
Ill.
Ind. Ohio
N.Y.
Pa.
Mont.
Kan.
Okla.
La.
Ark.
Miss. Ala.
Ga.
Tenn.
S.C.
N.C.
Va. 
Ky. 
Fla.
Colo.
Wyo.
Neb.
W.Va.
Maine 
Mass. 
Hawaii
Alaska
Iowa
R.I. 
Conn. 
N.J. 
Del. 
Md. 
D.C. 
Vt. N.H. 
Mich.
N.D.
14–15 years old
FIGURE 13.2 the minimum Age at Which a juvenile  
Can Be tried as an Adult
Source: National Center for Juvenile Justice.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After they have read 
the “Landmark Cases” feature on 
the previous page, tell students that 
Justice Potter Stewart disagreed 
with the majority opinion. Stewart 
wrote that juvenile delinquents do 
not deserve the same rights as 
adult criminal defendants. Why do 
students agree or disagree with 
Stewart’s dissent?
Discussion Tip: Have students 
examine the map in Figure 13.2. At 
what age (if ever) do they believe it 
is appropriate to transfer a juvenile 
to adult court? Why?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 
For the most part, when juveniles who remain in juvenile court are found guilty, 
they receive  “limited” sentences. Under these circumstances, they cannot remain incar-
cerated in juvenile detention centers past their eighteenth or twenty-first birthday. 
Consequently, a Colorado juvenile judge eventually sentenced the boy who shot his par-
ents to seven years in juvenile detention.
THE CuLPAbiLiTy quEsTion
Many researchers believe that by the age of fourteen, an adolescent has the same ability as 
an adult to make a competent decision.14 Nevertheless, according to some observers, a juve-
nile’s ability to theoretically understand the difference between “right” and “wrong” does 
not mean that she or he should be held to the same standards of competency as an adult. 
juvEniLE bEHAvioR A study released by the Research Network on Adolescent Development 
and Juvenile Justice found that 33 percent of juvenile defendants in criminal courts had 
the same low level of understanding of legal matters as mentally ill adults who had been 
found incompetent to stand trial.15 Legal psychologist Richard E. Redding believes that 
adolescents’ lack of life experience may limit their real-world decision- making ability. 
Whether we call it wisdom, judgment, or common sense, adolescents may not have nearly 
enough.16
 
Juveniles are generally more impulsive, more likely to engage in risky behavior, and 
less likely to calculate the long-term consequences of any particular action. Adolescents 
are also far more likely to respond to peer pressure than are adults. The desire for accep-
tance and approval may drive them to commit crimes: juveniles are arrested as part of 
a group at much higher rates than adults.17 Furthermore, juveniles are less likely than 
adults to display remorse immediately following a violent act. As a result, they are often 
penalized by the courts for showing “less grief than the system demands.”18 
diminisHEd guiLT The “diminished culpability” of juveniles was one of the rea-
sons given by the United States Supreme Court in its landmark decision in Roper 
v. Simmons (2005).19 As we saw in Chapter 9, that case forbade the execution of 
offenders who were under the age of eighteen when they committed their crimes. 
In his majority opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote that because minors 
cannot fully comprehend the consequences of their actions, the two main justi-
fications for the death penalty—retribution and deterrence—do not “work” with 
juvenile wrongdoers.20
 
Five years later, the Supreme Court applied the same reasoning in Graham 
v. Florida (2010).21 The case involved two defendants who had committed vio-
lent crimes as juveniles: Joe Sullivan, who raped a woman when he was thir-
teen, and Terrance Graham, who committed armed burglary at sixteen. Both 
defendants claimed that their life-without-parole sentences violated the Eighth 
Amendment’s prohibition of “cruel and unusual punishment.”
 
By a close 5–4 vote, the Court agreed, holding that juveniles who commit 
crimes that do not involve murder may not be sentenced to life in prison with-
out the possibility of parole. According to Justice Anthony Kennedy, who wrote 
the majority opinion, state officials must give these inmates “some meaningful 
opportunity to obtain release based on demonstrated maturity and rehabilita-
tion.”22 The Court used similar reasoning when it applied the life without parole 
ban to all juveniles—including murderers—in the summer of 2012, as mentioned 
earlier in the chapter.
In February 2012, a Cole 
County (Missouri) judge 
sentenced Alyssa Bustamante 
to life in prison with the 
possibility of parole. Three 
years earlier, when she was 
fifteen years old, Bustamante 
had brutally murdered her nine-
year-old neighbor so she could 
find out what it felt like to 
kill. Do you think that juvenile 
murderers such as Bustamante 
should be given a chance at 
parole? Why or why not?
AP Photo/Kelley McCall, Pool, File
Teaching Tip: Show the PBS 
Frontline video “When Kids Get 
Life” to stimulate discussion on 
juvenile life without parole laws. 
Keep in mind the United States 
Supreme Court’s recent decision on 
the topic, discussed at the bottom 
of this page.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   373
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 390.
The age at which a child can be held criminally responsible for his or her actions differs 
from ____________ to ____________. Many experts believe that minors should not 
be held to the same level of competency as adults, partially because they are more 
____________ and more likely to respond to ____________ pressure. This “diminished 
culpability” was one of the reasons the United States Supreme Court gave for 
prohibiting the ____________ ____________ for offenders who were under the age of 
eighteen when they committed their crimes. 
TREnds in juvEniLE dELinquEnCy
When asked, juveniles will admit to a wide range of illegal or dangerous behavior, includ-
ing carrying weapons, getting involved in physical fights, driving after drinking alcohol, 
and stealing or deliberately damaging school property.23 Has the juvenile justice system 
been effective in controlling and preventing this kind of misbehavior, as well as more 
serious acts? 
 
To answer this question, many observers turn to the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s 
Uniform Crime Report (UCR), initially covered in Chapter 2. Because the UCR breaks down 
arrest statistics by age of the arrestee, it has been considered the primary source of informa-
tion on the presence of juveniles in America’s justice system. This does not mean, however, 
that the UCR is completely reliable when it comes to measuring juvenile delinquency. The 
process measures only those juveniles who were caught and therefore does not accurately 
reflect all delinquent acts in any given year. Furthermore, it measures the number of arrests 
but not the number of arrestees, meaning that—due to repeat offenders—the number of 
juveniles actually in the system could be below the number of juvenile arrests.
dELinquEnCy by THE numbERs
With these cautions in mind, UCR findings are helpful in determining the extent of juve-
nile offending in the United States today. In 2011, juveniles accounted for 12.7 percent of 
violent crime arrests and 11.8 percent of criminal activity arrests in general.24 According 
to the 2011 UCR, juveniles were responsible for
• 
8 percent of all murder arrests.
• 
19 percent of all aggravated assault arrests.
• 
14 percent of all forcible rapes.
• 
18 percent of all weapons arrests.
• 
22 percent of all robbery arrests.
• 
20 percent of all Part I property crimes.
• 
19 percent of all drug offenses.
THE RisE And fALL of juvEniLE CRimE
As Figure 13.3 on the following page shows, juvenile arrest rates for violent crimes have 
fluctuated dramatically over the past three decades. In the 2000s, with a few exceptions, 
juvenile crime in the United States has decreased at a rate similar to that of adult crime, 
as discussed earlier in this textbook.  Furthermore, after peaking in 1997, juvenile court 
delinquency caseloads declined 12 percent over the next decade.25 Not surprisingly, the 
drop in juvenile arrests and court appearances has led to fewer juveniles behind bars. The 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
national population of juvenile inmates decreased 12 percent between 2006 and 2008, 
allowing officials in some states, including California, Ohio, and Texas, to close juvenile 
detention facilities.26
 
A number of theories have been put forth to explain this downturn in juvenile 
offending. Some observers point to the increase in police action against “quality-of-life” 
crimes such as loitering, which they believe stops juveniles before they have a chance 
to commit more serious crimes. Similarly, about 80 percent of American municipalities 
enforce juvenile curfews, which restrict the movement of minors during certain hours, 
usually after dark.27 In 2011, law enforcement made nearly 60,000 arrests for curfew and 
loitering law violations.28 
 
Furthermore, thousands of local programs designed to educate children about the 
dangers of drugs and crime operate across the country. The results of such community-
based efforts are difficult, if not impossible, to measure—it cannot be assumed that chil-
dren would have become delinquent if they had not participated. Still, these programs 
are generally considered a crucial element of keeping youth crime under control.29
giRLs in THE juvEniLE jusTiCE sysTEm
Although overall rates of juvenile offending have been dropping, arrest rates for girls 
are declining more slowly than those for boys.  Between 1995 and 2005, violent crime 
arrests for juvenile males dropped 28 percent, while violent crime arrests for juvenile 
females dropped only 10 percent.30 Self-reported studies show, however, that there has 
been little change in girls’ violent behavior over the past few decades.31 Why, then, is the 
presence of girls in the juvenile and criminal justice system increasing relative to their 
male counterparts?
Year
 Arrests per 100,000 Juveniles, Aged 10–17
Murder
Forcible Rape
Robbery
Aggravated Assault
300
250
200
150
100
25
20
15
10
5
0
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
02
00
04
08
06
10
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
02
02
00
04
04
08
08
06
06
10
Murder
Forcible Rape
Robbery
Aggravated Assault
FIGURE 13.3 Arrest Rates of juveniles
After rising dramatically from 1985 to 1994, arrest rates for juveniles have fallen steadily 
since, with a few exceptions.
Source: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, Statistical Briefing Book, at www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org 
/ojstatbb/crime/jAR.asp.
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
why they believe male juvenile 
delinquency is declining faster 
than female juvenile delinquency. 
What are the different factors that 
influence male and female juvenile 
delinquency? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   375
A gRowing PREsEnCE Although girls have for the most part been treated more harshly 
than boys for status offenses,32 a “chivalry effect” (see page 264) has traditionally existed 
in other areas of the juvenile justice system. In the past, police were likely to arrest 
offending boys while allowing girls to go home to the care of their families for similar 
behavior. This is no longer the case. According to the National Center for Juvenile Justice, 
juvenile courts handled more than twice as many cases involving girls in 2008 as they 
did in 1985.33 A particular problem area for girls appears to be the crime of assault. In 
2011, females accounted for 24 percent of all juvenile arrests for aggravated assault and 
36 percent of those arrests for simple assault—higher percentages than for other crimes 
involving violence or the threat of violence.34
fAmiLy-bAsEd dELinquEnCy Criminologists disagree on whether rising arrest rates for 
female juveniles reflect a change in behavior or a change in law enforcement practices. 
A significant amount of data supports the latter proposal, especially research show-
ing that police are much more likely to make arrests in situations involving domestic 
violence than they were even a decade ago. Experts have found that girls are four times 
more apt to fight with parents or siblings than are boys, who usually engage in violent 
encounters with strangers. Consequently, a large percentage of female juvenile arrests 
for assault arise out of family disputes—arrests that until relatively recently would not 
have been made.35
 
Evidence also shows that law enforcement agents continue to treat girls more 
harshly for status offenses. More girls than boys are arrested for the status offense of 
running away from home, for example, even though studies show that male and female 
juveniles run away from home with equal frequency.36 Criminologists who focus on 
issues of gender hypothesize that such behavior is considered normal for boys, but is 
seen as deviant for girls and therefore more deserving of punishment.37
sCHooL vioLEnCE And buLLying
One Monday morning in February 2012, seventeen-year-old T.J. Lane walked into the caf-
eteria of Chardon High School in Chardon, Ohio, and opened fire on a table of students, 
killing three of them and wounding two others. The incident is every student’s (and par-
ent’s and teacher’s) worst nightmare. Like other episodes of school violence, it received 
heavy media coverage, fanning fears that our schools are unsafe.
sAfE sCHooLs Research does show that juvenile victimization and delinquency rates 
increase during the school day. In addition, the most common juvenile crimes, such as 
simple assaults, are more likely to take place on school grounds than elsewhere.38 This is 
not the case, however, with violent crimes such as the one committed by T.J. Lane. In fact, 
school-age youths are more than fifty times more likely to be murdered away from school 
than on a campus.39 Furthermore, between 1995 and 2010, victimization rates of students for 
nonfatal crimes at school declined significantly, meaning that in general, schools are safer 
today than they were in the recent past.40
 
For the most part, these statistics mirror the downward trend of all criminal activity 
in the United States since the mid-1990s. In addition, since the fatal shootings of four-
teen students and a teacher at Columbine High School near Littleton, Colorado, in 1999, 
many schools have improved security measures. From 1999 to 2011, the percentage of 
American schools using security cameras to monitor their campuses increased from 19 
to 61 percent. Today, 92 percent of public schools control access to school buildings by 
locking or monitoring their doors.41
Discussion Tip: Ask students  
what types of security measures 
were present in their high schools 
(metal detectors, zero tolerance 
policies, and so on). Do they feel 
that these measures made their 
high schools safer places? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
“buLLiEd To dEATH” Bullying can be broadly defined as repeated, aggressive behavior 
with physical (hitting, punching, and spitting) and verbal (teasing, name calling, and 
spreading false rumors) aspects. Such behavior has traditionally been seen more as an 
inevitable rite of passage than as potentially criminal. In recent years, however, society 
has become more aware of the negative consequences of bullying, underscored by a 
number of high-profile “bullycides.” In March 2010, for example, thirteen-year-old Jon 
Carmichael of Cleburne, Texas, hanged himself after multiple acts of torment by fellow 
students, including being thrown into a trash can and having his head flushed in a toilet. 
That September, four teenage boys in different parts of the country committed suicide 
after being bullied about their sexuality.
 
According to data gathered by the federal government, 28 percent of students 
aged twelve to eighteen have been victims of bullying.42 In particular, gay students are 
targeted—nine out of ten report being bullied each year.43 As a response to this problem, 
forty-five states have passed antibullying legislation. These laws focus mostly on “soft” 
measures, such as training school personnel how to recognize and respond to bullying.44 
 
As yet, state legislatures have been reluctant to take “harder” measures such as 
specifically defining bullying as a crime. Such harder measures may ultimately come in 
response to dozens of civil lawsuits filed by parents of bullied children across the country. 
On the anniversary of their son’s death in 2011, for example, Jon Carmichael’s parents sued 
the Joshua Independent School District for $20 million, claiming that staff and students 
were aware of the bullying on school grounds and did nothing to prevent it.45
Bullying Overt acts taken 
by students with the goal of 
intimidating, harassing, or 
humiliating other students.
Although it is not clear whether bullying in general is more prevalent now than in the 
past, one form of bullying is definitely on the rise. As the Internet, texting, and social 
networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter have become integral parts of youth 
culture, so, it seems, has cyberbullying. Studies have shown that between one-fifth and 
one-third of American teenagers are targets of cyberbullying, which occurs when a person 
uses computers, smartphones, or other electronic devices to inflict willful and repeated 
emotional harm. One of the incidents involving Jon Carmichael (discussed above)—in 
which he was stripped nude, tied up, and placed in a trash can—was posted on YouTube. 
 
To many, cyberbullying can be even more devastating than “old school” bullying. Not 
only does the anonymity of cyberspace seem to embolden perpetrators, causing them to 
be more vicious than they might be in person, but, as one expert points out, when bullying 
occurs online, “you can’t get away from it.”  
tHINKING ABOUt CyBERBUllING: How should the criminal justice system 
respond to cyberbullying, if at all?
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Cyberbullying
Cheryl E. Davis/Shutterstock
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: In small groups, 
have students discuss “Questions 
for Critical Analysis” number 4 
on page 390, which asks them 
whether bullying should be 
punished by criminal sanctions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   377
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 390.
The crime rate for juveniles has generally been ____________ for more than a decade. 
Despite this trend, more ____________ are getting involved with the juvenile justice 
system today than at any time in recent history. ____________ violence is another area 
in which crime rates have dropped since the 1990s, thanks, in part, to greater security 
measures such as surveillance cameras and locked building doors. ____________ , in 
both its traditional and electronic forms, remains a problem, however, and is increasingly 
being addressed by school administrators and state legislators.
fACToRs in juvEniLE dELinquEnCy
As we discussed in Chapter 2, an influential study conducted by Professor Marvin 
Wolfgang and several colleagues in the early 1970s introduced the concept of the 
“chronic 6 percent” to criminology. The researchers found that out of one hundred boys, 
six will become chronic offenders, meaning that they are arrested five or more times 
before their eighteenth birthdays. 
 
Furthermore, Wolfgang and his colleagues determined that these chronic offenders 
are responsible for half of all crimes and two-thirds of all violent crimes within any given 
cohort (a group of persons who have similar characteristics).46 Does this “6 percent rule” 
mean that no matter what steps society takes, six out of every hundred juveniles are “bad 
seeds” and will act delinquently? Or does it point to a situation in which a small percent-
age of children may be more likely to commit crimes under certain circumstances?
 
Most criminologists favor the second interpretation. In this section, we will exam-
ine the four factors that have traditionally been used to explain juvenile criminal behav-
ior and violent crime rates: age, substance abuse, family problems, and gangs. Keep in 
mind, however, that the factors influencing delinquency are not limited to these topics 
(see Figure  13.4 on the following page). Researchers are constantly interpreting and 
reinterpreting statistical evidence to provide fresh perspectives on this very important 
issue. For example, criminologists continue to debate the consequences of dropping out 
of high school. Although adolescents who do so are statistically at a higher risk for com-
ing into contact with the juvenile justice system, does leaving school cause delinquency 
and criminal behavior? Or do adolescents drop out of high school for the same reasons 
that they become involved in crime, such as low self-control and substance abuse?47
THE AgE-CRimE RELATionsHiP
Crime statistics are fairly conclusive on one point: the older a person is, the less likely 
she or he will exhibit criminal behavior. Self-reported studies confirm that most people 
are involved in some form of criminal behavior—however “harmless”—during their early 
years. In fact, Terrie Moffitt of Duke University has said that “it is statistically aberrant to 
refrain from crime during adolescence.”48 So, why do the vast majority of us not become 
chronic offenders? According to many criminologists, particularly Travis Hirschi and 
Michael Gottfredson, any group of at-risk persons—regardless of gender, race, intelligence, 
or class—will commit fewer crimes as they grow older.49 
 
This process is known as aging out (or, sometimes, desistance, a term we first encoun-
tered in the previous chapter). Professor Robert J. Sampson and his colleague John H. Laub 
believe that this phenomenon is explained by certain events, such as marriage, employ-
ment, and military service, that force delinquents to “grow up” and forgo criminal acts.50
Aging Out A term used to 
explain the fact that criminal 
activity declines with age.
Describe the 
one variable 
that always 
correlates highly 
with juvenile 
crime rates.
Learning  
objective4
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After reading the 
“CJ & Technology” feature on 
the previous page, ask students 
to critique the assertion that 
cyberbullying is more harmful 
to the victim than “old school” 
bullying. Do they agree? Why  
or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 
Another view sees the age of onset, or the age at which the youth begins delinquent 
behavior, as a consistent predictor of future criminal behavior. One study compared 
recidivism rates between juveniles first judged to be delinquent before the age of fifteen 
and those first adjudicated delinquent after the age of fifteen. Of the  seventy-one subjects 
who made up the first group, 32 percent became chronic offenders. Of the sixty-five who 
made up the second group, none became chronic offenders.51 Furthermore, according to 
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, the earlier a youth enters the 
juvenile justice system, the more likely he or she will become a violent offender.52 This 
research suggests that juvenile justice resources should be concentrated on the youngest 
offenders, with the goal of preventing crime and reducing the long-term risks for society.
subsTAnCE AbusE
As we have seen throughout this textbook, substance abuse plays a strong role in crimi-
nal behavior for adults. The same can certainly be said for juveniles. According to the 
University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research, 27 percent of American tenth-graders 
and 40 percent of American twelfth-graders are regular alcohol drinkers, increasing their 
risks for violent behavior, delinquency, academic problems, and unsafe sexual behavior.53 
Regular marijuana use among high school seniors reached a thirty-year high in 2011, and 
more juveniles are abusing synthetic drugs (described on pages 57–58) than ever before.54
A sTRong CoRRELATion As with adults, substance abuse among juveniles seems to 
play a major role in offending. Drug use is associated with a wide range of antisocial 
and illegal behaviors by juveniles, from fist fights to large-scale theft.55 Nearly all young 
offenders (94 percent) entering juvenile detention self-report drug use at some point in 
their lives, and 85 percent have used drugs in the previous six months.56 According to 
the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program, nearly 60 percent of male juvenile detain-
ees and 46 percent of female juvenile detainees test positive for drug use at the time of 
Age of Onset The age at 
which a juvenile first exhibits 
delinquent behavior. 
FIGURE 13.4 Risk Factors for juvenile Delinquency
The characteristics listed here are generally accepted as “risk factors” for juvenile 
delinquency. In other words, if one or more of these factors are present in a juvenile’s 
life, he or she has a greater chance of exhibiting delinquent behavior—though such 
behavior is by no means a certainty. 
Family 
• Single parent/lack of parental role model 
 
 
• Parental or sibling drug/alcohol abuse 
 
 
• Extreme economic deprivation 
 
 
• Family members in a gang
School 
• Academic frustration/failure 
 
 
• Learning disability 
 
 
• Negative labeling by teachers 
 
 
• Disciplinary problems
Community 
• Social disorganization (see Chapter 2) 
 
 
• Presence of gangs and obvious drug use in the community 
 
 
• Availability of firearms 
 
 
• High crime/constant feeling of danger 
 
 
• Lack of social and economic opportunities
Peers 
• Delinquent friends 
 
 
• Friends who use drugs or who are members of gangs 
 
 
• Lack of “positive” peer pressure
Individual 
• Tendency toward aggressive behavior 
 
 
• Inability to concentrate or focus/easily bored/hyperactive 
 
 
• Alcohol or drug use 
 
 
• Fatalistic/pessimistic viewpoint
Discussion Tip: Have students 
examine the list of risk factors for 
juvenile delinquency in Figure 13.4. 
What risk factors do they believe 
are the most significant in predicting 
juvenile delinquency? Why? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   379
their offense.57 Drug use is a particularly strong risk factor for girls: 75 percent of young 
women incarcerated in juvenile facilities report regular drug and alcohol use—starting 
at the age of fourteen—and one study found that 87 percent of female teenage offenders 
need substance abuse treatment.58
A sTRong CAusATion? The correlation between substance abuse and offending for 
juveniles seems obvious. Does this mean that substance abuse causes juvenile offend-
ing?  Researchers make the point that most youths who become involved in antisocial 
behavior do so before their first experience with alcohol or drugs. Therefore, it would 
appear that substance abuse is a form of delinquent behavior rather than its cause.59 Still, 
a recent study of adolescent offenders did find that substance abuse treatment reduces 
criminal behavior in the short term, suggesting that, at the least, the use of illegal drugs 
is an integral component of the juvenile delinquent lifestyle.60
CHiLd AbusE And nEgLECT
Abuse by parents also plays a substantial role in juvenile delinquency. Child abuse can 
be broadly defined as the infliction of physical or emotional damage on a child. Similar 
though not the same, child neglect refers to deprivations—of love, shelter, food, and 
proper care—children undergo by their parents. According to the National Survey of 
Children’s Exposure to Violence, one in ten children in the United States suffers from 
mistreatment at the hands of a close family member.61 Children in homes characterized 
by violence or neglect suffer from a variety of physical, emotional, and mental health 
problems at a much greater rate than their peers.62 This, in turn, increases their chances 
of engaging in delinquent behavior.
 
One survey of violent juveniles showed that 75 percent had suffered severe abuse 
by a family member and 80 percent had witnessed violence in their homes.63 Nearly half 
of all juveniles—and 80 percent of girls—sentenced to life in prison suffered high rates 
of abuse.64 Cathy Spatz Widom, currently a professor of psychology at John Jay College of 
Criminal Justice, compared the arrest records of two groups of subjects—one made up 
of 908 cases of substantiated parental abuse and neglect and the other made up of 667 
children who had not been abused or neglected. Widom found that those who had been 
abused or neglected were 53 percent more likely to be arrested as juveniles than those 
who had not.65 Simply put, according to researchers Janet Currie of Columbia University 
and Erdal Tekin of Georgia State University, “child maltreatment roughly doubles the 
probability that an individual engages in many types of crime.”66
gAngs
When youths cannot find the stability and support they require in the family structure, 
they will often turn to their peers. This is just one explanation for why juveniles join 
youth gangs. Although jurisdictions may have varying definitions, for general purposes 
a youth gang is viewed as a group of three or more persons who (1) self-identify as an 
entity separate from the community by special clothing, vocabulary, hand signals, and 
names and (2) engage in criminal activity within a geographic territory. According to an 
exhaustive survey of law enforcement agencies, there are probably around 33,000 gangs 
with more than one million members in the United States.67
 
Juveniles who have experienced the risk factors discussed in this section are more 
likely to join a gang, and once they have done so they are more likely to engage in delin-
quent and violent behavior than non–gang members.68 Statistics show high levels of gang 
involvement in weapons trafficking, burglary, assault, and motor vehicle theft, and more 
Child Abuse Mistreatment 
of children by causing 
physical, emotional, or sexual 
damage without any plausible 
explanation, such as an 
accident.
Child Neglect A form of 
child abuse in which the child is 
denied certain necessities such 
as shelter, food, care, and love.
Youth Gang A self-formed 
group of youths with several 
identifiable characteristics, 
including a gang name and 
other recognizable symbols, 
a geographic territory, and 
participation in illegal activities.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
than 50 percent of all youth gangs are believed to be involved in drug sales.69 One-third 
of all murders in Chicago and one-third of all murders in Los Angeles are gang related.70 
(See Figure 13.5 below.)
wHo joins gAngs? The average gang member is seventeen to eighteen years old, though 
members tend to be older in cities with long traditions of gang activity, such as Chicago 
and Los Angeles. Although it is difficult to determine with any certainty the makeup of 
gangs as a whole, one recent survey found that 49 percent of all gang members in the 
United States are Hispanic, 35 percent are African American, and 9 percent are white, 
with the remaining 7 percent belonging to other racial or ethnic backgrounds.71 
 
Although gangs tend to have racial or ethnic characteristics—that is, one group 
predominates in each gang—many researchers do not believe that race or ethnicity is 
the dominant factor in gang membership. Instead, gang members seem to come from 
lower-class or working-class communities, mostly in urban areas but with an increasing 
number from the suburbs and rural counties. In addition, researchers are finding that 
adolescents who will eventually join a gang display significantly higher levels of delin-
quent behavior than those who will never become involved in gang activity.72
wHy do youTHs join gAngs? Gang membership often appears to be linked with status 
in the community. Many teenagers, feeling alienated from their families and communi-
ties, join gangs for the social relationships and the sense of identity a gang can provide.73
 
A number of youths, especially those who live in high-crime neighborhoods, see 
gang membership as a necessity—joining a gang is a form of protection against violence 
from other gangs. For example, Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) was formed by the children 
of immigrants who fled the civil war of El Salvador for Los Angeles in the 1980s. Finding 
themselves easy prey for the established local gangs, these young Salvadorans started 
MS-13 as a protective measure. 
FIGURE 13.5 Comparison of Gang and Nongang Delinquent Behavior
Taking self-reported surveys of subjects aged thirteen to eighteen in the Seattle area, 
researchers for the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention found that 
gang members were much more likely to exhibit delinquent behavior.
Source: Karl G. Hill, Christina Lui, and J. David Hawkins, Early Precursors of Gang Membership: A Study of Seattle Youth (Washington, 
D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, December 2001), Figure 1, page 2.
0
10
20
30
40
Percent
50
60
70
80
Assault 
Felony theft
Marijuana use
Drug selling
Arrest
Robbery
Binge drinking
Gang
Nongang
Indicate some 
of the reasons 
why youths 
join gangs.
Learning  
objective 5
Teaching Tip: Many areas have seen 
an increase in “middle class” gangs. 
Show students the clip “Police: 
Oklahoma’s Middle Class Children 
Lured into World of Gangs” from 
Oklahoma News 9, about the middle 
class gang problem in Oklahoma. 
Discuss why students think these 
particular youths would become 
involved in a gang.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   381
 
Excitement is another attraction of the gang 
life, as is the economic incentive of enjoying the 
profits from illegal gang activities such as deal-
ing drugs or robbery. Finally, some teenagers are 
forced to join gangs by the threat of violence from 
gang members.
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on 
page 390.
Criminologists have identified a number of 
____________ factors that increase the probability 
of juvenile misbehavior. One is youth. Studies of 
a process called ____________ ____________ show 
that children commit fewer offenses as they grow 
older. According to two researchers, ____________ 
____________ at the hands of parents or guardians 
doubles the chances of delinquency. Youth who become involved in ____________ 
____________ also more likely to engage in criminal activity than those who do not. 
fiRsT ConTACT: THE PoLiCE  
And PRETRiAL PRoCEduREs
Until recently, most police departments allocated few resources to dealing with juvenile 
crime. The number of violent crimes committed by youths under the age of eighteen has, 
however, provided a strong incentive for departments to set up special services for chil-
dren. The standard bearer for these operations is the juvenile officer, who operates either 
alone or as part of a juvenile unit within a department. 
 
The initial contact between a juvenile and the criminal justice system, however, is 
usually handled by a regular police officer on patrol, who either apprehends the juvenile 
while he or she is committing a crime or answers a call for service. (See Figure 13.6 on the 
following page for an overview of the juvenile justice process.) The youth is then passed 
on to the juvenile officer, who must decide how to handle the case.
PoLiCE disCRETion And juvEniLE CRimE
Police arrest about 1.1 million youths under the age of eighteen each year. In most states, 
police officers must have probable cause to believe that the minor has committed an 
offense, just as they would if the suspect were an adult. Police power with regard to juve-
niles is greater than with adults, however, because police can take youths into custody for 
status offenses, such as possession of alcohol or truancy. In these cases, the officer is acting 
in loco parentis, or in the place of the parent. The officer’s role is not necessarily to punish 
the youths, but to protect them from harmful behavior.
 
Police officers also have a great deal of discretion in deciding what to do with juveniles 
who have committed crimes or status offenses. Juvenile justice expert Joseph Goldstein 
labels this discretionary power low-visibility decision making because it relies on fac-
tors that the public is not generally in a position to understand or criticize. When a grave 
offense has taken place, a police officer may decide to formally arrest the juvenile, send him 
or her to juvenile court, or place the youth under the care of a social-service organization. 
In los Angeles, a gang 
member signifies his allegiance 
to the “Street Villains” 
through a series of elaborate 
tattoos. What role does identity 
play in a juvenile’s decision to 
join a gang?
Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images
Low-Visibility Decision 
Making A term used to 
describe the discretionary 
power police have in 
determining what to do with 
misbehaving juveniles. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
In less serious situations, the officer may simply issue a warning or take the offender to the 
police station and release the child into the custody of her or his parents.
 
In making these discretionary decisions, police generally consider the following factors:
• 
The nature of the child’s offense.
• 
The offender’s past history of involvement with the juvenile justice system.
• 
The setting in which the offense took place.
• 
The ability and willingness of the child’s parents to take disciplinary action.
• 
The attitude of the offender.
• 
The offender’s race and gender.
 
Law enforcement officers notify the juvenile court system that a particular young 
person requires its attention through a process known as a referral. Anyone with a valid 
reason, including parents, relatives, welfare agencies, and school officials, can refer a 
juvenile to the juvenile court. The vast majority of cases in juvenile courts, however, are 
referred by the police.74 
inTAKE
Following arrest, if a police officer feels the offender warrants the attention of the juvenile 
justice process and thus refers the youth to juvenile court, a complaint is filed with a spe-
cial division of the juvenile court. Then, the intake process begins. Intake may be followed 
by diversion to a community-based program, transfer to an adult court, or detention to 
await trial in juvenile court. Thus, intake, diversion, transfer, and detention are the four 
primary stages of pretrial juvenile justice procedure.
 
During intake, an official of the juvenile court—usually a probation officer, but 
sometimes a judge—must decide, in effect, what to do with the offender. The intake 
officer has several options during intake:
1. Simply dismiss the case, releasing the offender without taking any further action.
2. Divert the offender to a social-services program, such as drug rehabilitation or 
anger management.
Found delinquent
(guilty)
Adjudication
Probation
supervision
Referral from
law enforcement
sources or arrest
Referral from
 non–law
enforcement
sources
Detention
Automatic 
waiver to 
adult cout
Diverted from 
juvenile justice 
system
Judicial
intake
Judicial waiver
to adult court
Formal 
Processing
Secure or 
nonsecure
confinement
Found not delinquent
(not guilty)
FIGURE 13.6 the juvenile justice Process
This diagram shows the possible tracks that a young person may take after her or his first 
contact with the juvenile justice system (usually a police officer). 
Source: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Referral The notification 
process through which a law 
enforcement officer or other 
concerned citizen makes 
the juvenile court aware of a 
juvenile’s unlawful or unruly 
conduct.
Intake The process by 
which an official of the court 
must decide whether to file a 
petition, release the juvenile, or 
place the juvenile under some 
other form of supervision.
Describe the 
four primary 
stages of 
pretrial 
juvenile justice 
procedure.
Learning  
objective 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. File a petition for a formal court hearing. The peti-
tion is the formal document outlining the charges 
against the juvenile.
4. Transfer the case to an adult court, where the 
offender will be tried as an adult.
With regard to status offenses, judges have sole discretion 
to decide whether to process the case or divert the youth 
to another juvenile service agency.
PRETRiAL divERsion
In the early 1970s, Congress passed the first Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention (JJDP) Act, which ordered the 
development of methods “to divert juveniles from the 
traditional juvenile justice system.”75 Within a few years, 
hundreds of diversion programs had been put into effect. 
Today, diversion refers to the process of removing low-risk 
offenders from the formal juvenile justice system by placing them in community-based 
rehabilitation programs.
 
Diversion programs vary widely, but fall into three general categories:
1. Probation. In this program, the juvenile is returned to the community, but placed 
under the supervision of a juvenile probation officer. If the youth breaks the condi-
tions of probation, he or she can be returned to the formal juvenile system.
2. Treatment and aid. Many juveniles have behavioral or medical conditions that con-
tribute to their delinquent behavior, and many diversion programs offer remedial 
education, drug and alcohol treatment, and other forms of counseling to alleviate 
these problems.
3. Restitution. In these programs, the offender “repays” her or his victim, either 
directly or symbolically through community service.76
Increasingly, juvenile justice practitioners are relying on principles of restorative justice (see 
Chapter 9) to divert adolescents from formal institutions. For example, in Barron County, 
Wisconsin, delinquents have access to victim-offender conferences, underage drinking 
and anger management workshops, and group intervention courses for chronic offend-
ers.77 Juvenile drug courts, modeled on the adult drug courts we discussed in Chapter 10, 
have also had some success in this area.78 Proponents of diversion programs include many 
labeling theorists (see Chapter 2), who believe that contact with the formal juvenile justice 
system “labels” the youth a delinquent, which leads to further delinquent behavior. 
TRAnsfER To AduLT CouRT
One side effect of diversionary programs is that the youths who remain in the juvenile 
courts are more likely to be seen as “hardened” and thus less amenable to rehabilitation. 
This, in turn, increases the likelihood that the offender will be transferred to an adult 
court, a process in which the juvenile court waives jurisdiction over the youth. 
 
There are three types of transfer laws, and most states use more than one of them 
depending on the jurisdiction and the seriousness of the offense.79 Juveniles are most 
commonly transferred to adult courts through judicial waiver, in which the juvenile 
judge is given the power to determine whether a young offender’s case will be waived to 
adult court. The judge makes this decision based on the offender’s age, the nature of the 
offense, and any criminal history. All but five states employ judicial waiver. About nine 
Petition The document filed 
with a juvenile court alleging 
that the juvenile is a delinquent 
or a status offender and 
requesting that the court either 
hear the case or transfer it to 
an adult court.
Judicial Waiver The process 
in which the juvenile judge, 
based on the facts of the case 
at hand, decides that the 
alleged offender should be 
transferred to adult court.
A juvenile court judge makes 
a ruling in her courtroom 
at the Juvenile Court of 
Memphis and Shelby County 
(Tennessee). What are some 
of the reasons that juvenile 
judges might choose to divert 
status offenders into social-
service programs?
ZUMA Press/Newscom
C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   383
Discussion Tip: Ask students to 
consider the three different types 
of transfer laws. Which method do 
they think is the most appropriate 
to determine if a juvenile should be 
transferred to adult court. Why? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
thousand delinquency cases are waived to adult court by judges annually—1 percent of 
all cases that reach juvenile court.80 As you might guess, those juveniles who commit the 
most violent felonies are the most likely to be transferred.
 
Twenty-nine states have taken the waiver responsibility out of judicial hands 
through automatic transfer, also known as legislative waiver. In these states, the leg-
islatures have designated certain conditions—usually involving serious crimes such as 
murder and rape—under which a juvenile case is automatically “kicked up” to adult 
court. In Rhode Island, for example, a juvenile aged sixteen or older with two prior felony 
adjudications will automatically be transferred on being accused of a third felony.81 
Fifteen states also allow for prosecutorial waiver, in which prosecutors are allowed to 
choose whether to initiate proceedings in juvenile or criminal court when certain age 
and offense conditions are met. 
dETEnTion
Once the decision has been made that the offender will face adjudication in a juvenile 
court, the intake official must decide what to do with him or her until the start of the 
trial. Generally, the juvenile is released into the custody of parents or a guardian—most 
jurisdictions favor this practice in lieu of setting money bail for youths. The intake officer 
may also place the offender in detention, or temporary custody in a secure facility, until 
the disposition process begins. Once a juvenile has been detained, most jurisdictions 
require that a detention hearing be held within twenty-four hours. During this hearing, 
the offender has several due process safeguards, including the right to counsel, the right 
against self-incrimination, and the right to cross-examine and confront witnesses.
 
In justifying its decision to detain, the court will usually address one of three issues:
1. Whether the child poses a danger to the community.
2. Whether the child will return for the adjudication process.
3. Whether detention will provide protection for the child.
The Supreme Court upheld the practice of preventive detention (see Chapter 8) for juve-
niles in Schall v. Martin (1984)82 by ruling that youths can be detained if they are deemed 
a “risk” to the safety of the community or to their own welfare. Partly as a result, the 
number of detained juveniles increased by 41 percent between 1985 and 2008.83
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 391.
If the circumstances are serious enough, a police officer can formally ____________ an 
offending juvenile. Otherwise, the officer can ____________ the juvenile to the juvenile 
court system or place her or him in the care of a ____________-service organization. 
During the ____________ process, a judge or juvenile probation officer decides the 
immediate fate of the juvenile delinquent. One of the options is ____________ , in which 
low-risk offenders are placed in community rehabilitation programs. If the judge believes 
that the seriousness of the offense so warrants, she or he can transfer the juvenile into 
the adult court system through a process called judicial ____________. 
TRying And PunisHing juvEniLEs
Over the past forty years, the one constant in the juvenile justice system has been 
change. Supreme Court rulings in the wake of In re Gault (1967) have increased the 
procedural formality and the overriding punitive philosophy of the juvenile court. 
Automatic Transfer The 
process by which a juvenile is 
transferred to adult court as a 
matter of state law.
Prosecutorial Waiver A 
procedure used in situations 
where the prosecutor has 
discretion to decide whether a 
case will be heard by a juvenile 
court or an adult court.
Detention The temporary 
custody of a juvenile in a 
secure facility after a petition 
has been filed and before the 
adjudicatory process begins. 
Detention Hearing A 
hearing to determine whether a 
juvenile should be detained, or 
remain detained, while waiting 
for the adjudicatory process to 
begin.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students brainstorm the various 
factors that would make a juvenile 
offender “risky” to the extent that 
the juvenile should be subject to 
preventive detention. Have each 
group share its findings with the 
class.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   385
Diversion policies have worked to remove many status offenders from the juvenile 
court’s jurisdiction, and waiver policies ensure that the most violent juveniles are 
tried as adults. Some observers feel these adjustments have “criminalized” the juvenile 
court, effectively rendering it indistinguishable both theoretically and practically from 
adult courts.84 Just over half of the states, for example, permit juveniles to request 
a jury trial under certain circumstances. As the Mastering Concepts feature below 
explains, however, juvenile justice proceedings may still be distinguished from the 
adult system of criminal justice, and these differences are evident in the adjudication 
and disposition of the juvenile trial.
AdjudiCATion
During the adjudication stage of the juvenile justice process, a hearing is held to deter-
mine whether the offender is delinquent or in need of some form of court supervision. 
Most state juvenile codes dictate a specific set of procedures that must be followed 
during the adjudicatory hearing, with the goal of providing the respondent with “the 
essentials of due process and fair treatment.” Consequently, the respondent in an adjudi-
catory hearing has the right to notice of charges, counsel, and confrontation and cross-
examination, as well as the privilege against self-incrimination. Furthermore, “proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt” must be established to find the child delinquent. When the 
Adjudicatory Hearing The 
process through which a 
juvenile court determines 
whether there is sufficient 
evidence to support the initial 
petition.
Explain the 
distinction 
between an 
adjudicatory 
hearing and 
a disposition 
hearing.
Learning  
objective7
MASTeRInGcOncePTS
tHE jUvENIlE jUStICE SyStEm vERSUS tHE CRImINAl jUStICE SyStEm
When the juvenile justice system was first established in the United States, its participants saw it as being separate from the adult criminal 
justice system. Indeed, the two systems remain separate in many ways. There are, however, a number of similarities between juvenile and adult 
justice. Here, we summarize both the similarities and the differences.
•  The right to receive the Miranda 
warning.
•  Procedural protections when 
making an admission of guilt.
•  Prosecutors and defense 
attorneys play equally important 
roles.
•  The right to be represented by 
counsel at the crucial stages of 
the trial process.
•  Access to plea bargains.
•  The right to a hearing and an 
appeal.
•  The standard of evidence is proof 
beyond a reasonable doubt.
•  Offenders can be placed on 
probation by the judge.
•  Offenders can be held before 
adjudication if the judge believes 
them to be a threat to the 
community.
•  Following trial, offenders can 
be sentenced to community 
supervision.
 
SImIlARItIES 
DIFFERENCES
 
juvenile System 
Adult System
Purpose
Arrest 
 
Wrongdoing
Proceedings 
Information 
Parents
Release
jury trial 
Searches 
Records 
Sentencing 
Death penalty
Rehabilitation of the offender.
Juveniles can be arrested for acts 
(status offenses) that are not criminal 
for adults.
Considered a “delinquent act.”
Informal; closed to public. 
Courts may not release information to 
the public.
Play significant role.
Into parent/guardian custody.
In some states, juveniles do not have 
this right.
Juveniles can be searched in school 
without probable cause.
Juvenile’s record is sealed at age of 
adult criminal responsibility.
Juveniles are placed in separate 
facilities from adults.
No death penalty.
Punishment.
Adults can be arrested only for acts 
made illegal by the relevant criminal 
code.
A crime.
Formal and regimented; open to 
public.
Courts must release information to the 
public.
Play no role.
May post bail when appropriate.
All adults have this right. 
No adult can be searched without 
probable cause.
Adult’s criminal record is permanent. 
Adults are placed in county jails or 
state or federal prisons.
Death penalty for certain serious 
crimes under certain  circumstances.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
child admits guilt—that is, admits to the charges of the initial petition—the judge must 
ensure that the admission was voluntary.
 
At the close of the adjudicatory hearing, the judge is generally required to rule on 
the legal issues and evidence that have been presented. Based on this ruling, the judge 
determines whether the respondent is delinquent or in need of court supervision. 
Alternatively, the judge can dismiss the case based on a lack of evidence. It is important 
to remember that finding a child delinquent is not the same as convicting an adult of a 
crime. A delinquent does not face the same restrictions imposed on adult convicts in 
some states, such as limits on the right to vote (discussed in Chapter 11).
disPosiTion
Once a juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent, the judge must decide what steps will 
be taken toward treatment and/or punishment. Most states provide for a  bifurcated 
process in which a separate disposition hearing follows the adjudicatory hear- 
ing. Depending on state law, the juvenile may be entitled to counsel at the disposition  
hearing. 
sEnTEnCing juvEniLEs In an adult trial, the sentencing phase is primarily concerned 
with the needs of the community to be protected from the convict. In contrast, a 
juvenile judge uses the disposition hearing to determine a sentence that will serve 
the needs of the child. For assistance in this crucial process, the judge will order the 
probation department to gather information on the juvenile and present it in the form 
of a predisposition report. The report usually contains information concerning the 
respondent’s family background, the facts surrounding the delinquent act, and inter-
views with social workers, teachers, and other important figures in the child’s life.
judiCiAL disCRETion In keeping with the rehabilitative tradition of the juvenile justice 
system, juvenile judges generally have a great deal of discretion in choosing one of 
several disposition possibilities. A judge can tend toward leniency, delivering only a 
stern reprimand or warning before releasing the juvenile into the custody of parents 
or other legal guardians. Otherwise, the choice is among incarceration in a juvenile 
correctional facility, probation, or community treatment. In most cases, the serious-
ness of the offense is the primary factor used in determining whether to incarcerate 
a juvenile, though history of delinquency, family situation, and the offender’s attitude 
are all relevant. 
juvEniLE CoRRECTions
In general, juvenile corrections are based on the concept of graduated sanctions—that 
is, the severity of the punishment should fit the crime. Consequently, status and first-
time offenders are diverted or placed on probation, repeat offenders find themselves 
in intensive community supervision or treatment programs, and serious and violent 
offenders are placed in correctional facilities. 
 
As society’s expectations of the juvenile justice system have changed, so have the 
characteristics of its corrections programs. In some cities, for example, juvenile proba-
tion officers join police officers on the beat. Because the former are not bound by the 
same search and seizure restrictions as other law enforcement officials, this interdepart-
mental teamwork provides more opportunities to fight youth crime aggressively. Juvenile 
correctional facilities are also changing their operations to reflect public mandates that 
they should both reform and punish. 
Disposition Hearing  
Similar to the sentencing 
hearing for adults, a hearing 
in which the juvenile judge or 
officer decides the appropriate 
punishment for a youth found 
to be delinquent or a status 
offender.
Predisposition Report A 
report prepared during the 
disposition process that 
provides the judge with 
relevant background material to 
aid in the disposition decision.
Graduated Sanctions The 
practical theory in juvenile 
corrections that a delinquent or 
status offender should receive 
a punishment that matches in 
seriousness the severity of the 
wrongdoing.
Social Media and cJ 
The Campaign for youth 
justice is a special interest 
organization dedicated to 
removing juvenile offenders 
from the adult criminal 
justice system. To access its 
Twitter Web page, visit the 
Criminal Justice CourseMate 
at cengagebrain.com 
and select the Web 
Links for this chapter.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
respond to “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 5 on page 390, 
which asks them to think about how 
judges treat juveniles who have 
been transferred to adult court. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

juvEniLE PRobATion The most common form of juvenile corrections is probation. The 
majority of all adjudicated delinquents (nearly 60 percent) will never receive a disposi-
tion more severe than being placed on probation.85 These statistics reflect a general 
understanding among juvenile court judges and other officials that a child should nor-
mally be removed from her or his home only as a last resort. 
 
The organization of juvenile probation is very similar to adult probation (see Chapter 
10), and juvenile probationers are increasingly subjected to electronic monitoring and 
other supervisory tactics. The main difference between the two programs lies in the atti-
tude toward the offender. Adult probation officers have an overriding responsibility to pro-
tect the community from the probationer, while juvenile probation officers are expected to 
take the role of a mentor or a concerned relative in looking after the needs of the child.
Confining juvEniLEs About 81,000 American youths (up from 30,000 at the end of 
the 1970s) are incarcerated in public and private juvenile correctional facilities in the 
United States.86 Most of these juveniles have committed crimes against people or prop-
erty, but a significant number (about 15 percent) have been incarcerated for technical 
violations of their probation or parole agreements.87 After deciding that a juvenile 
needs to be confined, the judge has two sentencing options: nonsecure juvenile institu-
tions and secure juvenile institutions.
Nonsecure Confinement Some juvenile delinquents do not require high levels of 
control and can be placed in residential treatment programs. These programs, run 
by probation departments or social-services departments, allow their subjects freedom 
of movement in the community. Generally, this freedom is predicated on the juveniles 
following certain rules, such as avoiding illegal drugs and alcohol and returning to the 
facility for curfew. Residential treatment programs can be divided into four categories:88
1. Foster care programs, in which the juveniles live with a couple who act as surrogate 
parents.
2. Group homes, which generally house between twelve and fifteen youths and pro-
vide treatment, counseling, and education services by a professional staff.
3.  Family group homes, which combine aspects of foster care and group homes, 
meaning that a single family, rather than a group of professionals, looks after the 
needs of the young offenders.
4.  Rural programs, which include wilderness camps, farms, and ranches where 
between thirty and fifty children are placed 
in an environment that provides recreational 
activities and treatment programs.
Secure Confinement Secure facilities are com-
parable to the adult prisons and jails we discussed 
in Chapters 11 and 12. These institutions go by a 
confusing array of names depending on the state 
in which they are located, but the two best known 
are boot camps and training schools. A boot camp 
is the juvenile variation of shock probation. As we 
noted in Chapter 10, boot camps are modeled after 
military training for new recruits. Boot camp pro-
grams are based on the theory that by giving way-
ward youths a taste of the “hard life” of military-like 
Residential Treatment 
Program A government-
run facility for juveniles whose 
offenses are not deemed 
serious enough to warrant 
incarceration in a training 
school.
Boot Camp A variation on 
traditional shock incarceration 
in which juveniles (and some 
adults) are sent to secure 
confinement facilities modeled 
on military basic training camps 
instead of prison or jail. 
List the four 
categories 
of residential 
treatment 
programs.
Learning  
objective8
juvenile inmates prepare to 
enter a dormitory at Texas’s 
Marlin Orientation and 
Assessment Unit. What might 
be some of the reasons that 
juvenile correctional facilities 
often operate similarly to adult 
prisons and jails?
Michael Ainsworth/Dallas Morning News/Corbis
C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   387
Teaching Tip: Many states and 
private companies have created 
juvenile wilderness or challenge 
camps. Share information about 
these camps with your students.  
Do they think these are an 
improvement over traditional boot 
camps? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
training for short periods of time, usually no longer than 180 days, they will be “shocked” 
out of a life of crime. New York’s Camp Monterey Shock Incarceration Facility is typical of 
the boot camp experience. Inmates are grouped in platoons and live in dormitories. They 
spend eight hours a day training, drilling, and doing hard labor, and also participate in 
programs such as basic adult education and job skills training.89 
 
No juvenile correctional facility is called a “prison.” This does not mean they lack a 
strong resemblance to prisons. The facilities that most closely mimic the atmosphere at 
an adult correctional facility are training schools, alternatively known as youth camps, 
youth development centers, industrial schools, and several other similar titles. Whatever 
the name, these institutions claim to differ from their adult countparts by offering a vari-
ety of programs to treat and rehabilitate the young offenders. In reality, training schools 
are plagued by many of the same problems as adult prisons and jails, including high 
levels of inmate-on-inmate violence, substance abuse, gang wars, and overcrowding. 
Training School A 
correctional institution 
for juveniles found to be 
delinquent or status offenders.
f A s T f A C T s
REsidEnT youTH woRKER,  
job dEsCRiPTion:
•  Provide safety, security, custodial 
care, discipline, and guidance. 
Play a critical role in the 
rehabilitation of youth and, as a 
result, have a potentially great 
impact on a youth’s success 
during and after his or her 
incarceration.
wHAT Kind of TRAining  
is REquiREd?
•  A bachelor’s degree in human 
services, behavioral science, or a 
related field. 
• Professional and respectful 
verbal communication skills.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE? 
•  $16,840 – $44,940
cAReeRS In cJ
CARL McCULLOUGH, SR. 
RESIDENT YOUTH WORkER
I had a shot in the NFL, playing for the Buffalo Bills and the Minnesota Vikings, but 
that lasted only a short time. Today, I work at the Hennepin County (Minnesota) 
Juvenile Detention Center, where I’m responsible for a group of twelve young men, 
aged thirteen to eighteen, who are awaiting trial, waiting for placements, or just being 
held in a secure place due to the high-profile nature of their cases. 
I’m with the kids every day and every other weekend from 
6:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. I do everything from helping with 
homework to supervising their leisure time, running group 
programs, and just being a positive, caring adult with 
whom to talk. 
Having the NFL experience is a huge icebreaker 
with the residents. “Why are you here?” they always ask 
me, and I tell them I am here because I care about them, because I want to see a 
change, and because I’d like to help them believe that something better is possible. 
To do this job well, you have to be good at building relationships. It helps to know 
how to work with different cultures as well. Then you have to have patience; without 
it you won’t last long. You know they are going to test you, to see what they can 
and can’t get away with. You also have to be willing to learn a few things from 
them. You have to be a good listener. 
Social Media Career Tip  
Potential employers want information about you, but they do not want your life story. 
Take advantage of the two things that social media excel at when making career 
contacts: (1) personalize your message, and (2) be concise. 
Photo Courtesy of Carl McCullough, Sr.
Chris Scredon/iStockphoto
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   389
AfTERCARE Juveniles leave correctional facilities through an early release program or 
because they have served the length of their sentences. Juvenile corrections officials 
recognize that many of these children, like adults, need assistance in readjusting to the 
outside world. Consequently, released juveniles are often placed in aftercare programs. 
Based on the same philosophy that drives the prisoner reentry movement (discussed 
in the previous chapter), aftercare programs are designed to offer services for the juve-
niles, while at the same time supervising them to reduce the chances of recidivism. The 
ideal aftercare program includes community support groups, aid in finding and keeping 
employment, and continued monitoring to ensure that the juvenile is able to deal with 
the demands of freedom.
SeLFASSeSSMenT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 391.
A juvenile offender’s delinquency is determined during the ____________ hearing, which 
is similar in many ways to an adult trial.  If the juvenile is found to be delinquent, her or 
his sentence is determined during the ____________ hearing. The most common form of 
juvenile corrections is ____________. If the judge decides that the juvenile needs more 
stringent supervision, he or she can sentence the offender to a ____________ facility such 
as a residential treatment program. If the juvenile’s offense has been particularly serious, 
she or he will most likely be sent to a secure confinement facility such as a ____________ 
camp or a ____________ school. 
cHAPTeR SUMMARY
Describe the child-saving movement and 
its relationship to the doctrine of parens 
patriae. Under the doctrine of parens patriae, 
the state has a right and a duty to care for neglected, delinquent, 
or disadvantaged children. The child-saving movement, based 
on the doctrine of parens patriae, started in the 1800s. Its fol-
lowers believed that juvenile offenders require treatment rather 
than punishment. 
List the four major differences between 
juvenile courts and adult courts. (a) No 
juries, (b) different terminology, (c) no ad-
versarial relationship, and (d) confidentiality. 
Identify and briefly describe the single 
most important Supreme Court case 
with respect to juvenile justice. The case 
was In re Gault, decided by the Supreme Court in 1967. In 
this case a minor was arrested for allegedly making an ob-
scene phone call. His parents were not notified and were not 
present during the juvenile court judge’s decision-making 
process. In this case, the Supreme Court held that juveniles 
are entitled to many of the same due process rights granted 
to adult offenders, including notice of charges, the right to 
counsel, the privilege against self-incrimination, and the 
right to confront and cross- examine witnesses. 
Describe the one variable that always 
correlates highly with juvenile crime 
rates. The older a person is, the less likely he 
or she will exhibit criminal behavior. This process is known 
as aging out. Thus, persons in any at-risk group will commit 
fewer crimes as they get older. 
Indicate some of the reasons why youths 
join gangs. Some alienated teenagers join 
gangs for the social relationships and the 
sense of identity that gangs can provide. Youths living in 
high-crime neighborhoods join gangs as a form of protec-
tion. The excitement of belonging to a gang is another reason 
to join. 
Describe the four primary stages of pre-
trial juvenile justice procedure. (a) In-
take, in which an official of the juvenile 
court engages in a screening process to determine what to do 
with the youthful offender; (b) pretrial diversion, which may 
consist of probation, treatment and aid, and/or restitution;  
(c) jurisdictional waiver to an adult court, in which case the 
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Aftercare The variety of 
therapeutic, educational, 
and counseling programs 
made available to juvenile 
delinquents (and some adults) 
after they have been released 
from a correctional facility. 
Teaching Tip: Share with your 
students some of the aftercare 
services available for juveniles in 
your community. With the class, 
evaluate the effectiveness of these 
programs.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
QUeSTIOnS FOR cRITIcAL AnALYSIS
1. What is the difference between a status offense and 
a crime? What punishments do you think should be 
imposed on juveniles who commit status offenses?
2. Several years ago, eight Florida teenagers ranging in age 
from fourteen to eighteen beat a classmate so badly that 
she suffered a concussion. According to law enforcement 
officials, the teenagers recorded the assault so that they 
could post it on the Internet. If you were a prosecutor and 
could either waive these teenagers to adult court or refer 
them to the juvenile justice system, which option would 
you choose? What other information would you need to 
make your decision?
3. Forty-four states have enacted parental responsibility 
statutes, which make parents responsible for the offenses 
of their children. Seventeen of these states hold parents 
criminally liable for their children’s actions, punishing 
the parents with fines, community service, and even 
incarceration. What is your opinion of these laws—par-
ticularly those with criminal sanctions for parents?
4. Do you think that bullying should be punishable as a 
felony along the same lines as assault? (For the definition 
of assault, see page 33.) Why or why not?  
5. Research shows that judges in adult criminal courts 
impose a “juvenile penalty” during the sentencing pro-
cess. That is, they tend to punish juveniles who have been 
transferred to adult court more harshly than young adults 
(nineteen- and twenty-year-olds) who have been con-
victed of similar crimes. Why do you think judges behave 
in this manner?
KeY TeRMS
adjudicatory hearing  385
aftercare  389
age of onset  378
aging out  377
automatic transfer  384
boot camp  387
bullying  376
child abuse  379
child neglect  379
detention  384
detention hearing  384
disposition hearing  386
graduated sanctions  386
intake  382
judicial waiver  383
juvenile delinquency  368
low-visibility decision making  381
parens patriae  367
petition  383
predisposition report  386
prosecutorial waiver  384
referral  382
residential treatment  
program  387
status offender  368
training school  388
youth gang  379
SeLF ASSeSSMenT AnSWeR KeY
Page 370: i. parens patriae; ii. status offenses; iii. delinquency
Page 373: i. state; ii. state; iii. impulsive; iv. peer;  
v. death penalty
Page 377: i. declining; ii. girls; iii. School; iv. Bullying
Page 381: i. risk; ii. aging out; iii. child abuse/child neglect;  
iv. youth gangs
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
youth leaves the juvenile justice system; and (d) some type 
of detention, in which the youth is held until the disposition 
process begins. 
Explain the distinction between an adju-
dicatory hearing and a disposition hear-
ing. An adjudicatory hearing is essentially 
a “trial.” Defense attorneys may be present during the ad-
judicatory hearing in juvenile courts. In many states, once 
adjudication has occurred, there is a separate disposition 
hearing that is similar to the sentencing phase in an adult 
court. At this point, the court, often aided by a predisposi-
tion report, determines the sentence that serves the “needs” 
of the child. 
List the four categories of residential 
treatment  programs. Foster care, group 
homes, family group homes, and rural pro-
grams such as wilderness camps, farms, and ranches. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3 :  T H E  J u v E n i l E  J u s T i C E  s y s T E m   391
cOURSeMATe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
nOTeS
 1. Bruce Vielmetti, “Sentence of Life without 
Parole for Teen Upheld,” Milwaukee Journal 
Sentinel (May 22, 2011), B1.
 2. Miller v. Alabama, 567 U.S. ____ (2012).
 3. Polling on Public Attitudes about the Treatment 
of Young Offenders (Washington, D.C.: National 
Juvenile Justice Network, 2010).
 4. In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, at 15 (1967).
 5. Samuel Davis, The Rights of Juveniles: The 
Juvenile Justice System, 2d ed. (New York: C. 
Boardman Co., 1995), Section 1.2.
 6. Quoted in Anthony Platt, The Child Savers 
(Chicago: 
University 
of 
Chicago 
Press,  
1969), 119.
 7. 383 U.S. 541 (1966).
 8. Ibid., 556.
 9. 387 U.S. 1 (1967).
10. 397 U.S. 358 (1970).
11. 421 U.S. 519 (1975).
12. 403 U.S. 528 (1971).
13. Quoted in “Colo. Boy Pleads Guilty to Killing 
Parents,” Associated Press (September 29, 
2011).
14. Gary B. Melton, “Toward ‘Personhood’ for 
Adolescents: Autonomy and Privacy as Values 
in Public Policy,” American Psychology 38 
(1983), 99–100.
15. Research 
Network 
on 
Adolescent 
Development and Juvenile Justice, Youth on 
Trial: A Developmental Perspective on Juvenile 
Justice (Chicago: John D. & Catherine T. 
MacArthur Foundation, 2003), 1.
16. Richard E. Redding, “Juveniles Transferred 
to Criminal Court: Legal Reform Proposals 
Based on Social Science Research,” Utah Law 
Review (1997), 709.
17. Howard N. Snyder and Melissa Sickmund, 
Juvenile Offenders and Victims: A National 
Report (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, 1995), 47.
18. Martha Grace Duncan, “‘So Young and So 
Untender’: Remorseless Children and the 
Expectations of the Law,” Columbia Law 
Review (October 2002), 1469.
19. 543 U.S. 551 (2005).
20. Ibid., 567.
21. 560 U.S. ____ (2010).
22. Ibid.
23. Surveillance 
Summaries: 
Youth 
Risk 
Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2001 
(Washington, D.C.: Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, June 28, 2002).
24. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in 
the United States, 2011 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2012), at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/ 
table-38. 
25. Charles Puzzanchera, Benjamin Adams, and 
Melissa Sickmund, Juvenile Court Statistics 
2008 (Pittsburgh, PA: National Center for 
Juvenile Justice, July 2011), 6.
26. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, Juvenile Residential Facility 
Census, 2008: Selected Findings (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, July 2011), 1; 
and Todd Richmond, “Fewer Young Criminals 
Push States to Close Prisons,” Associated Press 
(June 7, 2010).
27. David McDowell, “Juvenile Curfew Laws and 
Their Influence on Crime,” Federal Probation 
(December 2006), 58.
28. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www.
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/ 
table-38.
29. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, “Community Prevention Grants 
Program,” at www.ojjdp.gov/cpg.
30. Margaret A. Zahn et al., Girls Study Group: 
Understanding and Responding to Girls’ 
Delinquency (Washington, D.C.: Office of 
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 
October 2008), 3.
31. Sara Goodkind et al., “Are Girls Really 
Becoming More Delinquent? Testing the 
Gender Convergence Hypothesis by Race 
and Ethnicity, 1976-2005,” Children and Youth 
Services Review (August 2009), 885–889.
32. Kimberly Kempf-Leonard and Lisa Sample, 
“Disparity Based on Sex: Is Gender-Specific 
Treatment Warranted?” Justice Quarterly 17 
(2000), 89–128.
33. Puzzanchera, Adams, and Sickmund, Juvenile 
Court Statistics 2008, 12.
34. Crime in the United States, 2011, at www. 
fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in the-u.s 
/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/
table-33. 
35. Zahn et al., 3.
36. Melissa Sickmund and Howard N. Snyder, 
Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 1999  
National Report (Washington, D.C.: Office 
of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, 1999), 58.
37. Meda Chesney-Lind, The Female Offender: 
Girls, Women, and Crime (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, 1997).
38. Denise C. Gottfredson and David A. Soulé, 
“The Timing of Property Crime, Violent Crime, 
and Substance Abuse among Juveniles,” 
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 
(February 2005), 110–120.
39. National Center for Education Statistics 
and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Indicators of 
School Crime and Safety: 2011 (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, February 
2012), 6.
40. Ibid., 10–15.
41. Ibid., 82–83.
42. Ibid., 44.
43. Jessica Bennett, “From Lockers to Lockup,” 
Newsweek (October 11, 2010), 39.
44. Adam J. Speraw, “No Bullying Allowed: A Call for 
a National Anti-Bullying Statute to Promote a 
Safer Learning Environment in American Public 
Schools,” Valparaiso University Law Review 
(Summer 2010), 1151–1198.
45. Natalie DiBlasio, “More Cases of Bullying Are 
Ending Up in Court,” USA Today (September 
12, 2011), 3A.
46. Marvin E. Wolfgang, From Boy to Man, from 
Delinquency to Crime (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1987).
47. Gary Sweeten, Shawn D. Bushway, and 
Raymond Paternoster, “Does Dropping Out 
of School Mean Dropping into Delinquency?” 
Criminology (February 2009), 47–88.
48. Quoted in John H. Laub and Robert J. Sampson, 
“Understanding Desistance from Crime,” 
in Crime and Justice: A Review of Research 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 6.
Page 384: i. arrest; ii. refer; iii. social; iv. intake;  
v. diversion; vi. waiver
Page 389: i. adjudicatory; ii. disposition; iii. probation;  
iv. nonsecure; v. boot; vi. training
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
49. Travis Hirschi and Michael Gottfredson, “Age 
and the Explanation of Crime,” American 
Journal of Sociology 89 (1982), 552–584.
50. Robert J. Sampson and John H. Laub, “A Life-
Course View on the Development of Crime,” 
Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science (November 2005), 12.
51. David P. Farrington, “Offending from 10 to 25 
Years of Age,” in Prospective Studies of Crime 
and Delinquency, ed. Katherine Teilmann 
Van Dusen and Sarnoff A. Mednick (Boston: 
Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishers, 1983), 17.
52. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, Juveniles in Court (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, June 2003), 29.
53. Lloyd D. Johnston et al., Monitoring the Future: 
National Results on Adolescent Drug Use—
Overview of Key Findings, 2011 (Ann Arbor,  
MI: Institute for Social Research, February 
2012), 36.
54. Anahad O’Connor, “Regular Marijuana Use by 
High School Students Hits New Peak, Report 
Finds,” New York Times (December 15, 2011), 
A16.
55. Carl 
McCurley 
and 
Howard 
Snyder, 
Co-occurrence of Substance Abuse Behaviors 
in Youth (Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile 
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2008).
56. Gary McClelland, Linda Teplin, and Karen 
Abram, “Detection and Prevalence of 
Substance Abuse among Juvenile Detainees,” 
Juvenile Justice Bulletin (Washington, D.C.: 
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, June 2004), 10.
57. Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program, 
Preliminary Data on Drug Use and Related 
Matters among Adult Arrestees and Juvenile 
Detainees 
(Washington, 
D.C.: 
National 
Institute of Justice, 2003).
58. National Mental Health Association, “Mental 
Health and Adolescent Girls in the Justice 
System,” 
at 
www.nmha.org/children/
justjuv/girlsjj.cfm.
59.  Larry J. Siegel and Brandon C. Welsh, Juvenile 
Delinquency: The Core, 4th ed. (Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2011), 268.
60. Edward P. Mulvey, Highlights from Pathways 
to Desistance: A Longitudinal Study of Serious 
Adolescent Offenders (Washington, D.C.: 
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, March 2011), 1–3.
61. Sherry Hamby, David Finkelhor, Heather 
Turner, and Richard Ormrod, Juvenile Justice 
Bulletin: Children’s Exposure to Intimate 
Partner Violence and Other Family Violence 
(Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention, October 
2011), 1.
62. Anne Dannerbeck and Jiahui Yan, “Missouri’s 
Crossover Youth: Examining the Relationship 
between Their Maltreatment History and 
Their Risk of Violence,” Journal of Juvenile 
Justice (Fall 2011), 85.
63. Grover Trask, “Defusing the Teenage Time 
Bombs,” Prosecutor (March/April 1997), 29.
64. Ashley Nellis, The Lives of Juvenile Lifers: 
Findings from a National Survey (Washington, 
D.C.: The Sentencing Project, March 2012), 2.
65. Cathy Spatz Widom, The Cycle of Violence 
(Washington, D.C.: National Institute of 
Justice, October 1992).
66. Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin, Does Child 
Abuse Cause Crime? (Atlanta, GA: Andrew 
Young School of Policy Studies, April 2006), 
27–28.
67. Arlen Egley, Jr., and James C. Howell, Highlights 
of the 2009 National Youth Gang Survey 
(Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention, June 2011), 1.
68. Chris Melde and Finn-Aage Esbensen, “Gang 
Membership as a Turning Point in the Life 
Course,” Criminology (August 2011), 513–546.
69. National Gang Threat Assessment 2009 
(Washington, D.C.: National Gang Intelligence 
Center, January 2009), iii.
70. James C. Howell et al., National Gang Center 
Bulletin: U.S. Gang Problem Trends and 
Seriousness, 1996–2009 (Washington, D.C: 
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, May 2011), Chart 1, page 10.
71. “Race/Ethnicity of Gang Members,” National 
Youth Gang Survey Analysis (Institute for 
Intergovernmental Research/National Youth 
Gang Center, 2009), at www.iir.com/nygc/
nygsa.
72. Rachel A. Gordon, Benjamin B. Lahey, Eriko 
Kawai, Rolf Loeber, and Magda Stouthamer-
Loeber, “Antisocial Behavior and Youth Gang 
Membership: Selection and Socialization,” 
Criminology (February 2004), 55–89.
73. Anthony Pinizzotto, Edward Davis, and 
Charles Miller, “Street-Gang Mentality: 
A Mosaic of Remorseless Violence and 
Relentless Loyalty,” FBI Law Enforcement 
Bulletin (September 2007), 1–6.
74. “Charles Puzzanchera, Benjamin Adams, and 
Melissa Sickmund, Juvenile Court Statistics 
2006–2007 (Washington, D.C.: National Center 
for Juvenile Justice, March 2010), 31.
75. 42 U.S.C. Sections 5601–5778 (1974).
76. S’Lee Arthur Hinshaw II, “Juvenile Diversion: 
An Alternative to Juvenile Court,” Journal of 
Dispute Resolution (1993), 305.
77. Ted Gordon Lewis, “Barron County Restorative 
Justice Programs: A Partnership Model for 
Balancing Community and Government 
Resources for Juvenile Justice Services,” Journal 
of Juvenile Justice (Fall 2011), 17–32.
78. Audrey Hickert et al., “Impact of Juvenile Drug 
Courts on Drug Use and Criminal Behavior,” 
Journal of Juvenile Justice (Fall 2011), 60–77.
79. Patrick Griffin et al., Trying Juveniles as 
Adults: An Analysis of State Transfer Laws 
and Reporting (Washington, D.C.: Office of 
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 
September 2011), 1-3.
80. Puzzanchera, Adams, and Sickmund, Juvenile 
Court Statistics 2008, 58.
81. Rhode Island General Laws Section 14-1-7.1 
(1994 and Supp. 1996).
82. 467 U.S. 253 (1984).
83. Puzzanchera, Adams, and Sickmund, Juvenile 
Court Statistics 2006–2007, 32.
84. Barry C. Feld, “Criminalizing the American 
Juvenile Court,” Crime and Justice 17 (1993), 
227–254.
85. Puzzanchera, Adams, and Sickmund, Juvenile 
Court Statistics 2008, 55.
86. Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention, Juvenile Residential Facility 
Census, 2008: Selected Findings (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, July 2011), 2.
87. Howard N. Snyder and Melissa Sickmund, 
Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2006 National 
Report (Washington, D.C.: National Center for 
Juvenile Justice, March 2006), 98.
88. Sickmund and Snyder, 182.
89. Dean John Champion, The Juvenile Justice 
System: Delinquency, Processing, and the Law, 
5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall, 2007), 581–582.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
C H A P T E R
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   395
LEARning objECTivEs
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
1  Identify three important trends in international terrorism. 
2  Explain how American law enforcement agencies have used 
“preventive policing” to combat terrorism.
3  Explain how the Patriot Act has made it easier for federal 
agents to conduct searches during terrorism investigations.
4  Describe the three following forms of malware: (a) botnets, 
(b) worms, and (c) viruses.
5  Explain how the Internet has contributed to piracy of 
intellectual property.
6  Explain the difference between a temporary visa and a 
green card.
7  Indicate some of the ways in which white-collar crime is 
different from violent or property crime.
8  Explain the concept of corporate violence.
Throughout the chapter you will see each learning objective repeated 
in the margin next to the content it relates to. The chapter summary 
on page 423 includes all of the learning objectives for review. 
Today’s  
 Challenges 
in Criminal  
    Justice
395
AP Photo/Delcia Lopez, File
CHAPTER ouTLinE
• Homeland Security
• Cyber Crime
• The Criminalization of 
Immigration Law
• White-Collar Crime
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
T
he offshoot of Anonymous that was responsible for breaking into Stratfor’s data-
base called itself LulzSec, playing on the Internet slang for “laughs” and “security.” 
The group is more than a collection of mere Internet pranksters, however. Jeremy 
Hammond allegedly made more than $700,000 in authorized charges using the credit-
card numbers stolen from Stratfor accounts. Furthermore, in February 2012, an Irish 
Anonymous member intercepted a telephone conference between the FBI and British 
law enforcement officials and published the transcript online.1
 
Over the past thirteen chapters, we have touched on cyber crime and homeland 
security, two subjects highlighted by the exploits of Hammond and his Anonymous associ-
ates.  In this final chapter of the textbook, we will look more closely at these matters, which 
provide two of the greatest challenges to the American criminal justice system in the 2000s. 
We will also explore two other hot topics in the field: (1) the increasingly blurred—and 
controversial—distinction between criminal law and immigration law, and (2) white-collar 
crime, a form of criminal activity that has received part of the blame for the worst eco-
nomic downturn in the United States since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
THE HaCkTivisT
The front page of the Chicago Sun-Times shows 
Jeremy Hammond dressed eccentrically, sitting on 
a rooftop, working on a computer. Above him, a 
headline asks the rhetorical question, “Evil Genius?”  
Indeed, Hammond does seem to be something of a 
genius when it comes to computers. Growing up in 
Glendale Heights, Illinois, he began programming 
video games at age nine and worked for an Apple 
specialist as a teenager. Hammond’s attorney 
compared his talent to that of a “comic book 
character’s superpower, like Superman’s X-ray vision.”
Hammond’s attorney also said that his client had 
“some extreme opinions and thoughts” but that he 
“used his social and political views for good.” It is true 
that Hammond volunteered for the Salvation Army, 
built bicycles for charity, and helped prepare free 
meals for the poor. At the same time, he was an active 
“hacktivist,” illegally using his computer skills to further 
his political viewpoints. In 2005, he was convicted 
of stealing credit-card data from Protest Warrior, a 
conservative Web site, and spent nearly two years 
in prison. Then, several years ago, Hammond joined 
up with Anonymous, a leaderless group of Internet 
activists who use computers to break into corporate 
and government databases around the world.
According to federal authorities, in early 2012, 
Hammond and several Anonymous colleagues 
breached the security of Strategic Forecasting 
(Stratfor), a Texas-based company that provides 
critical information on global business affairs. The 
hackers then released the account information 
of nearly 860,000 Stratfor subscribers, including 
former vice president Dan Quayle (1989–1993) and 
hundreds of government, law enforcement, and 
military officials. In a statement, Anonymous called on 
the “armies of darkness” to use the information “to 
wreak unholy havoc upon the systems and personal 
accounts of these rich and powerful oppressors.” On 
March 7, 2012, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
agents arrested Hammond at his Chicago, apartment.  
If found guilty of participating 
in the Stratfor operation, 
Hammond would face ten 
years in federal prison.
In March 2012, federal 
agents arrested Jeremy 
Hammond for using his 
computer skills to breach 
the security of corporate 
Web sites.
AFP/Getty Images/Newscom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   397
HomELAnd sECuRiTy
One day after the arrests of Jeremy Hammond and four of his colleagues, Robert S. 
Mueller III, the director of the FBI, warned that terrorist groups would surely employ 
such computer tactics against the United States in the near future. “These adaptations 
of the terrorist threat make the FBI’s counterterrorism mission that much more dif-
ficult and challenging,” Mueller said.2 Such unpredictability is one of the most striking, 
and unnerving, aspects of life in the United States post–September 11. Terrorism and its 
uncertainties have been a theme throughout this textbook, and we have seen a number 
of instances in which law enforcement, the courts, and corrections have had to evolve to 
meet the challenge. Now, we will focus more closely on the criminal justice system’s role 
in homeland security, defined by the federal government as 
a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States, reduce 
America’s vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the damage and recover from attacks 
that do occur.3
We start with an introduction to the phenomenon of terrorism—the driving force behind 
the homeland security movement in the United States.
THE gLobAL ConTExT of TERRoRism
Generally, terrorist acts are not the acts of nations or legally appointed governments. 
Rather, terror is the realm of nonstate actors, free of control by or allegiance to any 
nation, that use violence to further their own goals.  Today, the dominant strain of ter-
rorism mixes political ambitions with very strong religious affiliations. 
 
Modern terrorism is also characterized by extreme levels of violence. The January 24, 
2011, suicide bombing at Russia’s busiest airport, in Moscow, killed at least 37 people and 
injured almost 180 more. The three-day November 2008 raid on the financial district of 
Mumbai, India, left 173 dead and more than 300 wounded. And, of course, the September 
11, 2001, attacks on New York and Washington, D.C., claimed nearly 3,000 lives. Indeed, 
the power of terrorism is a direct result of the fear caused by this violence—not only the 
fear that such atrocities will be repeated but also that next time, they will be much worse.
dEfining TERRoRism Terrorism has always had a subjective quality, summed up by 
the useful cliché “one person’s terrorist is another person’s freedom fighter.” Because it 
means different things to different people in different situations, politicians, academics, 
and legal experts alike have long  struggled to  determine which acts of violence qualify as 
terrorism and which do not. The FBI defines terrorism as
the unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a 
government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or 
social objectives.4
This definition is useful for our purposes because it is relatively straightforward and easy 
to understand. It is inadequate, however, in that it fails to capture the wide scope of inter-
national terrorism in the twenty-first century. Today, many observers are asking whether 
the state should consider terrorist violence merely “unlawful,” as in the FBI definition, or 
an act of war. Generally, wars are considered military actions undertaken by one state or 
nation against another. This would seem to remove terrorism from the realm of warfare, 
given that its instigators are nonstate actors, as mentioned earlier. 
 
Professor David A. Westbrook of the University of Buffalo (New York) points out, how-
ever, that the large scale and financial resources of some modern terrorist organizations 
Nonstate Actor An entity 
that plays a role in international 
affairs but does not represent 
any established state or nation.
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
consider the argument that 
terrorism is an act of war rather 
than a crime. Do students a 
gree with this assertion? Why  
or why not?
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 1 on page 423, 
which asks them to define terrorism 
in their own words. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
make them as powerful as many nations, if not 
more so. In addition, the high body counts asso-
ciated with the worst terrorist acts seem better 
described in terms of war than of crime, which in 
most cases involves two people—the criminal and 
the victim.5 Thus, perhaps the most satisfying defi-
nition of terrorism describes it as a “supercrime” 
that incorporates many of the characteristics of 
warfare.
AL QAEdA vERsus THE uniTEd sTATEs On May 1, 
2011, a team of U.S. Navy Seals in helicopters 
descended on a three-story house in Abbottabad, 
a town located about thirty miles northeast of 
Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. Forty min-
utes later, they left with the body of Osama bin 
Laden, whom they had killed after a shootout 
with his bodyguards. “Justice has been done,” 
said President Barack Obama, echoing the sentiments of many Americans for whom 
the event marked a symbolic triumph in the struggle against international terrorism.6 
Experts, however, doubted that bin Laden’s death would have much practical impact.  
Al Qaeda, the movement he had helped to start, was already moving on without him.
Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda Osama bin Laden’s al Qaeda organization grew out of 
a network of volunteers who migrated to Afghanistan in the 1980s to rid that country of 
its Communist occupiers. (Ironically, in light of later events, bin Laden and his comrades 
received significant American financial aid at that time.) For bin Laden, these efforts 
took the form of jihad, a controversial term that has been the subject of much confusion.
 
Contrary to what many think, jihad does not mean “holy war.” Rather, it refers 
to three kinds of struggle, or exertion, required of the Muslim faithful: (1) the struggle 
against the evil in oneself, (2) the struggle against the evil outside oneself, and (3) the 
struggle against nonbelievers.7 Many Muslims believe that this struggle can be achieved 
without violence and denounce the form of jihad practiced by al Qaeda. Clearly, however, 
bin Laden and his followers rejected the notion that jihad can be accomplished through 
peaceable efforts.
 
In the 1990s, bin Laden began to turn his attention to the United States, and al 
Qaeda set its sights on American interests abroad. In 1998, for example, the organiza-
tion bombed two U.S. embassies in Africa, killing 231 people. Two years later, al Qaeda 
agents launched a suicide attack on the U.S.S. Cole, a Navy destroyer docked in Aden, a 
port in the small Middle Eastern country of Yemen, during which seventeen U.S. sailors 
died. About a year after the September 11, 2001, attacks, bin Laden wrote a letter to 
the American people outlining the reasons behind al Qaeda’s opposition to our govern-
ment. These included American support for Israel, which is widely seen as an enemy to 
Muslims, and U.S. exploitation of Islamic countries for their oil. Furthermore, bin Laden 
criticized the presence of U.S. military forces in the Middle East, “spreading your ideology 
and thereby polluting the hearts of our people.”8 
A Continuing Threat Two years before his death, Osama bin Laden boasted that his dis-
ciples would “continue jihad for another seven years, seven years after that, and even seven 
Rescue workers tend to a  
victim of the suicide bomber 
who struck Moscow’s 
Domodevo International  
Airport on January 24, 2011. 
Russian officials blamed the 
attack, which killed at least 
37 and wounded nearly 180 
more, on militant Islamists. 
How are such acts of terrorism 
distinguished from acts of war? 
AP Photo/Ivan Sekretarev
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   399
years more after.”9 Two days after his death, al Qaeda posted a statement on the Internet 
that echoed this prediction: “Sheik Osama didn’t build an organization to die when he dies,” 
it said. “The soldiers of Islam will continue in groups and united, plotting and planning 
. . . with determination, without giving up until striking a blow.”10 More and more often, 
these “soldiers of Islam” resemble José Pimental, a U.S. citizen arrested in November 2011 
for planning to use pipe bombs to attack banks and government buildings in New York 
City.  Such “homegrown” extremists present a grave new challenge for law enforcement.  
Because they have grown up in the United States, they know how to operate on American 
soil.  Because they possess U.S. passports, they can move freely in and out of the country.
 
Actions like those planned by Pimental have traditionally been described as domestic 
terrorism because they involved a local terrorist acting against his or her own people with 
no direct foreign involvement.  More frequently, however, homegrown American terrorists 
are relying on foreign support.  In some instances, this support comes from pro-jihadist 
Web sites, which offer training manuals, audio and video propaganda, and communication 
with like-minded individuals through chat rooms.  In other instances, the encouragement 
is “hands-on.” For example, Faisal Shahzad, who tried to detonate a car bomb in New York 
City’s Times Square in 2010, received five days of explosives training and $15,000 from an 
extremist group operating out of northwest Pakistan.
TERRoRism TREnds foR THE fuTuRE Smaller operations involving American-born ter-
rorists influenced by international sources reflect several trends in this area identified by 
homeland security expert Brian M. Jenkins. As the list below shows, each of  Jenkins’ trends 
de-emphasizes the importance of any single, dominant organization such as al Qaeda.11
1. Terrorists have developed more efficient methods of financing their operations 
through avenues such as Internet fund-raising, drug trafficking, and money laun-
dering schemes.
2. Terrorists have developed more efficient organizations based on the small-business 
model, in which individuals are responsible for different tasks including recruit-
ing, planning, propaganda, and social services such as supporting the families of 
suicide bombers. These “employees” do not answer to a single leader but rather 
function as a network that is quick to adjust and difficult to infiltrate.
3. Terrorists have exploited new communications technology to mount global campaigns, 
relying on the Internet for immediate, direct communication among operatives and 
as a crucial recruiting tool. Furthermore, large numbers of “jihobbyists” are operat-
ing online, disseminating extremist writings and videos and using social media to 
spread the terrorist message in cyberspace.
As you may have noted, each of these trends favors the 
global terrorism movement. Indeed, Jenkins finds that 
today’s jihadists are dangerous, resilient survivors who have 
achieved some strategic results and are determined to con-
tinue attacking their enemies. “Destroying their terrorist 
enterprise,” he concludes, “will take years.”12
THE AnTiTERRoRism And  
EffECTivE dEATH PEnALTy ACT
America’s first important step toward destroying terrorist enterprises actually predated 
the September 11, 2001, attacks. Signed into law by President Bill Clinton on April 
24, 1996, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) was passed 
Domestic Terrorism Acts 
of terrorism that take place 
within the territorial jurisdiction 
of the United States without 
direct foreign involvement.
Antiterrorism and 
Effective Death 
Penalty Act of 1996 
(AEDPA) Legislation giving 
law enforcement officers the 
power to arrest and prosecute 
any individual who provides 
“material support or resources” 
to a “foreign terrorist 
organization.”
Identify three 
important trends 
in international 
terrorism.
Learning  
objective1
“Terrorism cannot be 
‘defeated,’ because it is a 
tactic and not an enemy.”
— Nora Bensahel,  
political scientist
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

400   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
in response to the 1995 truck bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The primary goal of the AEDPA is to hamper terrorist organi-
zations by cutting off their funding from outside sources. The law prohibits persons from 
“knowingly providing material support or resources” to any group that the United States 
has designated a “foreign terrorist organization,” or FTO.13 Each year, the U.S. secretary 
of state is required to provide Congress with a list of these FTOs, loosely defined to cover 
organizations that (1) are foreign, (2) engage in terrorist activity, and (3) threaten the 
security of U.S. citizens or the United States itself.14 The latest edition of this list included 
forty-four such organizations, most of them based in the Middle East.15
 
“Material support” is defined very broadly in the legislation, covering funding, 
financial services, lodging, training, expert advice or assistance, communications 
equipment, transportation, and other physical assets.16 The “knowingly” requirement 
applies to all material support except for direct monetary donations to FTOs—this act 
is a strict liability crime (see pages 79–80). Consequently, even if a person is unaware 
that the recipient of charitable giving is involved in terrorist activity, she or he can be 
prosecuted under the AEDPA.17
THE PATRioT ACT
The original AEDPA did not include the provision making a donation to an FTO a strict 
liability crime. This amendment was part of the far-reaching scope of the Patriot Act, 
signed into law by President George W. Bush on October 26, 2001, just six weeks after the 
September 11 terrorist attacks.18 As we have seen throughout this textbook, the empha-
sis on the rights of the accused in the American criminal justice system often makes it 
difficult to arrest and convict suspected criminals. The Patriot Act is the result of a strong 
impulse in Washington, D.C., and elsewhere to “level the playing field” when it comes to 
terrorists. 
 
The legislation makes it easier for law enforcement agents to collect information 
about those suspected of committing terrorist acts or having knowledge of terrorist 
activity and then detain them based on that information. It enhances the power of the 
federal government to keep noncitizens under suspicion of having terrorist sympathies 
from entering the United States, and, as we have seen, it targets the fund-raising of ter-
rorist enterprises. (See Figure 14.1 below for an overview of the Patriot Act.)
Patriot Act Legislation 
passed in the wake of the 
September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks that greatly expanded 
the ability of government 
agents to monitor and 
apprehend suspected terrorists.
FIGURE 14.1 Selected Provisions of the Patriot Act
A massive piece of legislation, the Patriot Act is difficult to summarize. Selected aspects of it are 
listed here to provide a general idea of the statute’s goals, as well as its methods of achieving them.
•   The act relaxes restrictions on information sharing between various U.S. law enforcement 
agencies and other governmental departments concerning suspected terrorists.
•   It creates the crime of knowingly harboring a terrorist.
•   It allows law enforcement agents greater freedom in seizing the e-mail records of suspected 
terrorists.
•   It authorizes funds to triple the number of border patrol agents, customs inspectors, and 
immigration enforcement officers along the United States’ northern border with Canada.
•   It allows the federal government to detain non-U.S. citizens suspected of terrorist activity for up 
to seven days without informing them of the charges on which they are being held.
•   It eliminates the statute of limitations (see page 228) for prosecution of the most serious 
terrorism-related crimes.
Source: Jane A. Bullock, George Haddow, and Damon P. Coppola, Introduction to Homeland Security, 4th ed. (Waltham, MA: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2012), 45–46.
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Patriot Act online. 
Discuss those aspects of the 
Patriot Act affect students, directly 
or indirectly.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE dEPARTmEnT of  
HomELAnd sECuRiTy
While the Patriot Act transformed the legal landscape 
of America’s counterterrorism efforts, the Homeland 
Security Act of 2002 had a similar effect on the inner 
workings of the U.S. government. Prior to this legislation, 
disaster management at the federal level was primarily 
the responsibility of the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA). The Patriot Act placed FEMA, as well as 
twenty-one other federal agencies, under the control of the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The antiterror-
ism responsibilities of the DHS are, for the most part, con-
centrated in seven agencies. Three of these agencies—U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), U.S. Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and the U.S. Secret 
Service—were discussed in Chapter 4 (see pages 117–118).  The other four agencies also play 
a crucial role in preventing and responding to terrorist-related activity:
• 
The U.S. Coast Guard defends the nation’s coasts, ports, and inland waterways.  It 
also combats illegal drug shipping and enforces immigration law at sea.
• 
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is responsible for the safe opera-
tion of our airline, rail, bus, and ferry services. 
• 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) handles the “paperwork” side of 
U.S. immigration law. The agency processes the more than 20 million applications 
made each year by individuals who want to visit the United States or to reside or 
work in this country.
• 
FEMA retains its position as the lead federal agency in preparing for and respond-
ing to disasters such as hurricanes, floods, terrorist attacks, and infrastructure 
concerns. Infrastructure includes all of the facilities and systems that provide the 
daily necessities of modern life, such as electric power, food, water, transportation, 
and telecommunications.
fEdERAL AgEnCiEs ouTsidE THE dHs
The DHS does not directly control all federal efforts to combat terrorism. Since September 
11, 2001, the FBI, a branch of the Department of Justice, has been the “lead federal agency” 
for all terrorism-related matters. Its Strategic Information Operations Center serves as an 
information clearinghouse for federal, state, and local law enforcement agents who want to 
share information on terrorism-related matters. Indeed, the agency now lists “protecting the 
United States from terrorist attack” as its highest organizational priority.19 
 
The intelligence agencies of the U.S. government also play an important role in anti-
terrorism efforts. In contrast to a law enforcement agency, which works to solve crimes 
that have already occurred, an intelligence agency works to prevent crimes or other 
undesirable acts by gathering information, or intelligence, on potential wrongdoers and 
stopping the illegal conduct in the planning stage. Intelligence operations rely on the fol-
lowing strategies to collect information:
1. Electronic surveillance of phone, social media, and e-mail communications, as well 
as advanced recording devices placed on satellites, aircraft, and land-based tech-
nology centers.
Infrastructure The services 
and facilities that support the 
day-to-day needs of modern 
life, such as electricity, food, 
transportation, and water.
Intelligence Agency An 
agency that is primarily 
concerned with gathering 
information about potential 
criminal or terrorist events to 
prevent those acts from taking 
place.
In March 2012, U.S. Coast 
Guard agents offload 3,500 
pounds of confiscated 
cocaine at Base Miami Beach, 
Florida. Besides traditional 
duties such as illegal drug 
interdiction, in what ways might 
the Coast Guard contribute to 
the country’s homeland security 
efforts?
U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer  
2nd Class Nick Ameen
C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   401
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
2. Human-source collection, which refers to the recruitment of foreign agents and 
interviews with people who have particular knowledge about areas of interest.
3. Open-source collection, or close attention to “open” data sources such as books, 
newspapers, radio and television transmissions, and Internet sites.
4. Intelligence sharing with friendly foreign intelligence services.
5. Counterintelligence, which involves placing undercover agents in a position to gain 
information from hostile foreign intelligence services.20
 
In particular, two intelligence agencies are integral to American antiterrorism efforts. 
The first is the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which is responsible for gathering and 
analyzing information on foreign governments, corporations, and individuals, and then 
passing that information on to the upper echelons of our federal government. The second, 
the National Security Agency (NSA), is also in the business of gathering and analyzing 
information, but it focuses primarily on communications. NSA agents eavesdrop on foreign 
conversations, whatever form they might take, while at the same time working to ensure 
that sensitive messages sent by the U.S. government are not subjected to similar scrutiny.
CounTERTERRoRism CHALLEngEs And sTRATEgiEs
A government commission that investigated the circumstances leading to the September 
11, 2001, terrorist attacks found that the federal government “did not have an effective 
intelligence collection effort” with regard to terror cases.21 Over the past decade, the 
government has expended significant resources to remedy this situation.  In 2001, the 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Center had three hundred employees. Today, it has more than 
two thousand.22 The FBI is now more likely to investigate security threats than ordinary 
crimes. Between 2009 and 2011, FBI agents completed nearly 43,000 “assessments” of 
people or groups to determine any possible ties to terrorism.23
 
A similar shift can be seen in local police departments, for whom “intelligence used 
to be a dirty word,” according to David Carter, a professor of criminal justice at Michigan 
State University.24 Today, financial support from the federal government has helped cre-
ate more than one hundred state and local police intelligence units, with at least one unit 
in every state.25 As we saw in Chapter 4, the federal government has established more 
than seventy fusion centers to allow for better cooperation with local police forces in this 
area.  Indeed, intelligence gathering has become crucial in apprehending the “lone wolf” 
terrorist, as described below.
PREvEnTivE PoLiCing On February 17, 2012, a Moroccan immigrant named Amine El Khalifi 
was arrested near the U.S. Capitol Building in Washington, D.C. El Khalifi, who had bragged 
that he “would be happy killing thirty people,” was carrying an automatic weapon and wear-
ing a suicide vest packed with what he thought were explosives.26 In Chapter 3, we saw that 
criminal law generally requires intent and action. A person must have both intended to com-
mit a crime and taken some steps toward doing so. In most cases, criminal law also requires 
that a harm has been done and that the criminal act caused the harm. 
 
According to federal officials, however, no evidence showed that El Khalifi had 
made any successful contacts with established terrorist groups. The gun El Khalifi was 
carrying was inoperable, and the explosives were inert.  Both had been provided to him 
by an FBI undercover agent acting as an al Qaeda operative.  Indeed, El Khalifi had been 
under FBI surveillance for more than a year.
No Immediate Threat The case of Amine El Khalifi represents a growing trend in the 
criminal justice system brought about by the new challenges of fighting terrorism. The 
Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA) The U.S. 
government agency that is 
responsible for collecting 
and coordinating foreign 
intelligence operations.
National Security Agency 
(NSA) The intelligence 
agency that is responsible for 
protecting U.S. government 
communications and producing 
intelligence by monitoring 
foreign communications. 
Explain how 
American law 
enforcement 
agencies 
have used 
“preventive 
policing” 
to combat 
terrorism.
Learning  
objective 2
Technology Tip: Have students 
explore the Department of 
Homeland Security Web site 
to learn more about its various 
agencies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

goal for many law enforcement agencies is no longer to solve crimes after they have 
occurred but rather to prevent them from happening in the first place. Even though  
El Khalifi posed no immediate threat to the public, federal authorities were not willing 
to take the risk that he might eventually develop into a dangerous terrorist. Although 
some observers claim that law enforcement officials are exaggerating the threat posed by 
many of these accused plotters, the government points to a record of successes to justify 
this new approach. From the beginning of 2009 to February 2012, law enforcement agen-
cies arrested nearly forty lone wolf terrorist suspects similar to El Khalifi.27
Informants and Entrapment Because makeshift terrorist cells often need help to pro-
cure the weaponry necessary for their schemes, they are natural targets for well-placed 
informants and undercover agents (both discussed in Chapter 5). With their amateur 
approach to terrorist activities, these suspects are natural targets for well-placed “insid-
ers.” The resulting intelligence reports have been crucial in helping authorities identify 
potential terrorists. According to the Center on Law and Security at New York University, 
62 percent of the federal government’s most significant terrorism prosecutions have 
relied on evidence provided by informants.28
 
These tactics have drawn criticism from some quarters. Amine El Khalifi, crit-
ics point out, could never have hatched his plot without the aid of the fake al Qaeda 
operatives “Hussein,” a confidential informer, and “Yusuf,” an FBI undercover agent.  One 
observer sarcastically called El Khalifi’s efforts another case of “law-enforcement-assisted 
terrorism.”29 As you learned in Chapter 3, entrapment is a possible defense for criminal 
behavior when a government agent plants the idea of committing a crime in a defendant 
who would not have considered it on his or her own. Although the entrapment defense 
has often been raised in terrorism cases involving informants or undercover agents, it has 
yet to succeed.  In every instance, judges and juries have found that the defendant was 
predisposed to terrorist behavior without any help from the government.30
EmERgEnCy PREPAREdnEss And REsPonsE Preparedness is also an integral part of 
homeland security.  The White House defines preparedness as the “existence of plans, 
procedures, policies, training, and equipment necessary at 
the federal, state, and local level to maximize the ability to 
prevent, respond to, and recover from major events.”31 The 
term has come to describe a wide variety of actions taken 
at different governmental levels to protect a community 
not only against terrorist attacks but also against natu-
ral disasters such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods. 
The Oakland County (Michigan) Emergency Operations 
Center, for example, combines the contributions of thirty-
four different local agencies, each one organized and pre-
pared for a different type of emergency. 
 
A necessary complement to preparedness is 
response, or the actions taken after an incident has 
occurred. Because the federal government is usually 
unable to respond rapidly to any single incident, the 
burden of response initially falls on local emergency per-
sonnel such as police officers, firefighters, and emergency 
medical technicians. These aptly named first responders 
have several important duties, including the following:
Preparedness An umbrella 
term for the actions taken by 
governments to prepare for 
large-scale catastrophic events 
such as terrorist attacks or 
environmental disasters.
First Responders Those 
individuals, such as firefighters, 
police officers, and emergency 
medical technicians, who are 
responsible for the protection 
and preservation of life and 
property during the early 
stages following a disaster. 
Members of a hazardous 
materials team wear protective 
suits as they respond to an 
anthrax scare in Centennial, 
Colorado. Why are these 
emergency personnel called 
first responders? What role 
do first responders play in 
homeland security? 
John Moore/Getty Images
C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   403
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Visa Official authorization 
allowing a person to travel to 
and within the issuing country.
 •  Securing the scene of the incident by maintaining order.
 • Rescuing and treating any injured civilians.
 •  Containing and suppressing fires or other hazardous conditions that have resulted 
from the incident.
 • Retrieving those who have been killed.32
First responders show great bravery in carrying out their duties under extremely danger-
ous circumstances. On September 11, 2001, 343 firefighters and 75 police officers were 
killed in the line of duty.
boRdER sECuRiTy People and goods legally enter the United States through checkpoints 
at airports, seaports, and guarded land stations. At these regulated points of entry, govern-
ment agents check documents such as passports and visas and inspect luggage and cargo 
to ensure compliance with immigration and trade laws. (A visa is a document issued by the 
U.S. State Department that indicates the conditions under which a holder can enter and 
travel within the United States.) The task is immense. Close to 90 million foreign visitors 
arrive at America’s more than one hundred international airports each year, with millions 
more passing through patrol stations along our borders with Mexico and Canada. 
Increased Scrutiny One of the hard lessons of the September 11 attacks was that regulation 
of points of entry does not ensure security. Every one of the nineteen hijackers involved in 
those attacks entered the United States legally—that is, with a valid visa. They were also able to 
easily board the airplanes that they used as flying bombs. Consequently, one of the hallmarks 
of homeland security has been increased scrutiny at points of entry—particularly airports. 
 
The DHS Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has overseen significant 
changes in the way airports screen passengers, luggage, and cargo. Border personnel, 
both at home and abroad, have been trained to scrutinize all foreigners entering the 
United States for “terrorist risk factors.” The FBI’s Terrorist Screening Center has also 
compiled a “no fly” list of individuals who are deemed to pose a risk of terrorist activity 
and therefore are not allowed to board flights leaving or entering the United States.
Unregulated Border Entry Every year hundreds of thousands of non-U.S. citizens, 
unable to legally obtain visas, enter the country illegally by crossing the large, unregu-
lated stretches of our borders with Mexico and Canada. Securing these border areas has 
proved problematic, if not impossible, for the various homeland security agencies. As a 
result, the border areas provide a conduit for illegal drugs, firearms and other contra-
band, illegal immigrants, and, possibly, terrorists to be smuggled into the country.
 
The main problem for the U.S. Border Patrol and local law enforcement agents in 
trying to stem this flow is logistics. The U.S.-Canadian border extends for 3,957 miles 
(not counting Alaska), and the border with Mexico stretches for 1,954 miles. Much of 
the borderland consists of uninhabited plains and woodland to the north and desert 
and scrubland to the south. To compensate, the homeland security presence on the 
Mexican border has never been greater. 
 
Today, approximately 21,500 Border Patrol agents are monitoring the area, up from 
9,000 in 2001. This increase in personnel seems to have acted as a deterrent for those 
who would otherwise try to enter the United States illegally. In 2011, about 325,000 illegal 
crossers were apprehended on the Mexican and Canadian borders. A decade earlier, that 
number was close to 1.6 million.33 (The recent economic downturn in the United States, 
which has removed some of the economic incentives for illegal crossing, has probably also 
affected these figures.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

sECuRiTy vERsus CiviL LibERTiEs
Many of the informants who have provided crucial intelligence 
regarding homegrown terrorists have come from the Muslim 
American community. Ties between that community and law 
enforcement became strained in late 2011, however, when 
national media outlets began reporting on the New York Police Department’s Demographics 
Unit. With the help of the CIA, this secret team of sixteen officers had infiltrated Muslim 
communities in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut, gathering information on thou-
sands of American citizens without any proof of wrongdoing.34
 
This strategy caused widespread outrage and a reluctance among those in the affected 
communities to cooperate with the police.35 It has also raised the issue of racial profiling, 
which we first discussed in Chapter 6.  Still, polls have found that a relatively high percent-
age of Americans favor using Muslim identity as a trigger for government surveillance, par-
ticularly at the nation’s airports.36 (To learn about a country where such profiling is national 
policy, see the feature Comparative Criminal Justice—The Not-So-Friendly Skies below.) 
 
As we have seen throughout this textbook, the need to balance the rights of society and 
the rights of the individual is a constant in the criminal justice system. As we will see in this 
section, nowhere is this challenge more fraught with difficulty than in the struggle against 
terrorism.
sEARCHEs, suRvEiLLAnCE, And sECuRiTy The Fourth Amendment protects against 
unreasonable searches and seizures. According to the United States Supreme Court, 
the purpose of this amendment is to “prevent arbitrary and oppressive interference by 
“as terrible as 9/11 was, it 
didn’t repeal the Constitution.”
— Rosemary S. Pooler,  
U.S. circuit judge
C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   405
THe NoT-so- 
FrieNdly skies  
El Al, the national airline of Israel, has 
an impressive security record. Despite 
Israel’s near-constant state of conflict with one or more of 
its neighbors in the Middle East, and the country’s status as 
a favored target for terrorist attacks, no El Al airplane has 
been hijacked in three decades. The Israeli government 
credits this success to its profiling strategy, which is based 
on the principle that it is “essential to focus on a very small 
percentage of passengers with terrorist intent.”
Whereas American security procedures are designed to 
find weapons, the Israelis focus on finding terrorists. At Ben 
Gurion International Airport, outside Tel Aviv, travelers are 
stopped several times before they reach their gate. During 
these encounters, airport security personnel ask a series of 
questions and evaluate the security risk of each passenger. 
In doing so, screening agents take into account a traveler’s 
country of origin and skin color. Most Jewish Israeli citizens 
are waived through this process rather quickly. Arab Israelis 
and other non-Jewish passengers, however, are generally 
taken aside for lengthy questioning, as well as a thorough 
luggage check and physical examination.
Saleh Yaaqubi, an Arab Israeli student, called the 
security check at Ben Gurion “the most offensive and 
humiliating experience I have ever had.” Americans, too, 
are often taken aback by the experience. Writer Matthew 
Yglesias noted that the one African American traveling 
with his group was singled out for intense scrutiny, and he 
criticized the Ben Gurion staff for “the most unpleasant 
encounter I’ve had with airport security in a decade.” Israeli 
terrorism experts dismiss such complaints as shortsighted. 
“How many blonde, blue-eyed ladies have brought down 
planes in the last twenty years?” asked one security 
consultant. “They were all fanatic Muslims. So, if you are a 
Muslim, we have to find out if you are a fanatic or not.”
For CritiCal analysis Would you be in favor of 
instituting Israeli screening methods in American airports? 
Why or why not?
ComparaTive CRiminAL jusTiCE
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
debate the use of racial profiling 
in antiterrorism operations. Is it 
defensible? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

406   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
enforcement officials with the privacy and personal security of individuals.”37 In practice, 
this has meant that a “neutral and detached” judge must, in most circumstances, decide 
whether a search or surveillance of a suspect’s person or property is warranted. Law 
enforcement has often chafed against these restrictions, and this tension has only been 
exacerbated by the demands of counterterrorism search and surveillance strategies.
The Patriot Act and Searches In a 2011 poll, 34 percent of those questioned about 
the Patriot Act felt that the law “goes too far and poses a threat to civil liberties,” while  
42 percent considered it a “necessary tool that helps the government fight terrorism.”38 
The legislation has certainly made it easier for law enforcement agents to conduct 
searches.  For example, previously, to search a suspect’s apartment and examine the con-
tents of his or her computer, agents needed a court order based on probable cause that 
a crime had taken place or was about to take place. The Patriot Act amends the law to 
allow the FBI or other federal agencies to obtain warrants for “terrorism” investigations, 
“chemical weapons” investigations, or “computer fraud and abuse” investigations as long 
as agents can prove that such actions have a “significant purpose.”39 In other words, no 
proof of criminal activity need be provided.
The Patriot Act and Surveillance The Patriot Act gives intelligence agents more lee-
way when conducting surveillance.  The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 
(FISA) allowed for surveillance of a suspect without a warrant as long as the  “primary 
purpose” of the surveillance was to investigate foreign spying and not to engage in 
criminal law enforcement.40 The Patriot Act amends FISA to allow for searches and 
surveillance if a “significant purpose” of the investigation is intelligence gathering 
or any other type of antiterrorist activity.41 The statute also provides federal agents 
with “roving surveillance authority,” allowing them to  continue  monitoring a terrorist 
suspect on the strength of the original warrant even if the suspect moves to another 
jurisdiction.42 
 
Furthermore, the Patriot Act makes it much easier for law enforcement agents to 
avoid the notification requirements of search warrants. This means that a person whose 
home has been the target of a search and whose voice mails or computer records have been 
seized may not be informed of these activities until weeks after they have taken place.43
Congress and Wiretapping Following a series of controversies concerning the ability 
of the National Security Agency (NSA) to monitor telephone and e-mail communications 
of terrorism suspects, several years ago Congress passed an amended version of FISA.44 
The new law allows the NSA to wiretap for seven days, without a court order, any person 
“reasonably believed” to be outside the United States, if necessary to protect national 
security. It also permits the wiretapping of Americans for seven days without a court 
order, if the attorney general has probable cause to believe that the target is linked to ter-
rorism. Supporters of the amendments claim that the average American has nothing to 
fear from the law “unless you have al Qaeda on your speed dial.” Critics, however, see it as 
a further erosion of Fourth Amendment protections in the name of homeland security.45
duE PRoCEss And indEfiniTE dETEnTion The Fifth Amendment provides that no person 
shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. (See pages 89–91 
for a review of due process.) More than a century ago, the United States Supreme Court 
ruled that, because the amendment uses the word person and not citizen, due process 
protections extend to non-U.S. citizens under the jurisdiction of the U.S. government.46 
Immediately after the September 11, 2001, attacks, however, the Office of the U.S. Attorney 
Explain how 
the Patriot 
Act has made 
it easier for 
federal agents 
to conduct 
searches 
during 
terrorism 
investigations.
Learning  
objective 3
social media and CJ 
The Department of 
Homeland Security 
operates a Facebook 
page that provides up-
to-date information on its 
many organizations and 
operations.  To access this 
Web site, visit the Criminal 
Justice CourseMate at 
cengagebrain.com and 
select the Web Links 
for this chapter.
Discussion Tip: Ask students what 
rights they are willing to give up in 
the name of national security. Do 
they believe that sacrificing certain 
Fourth Amendment protections will 
make the country safer? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   407
General set forth regulations that allowed home-
land security officials to detain non-U.S. citizens 
of “special interest” without first charging them 
with any crime. The new rules also allowed for 
the indefinite detention of such suspects in  
the event of “emergency or other extraordinary 
circumstance.”47
Detention at GTMO More than eight hundred 
of these “enemy combatants” were eventually 
sent to a U.S. military detention center at the U.S. 
Naval Base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba (GTMO). 
At the time, American officials insisted that 
because these al Qaeda and Taliban operatives 
had been captured during military operations, 
they could be held indefinitely without being 
charged with any wrongdoing.48 The detainees 
were denied access to legal representation or 
family members and were subjected to harsh interrogation tactics such as waterboard-
ing, sleep and food deprivation, physical stress positions, and isolation.49 Because of 
the conditions at GTMO, the U.S. government came under a great deal of international 
criticism. In particular, Arab and Muslim governments have condemned GTMO, as have 
officials from those non-Muslim nations, such as Australia and Great Britain, whose citi-
zens were being held at the detention center.
 
As of January 2012, 171 detainees remained incarcerated at GMTO, many of the 
others having been returned to their home countries.  At least fifty of the remaining pris-
oners are considered too dangerous for release. Federal officials will review their status 
periodically, but in theory they could be held indefinitely.50 At present, no alternative site 
for these men has been identified. Consequently, despite continuing criticism of GTMO, 
the facility appears likely to remain open and operational for the foreseeable future.
Military Justice A large number of GTMO detainees—about 120—will be given the 
chance to prove their innocence in regard to terrorist charges. Initially, the Obama 
administration favored adjudicating these cases in civilian courts on U.S. soil, where 
the detainees would have enjoyed all of the rights available to any criminal defendant.  
However, following negative reaction to the criminal trial of Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani 
(described on page 230), federal authorities decided that military tribunals would be 
the primary means for trying GTMO detainees. In May 2012, for instance, a military  
tribunal at GTMO commenced proceedings against Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the 
“mastermind” behind the September 11, 2001, attacks, and four of his colleagues.
 
Such tribunals, operating out of a $12 million, high-tech courtroom located at the 
Guantánamo Bay facilities, offer a more limited set of protections than do civilian crimi-
nal courts. In a tribunal, the accused does not have the right to a trial by jury, as guar-
anteed by the Sixth Amendment. Instead, a panel of at least five military commissioners 
acts in place of the judge and jury and decides questions of both fact and law. Only two-
thirds of the panel members need to agree for a conviction, in contrast to the unanimous 
jury required by criminal trials. Furthermore, evidence that would be inadmissible in 
criminal court, such as some forms of hearsay testimony (pages 238–239) and “fruit of 
the poisoned tree” from unreasonable searches and seizures (page 163), is allowed before 
these tribunals.51 
Military Tribunal A court 
that is operated by the military 
rather than the criminal justice 
system and is presided over 
by military officers rather than 
judges. 
Detainees in orange jumpsuits 
sit in a holding area at the U.S. 
Naval Base in Guantánamo 
Bay, Cuba. Do you think non-
U.S. citizens who are in the 
custody of the U.S. military 
should be protected by our 
Constitution? Why or why not? 
Reuters NewMedia, Inc./Corbis
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: Have students 
answer “Questions for Critical 
Analysis” number 2 on page 423, 
which asks them to consider 
the rights of terrorism suspects 
detained by the United States 
government.
Teaching Tip: Have students learn 
more about military tribunals and 
then compare and contrast military 
tribunals and the civilian criminal 
justice system. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
selFassessmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 424.
Terrorist are ____________ actors, meaning that they are not affiliated with any 
established nation. Since September 11, 2001, law enforcement agencies have been 
taking steps to ____________ terrorist-related wrongdoing before it gets beyond 
the planning stage. To do so, they often rely on ____________ operations to gather 
information about such plots.  Under the Patriot Act, government agents no longer have 
to show ____________ cause to obtain warrants for terrorist investigations. Rather, they 
only need to show that their actions have a “____________ purpose.”
CybER CRimE
The Craigslist advertisement—offering $300 a week and a free trailer to “watch over a 
688-acre patch of hilly farmland and feed a few cows”—acted like a beacon to the unem-
ployed and the desperate.  The ad drew more than one hundred responses, and four men 
traveled to the property in rural southern Ohio for a final “interview.”  Only one of them 
survived, a man who alerted local law enforcement after a close escape on November 6, 
2011.  The bodies of the three other men were found in shallow graves, leaving authorities 
perplexed as to the motives of the two suspects in the crime, Richard J. Beasley and high 
school student Brogan Rafferty.52
 
Using false names, Beasley and Rafferty were allegedly able to attract applicants 
from across the United States (one of the victims was from Virginia, another from South 
Carolina) for a job that did not exist on land they did not own. Access and anonymity 
are two of the hallmarks of Internet technology, which has transformed daily life in 
the twenty-first century. Nearly three-fourths of all American households now own a 
computer, and the proliferation of handheld Internet devices has made it possible to be 
online at almost any time or in any “place.” Furthermore, nearly every business in today’s 
economy relies on computers to conduct its daily affairs and to provide consumers with 
easy access to its products and services. In short, the Internet has become a place where 
large numbers of people interact socially and commercially. As in any such environment, 
wrongdoing has an opportunity to flourish.
ComPuTER CRimE  
And THE inTERnET
The U.S. Department of Justice broadly defines computer 
crime as “any violation of criminal law that involves a 
knowledge of computer technology for [its] perpetration, 
investigation, or prosecution.”53 More specifically, com-
puter crimes can be divided into three categories, accord-
ing to the computer’s role in the particular criminal act:54
1. The computer is the object of a crime, such as when 
the computer itself or its software is stolen.
2. The computer is the subject of a crime, just as a 
house is the subject of a burglary. This type of com-
puter crime occurs, for example, when someone 
“breaks into” a computer to steal personal informa-
tion such as a credit-card number.
Computer Crime Any 
wrongful act that is directed 
against computers and 
computer parts or that involves 
wrongful use or abuse of 
computers or software.
P.C. Vey/Conde Nast Publications/www.cartoonbank.com
Teaching Tip: In a similar case, the 
“Craigslist Killer” Philip Markoff 
sought his victims by responding 
to Craigslist notices advertising 
massage services. Discuss the role 
that anonymity—and the Internet’s 
ability to provide anonymity—plays 
in these sorts of crimes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   409
3. The computer is the instrument of a crime, as was the case with the alleged plot of 
Richard J. Beasley and Brogan Rafferty in Ohio.
 
In this chapter, we will be using a broader term, cyber crime, to describe any 
criminal activity occurring via a computer in the virtual community of the Internet. It is 
very difficult, if not impossible, to determine how much cyber crime actually takes place. 
Often, people never know that they have been the victims of this type of criminal activity. 
Furthermore, businesses sometimes fail to report such crimes for fear of losing customer 
confidence. Nonetheless, in 2011, the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), operated as 
a partnership between the FBI and the National White Collar Crime Center, received about 
315,000 complaints.55 According to the Norton Cybercrime Report, nearly 70 percent of all 
adults who use the Internet have been victimized by cyber crime, with annual global losses 
exceeding $380 billion.56
CybER CRimEs AgAinsT PERsons And PRoPERTy
Most cyber crimes are not “new” crimes. Rather, they are existing crimes in which the 
Internet is the instrument of wrongdoing. In the Ohio Craigslist case described above, 
for example, the suspects were charged with a variety of crimes ranging from murder to 
kidnapping to wire fraud, the same charges that would have been filed if they had placed 
their bogus advertisements in a newspaper.
 
The challenge for law enforcement is to apply traditional laws, which were designed 
to protect persons from physical harm or to safeguard their physical property, to crimes 
committed in cyberspace. This challenge is made all the greater by two aspects of the 
Internet that may aid the perpetrators of cyber crimes—the anonymity it provides and 
the ease with which large amounts of information may be transferred quickly. In the 
pages that follow, we look at several types of activity that constitute “updated” crimes 
against persons and property: online consumer fraud, cyber theft, and cyberstalking.
CybER ConsumER fRAud The expanding world of e-commerce has created many 
benefits for consumers. It has also led to some challenging problems, including fraud 
conducted via the Internet. In general, fraud is any misrepresentation knowingly made 
with the intention of deceiving another person. Furthermore, the victim must reasonably 
rely on the fraudulent information to her or his detriment. Cyber fraud, then, is fraud 
committed over the Internet. Scams that were once conducted solely by mail or phone 
can now be found online, and new technology has led to increasingly more creative 
ways to commit fraud. Online dating scams, for example, have 
increased dramatically in recent years, with fraudsters creating 
fake profiles to deceive unwitting romantic partners. In one case, a  
fictitious American solider in Iraq convinced his online “sweet-
heart” that he had been kidnapped and needed $250,000 from her 
to buy his freedom.
 
As you can see in Figure 14.2 alongside, two widely reported 
forms of cyber crime are advance fee fraud and online auction fraud. 
In the simplest form of advance fee fraud, consumers order and pay 
for items that are never delivered. Online auction fraud is also fairly 
straightforward. A person puts up an item for auction, on either a legit-
imate or a fake auction site, and then refuses to send the product after 
receiving payment. In 2012, for example, the FBI uncovered a scheme in 
which an Oregon couple took photos of items on store shelves, offered 
them for auction on the Internet, and collected more than $300,000 
Cyber Crime A crime that 
occurs online, in the virtual 
community of the Internet, as 
opposed to taking place in the 
physical world.
Cyber Fraud Any misrepre-
sentation knowingly made over 
the Internet with the intention 
of deceiving another and on 
which a reasonable person 
would and does rely to his or 
her detriment.
FIGURE 14.2 Criminal Activities Online
The list below shows the five most common 
types of cyber crime reported to the Internet 
Crime Complaint Center in 2011.
1.   FBI-related scams, where the offender poses as an 
FBI agent to defraud victims.
2.   Identify theft, described on page 410.
3.  Advance fee fraud, described on this page.
4.  Online auction fraud, described on this page.
5.  Overpayment fraud, in which the victim is notified 
of non-existent overpayments and asked to return 
the funds.
Source: Internet Crime Complaint Center, IC3 2011 Internet Crime Report 
(Glen Allen, VA: National White Collar Crime Center, 2012), 10.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
from unsuspecting bidders. As a variation, the wrongdoer may send the purchaser a 
forgery or an item that is worth less than the one offered in the auction. 
CybER THEfT In cyberspace, thieves are not subject to the physical limitations of the 
“real” world. A thief can steal data stored in a networked computer with network access 
from anywhere on the globe. Only the speed of the connection and the thief’s computer 
equipment limit the quantity of data that can be stolen. 
Identity Theft This freedom from physical limitations has led to a marked increase in 
identity theft, which occurs when the wrongdoer steals a form of identification—such 
as a name, date of birth, or Social Security number—and uses the information to access 
the victim’s financial resources. According to the federal government, about 7 percent of 
American households have at least one member who has been the victim of identity theft.57
 
This crime existed to a certain extent before the widespread use of the Internet. 
Thieves would “steal” calling-card numbers by watching people using public telephones, or 
they would rifle through garbage to find bank account or credit-card numbers. The identity 
thief would then use the  calling-card or credit-card number or withdraw funds from the 
victim’s account until the theft was discovered. 
 
The Internet has provided even easier access to personal data. Frequent Web surf-
ers surrender a wealth of information about themselves without knowing it. Many Web 
sites use “cookies” to collect data on those who visit their sites. The data can include the 
areas of the site the user visits and the links the user clicks on. Furthermore, Web brows-
ers often store information such as the consumer’s name and e-mail address. Finally, 
every time a purchase is made online, the item is linked to the purchaser’s name, allow-
ing Web retailers to amass a database of who is buying what.  
Phishing A distinct form of identity theft known as phishing has added a different 
wrinkle to the identity theft. In a phishing attack, the perpetrators “fish” for financial 
data and passwords from consumers by posing as a legitimate business such as a bank 
or credit-card company. The “phisher” sends an e-mail asking the recipient to “update” 
or “confirm” vital information, often with the threat that an account or some other ser-
vice will be discontinued if the information is not provided. Once the unsuspecting 
target enters the information, the phisher can use it to masquerade as the person or to 
drain his or her bank or credit account. Over the past several years, dozens of companies, 
including Amazon.com, AT&T, and Zappos.com, have been forced to warn consumers 
that fraudulent e-mails asking for personal and financial information had been sent in 
the companies’ names.  
 
Phishing scams have also spread to other areas, such as text messaging and 
social-networking sites. Nearly 13 percent of all phishing, for example, takes place using 
Facebook alerts.58 A new form of this fraud, called spear phishing, is much more difficult 
to detect because the messages seem to have come from co-workers, friends, or family 
workers. “It’s a really nasty tactic because it’s so personalized,” explains security expert 
Bruce Schneier. “It’s an e-mail from your mother saying she needs your Social Security 
number for the will she’s doing.”59
CybER AggREssion And THE nEw mEdiA The growing use of mobile devices such as 
smartphones and tablets has added another outlet for online criminal activity. About 10 
percent of cyber crime now targets such devices.60 In particular, widespread smartphone 
use seems to have exacerbated cyberbullying, which we discussed in the context of school 
crime in the previous chapter (see page 376). According to a recent survey, American teen-
Identity Theft The theft of 
personal information, such as a 
person’s name, driver’s license 
number, or Social Security 
number. 
Phishing Sending an 
unsolicited e-mail that falsely 
claims to be from a legitimate 
organization in an attempt to 
acquire sensitive information 
such as passwords or credit-
card details from the recipient.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   411
agers who consider themselves “heavy users” of their cell phones are 
much more likely to experience cyberbullying than those who consider 
themselves “normal users” of the devices.61
Cyberstalking In 2009, the U.S. Department of Justice released a 
landmark study that shed light on the high incidence of stalking in 
the United States. Defined as a “credible threat” that puts a person in 
reasonable fear for her or his safety or the safety of the person’s imme-
diate family, stalking, according to the study, affects approximately 
3.4 million Americans each year.62 About one in four of these victims 
experiences a form of cyberstalking, in which the perpetrator uses 
e-mail, social media, text messages, or some other form of electronic 
communication to carry out his or her harassment.63
Session Hijacking Another growing threat to the privacy of 
Internet users is session hijacking, in which an outside party gains 
unauthorized access to Web activity. In most instances, the goal of 
session hacking is to steal code names and passwords for sensitive 
Web sites in order to gain access to bank accounts or Facebook 
pages, for example.
 
In some instances, though, this kind of privacy invasion can be a very effective form 
of cyber aggression. Following a dispute with his neighbors, for example, Barry Ardolf of 
Blaine, Minnesota, gained illegal access to their Wi-Fi (wireless) Internet server and dras-
tically misrepresented them on the Internet. Over the course of two years, among other 
things, Ardolf created a Myspace page covered with child pornography and threatened 
the vice president of the United States using his neighbors’ identities. In 2011, Ardolf was 
arrested and sentenced to eighteen years in prison for his actions. (For the most part, 
this form of identity theft can be avoided by password protecting private Wi-Fi networks 
and avoiding public ones.)
CybER CRimEs in THE businEss woRLd
Just as cyberspace can be a dangerous place for consumers, it presents a number of 
hazards for businesses that wish to offer their services on the Internet. The same cir-
cumstances that enable companies to reach a wide number of consumers also leave 
them vulnerable to cyber crime. For example, in 2011, Rogelio Hackett, Jr., of Lithonia, 
Georgia, pleaded guilty to fraud and identity theft for stealing more than 675,000 credit-
card accounts from online businesses. Hackett would sell these accounts for as little as 
$20 to third parties, who used them to make fraudulent charges of more than $36 million.
HACkERs Rogelio Hackett, Jr., is a particular type of cyber criminal known as a hacker. 
(So is Jeremy Hammond, whose misdeeds were described in the opening of this chapter.) 
Hackers are people who use one computer to illegally access another. The danger posed 
by hackers has increased significantly because of botnets, or networks of computers that 
have been appropriated by hackers without the knowledge of their owners. A hacker will 
secretly install a program on thousands, if not millions, of personal computer “robots,” 
or “bots,” that allows her or him to forward transmissions to an even larger number of 
systems. The program attaches itself to the host computer when someone operating the 
computer opens a fraudulent e-mail. 
 
The Zeus Trojan, or Zbot, for example, employs a technique called keystroke logging 
to embed itself in a victim’s computer and then record user names and passwords. Using 
In January 2012, Patrick 
Macchione was sentenced 
to four years in prison for 
cyberstalking fellow University 
of Central Florida student 
Kristen Pratt. Macchione sent 
death threats to Pratt using 
Twitter, posted lewd messages 
to her Facebook account, 
and directed nearly thirty 
threatening videos at her on 
YouTube. Do you agree that 
cyberstalking can cause just as 
much “reasonable fear” in a 
victim as physical stalking? Why 
or why not?
Photo Courtesy of Seminole County  
Sheriff’s Office
Cyberstalking The crime 
of stalking, committed in 
cyberspace through the use 
of e-mail, text messages, or 
another form of electronic 
communication. 
Hacker A person who uses 
one computer to break into 
another.
Botnet A network of 
computers that have been 
appropriated without the 
knowledge of their owners 
and used to spread harmful 
programs via the Internet; short 
for robot network. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
this “banking Trojan,” cyberthieves stole $4 million from American bank accounts in 
2010.64 Computer security experts also worry that fake apps containing botnets will find 
their way onto the increasingly popular smartphones and tablet computers, allowing 
hackers to harvest personal information from those devices.
mALwARE Programs that create botnets are one of the latest forms of malware, a term 
that refers to any program that is harmful to a computer or, by extension, a computer 
user. A worm, for example, is a software program that is capable of reproducing itself 
as it spreads from one computer to the next. A virus, another form of malware, is also 
able to reproduce itself, but it must be attached to an “infested” host file to travel from 
one computer network to another. Worms and viruses can be programmed to perform 
a number of functions, such as prompting host computers to continually “crash” and 
reboot, or otherwise infect the system. 
 
Over the past few years, malware has increasingly been used to target specific companies 
or organizations. In 2011, for example, hackers used malware to carry out a targeted attack 
on Sony’s PlayStation network, thus gaining access to personal information and, possibly, the 
credit-card numbers of 77 million online gamers worldwide. Sony, a Japanese company, was 
forced to shut down the network for twenty-four days, costing the company $170 million. The 
Ponemon Institute, a private research organization, estimates that individual American busi-
nesses each lose an average of $5.9 million a year because of malware and other cyber crime.65
THE sPREAd of sPAm Businesses and individuals alike are targets of spam, or unso-
licited “junk e-mails” that flood virtual mailboxes with advertisements, solicitations, 
and other messages. Considered relatively harmless in the early days of the Internet, by 
2011 nearly 150 billion spam messages were being sent each day, accounting for about 
75 percent of all e-mails. Far from being harmless, the unwanted files can wreak havoc 
with computer systems. Bot networks, described earlier, are responsible for about 90 
percent of spam e-mail.66 
 
Spam is also the preferred method of phishing, the identity theft scam described 
earlier. By sending millions or even billions of these fraudulent e-mails, phishers need 
only entice a few users to “take the bait” to ensure a successful and lucrative operation. 
“Social” spam is becoming more common on social-networking sites such as Facebook. 
This form of hacking relies on fake messages, such as “hey, check out this free iPad,” that 
appear to be from a friend rather than an unknown company. The message includes a 
link to download a coupon for the free product. In reality, however, by clicking on the link, 
the unsuspecting user may have allowed malware to infect his or her computer.67
Worm A computer program 
that can automatically replicate 
itself over a network such as 
the Internet and interfere with 
the normal use of a computer. 
A worm does not need to be 
attached to an existing file to 
move from one network to 
another.
Virus A computer program 
that can replicate itself over a 
network such as the Internet 
and interfere with the normal 
use of a computer. A virus 
cannot exist as a separate 
entity and must attach itself 
to another program to move 
through a network.
Spam Bulk e-mails, 
particularly of commercial 
advertising, sent in large 
quantities without the consent 
of the recipient.
Describe the 
three following 
forms of 
malware:  
(a) botnets,  
(b) worms, and 
(c) viruses.
Learning  
objective 4
There are more than a quarter billion automobiles on the roads of the United States, and 
many of them could accurately be described as computers on wheels. The “electronic 
brains” in cars control everything from air bags to stereos to brake systems. Like any 
other computer, these computers can be hacked.  Several years ago, for example, a 
CJ&TECHnoLogy
Hacking Cars
Critical Thinking Skill 
Development: After reading 
the “CJ & Technology” feature 
below, ask students to use their 
imaginations to brainstorm other 
computer-based daily services that 
are susceptible to hacking.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

team of researchers from Rutgers University and the University of South Carolina were 
able to commandeer a car’s wireless tire pressure-monitoring system while that car was 
traveling at sixty miles per hour.
Another academic experiment, conducted in 2011, showed that high-tech car 
thieves could cause an automobile to wirelessly divulge its GPS coordinates and vehicle 
identification number. Then, using those data, the crooks could issue a series of wireless 
orders “telling” the vehicle to unlock its doors and start its engines. As automobiles and 
other vehicles become more reliant on computers to function, say experts, the likelihood 
of “car hacking” becomes more of a real-world threat.
THINKING ABOUT HACKING CARS: Using your imagination, describe how 
the possibility of hacking car computers could be a threat to homeland security.
PiRATing inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy onLinE Most people think of wealth in terms of 
houses, land, cars, stocks, and bonds. Wealth, however, also includes intellectual 
 property, which consists of the products that result from intellectual, creative processes. 
The government provides various forms of protection for intellectual property, such as 
copyrights and patents. These protections ensure that a person who writes a book or a 
song or who creates a software program is financially rewarded if that product is sold in 
the marketplace.
 
Intellectual property such as books, films, music, and software is vulnerable to 
“piracy”—the unauthorized copying and use of the property. In the past, copying intellec-
tual products was time consuming, and the quality of the pirated copies was clearly infe-
rior. In today’s online world, however, things have changed. Simply clicking a mouse can 
now reproduce millions of unauthorized copies, and pirated duplicates of copyrighted 
works obtained via the Internet are often exactly the same as the original, or close to 
it. The Business Software Alliance estimates that 29 percent of all business software is 
pirated, costing software makers more than $59 billion in 2010.68
CybER CRimEs AgAinsT THE CommuniTy
One of the greatest challenges cyberspace presents for law enforcement is how to enforce 
laws governing activities that are prohibited under certain circumstances but are not always 
illegal. Such laws generally reflect the will of the community, which recognizes behavior as 
acceptable under some circumstances and unacceptable under others. Thus, while it is 
legal in many areas to sell a pornographic video to a fifty-year-old, it is never legal to sell the 
same item to a fifteen-year-old. Similarly, placing a bet on a football game with a bookmaker 
in Las Vegas, Nevada, is legal, but doing the same thing with a bookmaker in Cleveland, 
Ohio, is not. Of course, in cyberspace it is often impossible to know whether the customer 
buying porn is age fifty or fifteen, or if the person placing the bet is in Las Vegas or Cleveland.
 
Consequently, the Internet has been a boon to both the pornography and the gam-
bling industries. Twelve percent of all Web sites have pornographic content, and these 
sites generate $4.2 billion in revenue a year.69 Although no general figures are available, the 
Internet has undoubtedly also greatly aided those who illegally produce and sell material 
depicting sexually explicit conduct involving a child—child pornography. Furthermore, 
even though all states have statutes that regulate gambling—defined as any scheme that 
Explain how 
the Internet 
has contributed 
to piracy of 
intellectual 
property.
Learning  
objective5
Intellectual Property  
Property resulting from 
intellectual, creative  
processes. 
C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E E   413
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
involves the distribution of property by chance—the United 
States is the largest online betting market in the world, with 
some $6 billion wagered illegally each year.70
selFassessmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 424.
One common cyber crime is online ____________ fraud, 
which occurs when a consumer pays for a product that 
is not delivered. Web thieves have opportunities to 
practice ____________ theft because of the large amount 
of personal financial information that is stored on the 
Internet. A ____________ is someone who gains illegal 
access to one computer using another computer. These 
wrongdoers sometimes use ____________ , or networks of 
hijacked computers, to carry out various improper online 
activities, including the illegal spread of junk e-mails  
 known as ____________.
THE CRiminALizATion  
of immigRATion LAw
Given that Hispanics make up the majority of both legal and illegal immigrants in the 
United States, this demographic has received a great deal of attention when it comes to 
immigration law topics. As we noted in Chapter 11, Hispanics are the fastest growing 
group among inmates in federal prisons, mostly as a result of immigration offenses.  On 
the state level, as we saw in Chapter 6, efforts to police illegal immigrants have led to 
debate, outrage, and charges of racial profiling.
 
At the outset, it is important to understand two crucial aspects of immigration law:
1. It is a civil regulatory system. Violations of immigration law are civil infractions, 
not criminal infractions.  America’s criminal justice and immigration systems are 
separate entities.
2. The U.S. Constitution gives the power to admit, exclude, or expel non-U.S. citizens 
to the federal government, not the state governments.
Historically, then, immigration law has generally been considered a civil and federal mat-
ter. In recent decades, however, a process labeled “crimmigration” by some observers has 
drastically changed the immigration law landscape. According to its critics, this process 
has resulted in a hybrid system in which non-U.S. citizen civil law violators are treated as 
criminals while state and local law enforcement officers increasingly take on immigra-
tion law enforcement responsibilities.71 For supporters of crimmigration measures, such 
developments are not only welcome but also long overdue.
immigRATion LAw bAsiCs
Fundamentally, immigration law acts as a screening process. It determines which non-
U.S. citizens may come into this country, how long they can stay, and when they must 
leave. People violate immigration law in two ways: by entering the United States without 
proper authorization from the federal government or by staying in the country after that 
authorization becomes invalid.  
In 2012 several states, 
including California and Texas, 
considered legalizing many 
forms of Internet gambling in 
order to collect taxes on the 
activity. What would be the 
benefits and drawbacks if all 
states legalized online poker, 
slots (as shown here), and other 
Internet games of chance?
Cassi Alexandra/New York Times/Redux Pictures
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   415
visA bAsiCs An alien is someone who is not a citizen of the country in which she or he 
is located. As we saw on page 404, proper authorization for an alien to enter the United 
States usually comes in the form of a visa. The most common types of visas allow aliens 
to visit this country for purposes of employment, tourism, education, or medical treat-
ment. Such visas are temporary and allow only a limited stay in the United States. When 
a visa expires, the non-U.S. citizen must either renew it or leave the country immediately. 
 
Nontemporary visas are also available to certain foreign citizens who want to live in 
the United States on a permanent basis. Most of those who succeed in obtaining a non-
temporary visa—known as a green card even though the document itself is no longer 
green—do so with the help of a U.S. citizen family member or an American employer.  
Green card holders, or permanent residents, enjoy many of the same rights as U.S. citi-
zens to live and work in this country. Permanent residents are still aliens, however, and 
must carry their green cards with them at all times.72 Furthermore, they are subject to 
removal from the United States if they violate the terms of their visas.
REmovAL bAsiCs As we noted earlier in the chapter, hundreds of thousands of non-
U.S. citizens try to enter the United States each year without first obtaining a visa, 
mostly by crossing the U.S. border with Mexico. By definition, those who succeed are 
inadmissible (unauthorized) and can be removed by American immigration authori-
ties at any time. Removal is a legal proceeding in which the U.S. government formally 
declares that a legal alien or an unauthorized alien has violated immigration law and 
therefore does not enjoy the right to stay in the United States. Generally, removal 
results in the alien’s being returned to his or her home country.
 
The mere presence of an unauthorized alien on U.S. soil, if detected by immigra-
tion authorities, will almost always lead to his or her removal. In contrast, a permanent 
resident must have violated immigration law in a specific way to become eligible for 
deportation, another form of removal. Examples of such violations include lying to a fed-
eral immigration agent or encouraging another alien to enter the United States illegally. 
Criminal convictions also put permanent residents in danger of being removed.73 Indeed, 
of the nearly 400,000 aliens removed by ICE in 2011, about 55 percent had criminal con-
victions.74 (See Figure 14.3 below for a breakdown of those criminal convictions.) Keep 
in mind that removal proceedings are separate from the criminal court proceedings you 
have been studying in this textbook. When an alien faces removal, she or he is involved in 
a civil process with its own courtrooms, judges, and opportunities for appeal. 
Alien A person who is not 
a citizen of the country in 
which he or she is found and 
therefore does not enjoy the 
same rights as a citizen of that 
country.
Green Card A document—
no longer green—that indicates 
the holder’s status as a lawful 
permanent resident of the 
United States.
Permanent Resident An 
alien who has been granted 
permission by the U.S. 
government to live and work 
in the United States on a 
permanent basis.
Removal The process used 
by the federal government to 
expel an alien from the United 
States.
Explain the 
difference 
between a 
temporary visa 
and a green 
card.
Learning  
objective6
Underlying crime
Homicide
Sexual offenses
Driving under the influence
Drug-related offenses
Number of removals
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
FIGURE 14.3 Removal of Criminal Immigrants
As this figure shows, immigrants removed from the United States because of prior 
criminal convictions in 2011 were most likely to have been involved with drug- or alcohol-
related wrongdoing.
Source: Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Technology Tip: Have students 
visit the Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) Web site to 
learn more about the agency.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
iLLEgAL PREsEnCE As noted earlier, the September 11 plot exposed, among other home-
land security failures, several weaknesses in America’s immigration system. One such 
shortcoming was an inability to track foreigners who failed to conform to the terms 
of their visas and were therefore illegally present in the United States. Five of the 9/11 
hijackers had violated their visas—and were therefore eligible for removal from the 
country—before they carried out the attacks. To remedy this situation, the Department 
of Homeland Security created the United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator 
Technology (US-VISIT) program. Under US-VISIT, which started in 2004, most foreigners 
entering the United States on visas are subject to fingerprinting and a facial scan using 
digital photography. Their names are also checked against criminal records and watch 
lists for suspected terrorists. 
 
Although the program has been effective in recording the entry of foreigners, it has 
been less successful in following their movements once they are in the United States. 
Furthermore, without the cooperation of the visitor, US-VISIT is unable to confirm 
when, or if, she or he has left the country. As a result, about 200,000 non-U.S. citizens 
f A s T f A C T s
CusToms And  
boRdER PRoTECTion AgEnT,  
job dEsCRiPTion:
•  Make sure that laws are observed 
when goods or people enter the 
U.S. Work at ports of entry and 
all along the border to prevent 
smuggling and the entrance of 
unauthorized immigrants. 
wHAT kind of TRAining  
is REQuiREd?
•  Be under age 40, be a U.S. citizen 
and resident of the United States, 
and possess a valid state driver’s 
license.
• Be fluent in Spanish or be able to 
learn the Spanish language.
AnnuAL sALARy RAngE?  
•  $36,600 – $46,500
Careers iN CJ
Paul MoRRiS 
CuStoMS aNd BoRdeR PRoteCtioN ageNt
The most memorable day of my career was, without a doubt, September 11, 2001. 
That morning, as I watched the fall of the Twin Towers, I knew that things were going 
to be different. Personally, the attacks left me with a resolve to ensure, to the maximum 
extent possible, that nothing similar ever happens again. Professionally, that day 
marked a sea charge with respect to how the federal border agencies viewed border 
security. Ever since, our antiterrorism mission has been elevated above 
our other responsibilities, such as controlling illegal immigration, 
protecting our agricultural interests, and stopping the flow of illegal 
narcotics into this country.
To be sure, as each of these tasks is crucially important, the 
extra burdens of antiterrorism pose a significant challenge. With 
the volume of vehicles, cargo, and persons crossing our borders, 
there can be no guarantees that a potential terrorist or weapon of mass destruction 
cannot slip across the border. Nevertheless, with advanced identification technology, 
increased personnel, and a more efficient infrastructure, I am confident that the 
possibility of such a breach is low.
Social Media Career tip  
Consider setting up personal and career-oriented Facebook pages or Twitter 
accounts and keeping your posts on each separated. Remember, though, that just 
because material is on your “personal” page or account, it still may be seen by 
others outside your network.
Photo Courtesy of Paul Morris
www.dhs.gov
Discussion Tip: Recent 
legal changes allow certain 
undocumented immigrants who 
entered the United States before 
the age of sixteen to avoid being 
deported. Share information about 
these changes with students. Then, 
ask them their opinions of the new 
policy. Is it fair? Why or why not?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   417
intentionally overstay their visas each year.75 Amine El Khalifi, whose foiled plot to attack 
the U.S. Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., was discussed earlier in the chapter, had 
overstayed his visa by twelve years at the time of his arrest.
EnfoRCing immigRATion LAw
About 11.2 million unauthorized aliens are living in the United States, according to research 
conducted by the nonpartisan Pew Hispanic Center.76 The vast majority of these aliens are 
law-abiding individuals who have come to this country for no other reason than to make 
a better life for themselves and their families. Nevertheless, some aliens—both legal and 
unauthorized—do commit crimes, and American law enforcement has developed strate-
gies to combat this criminal behavior. Increasingly, these strategies have focused on a par-
ticular vulnerability of criminal unauthorized aliens: their immigrant status.
oPERATion CommuniTy sHiELd In matters of criminal justice, the U.S. Constitution 
does not differentiate on the basis of citizenship. Before, during, and after a criminal 
trial, both U.S. citizens and non-U.S. citizens are protected by the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth 
Amendments.77 This “equality principle” does not apply to the enforcement of immigra-
tion law, however. For example, an ICE agent can arrest a person for violating immigra-
tion law even if no probable cause exists. The agent needs to have only an “articulable,” or 
explainable, suspicion of a violation for the arrest to be valid.78 Immigration law violators 
also have no right to receive the Miranda warning before custodial interrogations and 
have no right to an attorney when appearing before an immigration judge.79 
 
As we have discussed, the probable cause requirement places significant restric-
tions on law enforcement’s ability to arrest suspects (see pages 161–163). Facing no such 
restraints when it comes to immigration law, federal agents can prove useful partners 
for their counterparts in local law enforcement. The benefits of such a partnership are 
evident in Operation Community Shield, launched in 2005 by ICE to “target violent trans-
national street gangs” by arresting and removing alien gang members.80 The mechanics 
of Operation Community Shield are fairly simple. First, local police officers identify street 
gang members who are also in the country illegally. Then, ICE agents use immigration 
law to remove these gang members, a process that, as we have noted, is much quicker 
and easier than criminal prosecution.
 
Overall, in its first five years, Operation Community Shield resulted in the arrest 
of more than 17,500 gang members.81 Although about 70 
percent of these aliens were ultimately removed because of 
immigration law violations,82 a significant number of them 
had violent criminal histories, as well.
sECuRE CommuniTiEs The most ambitious coopera-
tive effort between the federal government and state 
and local law enforcement is the Secure Communities 
initiative. Under this program, started in 2008, informa-
tion on every suspect arrested by state and local police 
officers is transmitted electronically to the Department 
of Homeland Security during the booking process. If this 
instant background check shows that the suspect has a 
history of criminal or immigration law violations that 
makes him or her eligible for removal, ICE will issue a 
detainer. This document allows ICE to take custody of 
Detainer A document that 
gives U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement custody 
of an immigration law violator 
following the disposition of that 
person’s case by the criminal 
justice system.
In March 2011, ICE agents 
and local law enforcement 
officers teamed up as part of 
Project Southern Tempest. 
The operation resulted in the 
arrests of more than 400 non-
U.S. citizen gang members 
throughout the nation. What 
advantages do ICE agents 
have when apprehending gang 
members who are in the country 
illegally?
Belmarie Campos/Senior Forensic 
Photographer/Medical Examiner Dept./Miami-
Dade County/ICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the suspect at the conclusion of his or her contact with the criminal justice system, 
usually after the suspect has been released by police or has completed a jail or prison 
sentence. As of April 2012, nearly 2,600 state and local law enforcement agencies had 
access to Secure Communities software, and the program had resulted in the removal 
of about 130,00 non-U.S. citizens.83
selFassessmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 424.
Immigration violations are a matter of ____________ , rather than criminal, law, and such 
violations have traditionally come under the jurisdiction of the ____________ government, 
not the states. When the holder of a green card, also known as a ____________ resident, 
violates immigration law, then he or she is subject to ____________. 
wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE
A woman in Huntsville, Alabama, squanders $60,000 in student loans on house bills and 
“entertainment.” The owners of the Glory Pharmacy in Hernando County, Florida, know-
ingly accept 1,400 fake prescriptions for the painkiller oxycodone. A New Jersey defense 
contractor sells the U.S. Army faulty helicopter parts. A former 
Massachusetts state treasurer is indicted for using lottery funds 
to finance an unsuccessful campaign to become governor.
 
These court cases represent a variety of criminal behavior 
with different motives, different methods, and different victims. Yet they 
all fall into the category of white-collar crime, an umbrella term for wrong-
doing marked by deceit and scandal rather than violence. As we mentioned in Chapter 
1, white-collar crime has a broad impact on the global economy, causing American 
businesses alone approximately $300 billion in losses each year.84 Despite its global and 
national importance, however, white-collar crime has consistently challenged a criminal 
justice system that struggles to define the problem, much less effectively combat it.
wHAT is wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE?
White-collar crime is not an official category of criminal behavior measured by the 
federal government in the Uniform Crime Report. Rather, it covers a broad range of ille-
gal acts involving “lying, cheating, and stealing,” according to the FBI’s Web site on the 
subject.85 To give a more technical definition, white-collar crimes are financial activities 
characterized by deceit and concealment that do not involve physical force or violence. 
Figure 14.4 on the facing page lists and describes some common types of white-collar 
crime.
diffEREnT TECHniQuEs To differentiate white-collar crime from “regular” crime, crimi-
nologists Michael L. Benson of the University of Cincinnati and Sally S. Simpson of the 
University of Maryland focus on technique. For example, in an ordinary burglary, a 
criminal uses physical means, such as picking a lock, to get somewhere he or she should 
not be—someone else’s home—to do something that is clearly illegal.  Furthermore, the 
victim is a specific identifiable individual—the homeowner. In contrast, white-collar 
criminals usually (1) have legal access to the place where the crime occurs, (2) are spa-
tially separated from the victim, who is often unknown, and (3) behave in a manner that 
is, at least superficially, legitimate.86
— Justin Paperny, 
who served eighteen months 
in prison for misleading 
investment clients (2010)
“my morals were for sale.”
Indicate some 
of the ways in 
which white-
collar crime 
is different 
from violent or 
property crime.
Learning  
objective 7
Teaching Tip: Show the PBS 
Frontline documentary “The Spill” 
in class to expose students to one 
particular type of white-collar crime. 
Discussion Tip: Ask students 
to think about the lack of a 
probable cause requirement 
for apprehending immigration 
law violators. Do they think that 
immigration cases should be 
subject to the same due process 
requirements as criminal cases? 
Why or why not? 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   419
 
Benson and Simpson also identify three main techniques used by white-collar 
criminals to carry out their crimes:87
1. Deception. White-collar crime almost always involves a party who deceives and 
a party who is deceived. For example, in 2009, Congress passed legislation giving 
first-time home buyers an $8,000 tax credit. By 2010, federal agents had uncovered 
more than 100,000 instances of deception involving this benefit—applicants were 
lying about being first-time home buyers or were misusing the funds.88
2. Abuse of trust. A white-collar criminal often operates in a position of trust and mis-
uses that trust for personal benefit.  Dishonest stockbrokers, for example, may steal 
funds from clients rather than investing those funds in the stock market as promised.
3.  Concealment and conspiracy. To continue their illegal activities, white-collar crimi-
nals need to conceal those activities. In odometer fraud, for example, an automo-
bile dealership “rolls back” the odometers of used cars so that a higher price can 
be charged for the vehicles. When the fraud is discovered, the scheme normally 
can no longer succeed.
viCTims of wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE  As the above examples show, sometimes the victim 
of a white-collar crime is obvious. A fraudulent stockbroker is stealing directly from her 
or his clients, and odometer fraud denies consumers the actual value of their purchased 
automobiles. But who was victimized when the tax credit for first-time home buyers was 
fraudulently claimed? In that instance, the “victims” were the U.S. taxpayers, who collec-
tively had to cover the cost of the unwarranted benefits. Often, white-collar crime does 
not target individuals but rather large groups or even abstract concepts such as “society” 
or “the environment.”  
Embezzlement 
Embezzlement is a form of 
employee fraud in which 
an individual uses her 
or his position within an 
organization to embezzle, or 
steal, the employer’s funds, 
property, or other assets. 
Pilferage is a less serious 
form of employee fraud in 
which the individual steals 
items from the workplace. 
tax Evasion 
Tax evasion occurs when 
taxpayers underreport 
(or do not report) their 
taxable income or otherwise 
purposely attempt to evade 
a tax liability. 
Credit-Card and Check 
Fraud  Credit-card fraud 
involves obtaining credit-
card numbers through a 
variety of schemes (such 
as stealing them from 
the Internet) and using 
the numbers for personal 
gain. Check fraud includes 
writing checks that are not 
covered by bank funds, 
forging checks, and stealing 
traveler’s checks. 
Mail and Wire Fraud  
This umbrella term covers all 
schemes that involve the 
use of mail, radio, television, 
the Internet, or a telephone 
to intentionally deceive in a 
business environment. 
securities Fraud   
Securities fraud covers illegal 
activity in the stock market. 
 Stockbrokers who steal funds 
from their clients are guilty of 
securities fraud, as are those 
who engage in insider trading, 
which involves buying or 
selling securities on the basis 
of information that has not 
been made available to the 
public.
Bribery   
Also known as influence 
peddling, bribery occurs in 
the business world when 
somebody within a company 
sells influence, power, or 
information to a person 
outside the company who 
can benefit. A county official, 
for example, could give a 
construction company a 
lucrative county contract to 
build a new jail. In return, the 
construction company would 
give some of the proceeds, 
known as a kickback, to the 
official.
Consumer Fraud    
This term covers a wide 
variety of activities designed 
to defraud consumers, from 
selling counterfeit art to 
offering “free” items, such 
as electronic devices or 
vacations, that include a 
number of hidden charges. 
insurance Fraud   
Insurance fraud involves 
making false claims in 
order to collect insurance 
payments. Faking an 
injury in order to receive 
payments from a workers’ 
compensation program, 
for example, is a form of 
insurance fraud.
PhotoDisc/Getty Images
Digital Vision CD
Digital Vision CD
FIGURE 14.4 White-Collar Crimes
Group Activity: Separate the class 
into small groups and assign each 
group a different type of white-
collar crime. Then, have each group 
research that particular crime and 
share its findings with the class.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students compare and 
contrast white-collar crime, violent 
crime, and property crime, focusing 
on typical perpetrators, victims, 
forms, and so on.  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REguLATing And PoLiCing wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE
Several years ago, Guidant Corporation was found guilty of deliberately selling flawed 
heart defibrillators, which employ electric energy to correct irregular heart rhythms. 
Because six people who used the faulty devices died, Guidant was fined nearly $300 mil-
lion and placed on three years’ probation, during which time its operations would be 
subject to regular government inspections.89
 
The deaths of six people because of Guidant Corporation’s heart defibrillators are 
an example of corporate violence. In contrast to assaults committed by individual people, 
corporate violence is a result of policies or actions undertaken by a corporation. In the 
United States, parallel regulatory and criminal systems have evolved to prevent corpo-
rate violence and other forms of white-collar crime.
THE REguLAToRy jusTiCE sysTEm Although most white-collar crimes cause harm, these 
harms are not necessarily covered by criminal statutes. Indeed, more often they are cov-
ered by administrative laws, which we first encountered in Chapter 3 (see page 69). Such 
laws make up the backbone of the U.S. regulatory system, through which the government 
attempts to control the actions of individuals, corporations, and other institutions. The 
goal of regulation is not prevention or punishment as much as compliance, or the 
following of regulatory guidelines.90 For example, following the Deepwater Horizon oil 
spill off the coast of Louisiana in April 2010, BP (the corporation that operated the faulty 
oil-drilling rig) used special types of chemicals called dispersants to aid in the cleanup. 
Agents from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) monitored the levels of these 
chemicals to ensure that further damage was not done to the Gulf of Mexico (see the 
photo below).
 
The EPA—which regulates practices relating to air quality, water quality, and 
toxic waste—is one of the federal administrative agencies whose compliance over-
sight brings them into contact with white-collar crime. Another, the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), enforces workplace health and safety stan-
dards. In 2011, OSHA cited Texas’ Taft Grain and Elevator for 
noncompliance and fined the company $188,000 after one of its 
employees was killed in a grain bin accident.91 In addition, the 
Federal Trade Commission regulates business interactions, and 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) ensures that 
financial markets such as the New York Stock Exchange operate 
in a fair manner. 
LAw EnfoRCEmEnT And wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE Two years after 
the Deepwater Horizon accident referred to above, in which 
eleven workers were killed, federal prosecutors charged a for-
mer BP engineer with intentionally deleting two hundred text 
messages relating to the accident. In general, when officials at 
a regulatory agency find that criminal prosecution is needed to 
punish a particular violation, they will refer the matter to the U.S. 
Department of Justice. Either through such referrals or at their 
own discretion, federal officials prosecute white-collar crime 
using the investigatory powers of several different federal law 
enforcement agencies. The FBI has become the lead agency when 
it comes to white-collar crime, particularly in response to high-
Corporate Violence  
Physical harm to individuals or 
the environment that occurs as 
the result of corporate policies 
or decision making.
Regulation Governmental 
control of society through 
rules and laws enforced by 
administrative agencies.
Compliance The state of 
operating in accordance with 
governmental standards.
What role did the 
Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) play in 
monitoring efforts to clean 
up the oil slick from the 
Deepwater Horizon oil spill 
in the spring of 2010? Why 
is the EPA considered a 
regulatory agency and not a 
law enforcement agency? 
Ted Jackson/Times-Picayune/Landov
Explain the 
concept of 
corporate 
violence.
Learning  
objective 8
420   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   421
profile financial scandals. The U.S. Postal Inspection Service is also quite active in such 
investigations, as fraudulent activities often involve the U.S. mail and Internet wire fraud. 
In addition, the Internal Revenue Service’s Criminal Investigative Division has jurisdic-
tion over a wide variety of white-collar crimes, including tax fraud, and operates perhaps 
the most effective white-collar crime lab in the country.
 
Local and state agencies also investigate white-collar crimes, but because of the 
complexity and costs of such investigations, most are handled by the federal govern-
ment. Federal prosecutors are also in a unique position to enforce the federal Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), which we discussed briefly in Chapter 10.  
Originally designed to combat organized crime, RICO makes it illegal to receive income 
through a pattern of racketeering.92 The definition of racketeering is so inclusive—basi-
cally covering any attempt to earn illegal income involving more than one person—that it 
can be used against a broad range of white-collar wrongdoing. In 2011, for example, federal 
prosecutors used RICO to convict eleven tobacco companies for misleading the American 
public about the addictive qualities of cigarettes.
wHiTE-CoLLAR CRimE in THE 2000s
The decade that ended in 2010 was marked by two periods of financial scandal. First, in 
2001 and 2002, fraudulent accounting practices led to the demise of giant corporations 
such as Enron and Worldcom, costing investors tens of billions of dollars. Then, near 
the end of the decade, the collapse of the subprime mortgage market caused millions of 
Americans to lose their homes to foreclosure and led to the collapse of major financial 
institutions such as Lehman Brothers and Washington Mutual. In the latter period, head-
lines focused on widespread mortgage fraud, or dishonest practices relating to home 
loans, along with the misdeeds of Bernard Madoff. Before his 2008 arrest, Madoff man-
aged to defraud thousands of investors out of approximately $65 billion.
 
As has often occurred in U.S. history, these scandals and the concurrent economic 
downturns led to greater regulation and criminalization of white-collar crime. In 1934, 
for example, in the wake of the Great Depression, Congress established the SEC to 
watch over the American economy.93 Similarly, in 2002, Congress passed legislation 
which, among other things, enhanced the penalties for those convicted of white-collar 
crimes.94 (See the feature Myth versus Reality—Soft Time for White-Collar Crime on the 
following page.) In response to the “Great Recession” of 2008 and 2009, the FBI created 
the National Mortgage Fraud Team and began to crack down on a variety of white-
collar crimes. Indeed, FBI agents are increasingly using aggressive tactics such as going 
undercover, planting wiretaps, and raiding offices—tactics previously reserved for 
drug dealers, mobsters, and terrorists—against white-collar criminals.95
selFassessmeNT
Fill in the blanks and check your answers on page 424.
According to the FBI, white-collar crimes are economic activities characterized by 
____________ and concealment that do not involve ____________ . Administrative 
agencies such as the ____________ Protection Agency make up the backbone of the 
U.S. regulatory system, which combats white-collar crime by requiring ____________ with 
certain guidelines. A powerful tool for law enforcement in combating white-collar crimes, 
____________ can be used against groups or organizations that attempt to earn income 
illegally.
Racketeering The criminal 
action of being involved in an 
organized effort to engage in 
illegal business transactions.
Technology Tip: Have students 
research racketeering online and 
learn more about the wide variety 
of crimes that are prosecuted 
under racketeering statutes.
Group Activity: In small groups, 
have students read the “Myth v. 
Reality” feature on the following 
page. Have the groups make the 
argument that white-collar crimes 
are more harmful to society, and 
therefore should be punished 
more harshly, than violent crimes.  
Following this exercise, determine 
if any students have adopted this 
position as their own.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
   
During the 1980s, the nation was rocked by a series of 
financial scandals, including the “savings and loan crisis.” 
As a result of this debacle, dozens of financial institutions 
failed, eventually costing American taxpayers more than 
$160 billion. To the outrage of many, the high-profile white-
collar criminals from the era received relatively light prison 
sentences for their fraudulent behavior. Corrupt Louisiana 
financier Herman K. Beebe spent less than a year in prison. 
Michael Milken, “the junk bond king” who pleaded guilty 
to violating securities laws, was released after twenty-two 
months. Bank president Charles Keating, Jr., whose actions 
wiped out the savings of more than 20,000 customers, 
served four and a half years.
tHe MYtH White-collar criminals, with their high-priced 
lawyers and friends in high places, receive light penalties. 
Even though their wrongdoing causes a great deal of 
suffering, they are not treated as harshly by the criminal 
justice system as petty thieves or low-level drug dealers.
tHe RealitY The political response to the financial 
scandals of the early 2000s focused on increasing penalties 
for white-collar criminals. In November 2001, the U.S. 
Sentencing Commission increased its recommended 
punishments for businesspersons who commit fraud, 
particularly when the misdeeds involve losses in excess of 
$100 million. Then, in 2002, Congress passed the White 
Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement Act, which doubled the 
maximum sentences for some kinds of corporate fraud.  
The results have been striking. In 2009, Edward Hugh 
Okun was sentenced to 120 years for stealing $126 million 
from clients, and Richard Harkless received 100 years for 
defrauding investors out of nearly $40 million. In December 
2011, a U.S. district judge sentenced Judith Negron to 
thirty-five years in prison for cheating federal government 
programs that provide health care to the elderly and 
disabled out of $205 million. Bernie Madoff, mentioned in 
the text, received a 150-year prison term. Although judges 
still have great leeway to depart from the guidelines when 
sentencing white-collar criminals, public outrage at white-
collar crime has apparently created an environment in which 
harsh punishments are the rule rather than the exception.
FoR CRitiCal aNalYSiS  What are some of the 
justifications for punishing white-collar criminals such as 
Judith Negron and Bernie Madoff so harshly? Are there 
any reasons to be lenient with those whose crimes do not 
physically harm their victims?
myTH vs. REALITY
soft Time for white-Collar Crime
Bernie Madoff, left center, was sentenced to 150 years in 
prison for stealing tens of billions of dollars from investment 
clients. 
Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   423
CHapTer sUmmary
Identify three important trends in inter-
national terrorism. (a) Terrorists have 
developed more efficient methods of financ-
ing their operations. (b)  Terrorists have developed more 
efficient organizations based on the small-business model. 
(c) Terrorists have exploited new communications technol-
ogy to mount global campaigns.
Explain how American law enforcement 
agencies have used “preventive polic-
ing” to combat terrorism. American law 
enforcement agencies are no longer willing to take the chance 
that nascent terrorist plots will lose momentum rather than 
develop into significant security threats. Therefore, they are 
taking steps to stop these plots in the planning stages, even if 
the dangers posed by the conspirators are minimal.
Explain how the Patriot Act has made 
it easier for federal agents to conduct 
searches during terrorism investigations. 
In requesting a search warrant for investigations of terrorism, 
federal agents no longer need to provide probable cause of 
wrongdoing. They must only prove that their actions have a 
“significant purpose,” which means that no proof of criminal 
activity need be provided.
Describe the three following forms of 
malware: (a) botnets, (b) worms, and  
(c) viruses. (a) A botnet is a network of 
computers that have been hijacked without the knowledge 
of their owners and used to spread harmful programs across 
the Internet. (b) A worm is a damaging software program 
that reproduces itself as it moves from computer to com-
puter. (c) A virus is a damaging software program that must 
be attached to an “infested” host file to transfer from one 
computer to the next.
Explain how the Internet has contrib-
uted to piracy of intellectual property. In 
the past, copying intellectual property such 
as films and music was time consuming, and the quality of 
the pirated copies was vastly inferior to that of the originals. 
On the Internet, however, millions of unauthorized copies 
of intellectual property can be reproduced at the click of a 
mouse, and the quality of these items is often the same as 
that of the original, or close to it.
Explain the difference between a tempo-
rary visa and a green card. A temporary 
visa is a document that gives a non-U.S. citi-
zen permission to visit the United States for a limited amount 
of time and for a limited purpose. A green card, or nontem-
porary visa, confers on the holder the status of permanent 
resident, and he or she enjoys many of the same rights as U.S. 
citizens to live and work in this country.
Indicate some of the ways in which 
white-collar crime is different from vio-
lent or property crime. A wrongdoer com-
mitting a standard crime usually uses physical means to 
get somewhere she or he legally should not be in order to 
do something clearly illegal. Also, the victims of violent and 
property crimes are usually easily identifiable. In contrast, a 
white-collar criminal usually has legal access to the crime 
scene where he or she is doing something seemingly legiti-
mate. Furthermore, victims of white-collar crimes are often 
unknown or unidentifiable. 
Explain 
the 
concept 
of 
corporate  
violence. 
Corporate 
violence 
occurs 
when a corporation implements policies 
that ultimately cause physical harm to individuals or the 
environment.
Learning  
objective1
Learning  
objective2
Learning  
objective3
Learning  
objective4
Learning  
objective5
Learning  
objective6
Learning  
objective7
Learning  
objective8
QUesTioNs For CriTiCal aNalysis
1. Using your own words, what is the definition of  
terrorism?
2. According to Donna Marsh, whose pregnant daughter was 
killed on September 11, 2001, in New York City, it is “uncon-
scionable” to hold terrorism suspects for nearly a decade 
without trial, and it “demeans the United States’ justice 
system” to say these suspects cannot be tried in civilian 
courts. What is your opinion of these statements?
3. Consider the following proposed state law: It is unlawful 
for any person, with intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, 
harass, annoy, or offend, to use ANY ELECTRONIC OR DIG-
ITAL DEVICE and use any obscene, lewd, or profane lan-
guage. What is your opinion of this statute? What might 
be some of its unforeseen consequences? 
4. Guy, who was born in Haiti, has lived in Miami, Florida, 
for fifteen years and is a permanent resident, meaning 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
that he has a green card. One night Guy gets in a fight 
with a neighbor and is eventually convicted of simple as-
sault. Even if a judge sentences him to probation rather 
than jail time, how might this conviction affect Guy’s 
ability to continue living in the United States legally?
5. Law enforcement agencies have extensively employed an-
tiracketeering laws such as RICO in combating drug deal-
ers and criminal gangs. (To review RICO, go to page 421.) 
Why would such legislation be useful in prosecuting these 
non-white-collar criminals?
key Terms
alien  415
Antiterrorism and Effective Death 
Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA)  399
botnet  411
Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA)  402
compliance  420
computer crime  408
corporate violence  420
cyber crime  409
cyber fraud  409
cyberstalking  411
detainer  417
domestic terrorism  399
first responders  403
green card  415
hacker  411
identity theft  410
infrastructure  401
intellectual property  413
intelligence agency  401
military tribunal  407
National Security Agency (NSA)  402
nonstate actor  397
Patriot Act  400
permanent resident  415
phishing  410
preparedness  403
racketeering  421
regulation  420
removal  415
spam  412
virus  412
visa  404
worm  412
selF assessmeNT aNsWer key
Page 408: i. nonstate; ii. prevent; iii. intelligence;  
iv. probable; v. significant
Page 414: i. retail; ii. identity; iii. hacker; iv. botnets;  
v. spam
Page 418: i. civil; ii. federal; iii. permanent; iv. removal
Page 421: i. deceit; ii. violence/physical force;  
iii. Environmental; iv. compliance;  
v. RICO/antiracketeering laws
CoUrsemaTe
For online help and access to resources that accompany 
Criminal Justice in Action: The Core, go to www.cengage-
brain.com/shop/ISBN/978-1-285-06915-9. Click  
“Access Now,” where you will find flashcards, an online  
quiz, and other helpful study aids. If you have an access 
code for CourseMate, log in and go to the chapter of your 
choice for additional online study aids. 
NoTes
 1. “Anonymous Hacks Cyber Cops,” Associated 
Press (February 6, 2012).
 2. Quoted in Michael S. Schmidt, “FBI Director 
Warns against Terrorist Hacking,” New York 
Times (March 8, 2012), A16.
 3. National Strategy for Homeland Security 
(Washington, D.C.: Office of Homeland 
Security, 2002), 2.
 4. “Domestic Terrorism Program,” at baltimore. 
fbi.gov/domter.htm.
 5. David A. Westbrook, “Bin Laden’s War,” Buffalo 
Law Review (December 2006), 981–1012.
 6. Quoted in Kimberly Dozier and David Espo, 
“U.S. Kills Osama bin Laden Decade after 9/11 
Attacks,” Associated Press (May 2, 2011).
 7. Ahmed S. Hashim, “Al-Qaida: Origins, Goals, 
and Grand Strategy,” in The McGraw-Hill 
Homeland Security Handbook, ed. David G. 
Kamien (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), 24.
 8. Quoted in ibid., 9.
 9. Quoted in “The Growing, and Mysterious, 
Irrelevance of al Qaeda,” The Economist 
(January 24, 2009), 64. 
10. Quoted in Maggie Michael, “Al-Qaida Confirms 
Osama bin Laden’s Death,” Associated Press 
(May 6, 2011).
11. Brian Michael Jenkins, “The New Age of 
Terrorism,” in The McGraw-Hill Homeland 
Security Handbook, ed. David G. Kamien (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), 117–129.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4 :  T o d A y ’ s  C H A l l E n g E s  i n  C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E   425
12. Ibid., 128.
13. 18 U.S.C. Section 2339B(a)(1) (1996).
14. 8 U.S.C. Section 1182(a)(3)(B) (Supp. I 2001); 
and 8 U.S.C. Section 1189(a)(1)(C) (Supp. I 
2001).
15. U.S. Department of State, “Country Reports 
on Terrorism,” at www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/
crt/2008/122449.htm.
16. 18 U.S.C. Section 2339A(b) (Supp. I 2001).
17. 8 U.S.C. Section 1182(a)(3)(B)(iv)(VI) (Supp. 
I 2001), amended by the Patriot Act of 2001, 
Pub. L. No. 107-56, Section 411(a), 115 Stat. 
272.
18. Uniting and Strengthening America by 
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to 
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, 
Pub. L. No. 107-56, 115 Stat. 272 (2001).
19. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Facts and 
Figures: FBI Priorities,” at www.fbi.gov/ 
priorities/priorities.htm.
20. Jane A. Bullock et al., Introduction to Homeland 
Security, 4th ed. (Waltham, MA: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2012), 182–183.
21. National Commission on Terrorist Attacks 
upon the United States, The 9/11 Commission 
Report: Executive Summary (Washington, D.C.: 
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks 
upon the United States, 2004), 77.
22.  Greg Miller and Julie Tate, “CIA Focus Shifts to 
Killing Targets,” Washington Post (September 
1, 2010), A1.
23. Charlie Savage, “FBI Focusing on Security 
over Ordinary Crime,” New York Times (August 
24, 2011), A15.
24. Quoted in “Spies Among Us,” U.S. News & 
World Report (May 8, 2006), 43.
25. Ibid., 41–43.
26. Richard A. Serrano, “D.C. Bomb Plot Foiled,” 
Baltimore Sun (February 18, 2012), 10A.
27. Debbie Siegelbaum, “Authorities Foil Planned 
Suicide Bombing Attack on Capitol Building,” 
The Hill (February 17, 2012), at thehill.com/
homenews/news/211447-authorities- 
foil-planned-suicide-bombing-attack- 
on-capitol-building.
28. Center on Law and Security, Terrorist Trial 
Report Card: September 11, 2001–September 
11, 2009 (New York: New York University 
School of Law, January 2010), 42–44.
29. Carl Strock, “How Far Was Terrorist an FBI 
Creation?” Daily Gazette (Schenectady, NY) 
(February 21, 2012), B1.
30. Eric Schmitt and Charlie Savage, “In U.S. Sting 
Operations, Questions of Entrapment,” New 
York Times (November 30, 2010), A22.
31. “Homeland Security Presidential Directive/
HSPD-8,” at www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/nspd/
hspd-8.html.
32. Bullock et al., 334.
33. Marc Lacey, “At the Border, on the Night Watch,” 
New York Times (October 13, 2011), A17.
34. Adam Goldman and Matt Puzo, “Inside the 
Spy Unit That NYPD Says Doesn’t Exist,” 
Associated Press (August 31, 2011).
35. Chris Hawley and Eileen Sullivan, “Angry 
over Spying, Muslims Say ‘Don’t Call NYPD,’ ” 
Associated Press (November 14, 2011).
36. “Anti-Muslim Sentiments Fairly Commonplace,” 
Gallup Poll (August 10, 2006), at www.gallup.
com/poll/24073/antimuslim-sentiments-
fairly-commonplace.aspx.
37. INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 215 (1983).
38. Pew Research Center for the People and the 
Press, “Public Remains Divided over the Patriot 
Act” (February 15, 2011), at pewresearch.org/
pubs/1893/poll-patriot-act-renewal.
39. Pub. L. No. 107-56, Section 201-2-2, 115 Stat. 
272, 278 (2001). 
40. 50 U.S.C. Section 1803 (2000).
41. Patriot Act, Section 203(d)(1), 115 Stat. 272, 
280 (2001).
42. Patriot Act, Section 206, amending Section 
105(c)(2)(B) of the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act.
43. Patriot Act, Section 213.
44. FISA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 
110-261, 122 Stat. 2436 (2008).
45. Eric Lichtblau, “Senate Approves Bill to 
Broaden Wiretap Powers,” New York Times 
(July 10, 2008), A1.
46. Wong Wing v. United States, 163 U.S. 228 (1896).
47. 66 Federal Register 48334 (September 20, 
2001).
48. Richard M. Pious, The War on Terrorism 
and the Rule of Law (Los Angeles: Roxbury 
Publishing Co., 2006), 165–166.
49. Michael Greenberger, “You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ 
Yet: The Inevitable Post-Hamdan Conflict 
between the Supreme Court and the Political 
Branches,” Maryland Law Review 66 (2007), 
805, 807.
50. Charlie Savage, “U.S. Prepares to Lift Ban on 
Guantanamo Cases,” New York Times (January 
20, 2011), A1.
51. Military Commission Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 
111-84, Sections 1801–1807, 123 Stat. 2190 
(2009).
52. Erica Goode, “Craigslist Used in Deadly Plot 
to Lure Victims to Ohio,” New York Times 
(December 2, 2011), A16.
53. National Institute of Justice, Computer 
Crime: Criminal Justice Resource Manual 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
Justice, 1989), 2.
54. Ibid.
55. Internet Crime Complaint Center, IC3 2011 
Internet Crime Report (Glen Allen, VA: National 
White Collar Crime Center, 2012), 9.
56. Symantec, press release, “Norton Study 
Calculates Cost of Global Cybercrime” 
(September 7, 2011), at ww.symantec.
com/about/news/release/article.
jsp?prid=20110907_02.
57. Bureau 
of 
Justice 
Statistics, 
Identity 
Theft Reported by Households, 2005–2010 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
November 2011), 1.
58. Benny Evangelista and Alejandro Martinez-
Cabrera, “Big Jump in Number of People on 
Twitter,” San Francisco Chronicle (September 
4, 2010), D2.
59. Quoted in Matt Richtel and Verne G. Kopytoff, 
“E-Mail Fraud Hides behind Friendly Face,” New 
York Times (June 3, 2011), A1.
60. Ben Rooney, “Cybercrime Exacts a Daily Toll,” 
Wall Street Journal (September 12, 2011), 29.
61. Openet, press release, “Openet-Sponsored Study 
Reveals 41 Percent of Teenagers Experience 
Cyber-bullying” (January 18, 2012), at www.
openet.com/company/news-events/press-
releases?id=482.
62. Bureau 
of 
Justice 
Statistics, 
Stalking 
Victimization in the United States (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, January 
2009), 1.
63. Ibid.
64. Geraldine Baum and Stuart Pfeifer, “Dozens 
Charged in Bank Thefts,” Los Angeles Times 
(October 1, 2010), B1.
65. Second Annual Cost of Cyber Crime Study: 
Benchmark Study of U.S. Companies (Traverse 
City, MI: Ponemon Institute, August 2011), 1.
66. Symantec Global Internet Security Threat 
Report: Trends for 2009 (Mountain View, CA: 
Symantec, April 2010), 16.
67. Geoffrey A. Fowler, Shayndi Raice, and Amir 
Efrati, “Spam Finds a New Target,” Wall Street 
Journal (January 4, 2012), B1.
68. Eighth Annual BSA and IDC Global Software 
Piracy Study (Washington, D.C.: Business 
Software Alliance, May 2011), 2.
69. “The Internet Porn ‘Epidemic’: By the Numbers,” 
The WEEK (June 17, 2010), at theweek.com/
article/index/204156/the-internet-porn-
epidemic-by-the-numbers.
70. Steve Chapman, “More Freedom Is a Sound 
Bet,” Chicago Tribune (August 1, 2010), 21.
71. Teresa A. Miller, “Lessons Learned, Lessons 
Lost: Immigration Enforcement’s Failed 
Experiment with Penal Severity,” Fordham 
Urban Law Journal (November 2010), 217.
72. 8 U.S.C.A. Section 1304(e).
73. 8 U.S.C.A. Section 1227(a).
74. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
“Removal Statistics,” at www.ice.gov/removal-
statistics.
75. James C. McKinley, Jr., and Julia Preston, “U.S. 
Can’t Trace Foreign Visitors on Expired Visas,” 
New York Times (October 12, 2009), A1.
76. John S. Passel and D’Vera Cohn, “Unauthorized 
Immigrant Population: National and State 
Trends, 2010,” Pew Hispanic Center (February 
1, 2011), at pewhispanic.org/reports/report.
php?ReportID=133.
77. Wong Wing v. United States, 163 U.S. 228 (1895).
78. 8 C.F.R. Section 287.3(a)-(b).
79. Ibid.; and Samayoa-Martinez v. Holder, 558 
F.3d 897, 901–902 (9th Cir. 2009).
80. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
“Operation Community Shield/Transnational 
Gangs,” at www.ice.gov/community-shield.
81. James Walsh, “Feds Arrest Eighteen Gang 
Members,” Star Tribune (Minneapolis–St. Paul) 
(July 9, 2010), 4B.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426   C R i m i n A l  J u s T i C E  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
82. Jon Freere and Jessica Vaughan, “Taking Back 
the Streets: ICE and Local Law Enforcement 
Target Immigrant Gangs,” Center for 
Immigration Studies, September 2008, at 
www.cis.org/immigrantgangs.
83. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
“Activated Jurisdictions,” at www.ice.gov/
doclib/secure-communities/pdf/sc- 
activated.pdf.
84. The 
Federal 
Bureau 
of 
Investigation, 
Seattle Division, “What We Investigate,” at  
www.fbi.gov/seattle/about-us/what-we-
investigate/priorities. 
85. The Federal Bureau of Investigation, “White-
Collar Crime” at www.fbi.gov/about-us/
investigate/white_collar/whitecollar 
crime.
86. Michael L. Benson and Sally S. Simpson, White-
Collar Crime: An Opportunity Perspective (New 
York: Routledge, 2009), 79–80.
87. Ibid., 81–87.
88. Anton R. Valukas, “White-Collar Crime and 
Economic Recession,” University of Chicago 
Legal Forum (2010), 5.
89. U.S. Department of Justice, “Medical Device 
Manufacturer Guidant Sentenced for Failure 
to Report Defibrillator Safety Problems to 
FDA” (January 12, 2011), at www.justice.gov/
opa/pr/2011/January/11-civ-035.html.
90. Benson and Simpson, 189.
91. Occupational Safety & Health Administra-
tion, “US Labor Department’s OSHA Cites 
Grain Elevator Operator with Safety Violations 
Following Worker Death in Taft, Texas” (May 
9, 2011), at www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/
owadisp.show_document?p_table=NEWS_
RELEASES&p_id=19764.
92. Lawrence Salinger, Encyclopedia of White-
Collar and Corporate Crime, 2d ed. (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 2004), 361.
93. 15 U.S.C. Sections 78a et seq.
94. White-Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement 
Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Sections 1341, 1343, 
1349–1350.
95. Peter Lattman and William K. Rashbaum, “A 
Trader, an F.B.I. Witness, and Then a Suicide,” 
Reuters (June 2, 2011)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  A :  T h e  C o n s t i t u t i o n  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s   A–1
Appendix A: The Constitution of the United States
Preamble
 
We the People of the United States, in Order to form 
a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic 
Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the 
general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to 
ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this 
Constitution for the United States of America.
article i
 
Section 1.  All legislative Powers herein granted shall 
be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall 
consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.
 
Section 2.  The House of Representatives shall be 
composed of Members chosen every second Year by the 
People of the several States, and the Electors in each State 
shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the 
most numerous Branch of the State Legislature.
 
No Person shall be a Representative who shall not have 
attained to the Age of twenty five Years, and been seven Years a 
Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, 
be an Inhabitant of that State in which he shall be chosen.
 
Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned 
among the several States which may be included within this 
Union, according to their respective Numbers, which shall be 
determined by adding to the whole Number of free Persons, 
including those bound to Service for a Term of Years, and 
excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other Persons. 
The actual Enumeration shall be made within three Years after 
the first Meeting of the Congress of the United States, and 
within every subsequent Term of ten Years, in such Manner as 
they shall by Law direct. The Number of Representatives shall 
not exceed one for every thirty Thousand, but each State shall 
have at Least one Representative; and until such enumeration 
shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be entitled to 
chuse three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence 
Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey 
four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia 
ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
 
When vacancies happen in the Representation from 
any State, the Executive Authority thereof shall issue Writs 
of Election to fill such Vacancies.
 
The House of Representatives shall chuse their 
Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of 
Impeachment.
 
Section 3.  The Senate of the United States shall be 
composed of two Senators from each State, chosen by the 
Legislature thereof, for six Years; and each Senator shall have 
one Vote.
 
Immediately after they shall be assembled in 
Consequence of the first Election, they shall be divided as 
equally as may be into three Classes. The Seats of the Senators 
of the first Class shall be vacated at the Expiration of the sec-
ond Year, of the second Class at the Expiration of the fourth 
Year, and of the third Class at the Expiration of the sixth Year, 
so that one third may be chosen every second Year; and if 
Vacancies happen by Resignation, or otherwise, during the 
Recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive thereof 
may make temporary Appointments until the next Meeting 
of the Legislature, which shall then fill such Vacancies.
 
No Person shall be a Senator who shall not have 
attained to the Age of thirty Years, and been nine Years 
a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when 
elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he shall be 
chosen.
 
The Vice President of the United States shall be 
President of the Senate, but shall have no Vote, unless they 
be equally divided.
 
The Senate shall chuse their other Officers, and also a 
President pro tempore, in the Absence of the Vice President, 
or when he shall exercise the Office of President of the 
United States.
 
The Senate shall have the sole Power to try all 
Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be 
on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United 
States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no Person 
shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of 
the Members present.
 
Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend 
further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to 
hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust, or Profit under 
the United States: but the Party convicted shall nevertheless 
be liable and subject to Indictment, Trial, Judgment, and 
Punishment, according to Law.
 
Section 4.  The Times, Places and Manner of hold-
ing Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be 
prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but 
the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such 
Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Senators.
 
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every Year, 
and such Meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, 
unless they shall by Law appoint a different Day.
 
Section 5.  Each House shall be the Judge of the 
Elections, Returns, and Qualifications of its own Members, 
and a Majority of each shall constitute a Quorum to do 
Business; but a smaller Number may adjourn from day to 
day, and may be authorized to compel the Attendance of 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A–2   C R i M i n A L  J U S T i C e  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) 
shall be presented to the President of the United States; and 
before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, 
or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds 
of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the 
Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill.
 
Section 8.  The Congress shall have Power To lay and 
collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts 
and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of 
the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall 
be uniform throughout the United States;
 
To borrow Money on the credit of the United States;
 
To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and 
among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes;
 
To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and 
uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the 
United States;
 
To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of for-
eign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures;
 
To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the 
Securities and current Coin of the United States;
 
To establish Post Offices and post Roads;
 
To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, 
by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the 
exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries;
 
To constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court;
To define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on 
the high Seas, and Offenses against the Law of Nations;
 
To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, 
and make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water;
 
To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of 
Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years;
 
To provide and maintain a Navy;
 
To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of 
the land and naval Forces;
 
To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the 
Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;
 
To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, 
the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be 
employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the 
States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the 
Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline 
prescribed by Congress;
 
To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatso-
ever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as 
may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance 
of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the 
United States, and to exercise like Authority over all 
Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of 
the State in which the Same shall be, for the Erection of 
Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-Yards, and other needful 
Buildings;—And
 
To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper 
for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all 
absent Members, in such Manner, and under such Penalties 
as each House may provide.
 
Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings, 
punish its Members for disorderly Behavior, and, with the 
Concurrence of two thirds, expel a Member.
 
Each House shall keep a Journal of its Proceedings, and 
from time to time publish the same, excepting such Parts 
as may in their Judgment require Secrecy; and the Yeas and 
Nays of the Members of either House on any question shall, 
at the Desire of one fifth of those Present, be entered on the 
Journal.
 
Neither House, during the Session of Congress, shall, 
without the Consent of the other, adjourn for more than 
three days, nor to any other Place than that in which the two 
Houses shall be sitting.
 
Section 6.  The Senators and Representatives shall 
receive a Compensation for their Services, to be ascertained 
by Law, and paid out of the Treasury of the United States. 
They shall in all Cases, except Treason, Felony and Breach of 
the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance 
at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to and 
returning from the same; and for any Speech or Debate in 
either House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place.
 
No Senator or Representative shall, during the Time for 
which he was elected, be appointed to any civil Office under 
the Authority of the United States, which shall have been cre-
ated, or the Emoluments whereof shall have been increased 
during such time; and no Person holding any Office under 
the United States, shall be a Member of either House during 
his Continuance in Office.
 
Section 7.  All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate 
in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose 
or concur with Amendments as on other Bills.
 
Every Bill which shall have passed the House of 
Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a 
Law, be presented to the President of the United States; If he 
approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his 
Objections to the House in which it shall have originated, 
who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and 
proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two 
thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be 
sent together with the Objections, to the other House, by 
which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by 
two thirds of that House, it shall become a Law. But in all 
such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by 
Yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and 
against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House 
respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President 
within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been 
presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as 
if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment 
prevent its Return in which Case it shall not be a Law.
 
Every Order, Resolution, or Vote, to which the 
Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  A :  T h e  C o n s t i t u t i o n  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s   A–3
other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government 
of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.
 
Section 9.  The Migration or Importation of such 
Persons as any of the States now existing shall think proper 
to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to 
the Year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a Tax or 
duty may be imposed on such Importation, not exceeding 
ten dollars for each Person.
 
The privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be 
suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion 
the public Safety may require it.
 
No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be 
passed.
 
No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless 
in Proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein before 
directed to be taken.
 
No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported from 
any State.
 
No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of 
Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those 
of another: nor shall Vessels bound to, or from, one State be 
obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.
 
No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in 
Consequence of Appropriations made by Law; and a regular 
Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of 
all public Money shall be published from time to time.
 
No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United 
States: And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust 
under them, shall, without the Consent of the Congress, 
accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any 
kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.
 
Section 10.  No State shall enter into any Treaty, 
Alliance, or Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and 
Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing 
but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass 
any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the 
Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.
 
No State shall, without the Consent of the Congress, lay 
any Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports, except what 
may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection 
Laws: and the net Produce of all Duties and Imposts, laid 
by any State on Imports or Exports, shall be for the Use of 
the Treasury of the United States; and all such Laws shall be 
subject to the Revision and Controul of the Congress.
 
No State shall, without the Consent of Congress, lay 
any Duty of Tonnage, keep Troops, or Ships of War in time of 
Peace, enter into any Agreement or Compact with another 
State, or with a foreign Power, or engage in War, unless actu-
ally invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit 
of delay.
article ii
 
Section 1.  The executive Power shall be vested in a 
President of the United States of America. He shall hold his 
Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice 
President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows:
 
Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the 
Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to 
the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which 
the State may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or 
Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit 
under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.
 
The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and 
vote by Ballot for two Persons, of whom one at least shall 
not be an Inhabitant of the same State with themselves. And 
they shall make a List of all the Persons voted for, and of the 
Number of Votes for each; which List they shall sign and cer-
tify, and transmit sealed to the Seat of the Government of the 
United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The 
President of the Senate shall, in the Presence of the Senate 
and House of Representatives, open all the Certificates, 
and the Votes shall then be counted. The Person having 
the greatest Number of Votes shall be the President, if such 
Number be a Majority of the whole Number of Electors 
appointed; and if there be more than one who have such 
Majority, and have an equal Number of Votes, then the House 
of Representatives shall immediately chuse by Ballot one of 
them for President; and if no Person have a Majority, then 
from the five highest on the List the said House shall in like 
Manner chuse the President. But in chusing the President, 
the Votes shall be taken by States, the Representation from 
each State having one Vote; A quorum for this Purpose shall 
consist of a Member or Members from two thirds of the 
States, and a Majority of all the States shall be necessary to a 
Choice. In every Case, after the Choice of the President, the 
Person having the greater Number of Votes of the Electors 
shall be the Vice President. But if there should remain two 
or more who have equal Votes, the Senate shall chuse from 
them by Ballot the Vice President.
 
The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the 
Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their Votes; 
which Day shall be the same throughout the United States.
 
No person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen 
of the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this 
Constitution, shall be eligible to the Office of President; 
neither shall any Person be eligible to that Office who shall 
not have attained to the Age of thirty five Years, and been 
fourteen Years a Resident within the United States.
 
In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or 
of his Death, Resignation or Inability to discharge the Powers 
and Duties of the said Office, the same shall devolve on the 
Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for 
the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of  
the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall 
then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, 
until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
 
The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his 
Services, a Compensation, which shall neither be increased 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A–4   C R i M i n A L  J U S T i C e  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour, 
and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services a 
Compensation, which shall not be diminished during their 
Continuance in Office.
 
Section 2.  The judicial Power shall extend to all 
Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under this Constitution, 
the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which 
shall be made, under their Authority;—to all Cases affect-
ing Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls;—
to all Cases of admiralty and maritime Jurisdiction;—to 
Controversies to which the United States shall be a Party;—
to Controversies between two or more States;—between a 
State and Citizens of another State;—between Citizens of 
different States;—between Citizens of the same State claim-
ing Lands under Grants of different States, and between a 
State, or the Citizens thereof, and foreign States, Citizens or 
Subjects.
 
In all Cases affecting Ambassadors, other public 
Ministers and Consuls, and those in which a State shall be 
a Party, the supreme Court shall have original Jurisdiction. 
In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court 
shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, 
with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the 
Congress shall make.
 
The Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, 
shall be by Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State 
where the said Crimes shall have been committed; but when 
not committed within any State, the Trial shall be at such 
Place or Places as the Congress may by Law have directed.
 
Section 3.  Treason against the United States, shall 
consist only in levying War against them, or, in adhering 
to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort. No Person 
shall be convicted of Treason unless on the Testimony of two 
Witnesses to the same overt Act, or on Confession in open 
Court.
 
The Congress shall have Power to declare the 
Punishment of Treason, but no Attainder of Treason shall 
work Corruption of Blood, or Forfeiture except during the 
Life of the Person attainted.
article iV  
 
Section 1.  Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each 
State to the public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings 
of every other State. And the Congress may by general Laws 
prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records and 
Proceedings shall be proved, and the Effect thereof.
 
Section 2.  The Citizens of each State shall be entitled 
to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several 
States.
 
A Person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, 
or other Crime, who shall flee from Justice, and be found in 
another State, shall on Demand of the executive Authority of 
the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed 
to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.
nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have 
been elected, and he shall not receive within that Period any 
other Emolument from the United States, or any of them.
 
Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he 
shall take the following Oath or Affirmation: “I do solemnly 
swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of 
President of the United States, and will to the best of my 
Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the 
United States.”
 
Section 2.  The President shall be Commander in 
Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the 
Militia of the several States, when called into the actual 
Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, 
in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive 
Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of 
their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant 
Reprieves and Pardons for Offenses against the United 
States, except in Cases of Impeachment.
 
He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and 
Consent of the Senate to make Treaties, provided two thirds 
of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and 
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall 
appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, 
Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the 
United States, whose Appointments are not herein other-
wise provided for, and which shall be established by Law; 
but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such 
inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, 
in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.
 
The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies 
that may happen during the Recess of the Senate, by grant-
ing Commissions which shall expire at the End of their next 
Session.
 
Section 3.  He shall from time to time give to the 
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and rec-
ommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall 
judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary 
Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in 
Case of Disagreement between them, with Respect to the 
Time of Adjournment, he may adjourn them to such Time 
as he shall think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and 
other public Ministers; he shall take Care that the Laws be 
faithfully executed, and shall Commission all the Officers of 
the United States.
 
Section 4.  The President, Vice President and all civil 
Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office 
on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or 
other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.
article iii
 
Section 1.  The judicial Power of the United States, 
shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior 
Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and 
establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  A :  T h e  C o n s t i t u t i o n  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s   A–5
 
No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, 
under the Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in 
Consequence of any Law or Regulation therein, be dis-
charged from such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered 
up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour 
may be due.
 
Section 3.  New States may be admitted by the 
Congress into this Union; but no new State shall be formed 
or erected within the Jurisdiction of any other State; nor any 
State be formed by the Junction of two or more States, or 
Parts of States, without the Consent of the Legislatures of the 
States concerned as well as of the Congress.
 
The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make 
all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or 
other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing 
in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any 
Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.
 
Section 4.  The United States shall guarantee to 
every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government, 
and shall protect each of them against Invasion; and on 
Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the 
Legislature cannot be convened) against domestic Violence.
article V  
 
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses 
shall deem it necessary, shall propose Amendments to this 
Constitution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures of 
two thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for 
proposing Amendments, which, in either Case, shall be valid 
to all Intents and Purposes, as part of this Constitution, 
when ratified by the Legislatures of three fourths of the 
several States, or by Conventions in three fourths thereof, as 
the one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed 
by the Congress; Provided that no Amendment which may 
be made prior to the Year One thousand eight hundred and 
eight shall in any Manner affect the first and fourth Clauses 
in the Ninth Section of the first Article; and that no State, 
without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in 
the Senate.
article Vi
 
All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, 
before the Adoption of this Constitution shall be as valid 
against the United States under this Constitution, as under 
the Confederation.
 
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States 
which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties 
made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the 
United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the 
Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in 
the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary not-
withstanding.
 
The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, 
and the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all 
executive and judicial Officers, both of the United States and 
of the several States, shall be bound by Oath or Affirmation, 
to support this Constitution; but no religious Test shall ever 
be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust 
under the United States.
article Vii
 
The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States 
shall be sufficient for the Establishment of this Constitution 
between the States so ratifying the Same.
amendment i [1791]
 
Congress shall make no law respecting an establish-
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right 
of the people peaceably to assembly, and to petition the 
Government for a redress of grievances.
amendment ii [1791]
 
A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security 
of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, 
shall not be infringed.
amendment iii [1791]
 
No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any 
house, without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, 
but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
amendment iV [1791]
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches 
and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall 
issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affir-
mation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, 
and the persons or things to be seized.
amendment V [1791]
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or oth-
erwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indict-
ment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or 
naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time 
of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for 
the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; 
nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness 
against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor shall private property be 
taken for public use, without just compensation.
amendment Vi [1791]
 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the 
right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the 
State and district wherein the crime shall have been com-
mitted, which district shall have been previously ascertained 
by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; 
to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A–6   C R i M i n A L  J U S T i C e  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the 
President.—The person having the greatest number of votes 
as Vice-President, shall be the Vice-President, if such number 
be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, and 
if no person have a majority, then from the two highest num-
bers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; 
a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the 
whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole num-
ber shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitu-
tionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to 
that of Vice-President of the United States.
amendment Xiii [1865]
 
Section 1.  Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, 
except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United 
States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
 
Section 2.  Congress shall have power to enforce this 
article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XiV [1868]
 
Section 1.  All persons born or naturalized in the 
United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they 
reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall 
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United 
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, 
or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any per-
son within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
 
Section 2.  Representatives shall be apportioned 
among the several States according to their respective num-
bers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, 
excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at 
any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice 
President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, 
the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members 
of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhab-
itants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citi-
zens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for 
participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of repre-
sentation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the 
number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number 
of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
 
Section 3.  No person shall be a Senator or 
Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice 
President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the 
United States, or under any State, who having previously 
taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of 
the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, 
or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support 
the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in 
insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or 
comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may by a vote 
of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.
amendment Vii [1791]
 
In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy 
shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be 
preserved, and no fact tried by jury, shall be otherwise reex-
amined in any Court of the United States, than according to 
the rules of the common law.
amendment Viii [1791]
 
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines 
imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
amendment iX [1791]
 
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, 
shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained 
by the people.
amendment X [1791]
 
The powers not delegated to the United States by the 
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved 
to the States respectively, or to the people.
amendment Xi [1798]
 
The Judicial power of the United States shall not be 
construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced 
or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of 
another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.
amendment Xii [1804]
 
The Electors shall meet in their respective states, and 
vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of 
whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state 
with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person 
voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person 
voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct 
lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons 
voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for 
each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit 
sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, 
directed to the President of the Senate;—The President of 
the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of 
Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall 
then be counted;—The person having the greatest number 
of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number 
be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; 
and if no person have such majority, then from the persons 
having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list 
of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives 
shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in 
choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the 
representation from each state having one vote; a quorum 
for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from 
two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all states shall be 
necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives 
shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice 
shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next 
following, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  A :  T h e  C o n s t i t u t i o n  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s   A–7
 
Section 4.  The validity of the public debt of the 
United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred 
for payment of pensions and bounties for services in sup-
pressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be questioned. 
But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or 
pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or 
rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss 
or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations 
and claims shall be held illegal and void.
 
Section 5.  The Congress shall have power to enforce, 
by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
amendment XV [1870]
 
Section 1.  The right of citizens of the United States to 
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or 
by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition 
of servitude.
 
Section 2.  The Congress shall have power to enforce 
this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XVi [1913]
 
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes 
on incomes, from whatever source derived, without appor-
tionment among the several States, and without regard to 
any census or enumeration.
amendment XVii [1913]
 
Section 1.  The Senate of the United States shall be 
composed of two Senators from each State, elected by the 
people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one 
vote. The electors in each State shall have the qualifications 
requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the 
State legislatures.
 
Section 2.  When vacancies happen in the representa-
tion of any State in the Senate, the executive authority of such 
State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, 
That the legislature of any State may empower the executive 
thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill 
the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
 
Section 3.  This amendment shall not be so con-
strued as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen 
before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.
amendment XViii [1919]
 
Section 1.  After one year from the ratification of this 
article the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxi-
cating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the 
exportation thereof from the United States and all territory 
subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage purposes is 
hereby prohibited.
 
Section 2.  The Congress and the several States shall 
have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate 
legislation.
 
Section 3.  This article shall be inoperative unless it 
shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution 
by the legislatures of the several States, as provided in the 
Constitution, within seven years from the date of the sub-
mission hereof to the States by the Congress.
amendment XiX [1920]
 
Section 1.  The right of citizens of the United States to 
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or 
by any State on account of sex.
 
Section 2.  Congress shall have power to enforce this 
article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XX [1933]
 
Section 1.  The terms of the President and Vice 
President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and 
the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d 
day of January, of the years in which such terms would have 
ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of 
their successors shall then begin.
 
Section 2.  The Congress shall assemble at least once 
in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d 
day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
 
Section 3.  If, at the time fixed for the beginning of 
the term of the President, the President elect shall have 
died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If the 
President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed 
for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall 
have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall 
act as President until a President shall have qualified; and 
the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein nei-
ther a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have 
qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the 
manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and 
such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice 
President shall have qualified.
 
Section 4.  The Congress may by law provide for 
the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the 
House of Representatives may choose a President whenever 
the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for 
the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the 
Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of 
choice shall have devolved upon them.
 
Section 5.  Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 
15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
 
Section 6.  This article shall be inoperative unless it 
shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution 
by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States 
within seven years from the date of its submission.
amendment XXi [1933]
 
Section 1.  The eighteenth article of amendment to 
the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
 
Section 2.  The transportation or importation into 
any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for 
delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of 
the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A–8   C R i M i n A L  J U S T i C e  i n  A C T i o n :  T h e  C o r e
 
Section 2.  Whenever there is a vacancy in the office 
of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice 
President who shall take office upon confirmation by a 
majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
 
Section 3.  Whenever the President transmits to the 
President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives his written declaration that he is 
unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and 
until he transmits to them a written declaration to the con-
trary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice 
President as Acting President.
 
Section 4.  Whenever the Vice President and a major-
ity of either the principal officers of the executive depart-
ments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, 
transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives their written decla-
ration that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immedi-
ately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting 
President.
 
Thereafter, when the President transmits to the 
President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives his written declaration that no 
inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of 
his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either 
the principal officers of the executive department or of such 
other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within 
four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives their written decla-
ration that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the 
issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose 
if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days 
after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress 
is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is 
required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both 
Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers 
and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue 
to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the 
President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.
amendment XXVi [1971]
 
Section 1.  The right of citizens of the United States, 
who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be 
denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on 
account of age.
 
Section 2.  The Congress shall have power to enforce 
this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XXVii [1992]
 
No law, varying the compensation for the services of 
the Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an 
election of Representatives shall have intervened.
 
Section 3.  This article shall be inoperative unless it 
shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution 
by conventions in the several States, as provided in the 
Constitution, within seven years from the date of the sub-
mission hereof to the States by the Congress.
amendment XXii [1951]
 
Section 1.  No person shall be elected to the office of 
the President more than twice, and no person who has held 
the office of President, or acted as President, for more than 
two years of a term to which some other person was elected 
President shall be elected to the office of President more 
than once. But this Article shall not apply to any person hold-
ing the office of President when this Article was proposed by 
the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be 
holding the office of President, or acting as President, during 
the term within which this Article becomes operative from 
holding the office of President or acting as President during 
the remainder of such term.
 
Section 2.  This article shall be inoperative unless it 
shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution 
by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States 
within seven years from the date of its submission to the 
States by the Congress.
amendment XXiii [1961]
 
Section 1.  The District constituting the seat of 
Government of the United States shall appoint in such man-
ner as the Congress may direct:
 
A number of electors of President and Vice President 
equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives 
in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were 
a State, but in no event more than the least populous state; 
they shall be in addition to those appointed by the states, but 
they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of 
President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a 
state; and they shall meet in the District and perform such 
duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
 
Section 2.  The Congress shall have power to enforce 
this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XXiV [1964]
 
Section 1.  The right of citizens of the United States 
to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice 
President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for 
Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied 
or abridged by the United States, or any State by reason of 
failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
 
Section 2.  The Congress shall have power to enforce 
this article by appropriate legislation.
amendment XXV [1967]
 
Section 1.  In case of the removal of the President 
from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President 
shall become President.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  B :  Y o u  B e  t h e  ________________:  A c t u a l  O u t c o m e s  a n d  C o u r t  d e c i s i o n s   B–1
Appendix B:  You Be The ________________:  
Actual Outcomes and Court decisions
1.1 SenATOr In 2009, New York Senator Charles Schumer 
introduced the Avoiding Life-Endangering and Reckless 
Texting by Drivers Act (ALERT), which would deny federal 
highway funds to states that fail to ban texting while driving. 
As of November 2012, Congress has failed to pass ALERT, 
and states continue to have the freedom to decide this issue 
without federal intrusion. 
3.1 Judge The appellate court refused to throw out the 
charges. Although Emil was unconscious at the time his car 
struck the schoolgirls, he had made the initial decision to 
get behind the wheel despite the knowledge that he suffered 
from epileptic seizures. In other words, the actus reus in this 
crime was not Emil’s driving into the girls, but his decision to 
drive in the first place. That decision was certainly voluntary 
and therefore satisfies the requirements of actus reus. Note 
that if Emil had never had an epileptic seizure before, and 
had no idea that he suffered from that malady, the court’s 
decision would probably have been different.
4.1 pOliCe COmmiSSiOner Boston Police Commis-
sioner Edward F. Davis gave the order to clear the Greenway. 
Police officers forced protestors onto their stomachs, cable-
tied their hands, and dragged them into police vans. “We 
have been very accommodating to everyone’s right to dem-
onstrate peaceably,” Boston police spokeswoman Elaine 
Driscoll said of Davis’s decision. “But when unpredictability 
starts to enter the scenario, we are obligated to maintain 
public order and protect public safety.”  Some protestors 
claimed that the Boston police were unnecessarily rough in 
making these arrests, but both sides seemed to have learned 
from the encounter.  A month later, Occupy Boston made a 
peaceful march on the Charlestown Bridge that avoided any 
confrontation with city law enforcement.
5.1 Sheriff’S depuTY As these events actually played 
out, fifteen Cincinnati law enforcement officers had sur-
rounded a suspect named Lorenzo Collins when he bran-
dished the brick, and the two officers closest to Collins fatally 
shot him. The two officers were cleared of any wrongdoing, 
given that a reasonable officer in their position could have 
seen the brick as an instrument that could cause death or seri-
ous bodily harm. The court of public opinion, however, was 
against the police officers, who were accused by members of 
the community of needlessly killing a mentally unstable man 
who was carrying a brick, not a knife or a gun.
6.1 Judge Federal district judge Aleta Trauger ruled that 
the drug task force agent did not have probable cause to 
stop the car—actually driven by two cousins named Luis and 
Gerardo Ruiz. Therefore, the half-kilo of heroin was “fruit of 
the poisoned tree” and was not allowed as evidence.  Trauger 
clearly did not believe that the cousins had broken any traffic 
laws, and suggested that the arresting officer had changed his 
story only after realizing that the “video showed that the Ruiz 
vehicle was not speeding.” Note that Trauger did not address 
the question of racial profiling in this case, though the defen-
dants’ Hispanic origins most likely gave him further reason to 
suspect the law enforcement officer’s motives and behavior.
8.1 defenSe ATTOrneY In defending Daniel Aguilar 
against charges regarding Christopher Ash’s murder, defense 
attorney Antonio Bestard’s primary argument was that his 
client did not know that Ash was going to be killed in the 
garage. After all, they were best friends. Along the same lines, 
Bestard argued that Aguilar was forced to lure his friend to 
the garage by older gang members, who would have killed 
Aguilar had he refused. Bestard also attacked the credibility 
of the main witness, José Covarrubias, who not only was 
under the influence of drugs on the night of the murder and 
sleeping with the victim’s sister, but also had received a lighter 
sentence of twenty-two years in return for testifying against 
fellow gang members. Bestard suggested that Covarrubias 
had an incentive to lie to law enforcement officials to get a 
lighter sentence. In the end, however, the jury found Aguilar 
guilty of first degree murder, and he was sentenced to life in 
prison without parole.
10.1 prOBATiOn OffiCer Alain LeConte’s probation 
officer did not take any steps to revoke his probation. The 
issue became moot, however, when LeConte was arrested 
for killing a gas station attendant during an armed robbery 
in Norwalk, Connecticut. The crime took place between his 
first and second failed drug tests. LeConte’s probation offi-
cer came under a great deal of criticism for failing to revoke 
his probation, but she received support from her supervisor. 
“We can only do so much,” he said. “[LeConte’s] probation 
officer went out of her way to assist this young man, but 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B–2   C R i M i n A L  J U S T i C e  i n  A C T i O n :  T h e  C o r e
1969, participated in one of the most sensationalized mass 
murders in American history. The woman Atkins stabbed 
sixteen times was Sharon Tate, an actress and the wife of 
film director Roman Polanski. On September 2, 2009, the 
California Board of Parole unanimously denied compassion-
ate release for Atkins, marking the eighteenth time she had 
been refused parole. Three months later, Atkins died of brain 
cancer. Her case highlights the extent to which parole boards 
are often swayed by the nature of the crime above all other 
considerations.
unfortunately it wasn’t successful.” The supervisor also 
pointed out that LeConte had no known history of violent 
behavior and had been a generally cooperative probationer 
when it came to getting treatment. This case underscores 
the difficult aspects of a probation officer’s job. A misjudg-
ment, even if it was based on a reasonable evaluation of the 
situation, can end in tragedy.
12.1 pArOle BOArd memBer Susan Atkins was a 
disciple of cult leader Charles Manson and, in the summer of 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A p p e n d i x  C :  T a b l e  o f  C a s e s   C–1
Appendix C: Table of Cases
A
Adamson v. California (1947), 229
Allen v. United States (1896), 243
Argersinger v. Hamlin (1972), 208
Arizona v. Fulminante (1991), 182
Arizona v. Gant (2009), 175
Atkins v. Virginia (2002), 273, 277
B
Barker v. Wingo (1972), 227
Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 232
Baze v. Rees (2008), 274, 275
Bell v. Wolfish (1979), 326
Bennis v. Michigan (1996), 298
Benton v. Maryland (1969), 91
Berger v. United States (1935), 205
Boykin v. Alabama (1969), 226
Breed v. Jones (1975), 369
Brewer v. Williams (1977), 164
Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association (EMA), 51, 52
Brown v. Plata (2011), 347
Burger v. New York (1967), 176
C
California v. Greenwood (1988), 171
Carroll v. United States (1925), 174
Chimel v. California (1969), 173
Coolidge v. New Hampshire (1971), 175
County of Riverside v. McLaughlin (1991), 163
D
Duncan v. Louisiana (1968), 91, 228
E
Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), 91
Estelle v. Gamble (1976), 346
F
Florida v. Powell (2010), 182
Furman v. Georgia (1972), 197, 271, 276
G
Gagnon v. Scarpelli (1973), 293
Gault, In re (1967), 91, 208, 369, 370, 384
Georgia v. McCollum (1992), 234
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), 91, 196, 208
Graham v. Connor (1989), 148
Graham v. Florida (2010), 372
Greenholtz v. Inmates of the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex 
(1979), 351
Gregg v. Georgia (1976), 197
H
Herring v. United States (2009), 164
Howes v. Fields (2012), 182
Hudson v. McMillan (1992), 345
Hudson v. Michigan (2006), 169–170
I
In re _______. See name of party
J
J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T. B. (1994), 234
K
Katz v. United States (1967), 171, 176
Kentucky v. King (2011), 160–161, 163
Kent v. United States (1966), 369
Klopfer v. North Carolina (1967), 91
Knights, United States v. (2001), 291
L
Leon v. United States (1984), 164
Lockyer v. Andrade (2003), 267
M
Malloy v. Hogan (1964), 91
Mapp v. Ohio (1961), 91
Maryland v. Shatzer (2010), 197
McClesky v. Kemp (1987), 277
McKeiver v. Pennsylvania (1971), 369
Mempa v. Rhay (1967), 293
Minnesota v. Murphy (1984), 294
Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 29, 91, 179, 180, 196, 244
Montana v. Egelhoff (1996), 86
Moran v. Burbine (1986), 182
Morrissey v. Brewer (1972), 293, 354–355
N
New York v. Benton (1981), 174–175
New York v. Quarles (1984), 182
Nix v. Williams (1984), 164
O
Oliver, In re (1948), 91
P
Parker v. Gladden (1966), 91
Payton v. New York (1980), 170
Pointer v. Texas (1965), 91
Powers v. Ohio (1991), 234
Q
Quirk, In re (1997), 291
R
Ring v. Arizona (2002), 272
Robinson, v. United States (1973), 173
Rochin v. California (1952), 91
Roper v. Simmons (2005), 273, 277, 372
Rovario v. United States (1957), 134
Rummel v. Estelle (1980), 267
S
Santobello v. New York (1971), 225
Schall v. Martin (1984), 384
Schneckcloth v. Bustamonte (1973), 174
Steagald v. United States (1981), 170
Swain v. Alabama (1965), 232
T
Tennessee v. Garner (1985), 147–148
Terry v. Ohio (1968), 165–166, 167, 168, 171
Texas v. Cobb (2001), 182
U
United States v. __________. See name of opposing party
W
Weems v. United States (1910), 271, 273
Whitley v. Albers (1986), 345
Wilson v. Arkansas (1995), 169
Wilson v. Seiter (1991), 346
Winship, In re (1970), 230, 369
Z
Zolin, v. United States (1989), 210
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–1
Glossary
a
acquittal A declaration following a trial that the individual 
accused of the crime is innocent in the eyes of the law and thus 
is absolved of the charges. 
actus reus (pronounced ak-tus ray-uhs). A guilty (prohibited) 
act. 
adjudicatory hearing The process through which a juvenile 
court determines whether there is sufficient evidence to sup-
port the initial petition. 
administrative law The body of law created by regulatory 
(administrative) agencies (in the form of rules, regulations, 
orders, and decisions) in order to carry out their duties and 
responsibilities. 
affidavit A written statement of facts, confirmed by the oath 
or affirmation of the party making it and made before a person 
having the authority to administer the oath or affirmation. 
affirmative action A hiring or promotion policy favoring 
those groups, such as women, African Americans, or Hispanics, 
who have suffered from discrimination in the past or continue 
to suffer from discrimination. 
aftercare The variety of therapeutic, educational, and coun-
seling programs made available to juvenile delinquents (and 
some adults) after they have been released from a correctional 
facility. 
age of onset The age at which a juvenile first exhibits delin-
quent behavior. 
aggravating circumstances Any circumstances accompa-
nying the commission of a crime that may justify a harsher 
sentence. 
aging out A term used to explain the fact that criminal activ-
ity declines with age. 
alien A person who is not a citizen of the country in which he 
or she is found and therefore does not enjoy the same rights as 
a citizen of that country. 
Allen Charge An instruction by a judge to a deadlocked jury 
with only a few dissenters that asks the jurors in the minority 
to reconsider the majority opinion. 
anomie A condition in which the individual suffers from the 
breakdown or absence of social norms. 
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 
(AEDPA) Legislation giving law enforcement officers the 
power to arrest and prosecute any individual who pro-
vides “material support or resources” to a “foreign terrorist 
organization.” 
appeal The process of seeking a higher court’s review of a 
lower court’s decision for the purpose of correcting or chang-
ing this decision. 
appellate courts Courts that review decisions made by lower 
courts, such as trial courts. 
arraignment A court proceeding in which the suspect is 
formally charged with the criminal offense stated in the 
indictment. 
arrest To take into custody a person suspected of criminal 
activity. 
arrest warrant A written order, based on probable cause and 
issued by a judge or magistrate, commanding that the person 
named on the warrant be arrested by the police. 
assault A threat or an attempt to do violence to another per-
son that causes that person to fear immediate physical harm. 
attempt The act of taking substantial steps toward commit-
ting a crime while having the ability and the intent to commit 
the crime, even if the crime never takes place. 
attendant circumstances The facts surrounding an event 
that must be proved to convict the defendant of the underlying 
crime. 
attorney-client privilege A rule of evidence requiring that 
communications between a client and his or her attorney be 
kept confidential, unless the client consents to disclosure. 
attorney general The chief law officer of a state; also, the chief 
law officer of the nation. 
authority The power designated to an agent of the law over a 
person who has broken the law. 
automatic transfer The process by which a juvenile is trans-
ferred to adult court as a matter of state law. 
B
bail The dollar amount or conditions set by the court to ensure 
that an individual accused of a crime will appear for further 
criminal proceedings. 
bail bond agent A businessperson who agrees, for a fee, to 
pay the bail amount if the accused fails to appear in court as 
ordered. 
ballistics The study of firearms, including the firing of the 
weapon and the flight of the bullet. 
ballot initiative A procedure in which citizens, by collect-
ing enough signatures, can force a public vote on a proposed 
change to state or local law. 
battery The act of physically contacting another person 
with the intent to do harm, even if the resulting injury is 
insubstantial. 
bench trial A trial conducted without a jury, in which a judge 
determines the defendant’s guilt or innocence. 
beyond a reasonable doubt The degree of proof required to 
find the defendant in a criminal trial guilty of committing the 
crime. The defendant’s guilt must be the only reasonable expla-
nation for the criminal act before the court. 
Bill of Rights The first ten amendments to the U.S. 
Constitution. 
biology The science of living organisms, including their struc-
ture, function, growth, and origin. 
biometrics Methods to identify a person based on his or her 
unique physical characteristics, such as fingerprints or facial 
configuration. 
blue curtain A metaphorical term that refers to the secrecy 
and the general mistrust of the outside world shared by many 
police officers. 
boot camp A variation on traditional shock incarcera-
tion in which juveniles (and some adults) are sent to secure  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G–2   C r I M I N a l  J U s T I C E  I N  a C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
citizen oversight The process by which citizens review com-
plaints brought against individual police officers or police 
departments. 
civil law The branch of law dealing with the definition and 
enforcement of all private or public rights, as opposed to crimi-
nal matters. 
civil liberties The basic rights and freedoms for American 
citizens guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution, particularly in the 
Bill of Rights. 
classification The process through which prison officials 
determine which correctional facility is best suited to the indi-
vidual offender. 
clearance rate A comparison of the number of crimes cleared 
by arrest and prosecution with the number of crimes reported 
during any given time period. 
closing arguments Arguments made by each side’s attorney 
after the cases for the prosecution and the defense have been 
presented. 
coercion The use of physical force or mental intimidation to 
compel a person to do something—such as confess to commit-
ting a crime—against her or his will. 
cold case A criminal investigation that has not been solved 
after a certain amount of time 
cold hit The establishment of a connection between a suspect 
and a crime, often through the use of DNA evidence, in the 
absence of an ongoing criminal investigation. 
community corrections The correctional supervision of 
offenders in the community as an alternative to sending them 
to prison or jail. 
community policing A policing philosophy that emphasizes 
community support for and cooperation with the police in pre-
venting crime. 
competency hearing A court proceeding to determine 
whether the defendant is mentally well enough to understand 
the charges filed against her or him and cooperate with a law-
yer in presenting a defense. 
compliance The state of operating in accordance with gov-
ernmental standards. 
computer crime Any wrongful act that is directed against 
computers and computer parts or that involves wrongful use 
or abuse of computers or software. 
concurrent jurisdiction The situation that occurs when two 
or more courts have the authority to preside over the same 
criminal case. 
concurring opinions Separate opinions prepared by judges 
who support the decision of the majority of the court but who 
want to make or clarify a particular point or to voice disap-
proval of the grounds on which the decision was made. 
confidential informant (CI) A human source for police who 
provides information concerning illegal activity in which he or 
she is involved. 
conflict model A criminal justice model in which the con-
tent of criminal law is determined by the groups that hold eco-
nomic, political, and social power in a community. 
confrontation clause The part of the Sixth Amendment that 
guarantees all defendants the right to confront witnesses testi-
fying against them during the criminal trial. 
congregate system A nineteenth-century penitentiary system 
in which inmates were kept in separate cells during the night but 
worked together in the daytime under a code of enforced silence. 
confinement facilities modeled on military basic training 
camps instead of prison or jail. 
botnet A networks of computers that have been appropri-
ated without the knowledge of their owners and used to spread 
harmful programs via the Internet; short for robot network. 
Boykin form A form that must be completed by a defen-
dant who pleads guilty. The defendant states that she or he 
has done so voluntarily and with full comprehension of the 
consequences. 
broken windows theory Wilson and Kelling’s theory that a 
neighborhood in disrepair signals that criminal activity is tol-
erated in the area. By cracking down on quality-of-life crimes, 
police can reclaim the neighborhood and encourage law-abid-
ing citizens to live there. 
bullying Overt acts taken by students with the goal of intimi-
dating, harassing, or humiliating other students. 
bureaucracy A hierarchically structured administrative orga-
nization that carries out specific functions. 
burglary The act of breaking into or entering a structure (such 
as a home or office) without permission for the purpose of com-
mitting a crime. 
burnout A mental state that occurs when a person suffers 
from exhaustion and has difficulty functioning normally as a 
result of overwork and stress. 
C
capital crime A criminal act that makes the offender eligible 
to receive the death penalty. 
capital punishment The use of the death penalty to punish 
wrongdoers for certain crimes. 
case attrition The process through which prosecutors, by 
deciding whether to prosecute each person arrested, effect an 
overall reduction in the number of persons prosecuted. 
case law The rules of law announced in court decisions. 
caseload The number of individual probationers or parolees 
under the supervision of a probation or parole officer. 
causation The relationship in which a change in one mea-
surement or behavior creates a recognizable change in another 
measurement or behavior. 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) The U.S. government 
agency that is responsible for collecting and coordinating for-
eign intelligence operations. 
challenge for cause A voir dire challenge for which an attor-
ney states the reason why a prospective juror should not be 
included on the jury. 
charge The judge’s instructions to the jury following the attor-
neys’ closing arguments. 
child abuse Mistreatment of children by causing physical, 
emotional, or sexual damage without any plausible explana-
tion, such as an accident. 
child neglect A form of child abuse in which the child is 
denied certain necessities such as shelter, food, care, and love. 
chronic offender A delinquent or criminal who commits 
multiple offenses and is considered part of a small group of 
wrongdoers who are responsible for a majority of the antisocial 
activity in any given community. 
circumstantial evidence Indirect evidence that is offered 
to establish, by inference, the likelihood of a fact that is in 
question. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–3
consensus model A criminal justice model in which the 
majority of citizens in a society share the same values and 
beliefs. Criminal acts are acts that conflict with these values 
and beliefs and that are deemed harmful to society. 
consent searches Searches by police that are made after 
the subject of the search has agreed to the action. In these 
situations, consent, if given of free will, validates a warrantless 
search. 
conspiracy A secret plot by two or more people to carry out 
an illegal or harmful act. 
constitutional law Law based on the U.S. Constitution and 
the constitutions of the various states. 
control theory A series of theories that assume that all individ-
uals have the potential for criminal behavior, but are restrained 
by the damage that such actions would do to their relationships 
with family, friends, and members of the community. 
coroner The medical examiner of a county, usually elected by 
popular vote. 
corporate violence Physical harm to individuals or the envi-
ronment that occurs as the result of corporate policies or deci-
sion making. 
corpus delicti The body of circumstances that must exist for a 
criminal act to have occurred. 
correlation The relationship between two measurements or 
behaviors that tend to move in the same direction. 
courtroom work group The social organization consisting 
of the judge, prosecutor, defense attorney, and other court 
workers. 
crime An act that violates criminal law and is punishable by 
criminal sanctions. 
crime control model A criminal justice model that places 
primary emphasis on the right of society to be protected from 
crime and violent criminals. 
crime mapping Technology that allows crime analysts to 
identify trends and patterns of criminal behavior within a 
given area. 
criminal justice system The interlocking network of law 
enforcement agencies, courts, and corrections institutions 
designed to enforce criminal laws and protect society from 
criminal behavior. 
criminologist A specialist in the field of crime and the causes 
of criminal behavior. 
criminology The scientific study of crime and the causes of 
criminal behavior. 
cross-examination The questioning of an opposing witness 
during trial. 
custodial interrogation The questioning of a suspect after 
that person has been taken into custody. In this situation, the 
suspect must be read his or her Miranda rights before inter-
rogation can begin. 
custody The forceful detention of a person, or the perception 
that a person is not free to leave the immediate vicinity. 
cyber crime A crime that occurs online, in the virtual commu-
nity of the Internet, as opposed to in the physical world. 
cyber fraud Any misrepresentation knowingly made over the 
Internet with the intention of deceiving another and on which a 
reasonable person would and does rely to his or her detriment. 
cyberstalking The crime of stalking, committed in cyberspace 
through the use of e-mail, text messages, or another form of 
electronic communication. 
D
dark figure of crime A term used to describe the actual 
amount of crime that takes place. The “figure” is “dark,” or 
impossible to detect, because a great number of crimes are 
never reported to the police. 
day reporting center (DRC) A community-based corrections 
center to which offenders report on a daily basis for treatment, 
education, and rehabilitation. 
deadly force Force applied by a police officer that is likely or 
intended to cause death. 
defendant In a civil court, the person or institution against 
whom an action is brought. In a criminal court, the person  
or entity who has been formally accused of violating a crimi-
nal law. 
defense attorney The lawyer representing the defendant. 
delegation of authority The principles of command on which 
most police departments are based, in which personnel take 
orders from and are responsible to those in positions of power 
directly above them. 
“deliberate indifference” The standard for violation of an 
inmate’s Eighth Amendment rights, requiring that prison offi-
cials be aware of harmful conditions in a correctional institu-
tion and fail to take steps to remedy those conditions. 
departure A stipulation in many federal and state sentenc-
ing guidelines that allows a judge to adjust his or her sentenc-
ing decision based on the special circumstances of a particu-
lar case. 
deprivation model A theory that inmate aggression is the 
result of the frustration inmates feel at being deprived of free-
dom, consumer goods, sex, and other staples of life outside the 
institution. 
desistance The process through which criminal activ-
ity decreases and reintegration into society increases over a 
period of time. 
detainer A document that gives U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement custody of an immigration law violator 
following the disposition of that person’s case by the criminal 
justice system. 
detective The primary police investigator of crimes. 
detention The temporary custody of a juvenile in a secure 
facility after a petition has been filed and before the adjudica-
tory process begins. 
detention hearing A hearing to determine whether a juvenile 
should be detained, or remain detained, while waiting for the 
adjudicatory process to begin. 
determinate sentencing A period of incarceration that is 
fixed by a sentencing authority and cannot be reduced by 
judges or other corrections officials 
deterrence The strategy of preventing crime through the 
threat of punishment. 
deviance Behavior that is considered to go against the norms 
established by society. 
differential response A strategy for answering calls for ser-
vice in which response time is adapted to the seriousness of 
the call. 
directed patrol A patrol strategy that is designed to focus on 
a specific type of criminal activity at a specific time. 
direct evidence Evidence that establishes the existence of a 
fact that is in question without relying on inference. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G–4   C r I M I N a l  J U s T I C E  I N  a C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
duress Unlawful pressure brought to bear on a person, caus-
ing the person to perform an act that he or she would not oth-
erwise perform. 
duty The moral sense of a police officer that she or he should 
behave in a certain manner. 
duty to retreat The requirement that a person claiming self-
defense prove that she or he first took reasonable steps to avoid 
the conflict that resulted in the use of deadly force. 
E
electronic monitoring A technique of probation supervision 
in which the offender’s whereabouts are kept under surveil-
lance by an electronic device. 
electronic surveillance The use of electronic equipment by 
law enforcement agents to record private conversations or 
observe conduct that is meant to be private. 
entrapment A defense in which the defendant claims that 
he or she was induced by a public official—usually an under-
cover agent or police officer— to commit a crime that he or she 
would not otherwise have committed. 
ethics The moral principles that govern a person’s perception 
of right and wrong. 
evidence Anything that is used to prove the existence or non-
existence of a fact. 
exclusionary rule A rule under which any evidence that 
is obtained in violation of the accused’s rights, as well as any 
evidence derived from illegally obtained evidence, will not be 
admissible in criminal court. 
exigent circumstances Situations that require extralegal or 
exceptional actions by the police. 
expert witness A witness with professional training or sub-
stantial experience qualifying her or him to testify on a certain 
subject. 
expiration release The release of an inmate from prison at 
the end of his or her sentence without any further correctional 
supervision. 
extradition The process by which one jurisdiction surrenders 
a person accused or convicted of violating another jurisdic-
tion’s criminal law to the second jurisdiction. 
F
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) The branch of the 
Department of Justice responsible for investigating violations 
of federal law. 
federalism A form of government in which a written constitu-
tion provides for a division of powers between a central govern-
ment and several regional governments. 
felony A serious crime, usually punishable by death or impris-
onment for a year or longer. 
felony-murder An unlawful homicide that occurs during the 
attempted commission of a felony. 
field training The segment of a police recruit’s training in 
which he or she is removed from the classroom and placed on 
the beat, under the supervision of a senior officer. 
first responders Those individuals, such as firefighters, police 
officers, and emergency medical technicians, who are respon-
sible for the protection and preservation of life and property 
during the early stages following a disaster. 
direct examination The examination of a witness by the 
attorney who calls the witness to the stand to testify. 
direct supervision approach A process of prison and jail 
administration in which correctional officers are in continuous 
physical contact with inmates during the day. 
discovery Formal investigation by each side prior to trial. 
discretion The ability of individuals in the criminal justice 
system to make operational decisions based on personal judg-
ment instead of formal rules or official information. 
discretionary release The release of an inmate into a com-
munity supervision program at the discretion of the parole 
board within limits set by state or federal law. 
discrimination The illegal use of characteristics such as gen-
der or race by employers when making hiring or promotion 
decisions. 
disposition hearing Similar to the sentencing hearing for 
adults, a hearing in which the juvenile judge or officer decides 
the appropriate punishment for a youth found to be delinquent 
or a status offender. 
dissenting opinions Separate opinions in which judges dis-
agree with the conclusion reached by the majority of the court 
and expand on their own views about the case. 
diversion In the context of corrections, a strategy to divert 
those offenders who qualify away from prison and jail and 
toward community-based sanctions. 
DNA fingerprinting The identification of a person based on 
a sample of her or his DNA, the genetic material found in the 
cells of all living things. 
docket The list of cases entered on a court’s calendar and thus 
scheduled to be heard by the court. 
domestic terrorism Acts of terrorism that take place within 
the territorial jurisdiction of the United States without direct 
foreign involvement. 
double jeopardy To twice place at risk (jeopardize) a person’s 
life or liberty. The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution 
prohibits a second prosecution for the same court for the same 
criminal offense. 
double marginality The double suspicion that minority 
law enforcement officers face from their white colleagues 
and from members of the minority community to which they 
belong. 
drug Any substance that modifies biological, psychological, or 
social behavior; in particular, an illegal substance with those 
properties. 
drug abuse The use of drugs that results in physical or psycho-
logical problems for the user, as well as disruption of personal 
relationships and employment. 
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) The federal 
agency responsible for enforcing the nation’s laws and regula-
tions regarding narcotics and other controlled substances. 
dual court system The separate but interrelated court system 
of the United States, made up of the courts on the national level 
and the courts on the state level. 
due process clause The provisions of the Fifth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution that guarantee that no per-
son shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due 
process of law. 
due process model A criminal justice model that places pri-
macy on the right of the individual to be protected from the 
power of the government. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–5
forensics The application of science to establish facts and evi-
dence during the investigation of crimes. 
forfeiture The process by which the government seizes pri-
vate property attached to criminal activity. 
formal criminal justice process The model of the criminal 
justice process in which participants follow formal rules to cre-
ate a smoothly functioning disposition of cases from arrest to 
punishment. 
frisk A pat-down or minimal search by police to discover 
weapons. 
fruit of the poisoned tree Evidence that is acquired through 
the use of illegally obtained evidence and is therefore inadmis-
sible in court. 
furlough Temporary release from a prison for purposes of 
vocational or educational training, to ease the shock of release, 
or for personal reasons. 
G
general patrol A patrol strategy that relies on police officers 
monitoring a certain area with the goal of detecting crimes in 
progress or preventing crime by their presence. 
“good faith” exception The legal principle that evidence 
obtained with the use of a technically invalid search warrant 
is admissible during trial if the police acted in good faith when 
they sought the warrant from the judge. 
“good time” A reduction in time served by prisoners based 
on good conduct, conformity to rules, and other positive 
behavior. 
graduated sanctions The practical theory in juvenile cor-
rections that a delinquent or status offender should receive 
a punishment that matches in seriousness the severity of the 
wrongdoing. 
grand jury The group of citizens called to decide whether 
probable cause exists to believe that a suspect committed the 
crime with which she or he has been charged. 
green card A document—no longer green—that indicates the 
holder’s status as a lawful permanent resident of the United 
States. 
gun control Efforts by a government to regulate or control the 
sale of guns. 
H
habeas corpus An order that requires correctional officials to 
bring an inmate before a court or a judge and explain why he or 
she is being held in prison. 
habitual offender laws Statutes that require lengthy prison 
sentences for those who are convicted of multiple felonies. 
hacker A person who uses one computer to break into another. 
halfway house A community-based form of early release that 
places inmates in residential centers and allows them to rein-
tegrate with society. 
“hands-off” doctrine The unwritten judicial policy that 
favors noninterference by the courts in the administration of 
prisons and jails. 
hate crime law A statute that provides for greater sanctions 
against those who commit crimes motivated by bias against an 
individual or a group based on race, ethnicity, religion, gender, 
sexual orientation, disability, or age. 
hearsay An oral or written statement made by an out-of-
court speaker that is later offered in court by a witness (not the 
speaker) concerning a matter before the court. Hearsay usually 
is not admissible as evidence. 
home confinement A community-based sanction in which 
offenders serve their terms of incarceration in their homes. 
homeland security A concerted national effort to prevent 
terrorist attacks within the United States and reduce the coun-
try’s vulnerability to terrorism. 
hormone A chemical substance, produced in tissue and con-
veyed in the bloodstream, that controls certain cellular and 
bodily functions such as growth and reproduction. 
hot spots Concentrated areas of high criminal activity that 
draw a directed police response. 
hung jury A jury whose members are so irreconcilably divided 
in their opinions that they cannot reach a verdict. 
hypothesis A possible explanation for an observed occur-
rence that can be tested by further investigation. 
I
“identifiable human needs” The basic human necessities 
that correctional facilities are required by the Constitution to 
provide to inmates. 
identity theft The theft of personal information, such as 
a person’s name, driver’s license number, or Social Security 
number. 
incapacitation A strategy for preventing crime by detaining 
wrongdoers in prison, thereby separating them from the com-
munity and reducing criminal opportunities. 
inchoate offenses Conduct deemed criminal without actual 
harm being done, provided that the harm that would have 
occurred is one the law tries to prevent. 
incident-driven policing A reactive approach to policing 
that emphasizes a speedy response to calls for service. 
indeterminate sentencing An indeterminate term of incar-
ceration in which a judge decides the minimum and maximum 
terms of imprisonment. 
indictment A charge or written accusation, issued by a grand 
jury, that probable cause exists to believe that a named person 
has committed a crime. 
“inevitable discovery” exception The legal principle that 
illegally obtained evidence can be admitted in court if police 
using lawful means would have “inevitably” discovered it. 
infancy A condition that, under early American law, excused 
young wrongdoers of criminal behavior because presumably 
they could not understand the consequences of their actions. 
informal criminal justice process A model of the criminal 
justice system that recognizes the informal authority exercised 
by individuals at each step of the criminal justice process. 
information The formal charge against the accused issued by 
the prosecutor after a preliminary hearing has found probable 
cause. 
infraction In most jurisdictions, a noncriminal offense for 
which the penalty is a fine rather than incarceration. 
infrastructure The services and facilities that support the 
day-today needs of modern life such as electricity, food, trans-
portation, and water. 
initial appearance An accused’s first appearance before a 
judge or magistrate following arrest. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G–6   C r I M I N a l  J U s T I C E  I N  a C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
l
larceny The act of taking property from another person with-
out the use of force with the intent of keeping that property.
lay witness A witness who can truthfully and accurately tes-
tify on a fact in question without having specialized training or 
knowledge.
learning theory The hypothesis that delinquents and crimi-
nals must be taught both the practical and emotional skills 
necessary to participate in illegal activity.
liability In a civil court, legal responsibility for one’s own or 
another’s actions.
life course criminology The study of crime based on the 
belief that behavioral patterns developed in childhood can pre-
dict delinquent and criminal behavior later in life.
lockdown A disciplinary action taken by prison officials in 
which all inmates are ordered to their quarters and nonessen-
tial prison activities are suspended.
low-visibility decision making A term used to describe the 
discretionary power police have in determining what to do 
with misbehaving juveniles. 
M
M’Naghten rule A common law test of criminal responsibility, 
derived from M’Naghten’s Case in 1843, that relies on the defen-
dant’s inability to distinguish right from wrong. 
magistrate A public civil officer or official with limited judi-
cial authority within a particular geographic area, such as the 
authority to issue an arrest warrant. 
mala in se A descriptive term for acts that are inherently 
wrong, regardless of whether they are prohibited by law. 
mala prohibita A descriptive term for acts that are made ille-
gal by criminal statute and are not necessarily wrong in and of 
themselves. 
malice aforethought A depraved state of mind in which the 
offender’s behavior reflected a wanton disregard for the well-
being of his or her victim. 
mandatory release Release from prison that occurs when an 
offender has served the full length of his or her sentence, minus 
any adjustments for good time. 
mandatory sentencing guidelines Statutorily determined 
punishments that must be applied to those who are convicted 
of specific crimes. 
master jury list The list of citizens in a court’s district from 
which a jury can be selected; compiled from voter registration 
lists, driver’s license lists, and other sources. 
maximum-security prison A correctional institution designed 
and organized to control and discipline dangerous felons, as well 
as prevent escape. 
medical model A model of corrections in which the psycho-
logical and biological roots of an inmate’s criminal behavior are 
identified and treated. 
medium-security prison A correctional institution that 
houses less dangerous inmates and therefore uses less restric-
tive measures to prevent violence and escapes. 
mens rea (pronounced mehns ray-uh). Mental state, or intent. 
A wrongful mental state is usually as necessary as a wrongful 
act to establish criminal liability. 
insanity A defense for criminal liability that asserts a lack of 
criminal responsibility due to mental instability. 
intake The process by which an official of the juvenile court 
decides whether to file a petition, release the juvenile, or place 
the juvenile under some other form of supervision. 
intellectual property Property resulting from intellectual, 
creative processes. 
intelligence agency An agency that is primarily concerned 
with gathering information about potential criminal or terror-
ist events to prevent those acts from taking place. 
intelligence-led policing An approach that measures the 
risk of criminal behavior associated with certain individuals or 
locations so as to predict when and where such criminal behav-
ior is most likely to occur in the future. 
intensive supervision probation (ISP) A punishment-ori-
ented form of probation in which the offender is placed under 
stricter and more frequent surveillance and control than in 
conventional probation by probation officers with limited 
caseloads. 
intermediate sanctions Sanctions that are more restrictive 
than probation and less restrictive than imprisonment. 
internal affairs unit (IAU) A division within a police depart-
ment that receives and investigates complaints of wrongdoing 
by police officers. 
interrogation The direct questioning of a suspect to gather 
evidence of criminal activity and try to gain a confession. 
intoxication A defense for criminal liability in which the 
defendant claims that the taking of intoxicants rendered him or 
her unable to form the requisite intent to commit a criminal act. 
involuntary manslaughter A negligent homicide, in which 
the offender had no intent to kill his or her victim. 
irresistible-impulse test A test for the insanity defense under 
which a defendant who knew his or her action was wrong may 
still be found insane if he or she was unable, as a result of a 
mental deficiency, to control the urge to complete the act. 
J
jail A facility, usually operated by the county government, 
used to hold persons awaiting trial or those who have been 
found guilty of misdemeanors. 
judicial review The power of a court—particularly the United 
States Supreme Court—to review the actions of the executive 
and legislative branches and, if necessary, declare those actions 
unconstitutional. 
judicial waiver The process in which the juvenile judge, 
based on the facts of the case at hand, decides that the alleged 
offender should be transferred to adult court. 
jurisdiction The authority of a court to hear and decide cases 
within an area of the law or a geographic territory. 
jury trial A trial before a judge and a jury. 
just deserts A sanctioning philosophy based on the assertion 
that criminals deserve to be punished for breaking society’s 
rules. 
justice The quality of fairness that must exist in the processes 
designed to determine whether individuals are guilty of crimi-
nal wrongdoing. 
juvenile delinquency Behavior that is illegal under federal or 
state law that has been committed by a person who is under an 
age limit specified by statute.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–7
methamphetamine (meth) An easily produced, relatively 
inexpensive stimulant that creates a strong feeling of euphoria 
in the user and is highly addictive. 
military tribunal A court that is operated by the military 
rather than the criminal justice system and is presided over by 
military officers rather than judges. 
minimum-security prison A correctional institution designed 
to allow inmates, most of whom pose low security risks, a great 
deal of freedom of movement and contact with the outside 
world. 
Miranda rights The constitutional rights of accused persons 
taken into custody by law enforcement officials, such as the 
right to remain silent and the right to counsel. 
misdemeanor A criminal offense that is not a felony; usually 
punishable by a fine and/or a jail term of less than one year. 
Missouri Plan A method of selecting judges that combines 
appointment and election. 
mitigating circumstances Any circumstances accompanying 
the commission of a crime that may justify a lighter sentence. 
morals Principles of right and wrong behavior, as practiced by 
individuals or by society. 
murder The unlawful killing of one human being by another. 
N
National Security Agency (NSA) The intelligence agency 
that is responsible for protecting U.S. government commu-
nications and producing intelligence by monitoring foreign 
communications. 
necessity A defense against criminal liability in which the 
defendant asserts that circumstances required her or him to 
commit an illegal act. 
negligence A failure to exercise the standard of care that a 
reasonable person would exercise in similar circumstances. 
neurotransmitter A chemical that transmits nerve impulses 
between nerve cells and from nerve cells to the brain. 
new-generation jail A jail that is distinguished architec-
turally by a design that encourages interaction between 
inmates and jailers and that offers greater opportunities for 
treatment. 
night watch system An early form of American law enforce-
ment in which volunteers patrolled their community from 
dusk to dawn to keep the peace. 
noble cause corruption Knowing misconduct by a police 
officer with the goal of attaining what the officer believes is a 
“just” result. 
nolo contendere Latin for “I will not contest it.” A criminal 
defendant’s plea, in which she or he chooses not to challenge, 
or contest, the charges brought by the government. 
nonpartisan elections Elections in which candidates are pre-
sented on the ballot without any party affiliation. 
nonstate actor An entity that plays a role in international 
affairs but does not represent any established state or nation. 
o
opening statements The attorneys’ statements to the jury at 
the beginning of the trial. 
opinions Written statements by the judges expressing the rea-
sons for the court’s decision in a case. 
oral arguments The verbal arguments presented in person by 
attorneys to an appellate court. 
organized crime Illegal acts carried out by illegal organiza-
tions engaged in the market for illegal goods or services, such 
as illicit drugs or firearms. 
P
pardon An act of executive clemency that overturns convic-
tion and erases mention of the crime from the person’s criminal 
record. 
parens patriae A doctrine that holds that the state has a 
responsibility to look after the well-being of children and to 
assume the role of parent if necessary. 
parole The conditional release of an inmate before his or her 
sentence has expired. 
parole board A body of appointed civilians that decides 
whether a convict should be granted conditional release before 
the end of his or her sentence. 
parole contract An agreement between the state and the 
offender that establishes the conditions of parole. 
parole grant hearing A hearing in which the entire parole 
board or a subcommittee reviews information, meets the 
offender, and hears testimony from relevant witnesses to deter-
mine whether to grant parole. 
parole guidelines Standards that are used in the parole pro-
cess to measure the risk that a potential parolee will recidivate. 
parole revocation When a parolee breaks the conditions of 
parole, the process of withdrawing parole and returning the 
person to prison. 
Part I offenses Crimes reported annually by the FBI in its 
Uniform Crime Report. Part I offenses include murder, rape, 
robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, motor vehicle 
theft, and arson. 
Part II offenses All crimes recorded by the FBI that do not fall 
into the category of Part I offenses. These crimes include both 
misdemeanors and felonies. 
partisan elections Elections in which candidates are affili-
ated with and receive support from political parties. 
Patriot Act Legislation passed in the wake of the September 
11, 2001, terrorist attacks that greatly expanded the ability 
of government agents to monitor and apprehend suspected 
terrorists. 
patronage system A form of corruption in which the politi-
cal party in power hires and promotes police officers, receiving 
job-related “favors” in return. 
penitentiary An early form of correctional facility that empha-
sized separating inmates from society and from each other. 
peremptory challenges Voir dire challenges to exclude 
potential jurors from serving on the jury without any support-
ing reason or cause. 
permanent resident An alien who has been granted permis-
sion by the U.S. government to live and work in the United 
States on a permanent basis. 
petition The document filed with a juvenile court alleging that 
the juvenile is a delinquent or a status offender and request-
ing that the court either hear the case or transfer it to an adult 
court. 
phishing Sending an unsolicited e-mail that falsely claims 
to be from a legitimate organization in an attempt to acquire  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G–8   C r I M I N a l  J U s T I C E  I N  a C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
private security The practice of private corporations or individ-
uals offering services traditionally performed by police officers. 
proactive arrests Arrests that occur because of concerted 
efforts by law enforcement agencies to respond to a particular 
type of criminal or criminal behavior. 
probable cause Reasonable grounds to believe the existence 
of facts warranting certain actions, such as the search or arrest 
of a person. 
probation A criminal sanction in which a convict is allowed 
to remain in the community rather than be imprisoned. 
probationary period A period of time at the beginning of a 
police officer’s career during which she or he may be fired with-
out cause. 
problem-oriented policing A policing philosophy that 
requires police to identify potential criminal activity and 
develop strategies to prevent or respond to that activity. 
procedural criminal law Rules that define the manner in 
which the rights and duties of individuals may be enforced. 
procedural due process The constitutional requirement that 
the law must be carried out in a fair and orderly manner. 
professional model A style of policing advocated by August 
Vollmer and O. W. Wilson that emphasizes centralized police 
organizations, increased use of technology, and a limitation of 
police discretion through regulations and guidelines. 
property bond An alternative to posting bail in cash, in which 
the defendant gains pretrial release by providing the court with 
property valued at the bail amount as assurance that she or he 
will return for trial. 
prosecutorial waiver A procedure used in situations where 
the prosecutor has discretion to decide whether a case will be 
heard by a juvenile court or an adult court. 
psychoactive drugs Chemicals that affect the brain, causing 
changes in emotions, perceptions, and behavior. 
psychology The scientific study of mental processes and 
behavior. 
public defenders Court-appointed attorneys who are paid by 
the state to represent defendants who are unable to hire private 
counsel. 
public order crime Behavior that has been labeled criminal 
because it is contrary to shared social values, customs, and 
norms. 
public prosecutor An individual, acting as a trial lawyer, who 
initiates and conducts cases in the government’s name and on 
behalf of the people. 
r
racial profiling The practice of targeting people for police 
action based solely on their race, ethnicity, or national origin. 
racketeering The criminal action of being involved in an orga-
nized effort to engage in illegal business transactions. 
rational choice theory A school of criminology that holds 
that wrongdoers act as if they weigh the possible benefits of 
criminal or delinquent activity against the expected costs of 
being apprehended. 
reactive arrests Arrests that come about as part of the 
ordinary routine of police patrols and responses to calls for 
service. 
real evidence Evidence that is brought into court and seen by 
the jury, as opposed to evidence that is described for a jury. 
sensitive information such as passwords or credit-card details 
from the recipient. 
plaintiff The person or institution that initiates a lawsuit in 
civil court proceedings by filing a complaint. 
plain view doctrine The legal principle that objects in plain 
view of a law enforcement agent who has the right to be in a 
position to have that view may be seized without a warrant. 
plea bargaining The process by which the accused and the 
prosecutor work out a mutually satisfactory conclusion to the 
case, subject to court approval. 
police corruption The abuse of authority by a law enforce-
ment officer for personal gain. 
police subculture The values and perceptions that are shared 
by members of a police department and, to a certain extent, by 
all law enforcement agents. 
precedent A court decision that furnishes an example or 
authority for deciding subsequent cases involving similar facts. 
predisposition report A report prepared during the disposi-
tion process that provides the judge with relevant background 
material to aid in the disposition decision. 
preliminary hearing An initial hearing in which a magistrate 
decides if there is probable cause to believe that the defendant 
committed the crime with which he or she is charged. 
preparedness An umbrella term for the actions taken by gov-
ernments to prepare for large-scale catastrophic events such as 
terrorist attacks or environmental disasters. 
preponderance of the evidence The degree of proof required 
to decide in favor of one side or the other in a civil case. In gen-
eral, this requirement is met when a plaintiff proves that a fact 
more likely than not is true. 
prescription drugs Medical drugs that require a physician’s 
permission for purchase. 
presentence investigative report An investigative report on 
an offender’s background that assists a judge in determining 
the proper sentence. 
pretrial detainees Individuals who cannot post bail after 
arrest and are therefore forced to spend the time prior to their 
trial incarcerated in jail. 
pretrial diversion program An alternative to trial offered by 
a judge or prosecutor, in which the offender agrees to partici-
pate in a specified counseling or treatment program in return 
for withdrawal of the charges. 
preventive detention The retention of an accused person 
in custody due to fears that she or he will commit a crime if 
released before trial. 
prisoner reentry A corrections strategy designed to prepare 
inmates for a successful return to the community and to reduce 
their criminal activity after release. 
prison gang A group of inmates who band together within the 
corrections system to engage in social and criminal activities. 
prisonization The socialization process through which a new 
inmate learns the accepted norms and values of the prison 
population. 
prison programs Organized activities for inmates that are 
designed to improve their physical and mental health, provide 
them with vocational skills, or simply keep them busy while 
incarcerated. 
private prisons Correctional  facilities operated by private 
corporations instead of the government and, therefore, reliant 
on profits for survival. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–9
“real offense” The actual offense committed, as opposed to 
the charge levied by a prosecutor as the result of a plea bargain. 
reasonable force The degree of force that is appropriate to 
protect the police officer or other citizens and is not excessive. 
rebuttal Evidence given to counteract or disprove evidence 
presented by the opposing party. 
recidivism The act of committing a new crime after a person 
has already been punished for a previous crime by being con-
victed and sent to jail or prison. 
recklessness The state of being aware that a risk does or will 
exist and nevertheless acting in a way that consciously disre-
gards this risk. 
recruitment The process by which law enforcement agencies 
develop a pool of qualified applicants from which to select new 
members. 
referral The notification process through which a law enforce-
ment officer or other concerned citizen makes the juvenile 
court aware of a juvenile’s unlawful or unruly conduct. 
regulation Governmental control of society through rules 
and laws enforced by administrative agencies. 
rehabilitation The philosophy that society is best served 
when wrongdoers are provided the resources needed to elimi-
nate criminality from their behavioral pattern. 
reintegration A goal of corrections that focuses on preparing 
the offender for a return to the community unmarred by fur-
ther criminal behavior. 
relative deprivation The theory that inmate aggression is 
caused when freedoms and services that the inmate has come 
to accept as normal are decreased or eliminated. 
release on recognizance (ROR) A judge’s order that releases 
an accused from jail with the understanding that he or she will 
return for further proceedings of his or her own will. 
relevant evidence Evidence tending to make a fact in ques-
tion more or less probable than it would be without the evi-
dence. Only relevant evidence is admissible in court. 
removal The process used by the federal government to expel 
an alien from the United States. 
residential treatment program A government-run facility 
for juveniles whose offenses are not deemed serious enough to 
warrant incarceration in a training school. 
response time The rapidity with which calls for service are 
answered. 
restitution Monetary compensation for damages done to the 
victim by the offender’s criminal act. 
restorative justice An approach to punishment designed to 
repair the harm done to the victim and the community by the 
offender’s criminal act. 
retribution The philosophy that those who commit criminal 
acts should be punished based on the severity of the crime and 
that no other factors need be considered. 
robbery The act of taking property from another person 
through force, threat of force, or intimidation. 
rule of four A rule of the United States Supreme Court that 
the Court will not issue a writ of certiorari unless at least four 
justices approve of the decision to hear the case. 
s
search The process by which police examine a person or property 
to find evidence that will be used to prove guilt in a criminal trial. 
searches and seizures The legal term, as found in the Fourth 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, that generally refers to the 
searching for and the confiscating of evidence by law enforce-
ment agents. 
searches incidental to arrests Searches for weapons and 
evidence that are conducted on persons who have just been 
arrested. 
search warrant A written order, based on probable cause and 
issued by a judge or magistrate, commanding that police offi-
cers or criminal investigators search a specific person, place, or 
property to obtain evidence. 
seizure The forcible taking of a person or property in response 
to a violation of the law. 
self-defense The legally recognized privilege to protect one’s 
self or property from injury by another. 
self-reported survey A method of gathering crime data that 
relies on participants to reveal and detail their own criminal or 
delinquent behavior. 
sentencing discrimination A situation in which the length of 
a sentence appears to be influenced by a defendant’s race, gen-
der, economic status, or other factor not directly related to the 
crime he or she committed. 
sentencing disparity A situation in which those convicted of 
similar crimes do not receive similar sentences. 
sentencing guidelines Legislatively determined guidelines 
that judges are required to follow when sentencing those con-
victed of specific crimes. 
separate confinement A nineteenth-century penitentiary 
system in which inmates were kept separate from one another 
at all times, with daily activities taking place in individual cells. 
sex offender notification law Legislation that requires law 
enforcement authorities to notify people when convicted sex 
offenders are released into their neighborhood or community. 
sexual assault Forced or coerced sexual intercourse (or other 
sexual acts). 
sheriff The primary law enforcement officer in a county, usu-
ally elected to the post by a popular vote. 
shock incarceration A short period of incarceration that is 
designed to deter further criminal activity by “shocking” the 
offender with the hardships of imprisonment. 
social conflict theories A school of criminology that views 
criminal behavior as the result of class conflict. 
social disorganization theory The theory that deviant 
behavior is more likely in communities where social institu-
tions such as the family, schools, and the criminal justice sys-
tem fail to exert control over the population. 
socialization The process through which a police offi-
cer is taught the values and expected behavior of the police 
subculture. 
social process theories A school of criminology that consid-
ers criminal behavior to be the predictable result of a person’s 
interaction with his or her environment. 
sociology The study of the development and functioning of 
groups of people who live together within a society. 
solitary confinement The isolation of an inmate in a separate 
cell, either as punishment or to remove the inmate from the 
general prison population for security reasons. 
spam Bulk e-mails, particularly of commercial advertising, 
sent in large quantities without the consent of the recipient. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G–10   C r I M I N a l  J U s T I C E  I N  a C T I o N :  T h e  C o r e
testosterone The hormone primarily responsible for the pro-
duction of sperm and the development of male secondary sex 
characteristics such as the growth of facial and pubic hair and 
the change of voice pitch. 
theory An explanation of a happening or circumstance that is 
based on observation, experimentation, and reasoning. 
time served The period of time a person denied bail (or unable 
to pay it) has spent in jail prior to her or his trial. 
total institution An institution, such as a prison, that pro-
vides all of the necessities for existence to those who live within 
its boundaries. 
trace evidence Evidence such as a fingerprint, blood, or hair 
found in small amounts at a crime scene. 
training school A correctional institution for juveniles found 
to be delinquent or status offenders. 
trial courts Courts in which most cases usually begin and in 
which questions of fact are examined. 
truth-in-sentencing laws Legislative attempts to ensure that 
convicts will serve approximately the terms to which they were 
initially sentenced. 
U
Uniform Crime Report (UCR) An annual report compiled by 
the FBI to give an indication of criminal activity in the United 
States. 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) The federal 
agency responsible for protecting U.S. borders and facilitating 
legal trade and travel across those borders. 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) The 
federal agency that enforces the nation’s immigration and cus-
toms laws. 
U.S. Secret Service A federal law enforcement organization 
with the primary responsibility of protecting the president, 
the president’s family, the vice president, and other important 
political figures. 
V
venire The group of citizens from which the jury is selected. 
verdict A formal decision made by the jury. 
victim impact statement (VIS) A statement to the sentenc-
ing body (judge, jury, or parole board) in which the victim is 
given the opportunity to describe how the crime has affected 
her or him. 
victimology A school of criminology that studies why certain 
people are the victims of crimes and the optimal role for vic-
tims in the criminal justice system. 
victim surveys A method of gathering crime data that directly 
surveys participants to determine their experiences as victims 
of crime. 
virus A computer program that can replicate itself over a net-
work such as the Internet and interfere with the normal use of 
a computer. A virus cannot exist as a separate entity and must 
attach itself to another program to move through a network. 
visa Official authorization allowing a person to travel to and 
within the issuing country. 
voir dire The preliminary questions that the trial attorneys 
ask prospective jurors to determine whether they are biased or 
have any connection with the defendant or a witness. 
specialty courts Lower courts that have jurisdiction over one 
specific area of criminal activity, such as illegal drugs or domes-
tic violence. 
split sentence probation A sentence that consists of incar-
ceration in a prison or jail, followed by a probationary period 
in the community. 
status offender A juvenile who has engaged in behavior 
deemed unacceptable for those under a certain statutorily 
determined age. 
statute of limitations A law limiting the amount of time pros-
ecutors have to bring criminal charges against a suspect after 
the crime has occurred. 
statutory law The body of law enacted by legislative bodies. 
statutory rape A strict liability crime in which an adult 
engages in a sexual act with a minor. 
stop A brief detention of a person by law enforcement agents 
for questioning. 
strain theory The assumption that crime is the result of frus-
tration felt by individuals who cannot reach their financial and 
personal goals through legitimate means. 
street gang A group of people, usually three or more, who 
share a common identity and engage in illegal activities. 
stressors The aspects of police work and life that lead to feel-
ings of stress. 
strict liability crimes Certain crimes, such as traffic viola-
tions, in which the defendant is guilty regardless of her or his 
state of mind at the time of the act. 
substantial-capacity test (ALI/MPC test) A test for the 
insanity defense that states that a person is not responsible 
for criminal behavior when he or she “lacks substantial capac-
ity” to understand that the behavior is wrong or know how to 
behave properly. 
substantive criminal law Law that defines the rights and 
duties of individuals with respect to one another. 
substantive due process The constitutional requirement 
that laws used to accuse and convict persons of crimes must 
be fair. 
supermax prison A correctional facility reserved for those 
inmates who have extensive records of misconduct in maxi-
mumsecurity prisons. 
supremacy clause A clause in the U.S. Constitution establish-
ing that federal law is the “supreme law of the land” and shall 
prevail when in conflict with state constitutions or statutes. 
suspended sentence A judicially imposed condition in which 
an offender is sentenced after being convicted of a crime, but is 
not required to begin serving the sentence immediately. 
sworn officer A law enforcement agent who has been autho-
rized to make arrests and use force, including deadly force, 
against civilians 
system A set of interacting parts that, when functioning prop-
erly, achieve a desired result. 
T
technical violation An action taken by a probationer that, 
although not criminal, breaks the terms of probation as desig-
nated by the court. 
terrorism The use or threat of violence to achieve political 
objectives. 
testimony Verbal evidence given by witnesses under oath. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y   G–11
voluntary manslaughter A homicide in which the intent to 
kill was present in the mind of the offender, but malice was 
lacking. 
W
warden The prison official who is ultimately responsible for 
the organization and performance of a correctional facility. 
warrantless arrest An arrest made without first seeking a 
warrant for the action. 
white-collar crime Nonviolent crimes committed by business 
entities or individuals to gain a personal or business advantage. 
widen the net The criticism that intermediate sanctions 
designed to divert offenders from prison actually increase the 
number of citizens who are under the control and surveillance 
of the American corrections system. 
work release program Temporary release of convicts from 
prison for purposes of employment. The offenders may spend 
their days on the job but must return to the correctional facility 
at night and during the weekend. 
worm A computer program that can automatically replicate 
itself over a network such as the Internet and interfere with the 
normal use of a computer. A worm does not need to be attached 
to an existing file to move from one network to another. 
writ of certiorari A request from a higher court asking a lower 
court for the record of a case. In essence, the request signals the 
higher court’s willingness to review the case. 
wrongful conviction The conviction, either by verdict or by 
guilty plea, of a person who is factually innocent of the charges. 
y
youth gang A self-formed group of youths with several iden-
tifiable characteristics, including a gang name and other rec-
ognizable symbols, a geographic territory, and participation in 
illegal activities. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N a m e  i N d e x   I–1
C
Caldero, Michael A., 151–152
Camp, Camille Graham, 345
Camp, George M., 345
Campbell, Howard, 58
Canter, David, 48
Capone, Al, 120
Carlson, Kenneth, 324
Carlsten, Annika, 234
Carmichael, Jon, 376
Carr, Craig L., 87
Carroll, Leo, 341
Carter, David, 142, 402
Cary, Mary Kate, 278
Casady, Tom, 142
Cash, Johnny, 336
Cassell, Paul, 267
Chahal, Shirin, 178
Champion, Dean John, 388
Chapman, Mark David, 352
Chapman, Steve, 414
Chapman, Warner, 216
Chase, Monique, 202
Chen, Edward M., 203
Chenoweth, James H., 107
Chermak, Steven, 98
Chesney-Lind, Meda, 45, 347–348, 
350, 375
Churchill, Vicki, 261
Claudy, Michael, 352
Clear, Todd R., 55, 219, 255, 266, 
287, 300, 319, 339, 344, 350, 
353
Clementi, James, 188
Clementi, Tyler, 188, 207, 238
Clemmer, Donald, 334, 337
Clifford, Mary, 302
Clinton, Bill, 315, 399
Cloninger, Dale O., 139
Cloud, John, 24
Cnaan, Ram, 22
Cochran, John K., 40
Coffee, John C., 265
Cohen, Larry, 53–54
Cohen, Neil P., 291
Cohen, Richard, 20
Cohn, D’Vera, 417
Cohn, Scott, 324
Cole, Dave, 175
Cole, David, 315
Cole, George F., 219, 266, 300, 319, 
339, 344, 350, 353
Cole, Simon A., 135
Collier, Acurie, 293
Collier, Linda J., 169
Cooksey, Kazi, 74
Cooper, Alexia, 42
Cooper, Jonathan, 278, 356
Cordner, Gary W., 132
Coscarelli, Kate, 299
Cottrell, Leonard S., 49
Cox, Steven M., 111, 112
Crank, John P., 151–152
Bello, Marisol, 24
Bennett, Jessica, 376
Benoit, Carl A., 173
Benson, Bruce L., 120
Benson, Michael L., 418, 420
Berk, Richard, 274
Berkowitz, Scott, 32
Berns, Walter, 269
Bhati, Avinash Singh, 254–255
Bianchi, Herman, 6, 48
Biggs, David C., 77
bin Laden, Osama, 398
Bittner, Egon, 99
Black, Antwain, 264
Black, Julia L., 266
Black, Kevin, 73
Blackstone, William, 32
Blair, J. Pete, 128
Blake, Martha, 136
Blakely, Curtis R., 324
Blitstein, Ryan, 221
Bloom, Barbara, 350
Bloomberg, Michael, 4
Blumberg, Mark, 39
Blumstein, Alfred, 18, 19
Bogard, David, 329
Boland, Barbara, 222
Boruchowitz, Robert C., 209
Borukhova, Mazoltuv, 236
Bourke, Michael L., 252
Bousquet, Steve, 325
Bouza, Anthony, 132
Bowker, Lee H., 339
Bowling, Ralph, 275
Boyer, Barbara, 137
Boyle, Douglas J., 299
Braccialarghe, Randolph, 210
Braga, Anthony, 287
Braiden, Chris, 103
Brantingham, Jeff, 105
Bratton, William, 101
Breivik, Anders Behring, 255
Bright, Stephen, 269
Brockway, Zebulon, 313
Broeder, David W., 242
Brown, Charles, 139
Brown, Robbie, 324
Bruck, David, 269
Brucker, Joseph, 239
Bullock, Jane A., 402, 404
Bumphus, Vic W., 324
Burchfield, Keri B., 55
Burgess, John Steven, 359
Burk, Lauren, 273
Burkhart, Harry, 218
Burnett, Ernest, 228
Burns, Jeffrey M., 47
Bush, George W., 315, 400
Bush, Jeb, 4
Bushway, Shawn D., 377
Bustamante, Alyssa, 372
Butterfield, Fox, 326, 330
A
Abbott, Jack Henry, 342
Abdur-Rashid, Talib, 348
Abram, Karen, 378
Adam, Jean, 192
Adam, Scott, 192
Adams, Benjamin, 42, 373, 375, 382, 
384, 387
Agnew, Robert, 35, 50
Alarcon, Arthur L., 90
al-Awlaki, Anwar, 90, 191
Albonetti, Celesta, 206
Alderden, Megan, 142
Alison, Laurence, 48
Alito, Samuel, 160
Alpert, Geoffrey P., 103
Alschuler, Albert W., 225, 226
Alvarez, Danielle A., 259
Alvarez, W., 146
Amabile, John, 210
Anastasia, George, 188
Andenaes, Johannes, 76
Anderson, Dale, 175
Anderson, Eddie Leroy, 86
Andrade, Leandro, 267–268
Anglin, Deirdre, 146
Anglin, M. Douglas, 295
Anthony, Casey, 24, 237
Anthony, Caylee, 24
Ardolf, Barry, 411
Arkin, William M., 107
Arpaio, Joe, 328
Ashenfeiter, David, 298
B
Bader, Ruth Ginsburg, 161, 203
Bainbridge, J. S., Jr., 265
Baissus, Jean-Marc, 202
Baker, John S., Jr., 68
Baker, Thomas J., 18
Baldwin, William A., 82
Banks, Elizabeth, 17
Barbour, Haley, 352
Barch, Krys, 6
Barr, Bob, 262
Barry, Rob, 5
Barthe, Emmanuel P., 103
Bartollas, Clemens, 111, 339, 345
Baskin, Deborah, 134
Basu, G., 47
Baum, Geraldine, 412
Bayley, David H., 131
Baze, Ralph, 275
Beasley, Richard J., 408
Beattie, James M., 311
Beck, Allen J., 315
Becker, Howard S., 56
Becker, Ronald F., 134, 151, 152
Beebe, Herman K., 422
Beebe, Paul, 81
Beh, Hazel Glenn, 150
Beiner, Theresa B., 203
Bell, Arnold E., 119
Name INdex
Crapeau, Richard, 366
Crew, Keith, 264
Cronin, Ingrid, 252
Cronin, James M., 134
Crumbley, Nikolaus, 135
Cullen, Francis T., 53, 314
Cunningham, William C., 121
Curran, Christopher, 138
Currie, Janet, 379
Cury, Colleen, 239
Cushing, M. A., 145
D
Dale, Maryclaire, 347
Dannerbeck, Anne, 379
Daranciang, Nelson, 324
David, Kenneth Culp, 149
Davis, Edward, 379
Davis, Kenneth Culp, 221
Davis, Roderick, 336
Davis, Samuel, 367
Davis, Shawn, 204
Day, David, 358
Day, Nathan, 310
Dayan, Colin, 345
Dean, Mensah M., 286
Decker, Scott, 25
DeeCorrell, Dee, 66
Deise, Jerome, 268
Deitz, A. Steven, 142
Delaney, Ruth, 315
del Carmen, Rolando V., 163, 164, 
168, 172, 181
DeLisi, Matt, 341
DeMichele, Matthew T., 293
Dempsey, John S., 100, 113, 130, 145
Deutsch, Linda, 200
Dewey, Robert, 23
Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, 274
Diamond, John L., 70
DiBlasio, Natalie, 376
Dieckman, Duane, 139
Dieter, Richard C., 278
DiIulio, John, 325
DiIulio, John J., Jr., 342
Donger, Rand D., 43
Donohue, John J., 274
Doob, Anthony N., 315, 316
Downing, Michael, 107
Downing, Rondal G., 202
Dozier, Kimberly, 398
Dressler, Joshua, 84
Drury, Alan J., 341
Dubois, Amber, 225
Duff, H. Wayne, 153
Duncan, Martha Grace, 372
Dunham, Roger G., 103
Durkheim, Emile, 49–50
Dwyer, Pete, 98
E
Earley, Eddie, 275
Earley, Tina, 275
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–2   C R i m i N a L  J U S T i C e  i N  a C T i o N :  T h e  C o r e
Hess, Karen M., 130–131, 138, 165
Heumann, Milton, 225–226
Hibberd, James, 145
Hickert, Audrey, 383
Hightower, Kyle, 88, 237
Hinkle, D. P., 109
Hinshaw, S’Lee Arthur, II, 383
Hipp, John R., 42
Hirschi, Travis, 51–52, 53, 377
Hirsh, Milton, 222
Holcomb, Jayme W., 174
Holland, Jesse J., 181
Hollander, Lee, 252
Holleran, David, 263, 264
Holmes, James, 8
Horowitz, M. J., 146
Householder, Jason, 259
Howe, Julie, 358
Howe, William, 162
Howell, James C., 19, 379
Huesmann, L. Rowell, 51
Huguely, George, 216
Hutchinson, Virginia A., 329
Hutson, H. Range, 146
Hymon, Elton, 147
I
Ibarra, Peter R., 301
Ifill, Sherrilyn A., 203
Ingraham, Barton L., 229
Ingulli, Elaine, 77
Iontcheva, Jena, 260
Irwin, John, 327, 337, 338
Israel, Jerold H., 170
Izzo, Tony, 320
J
Jackson, Michael, 75, 200
Jacobs, James B., 316
Jayarman, Mythri, 286
Jenkins, Brian M., 399
Jenkins, Philip, 252
Jenne, Denise L., 345
Jesilow, Paul, 254
Johnson, Alex, 137
Johnson, Brian, 264
Johnson, Donald, 134
Johnson, Kevin, 54, 357
Johnston, Lloyd D., 378
Jones, Antoine, 178
Jones, Christopher, 81
Jones, Mark, 303
Jonson, Cheryl L., 314
Jou, Donna, 359
Joy, Peter A., 208
Justin-Jinich, Johanna, 83
K
Kaczynski, Ted, 321
Kagan, Elena, 203
Kaiser, David, 340
Kaltreider, N. B., 146
Kalven, Harry, 235
Kanapaux, William, 339
Kane, Robert J., 150
Kanka, Megan, 359
Kaplan, Harold I., 47
Kaplan, John, 210
Kappeler, Victor E., 39
Gill, F. W., 72
Gilmore, Gary, 272
Giordano, Peggy C., 53
Gittings, R. Kaj, 274
Glaze, Lauren E., 22
Gobert, James J., 291
Goffman, Erving, 337
Goldman, Adam, 405
Goldstein, Herman, 142–143
Goldstein, Joseph, 15, 16, 381
Goldstein, Steven, 188
Gonzalez, Jaime, 128, 143
Gonzalez, Jaime, Sr., 128
Gonzalez, Noralva, 128
Goode, Erica, 98, 140, 252, 316, 408
Goodkind, Sara, 374
Goodnough, Abby, 57, 58
Gordon, Rachel A., 379
Gottfredson, Denise C., 375
Gottfredson, Michael, 53, 377
Gouras, Matt, 345
Grace, Anthony A., 57
Graham, Terrance, 372
Greenberger, Michael, 407
Greene, Edith, 268
Greene, Jack, 99
Greenman, Emma, 202
Greenwald, Glenn, 90
Greenwood, Peter W., 133
Gribble, Christopher, 48
Griffin, Patrick, 383
Griffiths, Elizabeth, 19
Grodin, Michael A., 340
Groff, Elizabeth R., 140
Grove, Walter R., 40
Guirguis, Michael, 146
Gupta, Sarika, 288
H
Hackett, Rogelio, Jr., 411
Hahn, Paul H., 287–288, 293
Haigh, Susan, 150
Halbert, Terry, 77
Haller, Mark H., 103
Hamby, Sherry, 379
Hammond, Jeremy, 396
Haney, Craig, 341
Harkless, Richard, 422
Harlan, John, Jr., 171
Harlow, Caroline Wolf, 43
Harris-Moore, Colton, 261
Hart, Henry, 70
Harvey, Brian, 177
Hashim, Ahmed S., 398
Hassine, Victor, 356
Hastie, Reid, 235
Haughney, Christine, 15, 16
Hawken, Angela, 295
Hawkins, Angela, 295
Hawkins, Gordon, 330
Hawkins, Karen, 137
Hawley, Chris, 405
Hehre, Robert, 202
Heinz, John, 13
Henrichson, Christian, 315
Hermann, Peter, 54
Hernandez, Andres E., 252
Hernstein, Richard J., 46
Egley, Arlen, Jr., 19, 379
Ehrlich, Isaac, 254
Elabed, Hanni, 324
Elgion, John, 223
El Khalifi, Amine, 402, 403, 417
Emshwiller, John R., 86
Enker, Arnold N., 87
Enzbrenner, David, 144
Erazo-Rodriguez, Jenny, 83
Erez, Edna, 268, 301
Eron, Leonard D., 51
Esbensen, Finn-Aage, 379
Espo, David, 398
Evangelista, Benny, 410
F
Fahim, Kareem, 264
Falkenberg, Lisa, 288
Farbiarz, Russell E., 256
Farnell, Dee Anna, 258
Farrington, David P., 378
Feinberg, Joel, 70
Feinman, Clarice, 264
Feld, Barry C., 385
Felson, Marcus, 37, 53–54
Felson, Richard, 55, 223
Ferdinand, Anton, 6
Fernandez, Manny, 128, 144
Fields, Gary, 86
Figlio, Robert, 55
Fine, Bernie, 228
Finkelhor, David, 379
Fisher, Jeffrey L., 181
Fletcher, Connie, 131, 133
Fletcher, George P., 15
Foglia, Michael, 239
Forst, Brian, 254, 262
Forst, Linda S., 100, 113, 130, 145
Fortas, Abe, 367, 370
Foucault, Michel, 342
Fowler, Geoffrey A., 412
Fox, James A., 42
Frana, John F., 53
Franklin, Christopher, 137
Franklin, Lonnie, Jr., 137
Franklin, Sharon B., 178
Freere, Jon, 417
Freud, Sigmund, 48
Friedman, Lawrence M., 71, 146, 
216
Friend, Zach, 140
Funes, Muaricio, 164
Fyfe, James, 128
G
Gable, Robert S., 300
Gallo, Andrew, 254
Gallo, Leonard, 150
Garcia, Greyston, 5
Gardner, John Albert, 225
Gartner, Rosemary, 315, 316
Garza, Tony, 58
Gault, Gerald, 370
Gay, William, 131–132
Geller, William A., 144
Geranios, Nicholas K., 338
Gershman, Bennett L., 205
Ghailani, Ahmed Khalfan, 228, 407
Gibson, Tammy, 82
Karmen, Andrew, 53
Katehis, John, 244
Katz, Jack, 46
Kauder, Neal B., 266
Kawai, Eriko, 379
Kazerounian, Salmun, 166
Keating, Charles, Jr., 422
Keel, Timothy G., 134
Kelling, George L., 52, 55, 101–102, 
103, 105, 130, 139, 140–141, 
142
Kelly, Raymond, 106–107
Kemmler, William, 269
Kempf-Leonard, Kimberly, 375
Ken, Rogers L., 128
Kenneally, Christine, 138
Kennedy, Anthony, 167, 372
Kennedy, David, 54
Kennedy, Robert, 117
Kent, Morris, 369
Kerman, Piper, 350
Kerr, Orin, 160
Kersting, Robert C., 345
Keve, Paul W., 258, 289
Kidwell, Keith, 241
Kimball, Peter, 318
King, Hollis, 160
King, Jeffrey R., 356
King, Nancy J., 260
King, Rodney, 146
Kirkham, Chris, 325
Kitzhaber, John, 278
Kleiman, Mark, 295
Kleinig, John, 16–17
Klockars, Carl, 99, 101, 292
Knox, George W., 341
Kochly, Robert, 222
Koenigs, Michael, 207
Koppel, Nathan, 288
Kopytoff, Verne G., 410
Korber, Dorothy, 357
Korey, Jason, 239
Koski, Douglas D., 235
Kramer, John, 264
Kraska, Peter B., 56
Kratcoski, Peter C., 340
Kreuz, L. E., 47
Kubrin, Charis E., 18
Kuehnel, Julie, 47, 48, 255
Kurlychek, Megan, 8
Kurtz, Josh, 301
Kyriacou, Demetrious N., 146
L
Lacey, Marc, 404
LaFond, John Q., 80
Lahey, Benjamin B., 379
Lake, Eli, 191
Lane, T. J., 375
Lanier, Mark M., 260
Lappin, Harley G., 324
Larson, Berry, 323
Larson, Robin, 151
Lasser, Mitchell, 202
Latessa, Edward J., 314
Lattman, Peter, 421
Laub, John H., 53, 377
Lee, Henry K., 222
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N a m e  i N d e x   I–3
Nink, Carl, 345, 346
Noble, Rosevelt L., 260
O
Obama, Barack, 90, 230, 398, 407
Oceant, Emose, 264
O’Connor, Anahad, 378
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 203, 268
Okun, Edward Hugh, 422
Olson, Wendy, 86
Omar, Mohamud Said, 191
Ommeren, Alice, 358
O’Neil, J. L., 145
Oppel, Richard, Jr., 18
O’Reilly, Gregory W., 258
Orlin, David, 170
Ormrod, Richard, 379
Ormsby, Thayne, 229
Osmakac, Sami, 22
Ostrom, Brian J., 266
O’Sullivan, Julie R., 261
Otteson, Christa, 349
Owens, John B., 120
P
Packer, Herbert, 13–14, 17, 189, 253
Padilla, José, 348
Page, Douglas, 320
Palazzolo, Joe, 5
Palmer, Ted, 300, 313
Palumbo, Dennis, 302
Pare, Paul-Philippe, 223
Parent, Dale, 300
Parker, Andre, 106
Parker, Ian, 188
Passel, John S., 417
Pastor, Michael, 200
Pate, Tony, 139
Paternoster, Ray, 268, 377
Payen, Laguerre, 348
Payne, William, 135
Paynter, Ben, 58
Peak, Ken, 103
Pearl, James, 170
Pederson, David, 356
Peel, Sir Robert “Bobbie,” 102
Pellegrino, Evan, 137
Penn, William, 311
Pennington, Nancy, 235
Pepinsky, Harold, 254
Percival, Robert V., 216
Persky, H., 47
Persons, Vicci, 329
Pescatore, Joanne, 286
Petersilia, Joan, 133, 290, 299, 315, 
339, 356
Peterson, Joseph, 134
Pettigrew, Charles A., 321
Pfeifer, Stuart, 412
Pimental, José, 399
Pinizzotto, Anthony, 379
Pious, Richard M., 407
Platt, Anthony, 368
Podolski, Cheryl-Lynn, 51
Pollak, Louis H., 200
Pollock, Joycelyn, 128, 151, 152
Potter, Gary W., 39
Pound, Roscoe, 189
McKinley, James C., Jr., 417
McKinley, Jesse, 137
McMunigal, Kevin C., 208
McNulty, Paul J., 106
McTaggart, Kelli C., 170
Meadows, Robert J., 47, 48, 255
Meier, Robert, 43, 50
Meisner, Jason, 293
Melde, Chris, 379
Melton, Gary B., 372
Menard, James, 80
Meranze, Michael, 311
Merton, Robert K., 50
Meyerson, Jessica, 349
Michael, Maggie, 399
Milazzo, Carl, 198
Milken, Michael, 422
Miller, Charles, 379
Miller, Claud H., III, 260
Miller, Greg, 402
Miller, Laurence, 146
Miller, R. L., 329
Miller, Teresa A., 414
Miranda, Ernesto, 180
Mitchell, Brian David, 233
Mitchell, Paula M., 90
Mocan, Naci, 274
Moeller, Marguerite, 44
Moffitt, Terrie, 377
Mohammed, Khalid Sheikh, 230, 
407
Mohler, Henry Calvin, 312
Moise-Titus, Jessica, 51
Molloy, Donald, 68
Montague, Don, 128
Moore, Mark H., 102, 103, 105, 130, 
141
Moore, Richard, 73
Morenoff, Jeffrey, 42, 44
Morgan, Stephen, 83
Morris, Paul, 416
Morton, Michael, 245
Moskos, Peter C., 112
Mroz, Jacqueline, 111
Mueller, Robert S., III, 397
Muller, Eric L., 233
Mullins, Harry J., 144
Mulvey, Edward P., 379
Murphy, Christopher K., 177
Murphy, Gerard R., 134
Murray, Conrad, 74–75, 200
Murray, Henry L., 301
Myers, Bryan, 268
Myers, David G., 56
N
Nagy, Pamela S., 271
Nalla, M. K., 102
Napolitano, Janet, 117
Nees, H., 129
Negron, Judith, 422
Nellis, Ashley, 330, 349, 379
Nelson, Craig, 358
Neubauer, David W., 244
Newman, G. R., 102
Nichols, Don, 355
Nichols, Terry, 321
Ninham, Omer, 366
Lee, Jason Vaughn, 142
LeFave, Wayne R., 170 
LeVin, Ryan, 303
Levitt, Steven, 254, 314
Lewis, Ted Gordon, 383
Lewter, Judith E., 135
Lichtblau, Eric, 406
Light, Stephen C., 340
Lincoln, Abraham, 269
Lindgren, James, 19
Lininger, Tom, 223
Liptak, Adam, 161, 175, 276
Lockhart, Courtney, 273
Loeber, Rolf, 379
Logan, Charles, 317
Lohan, Lindsay, 40
Lombardo, Lucien X., 343
Long, Charles, 371
Long, Marilyn, 371
Longmore, Monica A., 53
Longshore, Douglas, 295
Loughner, Jared, 48, 85
Love, Jack, 301
Love, Yeardley, 216
Lozier, James E., 202
Lum, Cynthia, 140
Lurie, Norman A., 301
Lynch, Mary, 302
M
Macchione, Patrick, 411
Mac Donald, Heather, 43
Madden, Shanterrica, 231
Madoff, Bernard, 421, 422
Mahanna, Paul, 222
Manikas, Peter, 13
Manning, Peter K., 103
Markus, David Oscar, 222
Marques, Janice, 358
Marseca, Steve, 252
Marshall, Thurgood, 203, 346
Marsico, Edward M., 178
Martin, Randy, 340
Martin, Susan, 112
Martin, Trayvon, 4, 88
Martinez-Cabrera, Alejandro, 410
Martinson, Robert, 313
Mata, Felix, 356
Mauer, Marc, 258, 315, 330, 349
McCamey, William P., 111, 112
McCarthy, Peggy, 296
McClelland, Gary, 378
McClure, David, 17
McClure, Julie, 188
McConnell, Mitch, 230
McCord, David, 277
McCoy, David, 106
McCue, Colleen, 106
McCullough, Carl, Sr., 388
McCullough, Jack Daniel, 228
McCurley, Carl, 378
McDonald, Douglas C., 324
McDonald, Ricky, 74
McDowell, David, 374
McEwen, Tom, 134
McGlone, Tim, 266
McIntyre, Douglas, 49
McKay, Henry, 49
Powers, Pamela, 164
Pratt, C. E., 149
Preston, Julia, 417
Pridemore, William A., 43
Priest, Dana, 107
Puzo, Matt, 405
Puzzanchera, Charles, 42, 373, 375, 
382, 384, 387
Q
Quagliana, Rhonda, 216
Quinsey, Vernon, 357
R
Rafferty, Brogan, 408
Raftery, Isolde, 261
Rankin, Bill, 269
Rashbaum, William K., 223, 421
Ratcliffe, Jerry H., 140
Rathbone, Cristina, 345, 348–350
Raudenbush, Stephen W., 42, 44
Ravi, Dharun, 188, 207, 227, 238
Ray, James Arthur, 66, 78
Redding, Richard E., 372
Reed, Thomas J., 238
Rehnquist, William, 166, 181
Reichel, Philip L., 328
Reid, Richard, 348
Reiman, Jeffery, 36
Reisig, Michael D., 219, 300, 319, 
339, 344, 350, 353
Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw, 45
Ri, Luis, 66
Rice, Phillip, 146
Richardson, Robert C., 273
Richtel, Matt, 410
Ritchie, Lauren, 4
Ritter, Nancy, 137
Robbins, Ira P., 325
Robert, David J., 107
Roberts, John G., Jr., 98, 275
Robinson, Marcus, 277
Robinson, Paul H., 83
Rochester, Stephanie, 47
Rodriguez, Francisco, 133
Rodriguez, Orlando, 128
Rookey, Bryan D., 45
Rooney, Ben, 410
Rose, R. M., 47
Rosenbloom, Deborah D., 169
Rosenfeld, Richard, 42
Ross, Darrell L., 345
Rossman, Shelli B., 297
Roth, Mitchell P., 102
Rowe, David C., 47
Rozas, Angela, 54
Rubin, Joel, 105
Rubin, Paul H., 274
Ryba, Krysten Lynn, 349
S
Sadock, Benjamin J., 47
Sadock, Virginia A., 47
Salinger, Lawrence, 421
Sample, Lisa, 375
Sampson, Robert J., 42, 44, 53, 377
Sanders, Kerry, 188
Sandusky, Jerry, 33
Sauter, Michael, 49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–4   C R i m i N a L  J U S T i C e  i N  a C T i o N :  T h e  C o r e
Tonry, Michael, 287, 302
Toporek, Lisa, 170
Torres-Spelliscy, Ciara, 202
Torrey, E. Fuller, 48
Trask, Grover, 379
Trojanowicz, Robert C., 142
Tunison, John, 324
Turley, Jonathan, 288
Turner, Heather, 379
Turner, Susan, 290, 299
Tyler, John H., 356
U
Urada, Darren, 295
Useem, Bert, 318, 340
Uviller, H. Richard, 179
V
Valukas, Anton R., 419
van den Haag, Ernest, 274
Van Dorn, Tom, 170
Vang, Zong, 366
Van Meter, Clifford W., 121
van Wormer, Katherine Stuart, 
339, 345
Vara, Vauhini, 327
Vaughan, Jessica, 417
Velman, Gerald F., 190
Vick, Michael, 193, 354
Vielmetti, Bruce, 366
Vilca, Daniel, 252
Violanti, John, 145
Vitiello, Michael, 339
Vogt, Mike, 145
Vollmer, August, 103, 109
W
Wakefield, Sara, 330
Walker, Jacob, 273
Walker, Jeffrey T., 168
Walker, Joseph, 354
Walker, Samuel, 103, 129, 131, 150, 
311
Wallace, George, 117
Wallenstein, Arthur, 326
Walshk, James, 417
Warner, Kris, 288
Warren, Earl, 180 
Warren, Patricia Y., 42
Watson, Richard A., 202
Watson, Robert E., 371
Weber, George, 244
Weger, Richard E., 134
Wei, Molly, 188
Weinstein, Jack, 266
Weisburd, David, 17, 140
Weiss, Alexander, 98
Welch, Jennifer, 237
Wellford, Charles, 262
Wells, Christina, 80–81
Wells, Mike, 80–81
Smith, K., 47
Snyder, Howard N., 20, 44, 372, 375, 
378, 387
Snyder-Joy, Zoann K., 302
Sommers, Ira, 134
Sotomayor, Sonia, 203, 206, 207
Soulé, David A., 375
Souter, David H., 268
Spahr, Lisa L., 134
Speraw, Adam J., 376
Spohn, Cassia, 263, 264
Stannow, Lovisa, 340
Steffensmeier, Darrell, 44, 264
Steinbeck, Margaret, 264
Sterling, Eric, 262
Stevens, John Paul, 113
Stevens, Robert, 197
Stewart, Eric A., 43
Stewart, Potter, 271
Stith, Kate, 259, 260
Stockdale, Charles, 49
Stockum, John, 259
Stouthamer-Loeber, Magda, 379
Stracner, Jenny, 170–171
Strang, Heather, 256
Strauchs, John J., 121
Strauss-Kahn, Dominique, 223
Streifel, Cathy, 264
Strock, Carl, 403
Strote, Jared, 146
Subban, P. K., 6
Sullivan, Eileen, 48, 405
Sullivan, Joe, 372
Sutherland, Edwin H., 51
Sutherland, George, 205–206
Swatt, Marc L., 42
Sweeten, Gary, 377
Swerdlow, Russell H., 47
T
Tabor, Diana, 12
Tanigughi, Travis, 140
Tate, Julie, 402
Taylor, Gregory, 267
Teeters, Negley K., 311, 312
Tekin, Erdal, 379
Temin, Carolyn Engel, 286, 289
Teplin, Linda, 53, 378
Terry, John, 6
Thiessen, Jacob, 170
Thomas, Aaron, 135
Thomas, Andre, 85
Thomas, Cal, 310
Thomas, Clarence, 203
Thurman, Quint C., 142
Tiffany, Lawrence P., 85
Tiffany, Mary, 85
Tita, George E., 19
Tittle, Charles, 43
Toliver, Jessica I., 134
Savage, Charlie, 33, 36, 316, 402, 
403, 407
Scalia, Antonin, 16, 52, 170
Scaramella, Gene L., 111, 112
Schack, Stephen, 131–132
Schaible, Catherine, 286, 288
Schaible, Herbert, 286, 288
Schaible, Kent, 286
Schaller, Barry R., 200
Schell, Theodore, 131–132
Schirmer, Sarah, 330, 349
Schmidt, Michael S., 397
Schmitt, Eric, 403
Schmitt, John, 288
Schneider, Mike, 88
Schneier, Bruce, 410
Schroeder, Ryan D., 53
Schulhofer, Stephen J., 226
Schultz, Ray, 98
Schumann, Cynthia, 98
Schwartz, Adam, 76
Schwartz, Jennifer, 45
Schwartz, John, 80
Scones, Ronald, 222
Scott, Eric J., 131
Scott, Gladys, 352
Scott, Jamie, 352
Scott, Michael S., 144
Seffrin, Patrick M., 53
Seligman, Dan, 329
Sellin, Thorsten, 55
Serrano, Richard A., 402
Seymour, Anne, 270
Shahzad, Faisal, 321, 399
Shaw, Clifford R., 49
Shearer, John D., 312
Shelton, Donald E., 237
Shepherd, Joanna M., 274
Sherman, Lawrence, 55, 140, 150, 
256
Shern, Ian, 207
Shilton, Mary, 288
Sias, Ben, 151
Sickmund, Melissa, 42, 372, 373, 
375, 382, 384, 387
Siegel, Larry J., 190, 208, 379
Siegelbaum, Debbie, 403
Sigala, Joey, 98
Simon, Darran, 137
Simons, Kenneth W., 86
Simons, Ronald L., 43
Simpson, Sally S., 418, 420
Sims, Barbara, 303
Singer, Richard G., 80
Siprut, Joseph, 177
Sklansky, David Alan, 112
Skogan, Wesley, 140, 142
Skolnick, Jerome, 101
Smith, Erica L., 42
Smith, Juan, 206
Welsh, Brandon C., 379
Wertsch, Teresa Lynn, 111
Westbrook, David A., 397, 398
Westly, William, 144
Wheeler, Russell, 189, 202
Whitcomb, Howard, 189
White, Bobby, 327
White, Byron, 208
White, Michael D., 150
White, Sarah, 166
Wides-Munoz, Laura, 117
Widom, Cathy Spatz, 379
Wiederanders, Mark, 358
Wildeman, Christopher, 330
Williams, Onta, 348
Williams, Robert, 164
Wilner, N., 146
Wilson, David B., 18
Wilson, James A., 40
Wilson, James Q., 13, 18, 41, 46, 52, 
55, 101–102, 140–141, 254
Wilson, Jeffrey M., 101
Wilson, O. W., 103
Wilson, Pearly L., 346
Winick, Bruce J., 85
Witkin, Gordon, 128
Wolf, Robert V., 297
Wolfers, Justin, 274
Wolfgang, Marvin, 55, 377
Wood, Jennifer D., 140
Wood, Peter B., 40
Woodson, Michael, 165
Wortmon, Maggie Jean, 79
Wortmon, Michael, 79
Wrobleski, Henry M., 130–131
Y
Yan, Jiahui, 379
Yellen, David, 253
Yeoman, Barry, 45
Z
Zacharias, Fred C., 225
Zahn, Margaret A., 374
Zamble, Edward, 357
Zeisel, Hans, 235
Zezima, Katie, 58
Zhao, Jihong, 142
Ziegler, Anne, 366
Zimbardo, Philip, 48, 51
Zimmerman, George, 4, 5, 88
Zimmerman, Paul R., 274
Zimmerman, Sherwood, 340
Zimring, Franklin, 41, 315, 316, 
326, 330
Zraick, Karen, 264
Zuidema, Brandon V., 153
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–5
Subject Index
A
Aberdeen Police Department, 151
Abuse, child, 379
Accomplice liability, 80
Acquittal, 229
Actus reus
attempt, 77
defined, 77
legal duty, 77
Adams County Correctional Center, 324
Adjudicatory hearing, 385–386
Administrative building assignment, 343
Administrative duties, of patrol officer, 132
Administrative law, 69, 420
Administrative Office of the United States 
Courts, 201
Adultery, 6
Advance fee fraud, 409
Affidavit, 172
Affirmative action, 110–111
Affirmative defense, 240
African Americans
consequences of high incarceration rate, 330
crime statistics and, 42
death penalty and, 276–277
drug offenses, 42, 43
female inmates, 348
incarceration rate, 23–24
jury selection, 232–234
as law enforcement officers, 110–113
low representation on Supreme Court, 
202–203
murder rate and, 42
poor relations with police, 104
prison violence and, 341
sentencing discrimination, 264
Aftercare programs, 389
Age
crime and, 377–378
juveniles tried as adults and, 371–372
of prison population, 338
Age of onset, 378
Aggravated assault
average length of sentence, 290
by juveniles, 373–374
as Part I offense, 37
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Aggravating circumstances, 261
Aging out, 377
Alcohol, juvenile delinquency and, 378
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 
(ATF), Bureau of, 11
responsibilities of, 116, 118–119
Alibi defense, 240
Alien, 415
ALI/MPC test, 84
Allen Charge, 243
al Qaeda, 398–399
history of, 398–399
Alternative sanctions, as form of punishment, 259
American Bar Association (ABA), on defending 
the guilty, 208
American Law Institute, 84
Ankle bracelet, 301
Anomie, 49–50
Anonymous, 396
Anti-terrorism. See also Homeland security
challenges of, 106–107
cost of, 107
Prislam, 348
prosecution of terrorists, 230
suspicious activity defined, 106
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act 
(AEDPA), 399–400
Apology, 256, 259
Appeals
double jeopardy, 244
habeas corpus, 244–245
percentage of cases, 244
reasons for, 244
steps in, 245
wrongful conviction, 245
Appellate courts
jurisdiction, 192
state court system, 195–196
U. S., 196
Appellate jurisdiction, 192
Arizona, S.B. 1070, 166–167
Arm’s reach doctrine, 173
Arraignment, 218, 223
Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program, 378
Arrests
authority to, 169
compared to stop, 168
crime rate and, 140–141
elements of, 168–169
entering a dwelling, 169
exigent circumstances, 169
intent, 168
knock and announce rule, 169–170
proactive, 140
reactive, 140
seizure or detention, 169
understanding of, 169
waiting period, 169–170
with a warrant, 169–170
without a warrant, 170
Arrest warrant, 169–170
Arson, 33
as Part I offense, 37
Aryan Brotherhood, 341
Asian Americans, as law enforcement officers, 
110–113
Assaults
defined, 33
gangs and, 380
as Part II offense, 38
Assistant prosecutors, 206
Association, probable cause based on, 163
Attempt, 77
Attendant circumstance, 81–82
Attica Correctional Facility, 319
Attorney-client privilege
defense attorneys, 209–210
defined, 210
exceptions to, 210
Attorney general, 206
Attorneys. See Defense attorneys; Prosecutors
Auburn Prison, 312
Auburn system, 312
Authority
as element of arrest, 169
of law enforcement officers, 146
of probation officer, 292–293
use of force and, 146–148
Automatic License Plate Recognition, 104, 177
Automatic transfer, 384
Automobiles, searches of, 174–175
B
Bail
average amounts, 219
posting, 219
purpose of, 217–219
reasonable, 217
Bail bond agent, 219
Bailiff, 204–205
Bail tariffs, 217
Ballistics, 135
Ballot initiatives, 68–69
Baltimore Police Department, 102
Bath salts, 58
Battery, 33, 82
Beat, 130
Bench trial, 228
Berkeley Police Department, 103
Beyond a reasonable doubt, 73
Bias intimidation, 188
Bifurcated death penalty process, 271–272
Bigamy, 70, 75
Bill of Rights, 21. See also Constitution, United 
States; individual amendments
procedural safeguards and, 89
bin Laden, Osama, al Qaeda and, 398
Biology, trait theory and, 47–48
Biometrics, 18
Block officers, 343
Blue curtain, 144
Booking, 218
Boot camps, 259, 300, 387–388
Border Patrol, 117
totality of circumstances test, 166
Border security
increased scrutiny, 404
regulated ports of entry, 404
unregulated ports of entry, 404
Boston Police Department, 102
Botnets, 411
Boykin form, 226
Brain, crime and, 47–48
Bribery, 149, 419
during political era of policing, 103
Bridewell Place, 311
Broken windows theory, 52, 55, 140–141
Broward County Sheriff Department, 151
Brownsville Texas Police Department, 128, 
143–144
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–6   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
Consensus model, 5–6
Consent
electronic surveillance, 176–177
searches with, 173–174
Consent decree, 111
Consent searches, 173–174
Constitution, United States. See also specific 
amendments
Bill of Rights, 89
choice of defense attorney, 209
cruel and unusual punishment, 89
double jeopardy, 89
due process, 89–91
excessive bail and fines, 89
federalism, 9
Fourth Amendment, 161–165
juveniles and, 369–370
Miranda warning, 180–182
prisoners’ rights, 346–347
private prisons, 325
public trial, 89
right to bear arms, 19
right to lawyer, 89
as source for criminal law, 67
speedy trial, 89
Supreme Court as interpreter of, 197–198
as supreme law of land, 67
unreasonable searches and seizure, 89
warrants for searches, 89
witness incrimination, 89
Constitutional law, 67. See also Constitution, 
United States
Consumer fraud, 419
cyber, 409–410
Continuity theory of crime, 53
Controlled Substances Act, 118
Control theory, 51–52
Coroner, 115
Corporate violence, 420
Corpus delicti, 77, 81, 238
Correctional officers
discipline by, 344–345
duties of, 343
female, 345–346
protecting prisoners’ rights, 346–347
rank of, 343
sanctioning prisoners, 344–345
use of force, 345
Corrections
community-based, 15
jail, 13
juvenile, 386–389
probation, 13
Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), 322
Correlation, 45
Corruption
bribery, 149
defined, 148
mooching, 149
payoffs, 149
in police subculture, 150
during political era of policing, 103
shakedowns, 149
stages of, 150
Cortisol, 145
Counterfeiting, 38
Counterintelligence, 402
Cincinnati Police Department, 102, 130, 151
Circumstantial evidence, 237
City attorney, 205
Civil law
burden of proof, 73
vs. criminal law, 72
defined, 72
responsibility and, 73
Civil liberties, 21
Civil rights, counterterrorism actions and, 
405–407
Civil Rights Act, 110
Civil suits, double jeopardy, 244
Classification process, prisons, 319
Clean Water Act, 69
Clearance rates, 134
Clerk of the court, 205
Closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras, 
177–178
Closing arguments, 241
Coast Guard, 116
under Homeland Security Department, 401
Cockfighting, 70–71
CODIS, 136
Coercion
confession and, 179
inherent, 179
Cold cases, 134
Cold hit, 135–136
Cole, U.S.S., 398
Commercialized vice, 38
Community corrections, 286–303
cost of, 288
defined, 15, 286
diversion, 287–288
intermediate sanctions, 295–302
justification for, 287–288
low-cost alternative, 288
number of people in, 286, 288, 289
paradox of, 303
probation, 288–295
reintegration, 287
Community dispute resolution centers, 297
Community era of policing, 104–105
Community policing, 101
defined, 141
historical perspective on, 103, 105
Community service, as form of punishment, 259
Community services, provided by police, 100–
101, 131
Competency hearing, 85
Compliance, 420
CompStat, 140
Computer crime, 408. See also Cyber crimes
Concurrence, 80
Concurrent jurisdiction, 193
Concurring opinions, 199
Confessions
attorney-client privilege and, 210
coercion and, 179
recording, 182
as self-incrimination, 179
Confidential informant, 134
Conflict model, 6–7
Confrontation clause, 239
Congregate system, 312
Connecticut State Police, 115
Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association 
(EMA), 52
Bullycides, 376
Bullying, 376
cyber, 410–411
Burden of proof
civil cases, 73
criminal cases, 73
Bureaucracy, 129
function of courts and, 190
Bureau of Prisons (BOP), 322, 329
Burglary
average length of sentence, 290
defined, 33
degree of crime and, 74
as Part I offense, 37
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Burnout, 145
Bush, George W.
creation of Homeland Security, 116
federalize gun possession crimes, 315
Patriot Act, 400
Business Software Alliance, 413
C
Calls for service, 132
Camden Police Department, number of officers 
and crime, 137
Capital crime, 23
Capital offense, 74
Capital punishment. See also Death penalty
defined, 269
as form of punishment, 258
Case citations, reading, 29
Case law, 69
Caseload, 293
Cases
case attrition, 221–222
priorities, 222–223
Causation, 45, 80–81
Cell blocks, 320, 321
Cell phones, banning texting while driving, 10
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
counterterrorism efforts, 402
Chain of command
police departments and, 129–130
prisons, 318
Challenges for cause, 232
Charge to jury, 242
Charging conference, 242
Chemical spray, 146–147
Chicago Police Department, 102
Child abuse, 379
Child neglect, 379
Children. See also Juveniles
abuse of, 379
infancy defense, 83
neglect of, 379
parens patriae, 367
pornography, 252, 413–414
Child savers, 367
Chivalry effect, 264
Christopher Commission, 146
Chronic offender, 55
Chronic 6 percent, 55, 377
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–7
County attorney, 205
Court reporters, 205
Courtroom work group, 203–210
defense attorney, 207–210
docket, 201
judge in, 205
members of, 204–205
prosecutor, 205–207
Courts
appellate, 192
criminal, 12
drug courts, 297
dual system of, 11–12
federal court system, 196–199
functions of
bureaucratic, 190
crime control, 189–190
due process, 189
rehabilitation, 190
problem-solving, 297
state court system, 194–196
trial, 192
United States Supreme Court, 196–199
work group in, 203–210
Credit-card and check fraud, 419
Crime control, function of courts and, 189–190
Crime control model, 17
Crime in the United States, 36
Crime-mapping technology, 140, 141
Crime prevention, by police officers, 101
Crime rate
arrest rate and, 140–141
defined, 36
drop in, 17–18, 41–42
economy and, 41
imprisonment and, 41
increased incarceration and, 315, 317
law enforcement impact on, 17–18
percentage change, 36
women and, 44–45
youth populations and, 41
Crime(s). See also Crime theories; specific types 
of crimes
actus reus, 77
attendant circumstances, 81–82
broken windows theory, 52, 55
capital, 23
causation, 80–81
class and, 42–44
classification of, 71–76
concurrence, 80
conflict model of, 6–7
consensus model of, 5–6
cyber, 408–414
dark figure of, 37–38
defined, 5–7
degree of, 33, 74–75
deliberate, 74
vs. deviance, 7
dropping crime rate, 17–18, 41–42
drug-crime relationship, 55–58
elements of, 77–82
ethnicity and, 44
felonies, 74–75
fortresses of crime, 49, 50
guns and, 19
harm, 82
hate, 81–82
high-tech, 34
illegal drugs and, 20
increased incarceration and rate of, 315
mala in se, 75–76
mala prohibita, 75–76
measuring, 35–45
mens rea, 77–80
misdemeanor, 75
organized, 34
premeditated crime, 74
property, 33
public order, 33–34
race and, 42
rate, 17–18
seduction of, 46–47
seriousness of, and sentencing, 260–261
street gangs and, 19
trends today, 40–45
types of, 33–34
victimless, 34
violent, 33
white-collar, 34, 418–422
women and, 44–45
Crime scene photographer, 12
Crime statistics
dropping crime rate, 41–42
gangs and, 380
on juveniles, 373–374
race and poverty, 42–44
self-reported surveys, 39–40
Uniform Crime Report (UCR), 36–38
victim surveys, 37–39
women and, 44–45
Crime theories, 45–53
continuity theory of crime, 53
control theory, 51–52
correlation and causation, 45
learning theory, 51
life course theories, 52–53
rational choice theory, 46–47
role of theory, 46
routine activities theory, 53–54
self-control theory, 53
social conflict theory, 50
social disorganization theory, 49, 50
social process theories, 51–52
strain theory, 49–50
trait theory, 47–49
Criminal act, 77–80
Criminal court system, dual court system, 193
Criminal harm, 70
Criminal justice process
as assembly line, 13–15
discretion in, 15–16
formal, 14
informal, 15
Criminal justice system
compared to juvenile justice system, 384–385
courtroom work group, 203–210
crime control model, 17
defined, 7
discretion in, 15–16
due process model, 17
federal court system, 196–199
federalism and, 9
goals of, 8
judges in court system, 199–203
jurisdiction, 191–192
local, state and federal employees of, 10–11
process of, 13–15
purpose of, 7–9
social media’s impact on, 24–25
state court system, 194–196
structure of, 9–15
trail and appellate courts, 192
Criminal law, 67–91
burden of proof, 73
vs. civil law, 72
defenses under, 82–88
due process, 89–91
elements of crime, 77–80
guilt and, 73
legal function of, 70
procedural, 88–91
purposes of, 70–71
safeguards, 88–91
social function of, 70–71
substantive, 88
written sources of, 67–69
Criminals
career criminal, 55
victim-offender connection, 54
Criminal trials. See also Trials
impartial jury, 228
presumption of innocence, 229
privilege against self-incrimination, 229
special features of, 227–231
speedy trial, 227–228
strict standard of proof, 230
Criminologists, 35, 45
Criminology, 45
Crimmigration, 414
Cross-examination, 239
Cruel and unusual punishment
defined, 271
deliberate indifference standard, 346
juveniles and, 372
method of execution and, 270–271
Supreme Court on, 271, 274
three-strikes laws, 267–268
Crush videos, 197
CSI effect, 237
Curfew, home confinement and, 300
Curfew violations, 38
Custodial interrogation, 179
Custody, defined, 179
Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
agent, 416
Border Patrol, 117
under Homeland Security, 117, 401
responsibilities of, 116, 117
Cyberbullying, 376, 410–411
Cyber crimes, 408–414
in business world
hackers, 396–397, 411–412
pirating intellectual property, 413
spam, 412
worms and viruses, 412
against the community, 413–414
gambling and pornography, 413–414
defined, 409
homeland security and, 396–397
incidence of, 409
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–8   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
as purpose of sentencing, 254
specific, 254
Deviance, 7
DHS. See Homeland Security, Department  
of (DHS)
Differential association, theory of, 51
Differential response, 138
Directed patrol, 139
Direct evidence, 236–237
Direct examination, 238
Direct supervision approach, 329
Discipline
by correctional officers, 344–345
role in society, 342–343
Discovery, 220
Discretion
in criminal justice system, 15–16
defined, 15
ethics and, 16–17, 152
in Japanese courts and, 224
judicial, 258, 259, 262, 265, 291, 386
juveniles and, 381–382
prosecutorial, 206, 221–223
Discrimination
death penalty, 276–277
hiring of women and minorities as police 
officers, 110–111
selection of judges for Supreme Court and, 
202–203
sentencing and, 263–264
Disorderly conduct, 38, 75
Disposition hearing, 386
Dispositions, 258
Dissenting opinions, 199
District, 130
District attorney, 205
District Courts, U.S., 196
Diversion
community corrections as, 287–288
pretrial diversion programs, 297
pretrial programs, 383
probation as, 383
treatment and aid, 383
DNA data
CODIS and cold hits, 136
death penalty and, 23
DNA fingerprinting, 135
familial searches, 137
touch DNA, 136–137
DNA profiling, 18
Docket, 201
Domestic court, 195
Domestic terrorism, 399
Domestic violence, uncooperative victim, 223
Dopamine, 47–48
drug addiction and, 57
Double jeopardy, 89, 244
civil suits, 244
hung jury, 244
juveniles, 369
limits of, 244
possibility and risk of retrial, 244
Driving under the influence, 38
Drug abuse
defined, 56
dopamine and addiction, 57
juvenile delinquency and, 378–379
attorney-client privilege and, 209–210
in civil case, 73
defined, 73
Fifth amendment, 229
plea bargaining and, 225, 226
presumption of innocence, 229
self-incrimination, 229
Defense(s)
affirmative defense, 240
alibi, 240
creating reasonable doubt, 239
duress, 86–87, 240
entrapment, 88, 240
infancy, 83
insanity, 83–85, 240
intoxication, 85–86
justifiable use of force, 87–88
mistake, 86
necessity, 88
self-defense, 87–88, 240
Defense attorneys, 207–210
attorney-client privilege, 209–210
charging conference, 242
closing arguments, 241
constitutional right to, 89
creating reasonable doubt, 239
cross-examination, 239
defending the guilty, 208
defense strategies, 240
evidence and, 236
hearsay, 238–239
jury selection, 232
opening statements, 235
plea bargaining and, 225–226
preliminary hearing, 220
private attorneys, 208
public defenders, 208
recross-examination, 239
responsibilities of, 207–208
in sentencing process, 260
social media and, 24
surrebuttal, 241
Delancey Street Foundation, 336
Delegation of authority, 129–130
Deliberate crime, 74
Deliberate indifference standard, 346
Delinquency in a Birth Cohort (Wolfgang, Figlio 
and Sellin), 55
Department of Homeland Security (DHS).  
See Homeland Security, Department  
of (DHS)
Departure, 266
Deprivation model, 340
Desistance, 357, 377
Detainer, 417–418
Detective, 133, 162
Detention
as element of arrest, 169
of juveniles, 384
pretrial, 217–219
preventive, 218–219, 384
Detention hearing, 384
Determinate sentencing, 257, 258
Deterrence
death penalty as, 274
general, 254
patrol officers, 131
against persons and property
consumer fraud, 409–410
cyberbullying, 410–411
cyberstalking, 411
identity theft, 410
phishing, 410
session hijacking, 411
Cyber fraud, 34, 409–410
Cyberstalking, 411
Cyber theft, 410
D
Dallas Police Department, 177
Operation Heat Wave, 143
Dark figure of crime, 37–38
Day-fines, 298
Day reporting centers, 299
Deadly force
defined, 147
justifiable use of, 87–88
Death penalty, 269–278
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act 
(AEDPA), 399–400
arbitrariness of, 276
bifurcated process, 271–272
choice theory and, 47
in colonies, 311
continued support for, 278
cost of, 277–278
cruel and unusual punishment, 270–271, 
273–274
decline in executions, 277–278
decrease in death sentences, 23
defined, 269
deterrence argument, 274
discriminatory effect, 276–277
DNA evidence and, 23
Eighth Amendment, 270, 271, 272, 273
executions by state, 276
fallibility and, 274–275
as form of punishment, 258
future of, 277–278
historical perspective on, 269–270
incapacitation argument, 254
insanity, 273
jury and, 260, 268
juveniles and, 273, 372
mentally handicapped and, 273
methods of execution, 269–270
mitigating circumstances, 273
number of executions 1976 to 2011, 271
number of prisoners on death row, 269
persons sentenced and later found to be 
innocent, 275
Sixth Amendment and, 273
Supreme Court rulings and, 197, 270–274
victim impact evidence and sentencing, 268
Death Penalty Information Center, 275
Death row, number of prisoners on, 269
Decarceration, 316
parole and, 352 
Deception, 419
Deepwater Horizon, 420
Defendants
appeals, 244–245
arraignment, 223
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–9
mistake, 86
overview, 83
Exigent circumstances, arrests and, 169
Expert witness, 236
Expiration release, 355
Extradition, 191
F
Facebook, 24, 25, 376
searches and, 178
Faith-based neglect, 288
Familial searches, 137
Family
child abuse and juvenile delinquency, 379
crime and, 51
Family group homes, 387
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 11
careers in, 119
counterterrorism efforts, 401–402
creation of, 118
definition of terrorism, 397
employees and budget, 118
fingerprint matches, 200
responsibilities of, 116, 118
Safe Streets initiative, 19
Strategic Information Operations Center, 
401–402
Terrorist Screening Center and “no fly” list, 
404
Uniform Crime Report (UCR), 36–38
Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP), 316
Federal Circuit, 196, 197
Federal court system
in dual court system, 193
judges, 196
selection of judges, 201
Supreme Court, 196–199
U.S. Courts of Appeal, 196
U.S. District Court, 196
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), under Homeland Security 
Department, 401
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 69
Federal government, law enforcement and, 11
Federalism, 9
Federal law enforcement agencies, 116–120
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives (ATF), 118–119
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), 117
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 118
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 118
Homeland Security, 116–118
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), 
117
Justice Department, 118–120
number of officers in, 116
Secret Service, 117–118
Treasury Department, 120
U.S. Marshals Service, 119–120
Federal Reporter, 29
Federal Rules of Evidence, 238
Federal statutes, 67
Federal Supplement, 29
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 420
Felony
case attrition, 221, 222
use of force by prison officials, 345
Electric chair, 270
Electronic monitoring
ankle bracelet, 301
defined, 300
technological advances in, 301
types of, 301
Electronic surveillance, 259
closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras, 
177–178
consent and probable cause, 176–177
defined, 176
as force multiplier, 177
traffic cameras, 177
Elmira Reformatory, 312–313, 319
El Paso County Sheriff’s Department, 114
El Salvador, gangs and firm hand laws, 164
Embezzlement, 38, 419
Emergency preparedness and response, 403–404
England, early police experience and, 102
Entrapment, 88
homeland security and, 403
Entrapment defense, 240
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 69, 420
Equal Employment Act, 110
Ethics
defined, 16
discretion and, 16–17, 152
duty, 152
elements of, 152
encouraging ethical policing, 153
ethical dilemmas, 151–152
honesty, 152
justice and, 16–17
kidney compensation, 68
loyalty, 152
police corruption, 149–150
Ethnicity, crime and, 44
Evidence
circumstantial, 237
CSI effect, 237
defined, 235
direct, 236–237
exclusionary rule, 163–165
fingerprint matches, 200
fruit of the poisoned tree, 163
good faith exception, 164–165
hearsay, 238–239
inevitable discovery exception, 162
prejudicial, 237–238
probable cause based on, 163
real evidence, 235–236
relevance, 237
role in trial, 235–237
testimonial, 235
victim impact evidence, 268
Exclusionary rule, 222
defined, 163
exceptions to, 163–165
good faith exception, 164–165
inevitable discovery exception, 162
purpose of, 163
Excuse defenses
duress, 86–87
infancy, 83
insanity, 83–85
intoxication, 85–86
synthetic drugs, 57–58
Drug courts, 195, 297
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 11, 
114
employees and budget, 118
responsibilities of, 116, 118
Drug offenses
average length of sentence, 290
increases in prison population and, 314–315
by juveniles, 373
race and, 42, 43
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Drugs
crime and, 20, 55–58
habits/categories of illegal drug users, 21
mandatory sentencing guidelines, 267
Mexican drug cartels, 58
psychoactive, 20
Drug trafficking
average length of sentence, 290
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Drug use
addiction and dependency, 56–57
drug-crime relationship, 57–58
learning theory, 56
methamphetamine, 57
prescription drugs, 57
social disorganization theory and, 56
Drug Use Forecasting Program, 39
Drunkenness offenses, 38
Dual court system, 11–12, 193
Due process
constitutional guarantee of, 89–91
defined, 89
function of courts and, 189
indefinite detention and war on terrorism, 
406–407
juveniles and, 369, 370
parole and, 354–355
procedural, 90
revocation process, 293–294
substantive, 90–91
Supreme Court’s role in, 91
Due process model, 17
Duress
as defense, 86–87, 240
defined, 86
Duty, ethical dilemmas of, 152
Duty to aid statutes, 77
Duty to retreat, 88
E
East Coast Rapist, 135
Eastern Penitentiary, 312
East Haven Police Department, 149–150
Eavesdropping Act, 76
Economy, crime rate variations and, 41
Eighth Amendment, 89
death penalty and, 270, 271, 272, 273
deliberate indifference standard, 346
identifiable human needs, 347
juveniles and, 372
reasonable bail, 217
three-strikes laws, 267
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–10   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
Great Recession, 421
Green card, 415
Grim Sleeper, 137
Gross misdemeanor, 75
Group homes, 387
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba (GTMO), 407
Guidant Corporation, 420
Guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt, 230
guilty but mentally ill, 84
plea bargaining, 224–227
pleading, 223–224
Guilty act, 77
Guilty plea, 218, 223–224
juveniles and, 386
misdemeanor cases at initial appearance,  
217
Gun control, 19
Gun Control Act, 118
Gun court, 195
Guns
ATF responsibilities and, 118–119
concealed weapon statutes, 70
control vs. right debate, 19
crime and, 19
federalization of gun possession crimes and 
prison populations, 315
H
Habeas corpus, 244–245
Habitual Criminal Sterilization Act, 91
Habitual offender laws, 267
Hacking, 396–397, 411–412
cars, 412–413
Hacktivist, 396
Halfway house, 357
Halfway house program manager, 358
Hallcrest Report II, 121
Hands-off doctrine, 346
Harm, 81–82
Hate crimes
incidence of, 82
laws against, 81–82
Hawaii’s Opportunity Probation with 
Enforcement (HOPE) program, 295
Hearsay, 238–239
High-tech crime, 34
Highway patrol, 10–11
number of agencies, 115
purpose and duties of, 115
Hillsborough (New Jersey) Police Department, 24
Hispanics
crime rate and, 44
immigration law and increase in prison 
population, 315, 414
incarceration rate and, 24
as law enforcement officers, 110–113
low representation on Supreme Court, 
202–203
prison violence and, 341
sentencing discrimination, 264
Home confinement, 300–301
defined, 300
levels of, 300
Home detention, 300
Home incarceration, 300
Fort Smith Police Department, 151
Foster care programs, 387
Four Loko, 7
Fourteenth Amendment, 89
Fourth Amendment, 21, 89, 161–165
arbitrary searches of prison cells, 346
automobile searches, 174
closed-circuit television cameras and, 178
electronic surveillance, 176
exclusionary rule, 163–165
garbage searches and, 170–171
good faith exception, 164–165
inevitable discovery exception, 162
prisoners’ rights, 346
probable cause, 161–163
reasonableness, 161
search warrants, 172
war on terrorism and, 405–406
Fraud
consumer, 419
credit-card and check, 419
cyber, 34, 409–410
insurance, 419
mail and wire, 419
mortgage, 421
as Part II offense, 38
securities, 419
Freedom of speech, 21
Fresno Police Department, budget cuts and,  
137
Frisk, 167
Fruit of the poisoned tree, 163, 182
Furlough, 355
Fusion centers, 402
G
Gambling, 38
online, 413–414
Gang investigator, 72
Gangs
characteristics of members of, 380
crime and, 19
defined, 379
firm hand laws in El Salvador, 164
in prison, 341
reasons for joining, 380–381
as risk factor for juvenile delinquency, 379–380
Gender
jury selection, 234–235
juvenile delinquency and, 473–475
sentencing discrimination, 264
General deterrence, 254
General jurisdiction, 195
General patrol, 139
General Theory of Crime, A (Gottfredson and 
Hirschi), 53
GEO Group, Inc., 322
Good faith exception, 164–165
Good time, 257, 319
Google+, 24
GPS, 301–302
Graduated sanctions, 386
Grand jury, 218, 220–221
Great Britain, abusive speech, 6
Great Law, 311
defined, 74
degrees of, 74
felony-murder, 80
initial appearance, 217
jury trials, 229
Felony-murder, 80
Female police officers. See Women police officers
Field services
defined, 130
investigations, 133–137
patrol, 131–133
Field training, 110
Field training officer (FTO), 110
Fifth Amendment, 89
arraignment, 223
double jeopardy, 244
due process and indefinite detention, 406–407
juveniles and, 369
Miranda warning, 179, 180, 181, 182
pretrial detention, 217
privilege against self-incrimination, 229
probation officer meeting with probationer, 
295
witnesses and, 229
Fines
day-fines in Sweden, 298
as form of punishment, 259, 296–297
Fingerprinting, 135
new techniques for, 200–201
Fingerprint matches, 200–201
Fire marshals, 10–11
First Amendment, 5
abusive speech, 6
crush videos, 197
freedom of speech, 21
prisoners’ rights, 347
First responders, 403–404
Flag burning, 68
Flash-rob, 25
Folsom State Prison, 319, 336, 341
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 69
Force
deadly, 87, 147
duty to retreat, 88
justifiable use of, 87–88
misuse of, 146–147
nondeadly, 147
by prison officials, 345
reasonable, 147
reasonable belief and, 87
Supreme Court decisions on, 147–148
types of, 147
use of force matrix, 146–147
Force multipliers, 177
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA),  
406
Foreign terrorist organization (FTO), 400
Forensics, 134–137
ballistics, 135
databases and cold hits, 135–136
DNA fingerprinting, 135
trace evidence, 134–135
Forensic scientist, 136
Forfeiture, 297–298
Forgery, 38
Formal criminal justice process, 14
Fortresses of crime, 49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–11
Secure Communities initiative, 417–418
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status 
Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) 
program, 416
visa basics of, 415
Impartial jury, 228
Imprisonment
crime rate variations and, 41
as form of punishment, 258
Incapacitation, as purpose of sentencing, 254–255
Incarceration
high rate of, in U.S., 314–315, 317
increased probability of, 314–315
of juveniles, 387–389
shock, 259, 289
Incarceration rate, race and, 23–24
Inchoate offenses, 82
Incident-driven policing, 138
Indeterminate sentencing
defined, 256
historical perspective of, 258
individualized justice, 258
rehabilitation and, 256–257, 258
Indictment, 218, 221
Individualized justice, 258
Industrial schools, 388
Industrial shop and school officers, 343
Inevitable discovery exception, 162
Infancy defense, 83, 371
Informal criminal justice process, 15
Informants
homeland security and, 403
probable cause based on, 163
Information
defined, 220
issued by prosecutor, 220
probable cause based on, 162
Infraction, 75
Infrastructure, 401
Inherent coercion, 179
Initial appearance, 217
In loco parentis, 381
Inmates. See Prisoners
Innocence, presumption of, 229
Innocence Project, 245
Insanity
ALI/MPC test, 84
death penalty and, 273
as defense under criminal law, 83–85
determining competency, 84–85
guilty but mentally ill, 84
irresistible-impulse test, 84
measuring, 83–84
M’Naghten rule, 83–84
substantial-capacity test, 84
use of, as defense, 8, 85
Insanity defense, 240
Insurance fraud, 419
Intake, 382
Intellectual property, 413
Intelligence agency, 401
Intelligence-led policing, 105–107
Intelligence operations, types of, 401–402
Intensive supervision probation, 299
Intent, 77, 79, 80, 81
as element of arrest, 168
Homeland security, 397–407. See also Anti-
terrorism; Terrorism
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act 
(AEDPA), 399–400
counterterrorism challenges and strategies, 
402–404
cyber crime and, 396–397
defined, 20, 397
Department of Homeland Security, 401
federal agencies outside DHS, 401–402
global context of terrorism, 397–399
homegrown extremists, 399
informants and entrapment, 403
lone wolf terrorist, 402–403
Patriot Act, 400
security vs. civil liberties, 405–407
state and local counterterrorism efforts, 402
Homeland Security, Department of (DHS), 401
agencies under, 401
creation of, 11, 116, 401
Customs and Border Protection (CBP), 117
federal agencies outside, 401–402
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), 
117
organization of, 401
Secret Service, 117–118
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status 
Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) 
program, 416
Homeland Security Act, 401
Homeless, attacks against, 46–47
Homicide. See also Murder
justifiable, 5
Honor killings, 76
Hormones, 47
Hot-spot policing, 18
Hot spots, 140
House arrest, 259
House of Refuge, 367
Human-source collection, 402
Hung jury, 239, 243
double jeopardy, 244
Hypothesis, 46
I
Idaho Correctional Center (ICC), 324
Identifiable human needs, 347
Identity theft, 410
Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 367–368
I-Max maximum security prison, 320
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
under Homeland Security Department, 117, 
401
responsibilities of, 116, 117
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), 
117
Immigration law
as civil regulatory system, 414
crimmigration, 414
enforcing, 417–418
as federal matter, 414
growth in prison population and, 315, 414
number of unauthorized aliens, 417
Operation Community Shield, 417
removal, 415
Intermediate sanctions, 295–302
boot camps, 300
day-fines, 297, 298
day reporting centers, 299
defined, 295
drug courts, 297
electronic monitoring, 300–301
forfeiture, 297–298
home confinement, 300–301
intensive supervision probation, 299
judicially administered, 296–298
pretrial diversion programs, 297
shock incarceration, 299–300
in Sweden, 298
widen the net, 302
Intermittent incarceration, 289
Internal affairs unit (IAU), 150
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 114, 120, 421
responsibilities of, 116
Internet. See also Cyber crimes
pornography, 252
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), 409
Interrogation process
custodial interrogation, 179
inherent coercion, 179
Miranda rights and, 178–182
recording, 182
Intoxication
as defense under criminal law, 85–86
involuntary, 85
voluntary, 85
Investigations, 133–137
ballistics, 135
clearance rates, 134
confidential informant, 134
databases and cold hits, 135–136
DNA fingerprinting, 135
forensics, 134–137
presentence, 259–260, 292
trace evidence, 134–135
undercover operations, 133–134
Involuntary intoxication, 85
Involuntary manslaughter, 74–75, 79
Irresistible-impulse test, 84
Islam, conversion to in prison, 348
J
Jails, 325–330
administration, 328
characteristics of population, 325–326
compared to prisons, 325–326, 327
defined, 13, 326
direct supervision approach, 329
function of, 326
new-generation jails, 328–329
pretrial detainees, 326
sentenced jail inmates, 327
sociology of, 327–328
Japan, discretion in courts and, 224
Jihad, meaning of term, 398
Judges
charge to jury, 242
discretion and, 16, 258, 259, 262, 265, 291
federal, 196
in France, 202
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–12   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
evolution of
child-saving movement, 367
constitutional protections, 369
Illinois Juvenile Court, 367–368
status offenses vs. juvenile delinquency, 368
girls in, 374–375
pretrial procedures, 381–384
detention, 384
intake, 382–383
overview of, 382
petition, 383
police discretion and, 381–382
pretrial diversion, 383
referral, 382
transfer to adult court, 383–384
on trial, 384–386
adjudication, 385–386
disposition hearing, 386
sentencing, 386
Juvenile officer, 381
K
Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment, 139
Keystroke logging, 411–412
Kidney transplant, 68
Knapp Commission, 149
Knock and announce rule, 169–170
Knock and talk strategy, 174
L
La Familia Michoacana drug cartel, 114
Lake Erie Correctional Institute, 325
La Nuestra Familia, 341
Larceny, 33
as Part I offense, 37
Law enforcement
federal, 11
impact on crime rate, 17–18
local, 10
state, 10–11
Law enforcement agencies, 114–121
benefit of cultural diversity, 113
counterterrorism efforts, 402–403
federal agencies, 116–120
municipal agencies, 114
number of, 114
sheriffs and county, 114–115
state police and highway patrol, 115
Law Enforcement Code of Ethics, 100
Law enforcement officers
academy training, 109
accountability, 150
broken windows theory, 140–141
community policing, 141–142
community services provided,  
100–101, 131
corruption by, 149–150
crime prevention, 101
cultural diversity and, 113
educational requirements for, 109
enforcing laws, 99–100
ethics, 151–152
field training, 110
general and directed patrol strategies, 139
incident-driven policing, 138
Justice Department, 118–120
law enforcement agencies of, 118–120
Justifiable homicide, 5
Justifiable use of force, 87–88
Justification defenses, 86–88
duress, 86–87
entrapment, 88
necessity, 88
overview, 86
self-defense, 87–88
Juveniles. See also Children; Juvenile 
delinquency; Juvenile justice system
age tried as adults, 371–372
bullying, 376
constitutional protections, 369–370
crimes committed by, 373–374
culpability and, 372
death penalty and, 273, 372
detention, 384
incarceration
aftercare programs, 389
boot camps, 387–388
nonsecure confinement, 387
residential treatment programs, 387
secure confinement, 387–389
training schools, 388
infancy defense, 83, 371
life-without-parole sentences, 366
parens patriae, 367
police and, 381–382
probation for, 387
school violence, 375
status offender, 368
on trial, 384–386
Juvenile corrections, 386–389
Juvenile courts, 195
age tried as an adult, 371–372
constitutional protections, 369–370
double jeopardy, 369
due process, 369, 370
establishment of, 367–368
Fifth Amendment, 369
Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 367–368
jury trial, 369
reasonable double standard, 369
tried as an adult, 367, 369, 371–372, 383–384, 
385
Juvenile delinquency
chronic 6 percent, 377
defined, 368
family-based delinquency, 375
girls, 374–375
rise and fall of crime rate for, 373–374
risk factors, 377–381
age, 377–378
child abuse and neglect, 379
gang involvement, 379–381
low self-control, 377
overview, 378
substance abuse, 378–379
vs. status offenders, 368
trends in, 373–376
UCR data on, 373
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
Act, 383
Juvenile justice system
compared to criminal justice system, 384–385
intermediate sanctions, 296–298
Missouri Plan, 201–202
roles
in courtroom work group, 205
of trial judges, 199–201
selection of, 201–202
sentencing, 259–260
departures, 266
factors in, 260–262
individualized justice, 258
sentencing disparity, 262–263
victim impact evidence, 268
Supreme Court, 196–199
Judicial discretion, 386
Judicial review, 197
Judicial system
courtroom work group, 203–210
dual court system, 193
federal court system, 196–199
judges in court system, 199–203
state court system, 194–196
trail and appellate courts, 192
Judicial waiver, 383
Jurisdiction
appellate, 192
concurrent, 193
defined, 191
general, 192, 195
geographic, 191
international, 191–192
limited, 192, 194–195
original, 192
subject-matter, 192
of Supreme Court, 198
universal, 192
Jury
Allen Charge, 243
charge to, 242
death penalty and, 260, 268
deliberations, 242
hung, 239, 243
impartial, 228
instructions, 242
requirements for, 231
right to trial by, 21
role of, 228–229
selection
challenges for cause, 232
goal of, 231
master jury list, 231
peremptory challenges, 232
race and, 232–234
venire, 231
voir dire, 231–232
women, 234–235
sentencing process and, 260
sequestered, 242
Jury instructions, 242
Jury pool, 231
Jury selection, 231–235
Jury trials, 228. See also Trials
juveniles, 369
Just deserts, 253
Justice
defined, 8
ethics and, 16–17
maintaining, 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–13
Misdemeanors
degrees of, 75
gross, 75
initial appearance, 217
petty, 75
punishment for, 75
Missouri Plan, 201–202
Mistake
as defense under criminal law, 86
of fact, 86
of law, 86
Mistrial, 243
Misuse of force, 146–147
Mitigating circumstances
death penalty, 273
defined, 261
as factor in sentencing, 273
M’Naghten rule, 83–84
Mobile Offender Recognition and Identification 
System (MORIS), 18–19
Model Penal Code, 74, 84
Mooching, 149
Morality, public, 70
Morals, 6
Mortgage fraud, 421
Moscow airport bombing, 397
Motor vehicle theft, 33
as Part I offense, 37
sentencing disparity, 263
MS-13, 164, 380
Mumbai financial district raid, 397
Municipal court judges, 195
Municipal law enforcement agencies
authority of, 114
population served, 114
vs. sheriff department, 115
Murder
African Americans and, 42
average length of sentence for, 290
clearance rate for, 134
defined, 33
degree of, 74, 79
felony-murder, 80
first degree, 74, 79
gangs and, 380
intent and, 79
involuntary manslaughter, 79
by juveniles, 373–374
vs. manslaughter, 74–75
mens rea, 79
as Part I offense, 37
second degree, 74, 79
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Muslims
conversion to Islam, in prison, 348
terrorist profiling, 405
MySpace, 107
N
National Advisory Commission on Civil 
Disorders, 104
National Center for Victims of Crime, 270
National Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), 
136
National Crime Information Center (NCIC), 118
Mala in se crimes, 75–76
Mala prohibita crimes, 75–76
Malice aforethought, 74
Malware, 412
Mandatory release, 353
Mandatory sentencing guidelines, 267–268
Manhattan Bail Project, 219
Manslaughter
involuntary, 74–75, 79
voluntary, 74
Mara Salvatrucha, 164
Marijuana, 58
for medical use, 68–69
Marriage, bigamy, 70
Marshals Service, responsibilities of, 116
Massachusetts Correctional Institution at 
Framingham, 349–350
Master jury list, 231
Maximum-security prison, 319–321
Medical examiner, 115
Medical marijuana, 68
Medical model, 313
Medium-security prison, 321
Megan’s Law, 359
Mens rea, 66
accomplice liability, 80
categories of, 78
criminal liability, 79
defined, 77
duress, 86
intoxication and, 85–86
murder and, 79
negligence, 78–79
recklessness, 79
strict liability, 79–80
Mental illness, prison population and, 338–339
Mentally handicapped, death penalty and, 273
Methadone, 57
Methadrone crystals, 58
Methamphetamine, 57
Mexican drug cartels, 58
Mexican Mafia, 341
Mexico, border patrol and, 404
Military tribunals, 407
Minimum-security prison, 321–322
Minorities
consequences of high incarceration rate, 330
jury selection, 232–234
low representation on Supreme Court, 202–203
sentencing discrimination, 263–264
Minority law enforcement officers
antidiscrimination law and affirmative action, 
110–111
benefits of diverse police force, 113
double marginality, 112–113
numbers of, 110, 111–112
Miranda warning
erosion of, 181–182
fourteen day invocation, 197–198
future of, 181–182
legal basis for, 179
recording confessions, 182
voluntary statements, 181–182
waiving rights, 181
when not required, 180–181
when required, 179
wording of, 179
investigations, 133–137
juveniles and, 381–382
killed in the line of duty, 144–145
minorities as, 110–113
patrol, 131–133
peacekeeping role, 101–102
physical dangers of police work, 144–145
probationary period, 109
problem-oriented policing, 142–143
reactive and proactive arrest strategies, 
140–141
recruitment for, 107–110
requirements for, 108–109
response time to 911 calls, 138
responsibilities of, 99–102
salary, 108
stress and mental dangers, 145–146
subculture of, 144
undercover officers, 133–134
women as, 111
Laws. See also Criminal law
administrative, 69
ballot initiatives and, 68–69
case, 69
constitutional, 67
legal function of, 70
police enforcing, 99–100
social function of, 70–71
statutory, 67–69
Lay witness, 236
Leading questions, 238
Learning theory, 51
drug use and, 56
Legal duty, 77
Legislative sentencing authority, 256–258
Legislative waiver, 384
Lehman Brothers, 421
Less-lethal weapons, 146–147
Lethal injection, 270, 273–274
Lexington-Fayette Police Department, 160
Liability, 73
Liable, 73
Life course criminology, 52–53
Life-without-parole sentence, 352
juveniles and, 366, 372 
Limited jurisdiction, 192, 194–195
Line services, 130
Liquor laws, 38
Local government, law enforcement, 10
Local police departments. See Municipal law 
enforcement agencies
Lockdown, 321
Loitering laws, 38
London Metropolitan Police, 102
Lone wolf terrorist, 402–403
Los Angeles County Men’s Central Jail, 328
Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, 
number of employees, 114
Low-visibility decision making, 381
Loyalty, ethical dilemmas of, 152
LulzSec, 396
Lynchburg Police Department, 153
M
Magistrate, 195
Mail and wire fraud, 419
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–14   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
Philadelphia Police Department, 102
Phishing, 410
Physical agility exam, 108–109
Physician-assisted suicide, 7, 9
Piracy, 413
Pittsburgh Police Department, 139
Plaintiff, 72
Plain view doctrine, 175–176
Platoons, 130
Plea bargaining
defendants and, 225, 226
defense attorneys and, 225–226
defined, 224
at initial appearance, 218 
motivations for, 225–227
prosecutors and, 225
role in justice system, 224–225
sentence outcome for, 225, 226
Police. See also Law enforcement officers
accountability, 150
citizen oversight, 150
corruption, 149–150
discretion and, 15–16
ethics and, 151–152
historical perspective
anti-terrorism, 106–107
community era, 104–105
early American experience, 102
first police department, 102
intelligence-led, 105–107
political era and corruption, 103, 105
professionalism, 103
reform era, 103, 105
technology and, 105–106
municipal government and, 10
Police academy, 109
Police Code of Conduct, 151
Police corruption, 149–150
bribery, 149
defined, 149
mooching, 149
payoffs, 149
shakedowns, 149
stages of, 150
Police departments
bureaucratic model for, 129
chain of command, 129–130
compared to prisons, 318
delegation of authority, 129–130
effective strategies for, 137–143
organization of, 129
patrol, 131–133
structure of, 129–131
Police Executive Research Forum, 142
Police Services Study, 131
Police strategies
broken windows theory and, 140–141
community policing, 141–142
general and directed patrol strategies, 139
hot-spot policing, 18
incident-driven policing, 138
predictive policing and crime mapping, 
139–140
proactive policing, 18
problem-oriented, 142–143
reactive and proactive arrest strategies, 
140–141
Parole
authority, 351
characteristics of offenders, 351
compared to probation, 289, 351
conditions of, 354
defined, 13, 350, 351
due process and, 354–355
eligibility for, 257, 351–352
guidelines for, 353
life-without-parole sentences, 352
mandatory release, 353
parole contract, 354
parole grant hearing, 352–353
parole officer and, 354–355
presumptive parole date, 353
promoting desistance, 357
revocation of, 354–355
supervision, 354–355
technical violation, 354
timing, 351
work release programs and halfway houses, 
357
Parole board, 257
defined, 352
good time and, 257
indeterminate sentencing and, 257
parole hearing, 352
Parole contract, 354
Parole grant hearing, 352–353
Parole guidelines, 353
Parole officers, 354–355
presentence investigation report, 259–260, 292
Parole revocation, 354–355
Part I offenses, 36–37
Part II offenses, 37–38
Partisan elections, 201
Patriot Act, 400
criticism of, 21
key provisions of, 20
overview of, 400
searches and, 406
surveillance and, 406
Patrol, 131–133
activities on, 131–133
administrative duties, 132
calls for service, 132
community services, 131
directed, 139
general, 139
officer-initiated activities, 132
preventive patrol, 132
purpose of, 131
strategies for, 139
Patronage system, 103
Payoffs, 149
Peacekeeping role of police, 101–102
Penal harm movement, 314
Penitentiary, 311. See also Prisons
Penitentiary Administrative Maximum (ADX), 
321
Pennsylvania System, 312
Peremptory challenges, 232
Permanent residents, 415
Persistent offender, 267
Petition, 383
Petty misdemeanor, 75
Petty offense, 75
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), 
38–39
National Gang Crime Research Center, 341
National Mortgage Fraud Team, 421
National Reporter System, 29
National Security Agency (NSA), 402
counterterrorism efforts, 406
National White Collar Crime Center, 409
Necessity defense, 88
Negligence
defined, 78
mens rea, 78–79
Neurons, 47
Neurotransmitters, 47–48
New Folsom, 336
Newgate Prison, 312
New-generation jails, 328–329
New Orleans Police Department, 102
New York Police Department (NYPD)
corruption in, 149
crime-mapping system, 140
establishment of, 102
internal affairs investigation department, 150
number of employees, 114
stops and race, 166
New York system, 312
Night watch system, 102
911 calls, response time to, 138
Nolle prosequi, 221
Nolo contendere plea, 224
Nondeadly force, 147
Nonpartisan elections, 201
Nonstate actors, 397
Norepinephrine, 47–48
Norway, sentencing and rehabilitation focus, 255
Notification laws, sex offenders, 359
O
Obama, Barack
bin Laden’s death, 398
military tribunals, 407
prosecuting terrorists, 230
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA), 69
Occupy Boston, 100
Officers. See Law enforcement officers
Oklahoma City bombing, 400
Oleoresin capsicum, 146–147
Online auction fraud, 409
Online child pornography, 413–414
Online gambling, 413–414
Opening statement, 235
Open-source collection, 402
Operation Community Shield, 417
Operation Heat Wave, 143
Operations, 130
Opinions, 192
Oral arguments, 198
Organized crime, 34
Original jurisdiction, 192
Orlando Police Department, 147
OxyContin, 57
P
Pardon, 355
Parens patriae, 367
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–15
management structure, 318
organizational chart for, 319
types of offenses of federal and state 
inmates, 316–317, 318
warden and, 318, 319
penal harm movement, 314
population of
aging, 338
ailing, 338–339
decarceration, 316
decrease in, 310
growth in, 314–315
high rate of incarceration and, 314–315,  
317
immigration law and, 315, 414
leveling off of, 22, 23
mental illness and, 338–339, 356
private prisons, 322–325
arguments against, 324–325
cost efficiency, 322–324
future of, 325
outsourcing inmates, 324
overcrowding, 324
philosophical concerns, 325
profitability of, 325
reasons for, 322–324
safety concerns, 324
rehabilitation and prison programs, 339
riots, 340–341
separate confinement, 312
technology and tracking inmates, 344
as total institutions, 337
truth-in-sentencing laws, 257–258
types of
maximum-security, 319–321
medium-security, 321
minimum-security, 321–322
security measures in, 320–321
supermax, 321
violence in, 339–341
women in, 315, 347–350
Privacy
closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras, 
177–178
garbage searches and, 171
prisoners’ rights, 346
reasonable expectation of, 171
role in searches, 171
Private prisons, 322–325
Private security, 120–121
defined, 120
demand for, 120
growth in, 121
Proactive arrests, 140
Proactive policing, 18
Probable cause, 161–163
electronic surveillance, 176–177
establishing, 220–221
framework, 163
grand jury, 220–221
preliminary hearing, 220
search warrant and, 171
sources of, 161–163
Probation, 286–303
authority, 351
average length of, 290
caseload and, 293
release of, 350–355
challenges of, 356
conditional, 350
discretionary, 351–353
expiration release, 355
furlough, 355
pardon, 355
parole, 350–355
probation release, 355
promoting desistance, 357
sex offenders, 358–360
temporary release, 355
threat of relapse, 357
work release programs and halfway houses, 
357
rights of, 346–347
deliberate indifference standard, 346
First Amendment, 347
hands-off doctrine, 346
identifiable human needs, 347
slang, 337
solitary confinement, 345
violence and
deprivation model, 340
incidence of, 340
prison conditions and, 336
in prison culture, 339–341
race and ethnicity, 341
relative deprivation model, 340–341
riots, 340–341
women, 347–350
Prison gang, 341
Prisonization, 337
Prisons, 310–325. See also Prisoners
average length of sentence, 290
average sentence length vs. time served, 257
classification process, 319
community corrections as low-cost alternative 
to, 288
compared to jails, 325–326, 327
conditions in, and violence, 336
congregate system, 312
consequences of high incarceration rate, 330
correctional officers, 342–347
cost of, 22–23, 288, 315–316
decarceration, 316
defined, 13
designs of, 320
as form of punishment, 258
gangs, 341
good time, 257
growth of inmate population of, 314–315
high rate of incarceration in U.S., 314–315,  
317
history of
in colonies, 311
first penitentiary, 311
high rate of incarceration, 314–315
Pennsylvania vs. New York systems, 
311–312
reassertion of punishment, 313
reformers and progressives, 312–313
medical model, 313
organization and management, 316–318
chain of command, 318
compared to police department, 318
governing, 318
response time to 911 calls, 138
Police subculture
authority and use of force, 146–148
blue curtain, 144
corruption and, 150
defined, 144
physical danger of police work and, 144–145
socialization, 144
stress and mental dangers, 145–146
Political era of policing, 103
Pornography
child, 252
online, 252, 413–414
Postal Inspectors, 116, 421
Postpartum psychosis, 47
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),  
145–146
Poverty, crime and, 42–44, 49, 50
Precedent, 69
Precincts, 130
Predictive policing, 139–140
Predisposition report, 386
Prejudicial evidence, 237–238
Preliminary hearing, 218
to establish probable cause, 220
pretrial diversion programs, 297
revocation of probation, 293–294
waiving, 220
Premeditated crime, 74
Preparedness, 403
Preponderance of the evidence, 73
Prescription drugs, 57
Presentence investigation report, 259–260, 292
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement 
and Administration of Justice, 13, 37–38
Pretrial detainees, 326
Pretrial detention, 217–219
bail bond agent, 219
initial appearance, 217
posting bail, 219
preventive detention, 218–219
purpose of bail, 217–219
release on recognizance, 219
Pretrial diversion programs, 297
Pretrial procedures
arraignment, 223–224
plea bargaining, 224–227
prosecutorial screening process, 221–223
Preventive detention, 218–219
Preventive patrol, 132
Preventive policing, counterterrorism strategy, 
402–403
Prima facie case, 233
Prislam, 348
Prison Community, The (Clemmer), 337
Prisoner reentry, 356–360
Prisoners, 336–360. See also Prisons
adapting to prison society, 337–338
age of, 338
classification process, 319
culture of, 337–341
discipline, 344–345
gangs, 341
health and health care for, 338–339
in prison vs. jail, 326, 327
recidivism rate, 23, 357
rehabilitation and prison programs, 339
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–16   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
Reasonable force, 147
Reasonable suspicion
frisk, 167
Terry case, 165–166
totality of the circumstances test, 166
Rebuttal, 241
Recidivism, 23
Recklessness, 79
Recruitment, of police officers, 107–110
Redirect examination, 239
Reentry courts, 357
Referral, 382
Reform era of policing, 103, 129–130
Regulation, 420
Regulatory agency, 69
Rehabilitation
criticism of, by Martinson, 313
day reporting centers, 299
function of courts and, 190
indeterminate sentencing and, 256–257,  
258
Pennsylvania and first penitentiary, 311
of prisoners and prison programs, 339
Progressives and, 312–313
as purpose of sentencing, 254
reintegration through community corrections, 
287
Reintegration, community corrections, 287
Relapse process, 357
Relative deprivation, 340–341
Release on recognizance, 219
Relevant evidence, 237
Religion, prisoners’ rights and, 347
Removal, immigration law and, 415
Research Network on Adolescent Development 
and Juvenile Justice, 372
Residential treatment programs, 387
Resident youth worker, 388
Response time
to 911 calls, 138
defined, 138
Restitution, 256
as form of punishment, 259
in pretrial diversion program, 383
Restorative justice, 383
defined, 256
as form of punishment, 259
purpose of sentencing and, 256
Retribution
as purpose of sentencing, 253–254
state sentencing guidelines, 265
Reviewing court, 195
Revocation, of probation, 293–294
Revocation hearing, 294
Revocation sentencing, 294
Riots, prison, 340–341
Robbery
average length of sentence, 290
defined, 33
gangs and, 380
by juveniles, 373–374
as Part I offense, 37
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Routine activities theory, 53–54
Rule of four, 198
Rural programs, 387
organization of, 206
plea bargaining and, 225
power of, 205–206
preliminary hearing, 220
pretrial diversion programs, 297
rebuttal, 241
redirect examination, 239
screening process, 221–223
in sentencing process, 260
social media and, 24
strict standard of proof, 230–231
Prostitution, 38, 76
Psychoactive drugs, 20
Psychology, 47
crime and, 48
Public defenders
defined, 208
eligibility issues, 208–209
job description, 234
role of, 208
Public morality, 70
Public order crime, 33–34
Public policy
rational choice theory and, 47
trait theory, 48–49
Public prosecutors, 205–206
Punishment
choice theory and, 47
cruel and unusual punishment, 270–271, 
273–274
forms of, 258–259
intermediate sanctions, 295–302
probation as, 289
R
Race
consequences of high incarceration rate,  
330
crime and, 42
drug offenses and, 42, 43
incarceration rate and, 23–24
prison violence and, 341
stops and, 166–167
Racial profiling
defined, 166
stops and, 166
terrorist profiling, 405
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 
Act (RICO), 297–298, 421
Racketeering, 421
Radio frequency identification (RFID), 344
Rape
definition of, 32, 33
incidence of, 32
by juveniles, 373–374
as Part I offense, 36
Prison rape, 340 
statutory, 80
Rational choice theory, 46–47
Reactive arrests, 140
Real evidence, 235–236
Real offense, 261
Reasonable bail, 217
Reasonable belief, 87
Reasonable doubt standard, 230
juveniles and, 369, 385
characteristics of offenders, 351
compared to parole, 289, 351
conditions for, 290–292
defined, 13, 289, 351
diversion, 288
in diversion programs, 383
effectiveness of, 295
eligibility for, 290
as form of punishment, 258–259
intensive supervision probation, 299
juveniles, 387
as low-cost alternative to prison, 288
new models of, 295
number of people under, 286, 288, 289
principles of, 291
vs. prison, 13
probation officer’s supervisory role in, 
292–293
revocation of, 291, 293–295
shock probation, 289
split sentence, 289
successful completion of, 293
suspended sentence, 289
timing of, 351
Probationary period, 109
Probation officers
authority of, 292–293
as career, 296
caseloads and, 293
presentence investigative report,  
259–260
supervisory role, 292–293
Problem-oriented policing, 142–143
Problem-solving courts, 297
Procedural criminal law, 88–91
Procedural due process, 90
Professional model of policing, 103
Progressive movement, 312–313
Project Delirium, 114
Project 54, 104
Property bonds, 219
Property crime
defined, 33
by juveniles, 373
Prosecuting attorney, 205
Prosecutorial waiver, 384
Prosecutors, 205–207
assistant prosecutors, 206
attorney general, 206
burden of proving guilt, 229–230
case attrition, 221–222
case priorities, 222–223
charging conference, 242
closing arguments, 241
direct examination of witnesses, 238
discretion and, 206, 221–223, 266
double jeopardy, 244
as elected official, 206–207
establishing probable cause pretrial, 
 220–221
evidence and, 236
grand jury, 220–221
hearsay, 238–239
information issued by, 220
jury selection, 232
office of, 206
opening statements, 235
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–17
first responders killed in, 404
Homeland Security, 20
Patriot Act, 20–21, 400
Sequestration, 242
Serotonin, 47–48
Session hijacking, 411
Sex offender notification law, 359
Sex offenders
conditions of release, 359–360
Megan’s Law, 359
release of, 358–360
residency restrictions, 360
sex offender notification law, 359
Sex offenses, 38
Sexual assault
average length of sentence, 290
defined, 33
sentence outcome for guilty plea, 226
sentencing disparity, 263
Shakedowns, 149
Sheriffs
county law enforcement, 10
defined, 114
vs. local police departments, 115
number of departments, 114
political aspect of, 114
size and responsibility of departments, 
114–115
Shifts, 130
Shock incarceration, 259, 289
boot camps, 300
defined, 299
value of, 300
Shock probation, 289
Sing Sing Correctional Facility, 319, 347
Sixth Amendment, 21, 89
cross-examination, 239
death penalty, 273
defense attorneys and, 207, 208
impartial jury, 228
military tribunals, 407
pretrial detention, 217
speedy trial, 227, 228
Social conflict theory, 50
Social disorganization theory, 49, 50
Socialization, 144
Social media, impact on criminal justice system, 
24–25
Social networking, collecting intelligence on,  
107
Social process theories, 51–52
Social psychology, 48
Societal boundaries, 71
Sociology, 49
Solitary confinement, 345
Spam, 412
Special prosecution, 206
Specialty courts, 195
Specific deterrence, 254
Speedy trial, 227–228
Speedy Trial Act, 228
Split sentence probation, 289
Spoils system, 103
Stalking, cyber, 411
Standard of proof
civil cases, 73
criminal cases, 73
Self-incrimination
confession as, 179
privilege against, 229
witnesses, 229
Self-reported surveys, 39–40
Sentences
average length of, 290
split, 289
suspended, 289
Sentencing, 253–268
average sentence length vs. time served, 257
chivalry effect, 264
community service, 296
determinate, 257, 258
discrimination in, 263–264, 276–277
disparity in, 262–263
factors in
judicial philosophy, 262
mitigating and aggravating circumstances, 
261
real offense, 261
seriousness of crime, 260–261
fines, 296–297
forfeiture, 297–298
forms of punishment, 258–259
good time, 257
growth in prison population and, 315
guidelines, 265–267
indeterminate, 256–257
individualized justice and judge, 258
juveniles, 386
presentence investigative report, 259–260
probation, 289–290
process of, 259–260
purpose of
deterrence, 254
incapacitation, 254–255
rehabilitation, 255
restitution, 256
restorative justice, 256
retribution, 253–254
reform, 265–268
restitution, 296
revocation sentencing, 294
structure of
judicial authority, 258–259
legislative authority, 256–258
truth-in-sentencing laws, 257–258, 315
victim impact evidence and, 268
Sentencing discrimination, 263–264
Sentencing disparity, 262–263
Sentencing guidelines
federal, 265–266
habitual offender laws, 267
judicial departures from, 266–267
mandatory, 267–268
state, 265
three-strike laws, 267–268
Sentencing Guidelines Commission, 265
Sentencing reform, 265–268
departure, 266
sentencing guidelines, 265–267
victim impact evidence, 268
Sentencing Reform Act (SRA), 264, 265–266, 315
Separate confinement, 312
September 11, 2001 attacks, 397
anti-terrorism and policing, 106–107
S
San Jose Police Department, 151
San Quentin State Prison, 319
Santa Clara County Reentry Court, 357
Santa Cruz Police Department, 140
Santa Fe Police Department, 114
S.B. 1070, 166–167
Supreme Court ruling, and, 167 
Schizophrenia, 48
Schools
bullying, 376
violence in, 375
Scientific method, 46
Screening process, 222–223
Search(es). See also Search and seizure
arm’s reach doctrine, 173
automobiles, 174–175
with consent, 173–174
defined, 171
incidental to arrest, 173
knock and talk strategy, 174
social media searches, 178
Search and seizure
arm’s reach doctrine, 173
automobiles, 174–175
with consent, 173–174
electronic surveillance, 176–178
exclusionary rule, 163–165
good faith exception, 164–165
incidental to arrest, 173
inevitable discovery exception, 162
knock and talk strategy, 174
Patriot Act, 406
plain view doctrine, 175–176
probable cause, 161–163
reasonableness, 161, 172
role of privacy in, 171
search warrants, 171–172
thermal imagers, 175–176
war on terrorism and, 405–406
without warrant, 172–174
Search warrants
defined, 171
exceptions to requirements for, 174
particularity requirements, 172
probable cause and, 171
purpose of, 172
search and seizure without, 172–174
Secret Service, 11
under Homeland Security, 117–118, 401
responsibilities of, 116, 117–118
Secure Communities initiative, 417–418
Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitor 
(SCRAM), 40
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 420
Securities fraud, 419
Security. See Private security
Security Housing Unit (SHU), 321
Seduction of crime, 46–47
Seizure. See also Search and seizure
categories of items for, 172
defined, 172
as element of arrest, 169
plain view doctrine, 175–176
Self-control theory, 53
Self-defense, 76
as defense, 87, 240
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–18   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
Taser, 146, 147
Tax evasion, 419
Technical violation, 293
parole, 354
Technology
Automatic License Plate Recognition, 104,  
177
closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras, 
177–178
crime-mapping, 140, 141
electronic eavesdropping, 76
fingerprinting techniques, 200–201
GPS, 301–302
hacking cars, 412–413
patrol cars and, 104
Project 54, 104
radio frequency identification (RFID), 344
self-surveillance, 151
social media and criminal justice system, 
24–25
thermal imagers, 175–176
tracking inmates and, 344
transdermal alcohol testing, 40
wireless devices in courtroom, 243
Television, aggression and televised violence, 
51, 52
Tenth Amendment, 67
Terrorism, 396–423. See also Homeland security
characteristics of, 397
civil liberties and
due process and indefinite detention, 
406–407
military tribunals, 407
searches, surveillance and security,  
405–406
terrorist profiling, 405
counterterrorism strategies
border security, 404
emergency preparedness and response, 
403–404
preventive policing, 402–403
defined, 20
domestic, 399
foreign terrorist organization list, 400
global context of, 397–399
homegrown extremists, 399
homeland security
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty 
Act (AEDPA), 399–400
counterterrorism challenges and strategies, 
402–404
Department of Homeland Security, 401
federal agencies outside DHS, 401–402
informants and entrapment, 403
lone wolf terrorist, 402–403
Patriot Act, 400
security vs. civil liberties, 405–407
homeland security response
FBI, CIA, NSA efforts, 401–402
state and local antiterrorism efforts, 402
jihad, 398
Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda, 398
Patriot Act and, 20–21
police department and anti-terrorism, 
106–107
prosecution of terrorists, 230
supercrime of, 398
deliberate indifference standard, 346
dissenting opinions, 199
diversity on bench, 202–203
due process and, 91
electronic surveillance, 176–177
federal mandatory sentencing guidelines, 
267–268
flag burning, 68
forfeiture, 298
good faith exception, 164–165
hands-off approach, 346
identifiable human needs, 347
impact of, 196–197
indefinite detention, 406–407
initial appearance, 217
interpreter of law, 197–198
judicial review, 197
jurisdiction, 191, 198
jury selection, 232–234
juveniles and, 369–370
knock and announce rule, 169–170
Miranda warning, 180–182, 197–198
number of cases heard by, 198
oral arguments before, 198
parole, 351
parole revocation and due process, 354–355
plain view doctrine, 175–176
plea bargaining, 225
pretrial detainees, 326
preventive detention, 384
prisoners medical care, 340
prisoners’ rights, 346–347
privacy, 171
probable cause, 163
process of reaching a decision, 198–199
reasonable doubt standard, 230
reasonable search, 161
rule of four, 198
searches incidental to arrest, 173
self-incrimination, 229
speedy trial, 227
stops, 165–166, 167
totality of the circumstances test, 166
use of force by law enforcement officials, 
147–148
use of force by prison officials, 345
victim impact evidence, 268
warrantless arrest, 170
writ of certiorari, 198
Supreme Court justices
appointment and terms of, 196
diversity on bench, 202–203
impact of past discrimination, 203
Supreme Court Reporter, 29
Surrebuttal, 241
Surveillance, war on terrorism and, 405–406
Suspended sentence, 289
Suspicious Activity Report (SAR), 106
Sweden, day-fines, 298
Sworn officers, 131
Synthetic drugs, 57–58
System, 13
T
Taft Correctional Institution, 324
Taft Grain and Elevator, 420
Stand Your Ground statute, 4, 5
State court systems
courts of appeal, 195–196
courts of limited jurisdiction, 194–195
in dual court system, 193
organization of, 194
selection of judges, 201–202
specialty courts, 195
trial courts of general jurisdiction, 195
State police, 10–11
number of departments, 115
purpose and duties of, 115
State prosecutor, 205
States, law enforcement and, 10–11
State statutes, 67
Station, 130
Status offenders, 368
treatment of girls, 375
Statute of limitations, 228
Statutes
ballot initiatives, 68–69
as source of law, 67
Statutory law, 67–69
Statutory rape, 80
Stolen property, 38
Stop-and-identify laws, 167
Stops
compared to arrests, 168
defined, 167
race and, 166–167
racial profiling, 166
Terry case, 165–166
totality of the circumstances test, 166
Strain theory, 49–50
Strategic Forecasting, 396
Strategic Information Operations Center, 401–402
Street gangs, 19. See also Gangs
Stress, of police work, 145–146
Stress hormone, 145
Stressors, 145
Strict liability crimes, 79–80
Subculture. See Police subculture
Substance abuse, juvenile delinquency and, 
378–379
Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act, 295
Substantial-capacity test, 84
Substantive criminal law, 67, 88
Substantive due process, 90–91
Suicide
bullycides, 376
physician-assisted suicide, 7, 9
Supermax prison, 321
Supremacy clause, 68
Supreme Court, state, jurisdiction on, 195
Supreme Court, United States, 67
Allen Charge, 243
appeals process, 244
arrests, 168
automobile searches, 174–175
cases heard by, 198
choice of defense attorney, 209
concurring opinions, 199
counsel at criminal trials, 196
cruel and unusual punishment, 271, 274
crush videos, 197
death penalty, 197, 270–274
death penalty for juveniles, 372
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s u b j e c t  i n d e x   I–19
victim impact evidence and sentencing,  
268
victim-offender connection, 54
victim-offender mediation, 256
of white-collar crime, 419
Victim surveys, 37–39
Video games, violent, 51, 52
Violence
corporate, 420
in prisons, 339–341
in schools, 375
Violent crimes
categories of, 33
defined, 33
demographics of victims, 54
drop in crime rate, 17–18, 41–42
juveniles, 373–374
Part I offenses, 36–37
Virus, 412
Visa, 404, 415
Voir dire, 231–232
Voluntary intoxication, 85
Voluntary manslaughter, 74
W
Waiver
automatic, 384
judicial, 383
legislative, 384
prosecutorial, 384
Wake County Sheriff Department, 149
Walnut Street Jail, 311, 329
War, terrorism as act of, 397–398
Warden, 318, 319, 323
War on drugs, 43
Warrantless arrest, 170
Warrants
arrests with, 169–170
arrests without, 170
probable cause and, 161
Washington, George, 119
Washington Mutual, 421
Wealth, crime and, 42–44
Weapons, violations, 38
Wedding cake model, 216–217
Western Penitentiary, 312
White-collar crime
in 2000s, 421
defined, 34, 418
law enforcement and, 420–421
penalties for, 422
regulating, 420
types of, 418–419
victims of, 419
White Collar Crime Penalty Enhancement Act, 
422
Widen the net, 302
Willful, 79
Wilmington Police Department, 99
Wiretapping, 406
Witnesses
cross-examination of, 239
direct examination of, 238
expert, 236
Fifth amendment, 229
granted immunity, 229
pleading guilty, 223–224
pretrial procedures, prosecutorial screening 
process, 221–223
special features of criminal trials, 227–231
impartial jury, 228–229
presumption of innocence, 229
privilege against self-incrimination, 
 229
role of jury, 228–229
speedy trial, 227–228
strict standard of proof, 230–231
speedy, 227–228
statute of limitations, 227
steps leading to, 218
wireless devices in courtroom, 243
Truth-in-sentencing laws, 257–258, 315
Twitter, 24, 25, 98, 107, 376
searches and, 178
Two Rivers Correctional Institution, 320
U
UCR. See Uniform Crime Report (UCR)
Undercover officers, 133–134
Uniform Code of Military Justice, 192
Uniform Crime Report (UCR), 36–38, 99
defined, 36
dropping crime rate, 41–42
juvenile delinquency and, 373
Part I offenses, 36–37
Part II offenses, 37–38
United States Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS), under Homeland 
Security Department, 401
United States Reports, 29
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status 
Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) program, 
416
Universal jurisdiction, 192
Unreasonable searches and seizures, 21
Use of force. See Force
Use of force matrix, 146, 147
U.S. Marshals Service
creation of, 119
responsibilities of, 120
V
Vagrancy, 38
Vandalism, 38
Vehicles, searches of, 174–175
Venire, 231
Verdict, 243
Vicodin, 57
Victim impact statements (VISs), 268
Victimless crimes, 34
Victim-offender mediation, 256
Victimology, 53
Victims
civil lawsuits brought by, 244
demographics of, 54
drug use and, 55
reasonable doubt about credibility, 223
risks of, 53–54
routine activities theory, 53–54
uncooperative, 223
unreliable, 223
trends in, 399
violence of, 397
as warfare, 397–398
Testimony
defined, 235
as evidence, 235
Testosterone, 47
Texas Department of Public Safety, 114
Texting, banning while driving, 10
Theft
cyber, 410
gangs and, 380
identity, 410
motor vehicle, 33
as Part I offense, 37
property crime, 33
Theories, 46. See also Crime theories
Thermal imagers, 175–176
Thirteenth Amendment, prisoners’ rights, 346
Three-strike laws, 55, 267–268, 315
Three-strikes laws, 69
Thrill offenders, 46–47
Time served, 327
Tokenism, 111
Total institution, 337
Totality of the circumstances test, 166
Touch DNA, 136–137
Tours, 130
Tower guards, 343
Trace evidence, 134–135
Traffic cameras, 177
Traffic laws, 71
Training schools, 388
Trait theory, 47–49
biochemical conditions and, 47–48
psychology and crime, 48
public policy and, 48–49
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse,  
267
Transdermal alcohol testing, 40
Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
airport screening, 404
under Homeland Security Department, 401
Treasury Department, 120
Treasury Police Force, 118
Trespassing, 75
Trial courts, jurisdiction, 192
Trial judges
administrative role of, 201
roles and responsibilities of, 199–201
before trial, 199–200
during trial, 200
Trials
bench, 228
change of venue, 229
elements of
appeals, 244–245
closing arguments, 241–242
cross-examination, 239
defendant’s case, 239–240
jury deliberation, 242
opening statements, 235
prosecution’s case, 238–239
rebuttal and surrebuttal, 241
role of evidence, 235–238
verdict, 243
jury selection, 231–235
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I–20   c R i M i n A L  j u s t i c e  i n  A c t i o n :  t h e  c o r e
hearsay, 238–239
lay, 236
redirect examination, 239
self-incrimination, 229
Women
chivalry effect, 264
as correctional officers, 345–346
crime and, 44–45
girls in juvenile justice system, 374–375
honor killings, 76
increasing number of incarcerated, 315
jury selection, 234–235
low representation on Supreme Court, 202–203
sentencing discrimination, 264
Women police officers
added scrutiny of, 111
antidiscrimination law and affirmative action, 
110–111
benefits of diverse police force, 113
effectiveness of, 112
in leadership positions, 111
numbers of, 110, 111–112
tokenism, 111
Women’s prisons
characteristics of inmates, 348–349
culture of, 349–350
history of abuse, 349
motherhood problems, 349
number of inmates, 44
pseudo-family, 350
Work detail supervisors, 343
Work release programs, 357
Worm, 412
Writ of certiorari, 198
Wrongful convictions, 245
Y
Yard officers, 343
Youth camps, 388
Youth development centers, 388
Youth gangs, 379–381
Youth populations, crime rate variations and, 41
Z
Zero-tolerance theory, 101–102
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has 
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

