
C R I M I N A L  E V I D E N C E

This page intentionally left blank 

C R I M I N A L  E V I D E N C E
Sixth Edition
Judy Hails, J.D., LL.M.
California State University, Long Beach
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2009, 2005  Wadsworth Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted 
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007940633
Student Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-0-495-09581-1 
ISBN-10: 0-495-09581-8
Wadsworth Cengage Learning
10 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002-3098
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson 
Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit 
academic.cengage.com 
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our 
 preferred online store, www.ichapters.com
Criminal Evidence, 
Sixth Edition
Judy Hails
Executive Editor: Marcus Boggs 
Acquisitions Editor: 
Carolyn Henderson-Meier 
Assistant Editor: Beth Rodio
Editorial Assistant: Jill Nowlin
Marketing Manager: 
Terra Schultz
Marketing Communications 
Manager: Tami Strang
Project Manager, Editorial 
Production: Samen Iqbal
Creative Director: Rob Hugel
Art Director: Maria Epes
Print Buyer: Paula Vang 
Permissions Editor: 
Roberta Broyer
Production Service: 
Aaron Downey, Matrix 
Productions Inc.
Copy Editor: Dan Hays
Cover Designer: Yvo Riezebos 
Designs
Cover Image: Corbis Images/
William Whitehurst
Compositor: International 
Typesetting and Composition
For product information and technology assistance, contact us 
at Cengage Learning Academic Resource  Center, 
1-800-423-0563
For permission to use material from this text or product,  submit 
all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America  
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  12  11  10  09  08

To my daughters
Miriam Soto and Kahina Kaci
I’m so proud of both of you

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
Table of Cases xvii
Preface xxi
Chapter 1
Introduction 1
Feature Case: Michael Jackson 1
What Is Evidence? 2
Burden of Proof 4
Role of Judge and Jury 6
History and Development of Rules of Evidence 8
Sources of Evidence Law 9
United States Constitution 9
United States Supreme Court 10
Federal Courts 10
Federal Rules of Evidence 10
State Rules of Evidence 11
State Case Law 12
Impact of Case Law 12
Review of Evidentiary Matters on Appeal 14
The Appellate Process 15
How Legal Research Is Conducted 17
Summary 19
Review Questions 20
Writing Assignment 20
Chapter 2
The Court Process 21
Feature Case: Phil Spector 21
Introduction 22
The Criminal Complaint 23
Arraignment 25
Preliminary Hearing 26
CONTENTS

viii 
Contents
Grand Jury 27
Suppression Hearing 28
Discovery 30
Plea Bargaining 31
The Trial 32
Jury Selection  33
The Courtroom Setting 36
Opening Statements 37
Prosecution’s Case in Chief  38
Defense’s Case in Chief 42
Rebuttal and Rejoinder 44
Closing Arguments and Summation 44
Jury Instructions 44
Jury Deliberations 45
Verdict 47
Sentencing 48
Appeal 50
Summary 54
Review Questions 55
Writing Assignment 55
Notes 55
Chapter 3
Types of Evidence 57
Feature Case: Martha Stewart 57
Relevant Evidence 58
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 63
Testimonial and Real Evidence 65
Substitutes for Evidence 66
Stipulations 66
Judicial Notice 67
Presumptions 69
Summary 72
Review Questions 73
Writing Assignment 73
Chapter 4
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 75
Feature Case: Kobe Bryant 75
Basic Definitions 77
Weight of Evidence 77
Circumstantial Evidence of Ability to Commit the Crime 78
Skills and Technical Knowledge 79
Means to Accomplish the Crime 80
Physical Capacity 80
Mental Capacity 81
Circumstantial Evidence of Intent 81
Modus Operandi 82

Contents 
ix
Motive 83
Threats 84
Circumstantial Evidence of Guilt 85
Flight to Avoid Punishment 85
Concealing Evidence 85
Possession of Stolen Property 86
Sudden Wealth 87
Threatening Witnesses 87
Character 88
The Defendant’s Character in General 89
Specific Character Traits of the Defendant 89
Character Traits of the Victim 90
Other Acts Evidence 91
Identity 91
Habit or Custom 92
Lack of Accident 93
Prior False Claims 94
Offers to Plead Guilty 94
Circumstantial Evidence Involving the Victim 95
Rape Shield Laws 96
Summary 98
Review Questions 99
Writing Assignment 99
Notes 100
Chapter 5
Witnesses 101
Feature Case: Andrea Yates 101
Competency of Witness 103
Duty to Tell the Truth 104
Ability to Narrate 105
Procedure to Establish Competency 106
Impeachment 106
Bias or Prejudice 107
Prior Felony Convictions 110
Uncharged Crimes and Immoral Acts 112
Prior Inconsistent Statements 113
Inability to Observe 113
Reputation 115
Rehabilitation 115
Corroboration 118
Memory Failures 120
Unavailable Witnesses 122
Types of Witnesses 122
Opinion Rule 124
Lay Witnesses 124
Expert Witnesses 125
Foundation for Expert Witness 127

x 
Contents
Voir Dire of Experts 128
Examination of Expert Witnesses 128
Examples of Expert Testimony 129
Summary 131
Review Questions 132
Writing Assignment 133
Notes 133
Chapter 6
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 135
Feature Case: Scott Peterson 135
Introduction 138
Crime Scene Evidence 139
Scientific Evidence 142
Types of Cases Commonly Using Scientific Evidence 143
Laying the Foundation 143
Commonly Accepted Scientific Tests 146
Fingerprints 146
Blood Alcohol 149
Blood Typing 150
DNA Testing 151
Identification of Controlled Substances 153
Identification of Firearms 154
Other Forensic Specialties and Tests 156
Tests That Are Not Commonly Accepted 158
Polygraph 159
Hypnosis 160
Experiments 161
Summary 163
Review Questions 164
Writing Assignment 164
Notes 165
Chapter 7
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 167
Feature Case: Enron 167
Definitions Used to Describe Documents 169
Authentication 169
Self-Authenticating Documents 171
Documents Requiring Authentication 175
Forensics Documents Examiners 177
Handwriting Comparisons 178
Typewriting Comparisons 179
Alterations, Erasures, and Obliterations 180
Comparisons of Paper and Ink 180
Introducing the Contents of Documents 181
Primary Evidence 182
Secondary Evidence 184

Contents 
xi
Photographic Evidence 186
Models, Maps, and Diagrams 189
Summary 190
Review Questions 191
Writing Assignment 192
Notes 192
Chapter 8
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 193
Feature Case: Robert Blake 193
Basic Hearsay Definitions 195
The Hearsay Rule 197
Testimonial Hearsay 199
Unavailability of the Hearsay Declarant 200
Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 201
Admissions and Confessions 202
Admission of a Party 203
Adoptive (Tacit) Admission 204
Authorized Admission 206
Admission by Agent 207
Admission by Co-conspirator 208
Declarations against Interest (Declarant Must Be Unavailable) 209
Spontaneous Statements (Also Called Excited Utterances) 211
Contemporaneous Declarations (Also Called Present Sense Impressions) 213
Dying Declarations Exception (Also Called Statement under Belief of Impending Death; 
 Declarant Must Be Unavailable) 215
Mental and Physical State 217
Business Records and Official Documents 218
Business Records 219
Absence of a Business Record 222
Public Records and Reports (Also Called Official Documents) 223
Vital Statistics 225
Reputation 227
Former Testimony (Witness Must Be Unavailable) 229
Prior Inconsistent Statements 231
Prior Consistent Statements 232
Ancient Documents 235
Past Recollection Recorded 236
Summary 239
Review Questions 240
Writing Assignment 240
Chapter 9
Privileged Communications 241
Feature Case: President Bush Claims Executive Privilege 241
Basis for Privileges 243
Attorney–Client Privilege 245
Husband–Wife Privilege 247

xii 
Contents
Physician–Patient Privilege 251
Clergy–Penitent Privilege 255
Media Reporter Privilege 256
Executive Privilege 258
Privilege for Official Information 260
Privilege Not to Disclose Identity of Informant 261
Summary 263
Review Questions 265
Writing Assignment 265
Notes 265
Chapter 10
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 267
Feature Case: Murder of Christa Worthington 267
History and Development of Fourth Amendment 270
Definitions 271
Search 272
Seizure 273
Probable Cause 274
Standing 275
Warrant Requirements 277
Information Needed to Obtain a Warrant 277
Procedure to Obtain a Warrant 284
Execution of Search Warrants 287
Exclusionary Rule 290
Exclusionary Rule and the Fruit of Poison Tree Doctrine 291
Good Faith Exception 293
Inevitable Discovery 294
Independent Source 295
Public Safety 296
Knock-and-Announce Exception 296
Procedural Exceptions 297
Impermissible Methods of Obtaining Evidence 302
Summary 304
Review Questions 305
Writing Assignment 306
Notes 306
Chapter 11
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 309
Feature Case: The Trial of Ivory John Webb Jr. 309
Right to Use Force to Detain or Arrest Suspects 312
Reasonable Person 312
Reasonable Appearances 313
Reasonable Force  313
Criminal Charges for Using Excessive Force 315
Field Interviews 315
Right to Detain 315

Contents 
xiii
Searches during Temporary Detention 317
Special Situations 319
Arrests 322
Probable Cause to Arrest 323
Powers of Arrest 324
Search Incident to Arrest 325
Booking 330
Search of the Person 331
Property Searches 332
Jail and Prison Searches 333
Summary 334
Review Questions 334
Writing Assignment 335
Notes 335
Chapter 12
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 337
Feature Case: Snoop Dogg Arrested at Airport 337
Plain View and Open Fields Doctrines 338
The Observation 339
Legally on Premises 340
Probable Cause to Seize 341
Open Fields Doctrine 342
Abandoned Property 343
Consent Searches 344
Standard for Consent 345
Who Can Consent 346
Scope of the Search 347
Vehicle Searches 348
Vehicle Search Incident to Arrest 349
Vehicle Searches Based on Probable Cause 350
Vehicle Search—Inventory of Impounded Vehicles 352
Vehicle Search during Stop Based on Reasonable Suspicion 353
Vehicle Search—Outside of Vehicle 355
Vehicle Search during Non-Criminal Investigation  355
Vehicle Stops at Roadblocks 356
Administrative Searches 357
Summary 360
Review Questions 361
Writing Assignment 361
Notes 361
Chapter 13
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic 
Surveillance Covered by Federal Law 363
Feature Case: Jose Padilla 363
Eavesdropping and Electronic Surveillance 366

Misplaced Reliance Doctrine 366
Electronic Surveillance and Wiretap Act of 1968 368
Federal Legislation on Electronic Surveillance 371
National Security Letters 379
Summary 381
Review Questions 381
Writing Assignment 381
Notes 382
Chapter 14
Self-Incrimination 385
Feature Case: Central Park Jogger Attack 385
Scope of the Privilege against Self-Incrimination 386
Situations Not Covered by the Fifth Amendment 387
How the Privilege against Self-Incrimination Is Invoked 389
Nontestimonial Compulsion 391
Miranda Warnings 394
Content of Miranda Warnings 394
When Miranda Warnings Are Required 396
Waiver of Miranda Rights 399
Sequential Interrogations 402
Prior Interrogation without Valid Miranda Waiver 402
Prior Interrogation with Valid Miranda Waiver 403
Suspect Invoked Right to Remain Silent 404
Suspect Invoked Right to Attorney 404
Special Situations 406
Suspect Illegally Arrested 407
Interrogating Juvenile Suspects 408
Impeachment 409
Post-Arraignment Confessions 410
Summary 413
Review Questions 414
Writing Assignment 414
Notes 415
Chapter 15
Identification Procedures 417
Feature Case: Centennial Olympics Suspect Richard Jewell 417
Definitions Used for Identification Procedures 419
Lineups 419
Showups 420
Photographic Lineups 420
Fourth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures 421
Fifth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures 423
Sixth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures 424
Due Process Rights during Identification Procedures 426
Due Process Rights at Lineups and Photographic Lineups 426
Due Process Rights at Showups 428
xiv 
Contents

Contents 
xv
Use of Identification Testimony at Trial 430
Summary 433
Review Questions 434
Writing Assignment 434
Notes 434
Chapter 16
Preparing the Case for Court 437
Feature Case: The Perjury of Los Angeles Police Department Detective Mark 
 Fuhrman 437
Introduction 439
Reviewing Facts of the Case 439
Working with the Prosecutor 441
Preparing Physical Evidence 442
Witnesses 443
Dress and Demeanor 445
Appearance 446
Demeanor 446
Contacts with Lawyers, Witnesses, and Jurors 449
Press Coverage 452
Summary 452
Review Questions 453
Writing Assignment 454
Glossary 455
Index 485

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
Adams v. Williams 316
Aguilar v. Texas 278
Alabama v. White 316
Arizona v. Evans 293
Arizona v. Fulminante 400
Arizona v. Hicks 341
Arizona v. Roberson 406
Atwater v. City of Lago Vista 326
Bell v. Wolfish 333
Berger v. New York 368
Berkemer v. McCarty 396
Brady v. Maryland 30
Brewer v. Williams 397
Brown v. Illinois 407
Bumper v. North Carolina 345
Burdeau v. McDowell 302
Cady v. Dombrowski 355
California v. Beheler 397
California v. Carney 348
California v. Ciraolo 340
California v. Greenwood 343
California v. Hodari D. 344
Camara v. Municipal Court 357
Cardwell v. Lewis 355
Carter v. Kentucky 389
Chambers v. Maroney 350
Chapman v. California 297
Chimel v. California 325
City of Indianapolis v. 
Edmond 357
Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United 
States 358
Colorado v. Connelly 400
Colorado v. Spring 400
Connecticut v. Barrett 401
Coolidge v. New Hampshire 284, 
338
County of Sacramento v. 
Lewis 303
Crawford v. Washington 199
Dalia v. United States 374
Daubert v. Merrell Dow 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 126
Davis v. Mississippi 321
Davis v. Washington 199
Delaware v. Prouse 319, 356
Dickerson v. United States 414
Donovan v. Dewey 358
Dunaway v. New York 321
Edwards v. Arizona 404
Estelle v. McGuire 95
Estelle v. Smith 397
Fare v. Michael C. 408
Fellers v. United States 410
Florida v. Bostick 345
Florida v. J. L. 316
TABLE OF CASES

Florida v. Jimeno 347
Foster v. California 426
Frye v. United States 126
Gideon v. Wainwright 53
Gilbert v. California 423, 431
Graham v. Connor 312
Griffin v. California 243, 389
Griffin v. Wisconsin 347
Groh v. Ramirez 288
Gustafson v. Florida 326
Hammon v. Indiana 199
Harris v. New York 298
Hayes v. Florida 321, 392
Hayes v. Washington 302
Hoffa v. United States 367
Horton v. California 339
Hudson v. Michigan 297
Hudson v. Palmer 333
Illinois v. Gates 283
Illinois v. Krull 293
Illinois v. Lafayette 332
Illinois v. Lidster 357
Illinois v. Patterson 410
Illinois v. Perkins 397
Illinois v. Rodriguez 346
Illinois v. Wardlow 316
In re: Sealed Case No. 02-001 378
INS v. Delgado 359
INS v. Lopez-Menendez 300
James v. Illinois 299
Katz v. United States 368
Kaupp v. Texas 408
Kirby v. Illinois 424
Lanier v. South Carolina 407
Manson v. Brathwaite 429
Mapp v. Ohio 4, 291
Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc. 359
Maryland v. Buie 290, 329
Maryland v. Dyson 350
Maryland v. Wilson 319
Massachusetts v. Sheppard 
279–280, 293
Massiah v. United States 410, 411
McCray v. Illinois 261
Michigan v. Clifford 359
Michigan v. Long 319, 353
Michigan v. Mosley 404
Michigan v. Thomas 350
Michigan v. Tyler 359
Michigan Dept. of State Police v. 
Sitz 357
Mincey v. Arizona 289
Minnesota v. Dickerson 318
Minnick v. Mississippi 405
Miranda v. Arizona 394
Moore v. Illinois 424
Moran v. Burbine 400
Murray v. United States 296
Neil v. Biggers 429
New Jersey v. T.L.O. 321
New York v. Belton 329, 349
New York v. Burger 358
New York v. Class 355
New York v. Harris 407
New York v. Quarles 296, 398
Nix v. Williams 294
North Carolina v. Butler 401
Oliver v. United States 342
Oregon v. Bradshaw 405
Oregon v. Elstad 402
Oregon v. Mathiason 397
Orozco v. Texas 397
Payton v. New York 288, 325
Pennsylvania v. Bruder 396
Pennsylvania v. Mimms 319
Pennsylvania v. Muniz 393
Pennsylvania Board of Probation & 
Parole v. Scott 301
People v. Hults 160
People v. Schreiner 160
xviii 
Table of Cases

Rhode Island v. Innis 397
Richards v. Wisconsin 289
Rochin v. California 302
Rock v. Arkansas 160
Schmerber v. California 391
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte 345
Scott v. United States 375
Sealed Case No. 02-001 378
See v. City of Seattle 357
Segura v. United States 295
Smith v. Illinois 405
Smith v. Maryland 369
South Dakota v. Opperman 352
Spinelli v. United States 283
Stansbury v. California 397
Stegald v. United States 325
Stovall v. Denno 428
Tennessee v. Garner 312
Terry v. Ohio 315, 318, 319
Thornton v. United States 329, 
349
United States v. Ash 425
United States v. Banks 290
United States v. Biswell 358
United States v. Calandra 298
United States v. Donovan 375
United States v. Dunn 342
United States v. Dunnigan 390
United States v. Edwards 332
United States v. Gouveia 410
United States v. Havens 299
United States v. Hensley 316
United States v. Janis 299
United States v. Kahn 375
United States v. Karo 370
United States v. Knotts 370
United States v. Larios 300
United States v. Leon 280–281, 293
United States v. Mara 392
United States v. Matlock 346
United States v. New York Telephone 
Co. 369
United States v. Nixon 259
United States v. Owens 431
United States v. Place 322
United States v. Robinson 326, 389
United States v. Ross 351
United States v. United States 
District Court (Keith) 375
United States v. Wade 392, 423
United States v. White 367
Washington v. Chrisman 338
Watkins v. Sowders 430
Weeks v. United States 290
Whiteley v. Warden 317
Wilson v. Arkansas 289
Winston v. Lee 302
Wong Sun v. United States 291, 
292–293
Wyoming v. Houghton 350
Yarborough v. Alvarado 408
Zurcher v. Stanford Daily 257
 
Table of Cases 
xix

This page intentionally left blank 

xxi
This book has been written for use in introductory-level criminal evidence 
courses. It is introductory in the sense that it is intended for students who 
have no legal background. It is not introductory in the sense of being 
superficial.
Criminal Evidence is a comprehensive evidence text. All evidentiary 
topics that commonly occur in criminal proceedings are included. Hearsay 
and privileges are thoroughly covered. Six chapters are devoted to consti-
tutional issues that are essential to the collection of admissible evidence. 
Mastery of the material presented in Criminal Evidence will enable 
a law enforcement officer to analyze the evidence collected with an eye 
toward building a solid case. Interaction with the prosecutor will be 
improved because the officer will understand what is required to admit 
crucial evidence in court. On the witness stand, the officer will be better 
prepared to testify because he or she has a better understanding of the 
strategies used to establish credibility and impeach witnesses.
All legal texts, except those designed for use in only one state, must 
deal with the diversity that exists in the laws of the 50 states. The Federal 
Rules of Evidence provide a starting point because they are in use in the 
federal courts as well as in the courts of several states. Criminal Evidence
makes frequent reference to the Federal Rules of Evidence for this reason. 
The approach used in the text is to state the most common rules and defi-
nitions. Where wide variation exists among the states, students are specifi-
cally urged to consult their local laws.
Most definitions have been converted to itemized lists that are easy 
for the student to understand. Whenever possible, legal jargon has been 
avoided. Key terms are boldfaced throughout the chapters, as well as listed 
at the beginning of each chapter, in order to draw the reader’s attention 
to the importance of these terms. All concepts have been amply illustrated 
PREFACE

xxii 
Preface
with examples arising in criminal cases; examples of situations in which 
the rules do not apply are also given. Chapters are carefully subdivided 
into suitable teaching units.
Organization
Chapters 1 and 2 provide a basic introduction to the American legal 
system. State criminal trials are placed in the larger context of the state and 
federal judicial systems. Variations among states and the ever-changing 
nature of law are explained. Chapter 2 provides a detailed explanation of 
the trial process and related court activities. New trends, such as allowing 
judges to conduct voir dire during jury selection, expanding the use of 
hearsay at preliminary hearings, and giving the judge authority to decide 
if new scientific tests should be admitted at trial, are covered.
Chapter 3 defines basic concepts of evidence: relevance, direct evi-
dence, circumstantial evidence, testimonial evidence, real evidence, stipu-
lations, judicial notice, and presumptions.
Chapter 4 explores direct and circumstantial evidence in more depth. 
A wide variety of situations in which circumstantial evidence can play 
a key role in criminal trials is discussed. A discussion of the use of the 
Battered Child Syndrome, Rape Trauma Syndrome, and Battered Woman 
Syndrome as circumstantial evidence is included.
Witnesses are covered in Chapter 5. Topics related to the handling of trial 
witnesses include competence, impeachment, rehabilitation, and corrobora-
tion. The Opinion Rule is covered in depth with the role of the expert witness 
illustrated by examples related to sanity, ballistics, and blood matching.
Chapters 6 and 7 focus on real evidence. Preservation of evidence at 
the crime scene and maintaining the chain of custody are emphasized. 
Basic rules on the use of scientific evidence are given with background 
information on the scientific basis for fingerprints, blood tests, and bal-
listic testing.  The section on DNA matching has been expanded to include 
a wider array of tests. Specialties in areas such as forensic accounting, age 
progression photography, and forensic anthropology that may play a role 
in a criminal trial are reviewed. Documentary evidence is covered in detail. 
Authentication requirements are enumerated. The capabilities of forensics 
documents examiners are discussed. The need to account for the original 
document is included in this section along with rules that authorize the 
use of substitutes when the original is unavailable.
Chapter 8 is devoted to the Hearsay Rule. Recent Supreme Court cases 
restricting the use of testimonial hearsay are covered. More than a dozen 

Preface 
xxiii
exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are discussed in detail. The use of itemized 
lists in place of more traditional definitions is one of the strong points of 
this chapter. Numerous examples that illustrate each exception make the 
Hearsay Rule easier to understand.
Privileges are covered in Chapter 9. Again, definitions are turned into 
itemized lists in order to assist in the learning process. Eight different 
privileges are covered in detail. Examples are included for each.
Chapters 10 through 15 are devoted to constitutional issues. The 
framework of the Fourth Amendment and the Exclusionary Rule are cov-
ered in Chapter 10. The numerous exceptions to the Exclusionary Rule are 
explained. This chapter also contains a detailed discussion of the proce-
dures that must be followed in order to obtain a warrant.
Chapter 11 focuses on detentions. Field interviews, arrests, book-
ing, and custodial situations are discussed. In each of these situations, 
the grounds for detaining a subject are established, as is the extent of the 
search that accompanies the detention.
A thorough discussion of other warrantless searches is contained in 
Chapters 12.  This chapter cites more than 45 major Supreme Court cases. 
Topics covered in Chapter 12 include the Plain View Doctrine, the Open 
Fields Doctrine, abandoned property, consent searches, vehicle searches 
(incident to arrest, probable cause, inventory, and reasonable suspicion), 
the appropriate use of roadblocks, and administrative searches. 
Chapter 13 has major revisions. It now focuses on both physical 
and electronic eavesdropping. It contains detailed discussion of the USA 
PATRIOT Act and electronic surveillance (wiretaps, “bugs,” pen registers, 
and e-mail), as well as physical searches and National Security Letter sub-
poenas used in domestic criminal investigations and foreign intelligence 
purposes.
Self-incrimination is covered in Chapter 14. Miranda, of course, is 
the key to this discussion. A wide variety of situations that complicate the 
application of Miranda are discussed. The right to counsel during post-
arraignment interrogation is also covered.
Chapter 15 is devoted to identification procedures. Constitutional 
aspects of lineups, showups, and photographic lineups are discussed. This 
short but comprehensive chapter serves as a guide for avoiding the pitfall 
of improperly handling witnesses during the identification process.
The role of the officer once the case goes to court is covered in Chapter 16. 
A convenient record-keeping system is suggested to help collect all needed 
information. Tips are given on courtroom demeanor and dress, along with 
suggestions for dealing with jurors and the media.

A comprehensive glossary and index are at the end of the book. Both 
are designed to make it easy for a student to look up information and/or 
for people to quickly refresh their memories.
What’s New in the Sixth Edition
Each chapter starts with a recent, high publicity case selected with care so 
that it is appropriate for discussion while studying the chapter. Following 
the case study, many chapters have a table of myths and corresponding facts 
about the topic under discussion. The entries in these tables are intended to 
pique interest and do not attempt to be comprehensive. A writing assign-
ment is found at the end of each chapter. Students are told to go online and 
find a case on a specific topic covered in each chapter. Writing across the 
curriculum is emphasized in each chapter as well as Internet research skills.
Additional examples have been added throughout the book. In many 
instances, they are in chart form so that it is easier for the student to 
catalog the rules that apply. Some chapters also have mini scenarios that 
illustrate situations that at first glance appear to be governed by the rule 
under discussion but, upon more thorough analysis, do not. The reasons 
for the final conclusion are clearly stated.
Chapter 6, Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments, now contains 
information on a wider variety of DNA tests and points out the reason for 
utilizing each test. Several new areas of expertise, such as forensic account-
ing, age progression photography, and forensic footwear analysis, are dis-
cussed to help students understand the role of the expert witness. 
Every effort has been made in Chapters 10–15 to cover the most recent 
U.S. Supreme Court cases that apply during criminal investigations. It is 
important to recognize that the vast majority of Supreme Court decisions 
in the past 20 years have made subtle refinements in existing rules; the 
barrage of new rules typical of the Warren and Berger Courts has disap-
peared. In its place are cases the Court carefully selects in order to fine-
tune the brash opinions of the past. These refinements are included in the 
discussions of the rules police officers must follow. The text was updated 
and now includes Supreme Court cases that were decided before January 1, 
2008, as well as revisions of other material.
The portion of Chapter 11 that discusses an officer’s right to use force 
has been expanded. In addition to stating the rule that deadly force may 
only be used when a life is in imminent danger, the discussion of what 
is reasonable force has been expanded as well as the role that reasonable 
appearances play in the legal analysis of the decision to use physical force 
in reaction to a tense situation.
xxiv 
Preface

Chapter 13, USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types 
of Electronic Surveillance Covered by Federal Law, now focuses on the 
post-September 11, 2001, fight against terrorism. Most of the new laws 
provide additional tools for federal agencies, particularly the FBI; they are 
discussed in Criminal Evidence because of their broad general interest. The 
Federal Wiretap Act, which is used in criminal investigations involving 
U.S. citizens and residents, is also discussed.
A glossary containing more than 200 terms (including all key terms) is 
conveniently located at the back of the book. It has been revised in order 
to make it easier for students to use. Terms were selected on the basis of 
what a student would be likely to look up. Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 
and exceptions to the Exclusionary Rule are identified in a manner that 
will help students recognize which rule is discussed. Some terms have been 
cross-referenced so that they could be found by both their legal designa-
tion and their common moniker.
The Table of Cases has been updated to enable the reader to quickly 
locate the discussion and full citation for each of the more than 190 U.S. 
Supreme Court cases covered in the book.
A number of changes were made based on suggestions by many teach-
ers who use Criminal Evidence. Chapter layout has been changed to make 
it easier to find the definitions. Many more examples are included; in a 
number of chapters, mini scenarios were added to illustrate situations in 
which specific rules would and would not apply.
Supplements
An extensive test bank is available for Criminal Evidence. It has been revised 
and now includes true–false, multiple-choice, and essay questions. Annotated 
chapter outlines, useful frameworks for classroom presentations, are also 
available. PowerPoint presentations will be available for all chapters.
Acknowledgments
Many reviewers generously provided feedback in preparation for the 
sixth edition of this text. I would like to thank each one. I also thank 
the editors and production staff at Wadsworth for their assistance and 
support in bringing this book to you. Particularly, Carolyn Henderson-
Meier, Beth Rodio, Jill Nowlin, and Samen Iqbal. Dan Hays did an 
outstanding job as copy editor, as did Aaron Downey from Matrix 
Productions Inc.
Preface 
xxv

xxvi 
Preface
I thank James Young, Esq., Deputy City Prosecutor, Long Beach, CA, 
and adjunct professor in the Department of Criminal Justice at California 
State University, Long Beach. Without his assistance in editing and updat-
ing Chapters 12–16, I would not have been able to complete this project.
About the Author
Judy Hails has taught in the criminal justice field for more than 35 years. She 
is currently a professor in the Department of Criminal Justice at California 
State University, Long Beach, where she received the Distinguished Faculty 
Teaching Award in 1998. She was a visiting assistant professor at Illinois 
State University (1981–1983) and an adjunct professor at John Jay College 
in New York City (1978–1980). From 2000 to 2002, she was also an adjunct 
instructor at Los Angeles Harbor College and Long Beach City College. 
During the Fall 2007 semester, she taught at the China Criminal Police 
College in Shenyang, China.
Dr. Hails is a former sergeant with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s 
Department. Her education includes: B.S. in mathematics from Loma 
Linda University; M.S. in criminology from CSU Long Beach; J.D. from 
Southwestern University School of Law; and an LL.M. in criminal justice 
from New York University School of Law.
She has published four well-received textbooks: Criminal Evidence, 
Criminal Procedure, Criminal Procedure: A Case Approach, and Criminal 
Law. She has also published numerous articles in professional journals on 
criminal procedure, prisoners’ rights, and domestic violence.
Dr. Hails is a past president of the California Association of Administration 
of Justice Educators and also the Western and Pacific Association of Criminal 
Justice Educators. She served a 3-year term as Trustee for Region V of the 
Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences. She is a life member of the Academy 
of Criminal Justice Sciences and the Western Society of Criminology. She is 
an inactive member of the California State Bar.

1
Introduction
CHAPTER 1
Feature Case: Michael Jackson
Once known as the King of Pop, one of his most unforgettable roles was 
that of Defendant Jackson in a 14-week trial in a small California county 
where he lived in the secluded ranch he called Neverland. Jackson had 
been charged with multiple counts of sexual acts with a boy who was 
underage at the time, and the prosecutor presented witnesses who testi-
fied about events that fall under nearly every category we discuss in this 
book: eye witnesses who presented direct evidence, claiming they watched 
as Jackson had sex with the boy; circumstantial evidence, such as wit-
nesses who observed Jackson and the victim’s behavior and concluded 
that a sexual relationship existed; witnesses called to establish Jackson’s 
modus operandi based on the fact that Jackson had molested them even 
though there could be no prosecution of those cases because the statute of 
limitations had expired; expert witnesses from both the behavioral sciences 
and the physical sciences who analyzed the evidence and tried to persuade 
the jury to believe their conclusions; and physical evidence introduced by 
the person who found it, analyzed by the person who performed the tests 
on it, and explained by the person who claimed to be an expert witness. 
Jackson’s attorney carefully cross-examined all the prosecution witnesses, 
impeaching many of them, and put his own witnesses on the stand.
In the end, the prosecution was for naught; the jurors acquitted 
Jackson. We discuss the role of the jury and how it can come to conclu-
sions that are out of sync with public opinion.

2 
Chapter 1
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define the term evidence.
• Explain who has the burden of proof in a criminal case.
• Describe the role of the judge and jury in a criminal case.
• Specify the historical changes that have occurred in the way evidence is presented 
at trial.
• Identify three sources of the law governing evidence.
• Discuss the relationship between federal and state rules of evidence.
• Clarify how case law can change statutory rules of evidence.
• Describe what materials are used for legal research.
• Look up a case if provided with the correct legal citation.
Key Terms
•  Beyond a reasonable doubt
•  Burden of persuasion
•  Burden of proof
•  Case law
•  Evidence
•  Federal Rules of Evidence
•  Harmless Error Rule
•  Judicial discretion
•  Probative force
• Stare decisis
•  Trier of the facts
•  Trier of the law
What Is Evidence?
We all use evidence every day. For example, we might look out the window 
to see what the weather is like and use this evidence to decide what to wear. 
Commercial companies collect sales statistics and use that evidence to 
guide their marketing strategy. Teachers give tests to see how much their 
students are learning and use this evidence to assign grades. Scientists con-
duct experiments and use the evidence to find cures for diseases.
There are many definitions of evidence. Two found in Black’s Law 
Dictionary (pocket), third edition (2006), are given to help you understand 
the concept:
Evidence Defined
Something (including testimony, documents, and tangible objects) that tends to 
prove or disprove the existence of an alleged fact. 
The collective mass of things, especially testimony and exhibits, presented before 
the court in a given dispute.
Police investigators also try to gather as much evidence as possible. If they 
are convinced a case has been established, they take all the information to the

 
Introduction 
3
prosecutor. The prosecutor evaluates the evidence in order to decide if the 
case should be filed. Ultimately, the jury (or the judge if both sides decide 
to forego the jury) will hear all the evidence and decide if the defendant 
is guilty.
Along with other aspects of evidence, this book is interested in the 
process of introducing evidence at trial. You will find it helpful to under-
stand the legal definition of evidence. Black’s Law Dictionary (pocket), 
third edition (2006), gives comprehensive definitions and the pocket edi-
tion is a convenient size for students.
Evidence, in the legal sense, includes only what is introduced at trial. 
Lawyers and judges use the phrase “introduced into evidence.” Only the 
things that have been formally introduced at trial are evidence. Some com-
monly used terms, such as “inadmissible evidence,” are misleading. If the 
object is not admissible, it cannot be evidence. One side may attempt to 
admit something into evidence, but if it is not admitted it does not become 
evidence in the case.
A wide range of things can be used as evidence. If you go to court 
and watch a trial, the most obvious evidence is the testimony of the wit-
nesses. What a person says from the witness stand while under oath is 
evidence. All evidence must be introduced via the testimony of a witness. 
For example, a physical object, such as a gun, may be introduced into evi-
dence only after a witness has testified about it, thus providing a founda-
tion for its admission. Such testimony might include, among other facts, 
the circumstances under which the gun was found. The variety of things 
that can be used as evidence is only limited by the facts of the case. A gun 
might be evidence in a murder case where the victim was shot, but a gun 
would be not be evidence in a murder case where poison was used by an 
unarmed assailant. 
A survey of recent murder cases reveals a vast assortment of things 
that could be used as evidence, such as guns, knives, scissors, lead pipes, 
baseball bats, blunt objects, bombs, cars, poisons, lye, acids, water, ice 
picks, and even pillows and knitting needles. 
Many types of documents can also be evidence. Anything written 
or printed, pictures (whether still, movies, or videos), sound recordings, 
and electronic files are also considered documents when introduced into 
evidence. A forged check is a document; the demand note given to a bank 
teller during the robbery is another example. Counterfeit money would 
also be considered documents, as well as graffiti on a wall or inscriptions 
on tombstones. An e-mail message is also a document. Court records can 
also be important documents if the prosecutor needs to prove that the 
defendant had a prior conviction.

4 
Chapter 1
Some evidence is developed just for the trial. A wide variety of tests 
are done in forensics laboratories to prepare cases for trial. The defendant 
may be fingerprinted solely for the purpose of comparing his or her prints 
with those found at the scene. The case may be reenacted to determine if 
the scenario given by a witness could possibly be true. Scale models may 
even be constructed for submission as evidence.
Several chapters in this book are devoted to explaining what evidence is 
legally admissible in court. The mere fact that something could be admitted 
is not enough. The proper groundwork must be laid before the judge will 
allow the evidence to be introduced. These requirements are also covered.
Since the U.S. Supreme Court decided Mapp v. Ohio in 1961, the 
police have also had to be concerned with how the evidence was obtained. 
Information and physical objects obtained in violation of the defendant’s 
constitutional rights are generally not admissible as evidence in a case. 
Later chapters deal with these problems.
Burden of Proof
It is widely said that the prosecution has the “burden of proof” in crimi-
nal cases. This means that the prosecution is required to produce credible 
evidence to prove every element of each crime charged. The proof must be 
“beyond a reasonable doubt.” This places a heavy burden on the prosecu-
tion. Our society, however, has decided that it is better to let the guilty go 
free than to convict innocent people.
Black’s Law Dictionary (standard edition) (2004) gives a brief defini-
tion of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
Beyond a Reasonable Doubt Defined 
Proof that precludes every reasonable hypothesis except that which the law 
requires for the case. In criminal cases, the accused’s guilt must be established 
“beyond a reasonable doubt,” which means that facts proven must, by virtue of 
their probative [tending to prove] force, establish guilt.
There have been many attempts to explain the reasonable doubt stan-
dard. Pattern Criminal Jury Instruction 1.03 used by the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit gives a useful explanation:
The defendant starts the trial with a clean slate, with no evidence at all 
against him, and the law presumes that he is innocent. The presumption 
of innocence stays with him unless the government presents evidence here 
in court that overcomes the presumption, and convinces you beyond a 
reasonable doubt that he is guilty.

 
Introduction 
5
 
This means that the defendant has no obligation to present any evidence at 
all, or to prove to you in any way that he is innocent. It is up to the government 
to prove that he is guilty, and this burden stays on the government from start to 
finish. You must find the defendant not guilty unless the government convinces 
you beyond a reasonable doubt that he is guilty.
 
The government must prove every element of the crime charged beyond 
a reasonable doubt. Proof beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean proof 
beyond all possible doubt. Possible doubt or doubts based purely on speculation 
are not reasonable doubts. A reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and 
common sense. It may arise from the evidence, the lack of evidence, or the 
nature of the evidence.
 
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt means proof which is so convincing 
that you would not hesitate to rely and act on it in making the most 
important decisions in your own lives. If you are convinced that the 
government has proved the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, say 
so by returning a guilty verdict. If you are not convinced, say so by returning 
a not guilty verdict.
Thus, the prosecutor is required to fully satisfy the jury that the defen-
dant committed each crime charged. Prosecutors must look at the definition 
of each crime and make sure that proof has been presented on each element 
of every offense. Many states have pattern jury instructions for each offense 
that the judge will read to the jury at the end of the trial. Prosecutors fre-
quently use these instructions to help itemize what they will be required to 
establish. 
The defense does not have to prove that the defendant did not 
commit the crime. Even so, the defense attorney frequently calls witnesses. 
The defendant may also take the witness stand even though the Fifth 
Amendment gives him or her the right to refuse to do so. These acts are 
usually the result of a “game plan” developed by the defendant and his or 
her attorney. Although it is true the defense does not have to do anything, 
as a practical matter the defendant is more likely to be convicted if no 
defense evidence is presented. It is usually safer to call defense witnesses 
and try to convince the jury that the prosecution’s evidence does not estab-
lish the case beyond a reasonable doubt. For example, the defense could 
try to show any or all of the following: that the prosecution’s witnesses are 
lying, the case rests on mistaken identity, the defendant has an alibi, or the 
defendant is “not guilty by reason of insanity.” 
Another way to explain this adversarial relationship between defense and 
prosecution is that the prosecution has the burden of producing evidence that 
establishes the crime(s) beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense, on the other 

6 
Chapter 1
hand, will have the burden of persuasion. This means that the defense can try to 
persuade the jury that the prosecution has not established the defendant’s guilt.
There are some special situations in which the defendant does have the 
burden of proof. These are the so-called “affirmative defenses.” Self defense, 
duress, intoxication, entrapment, and insanity are good examples. The defense 
must introduce evidence on these issues. Some states even require the defen-
dant to prove them, usually by a preponderance of the evidence. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has upheld this allocation of the burden of proof as long as 
the defendant is not required to disprove an element of the crime. Due to the 
variations between the states, you should consult local laws to determine who 
bears what burden on each affirmative defense. 
In cases in which the defense is attacking the constitutionality of the 
methods used to obtain evidence, the burden may be altered by the fact 
that the police obtained a warrant. Searches without a warrant are usually 
presumed to be unconstitutional; that is, the prosecution has the burden of 
proof. Search warrants are frequently treated differently. The defense has 
the burden of proving that the search incident to a warrant was illegal.
Role of Judge and Jury
In a jury trial the roles of judge and jury are distinct: The judge is the 
“trier of the law” and the jury is the “trier of the facts.” If the case is heard 
without a jury, the judge plays both roles.
The “trier of the law” determines what laws apply to the case. This is 
clearly shown in the selection of jury instructions. After consultation with 
the attorneys for both sides, the judge selects instructions that inform the 
jury what the law is. Errors in selecting jury instructions may be grounds 
for reversal of a conviction.
Not as obvious, but equally important, is the role of the judge in decid-
ing what evidence is admissible at trial. This is easier in some areas than 
others. For example, if a statement is privileged, the judge must exclude it 
unless there is an applicable exception to the privilege. If a confession was 
obtained by coercion, the judge must exclude it. Even in these examples, 
the judge must analyze the facts and conclude that the privilege applied 
to the conversation or that the tactics used to obtain the confession were 
coercive. This is done, of course, after each side has had a chance to argue 
what ruling should be made. The judge may have the benefit of reviewing 
written briefs, submitted by both sides, giving legal points and authorities 
relevant to the decision. Judges are also allowed to do legal research or have 
their law clerks check the legal basis for the decision.

 
Introduction 
7
Perhaps the most difficult decisions are those where the judge must 
rule on specific questions the attorneys want to ask the witnesses. Although 
some questions are obviously permitted and others are not, there is a gray 
area in between. The judge must try to apply the law to these situations and 
make a ruling. This is referred to as “judicial discretion.” The judge has 
the legal right to decide if the questions should be allowed and must rule 
on numerous objections by the lawyers during each trial. Higher courts 
will uphold the trial judge’s rulings unless there is an obvious abuse of 
discretion.
A good example of this use of discretion is the right to ask questions 
to test the witness’s memory. The Sixth Amendment gives criminal defen-
dants the right to cross-examine their accusers. Obviously, this includes 
the right to try to show the jury that the witness has a bad memory. On 
the other hand, it is unrealistic to expect a witness to recall every minute 
detail of an event that may have happened 6 months or a year ago. 
Additionally, excessive questioning wastes time and may confuse the jury. 
At some point, the judge will rule that no more questions on this issue 
will be allowed.
Questions that attempt to introduce evidence that has only slight 
value to the case are also involved here. The side wishing to introduce 
the evidence will probably argue that the evidence is very important. The 
opposing side will tell the judge that the information is useless. The judge 
must use discretion and decide if there is a valid reason for introducing 
the evidence.
Other rules of evidence call for similar determinations by the judge. 
For example, evidence that is too prejudicial or photographs that are 
too graphic are inadmissible. The individual judge is left to decide 
where the line is to be drawn between what is acceptable and what is too 
prejudicial—what is merely a realistic depiction and what is too graphic 
or gruesome. 
The jury is the “trier of the facts.” This means that the jury reviews 
the evidence presented, decides which evidence to believe, and applies the 
legal instructions the judge gave to the facts. If two witnesses have given 
conflicting testimony, the jury must decide whom to believe. The jury 
decides how much weight to give to the testimony of each witness and 
which witnesses are telling the truth. 
This function of determining the truthfulness of the witnesses is par-
ticularly important. Our legal system gives jurors almost total responsibil-
ity for determining the credibility of witnesses. Very few cases successfully 
argue credibility of a witness as grounds for reversal.

8 
Chapter 1
History and Development of Rules of Evidence
The rules of evidence were designed to control both the judge and the 
jury. They were also intended to make the trial more businesslike and 
efficient. The evolutionary process that resulted in our present rules of 
evidence is a reflection of both English and American history.
In the Middle Ages, glaring abuses of the trial process, such as the 
Star Chamber and the Inquisition, developed. Strangely enough, the Star 
Chamber was originally developed to cure abuses by the royalty. At their 
height, both the Star Chamber and the Inquisition became obsessed with 
forcing the suspect to confess. The noble ideal that a person could not be 
convicted solely on the allegations of others dissolved into a nightmare of 
torture chambers designed to force the suspect to confess.
The earliest forms of juries differed greatly from our current jury. At 
one time, jurors were selected based on their knowledge of the case. Unlike 
our present system in which jurors are not supposed to have an opinion 
about the case prior to the trial, early jurors were only selected if they 
had personal knowledge of the facts. Busybodies made excellent jurors. 
Juries were also given the right to conduct their own investigations into 
the cases.
During the sixteenth century, the rule developed that anyone having 
a personal interest in the case was disqualified from testifying. This was 
based on a belief that someone with an interest in the case would more 
likely be biased and untruthful. In addition to disqualifying people with 
a financial interest in the outcome of the lawsuit, this rule prevented the 
parties to the case from testifying. The spouses of parties were also dis-
qualified as witnesses. Connecticut was the first state in the United States 
to abolish this rule, but that did not happen until the 1840s. Some states 
retained the rule until after the Civil War. 
Old transcripts indicate that trials were much less formal between 
1776 and 1830 than they are today. Hearsay was freely admitted, witnesses 
were allowed to give long narrative answers, and opposing attorneys broke 
in to cross-examine whenever they wished. Many of our present rules 
of evidence were developed to correct problems posed by these unruly 
trials.
As with many reforms, the rules that emerged were found to be too 
rigid. Exceptions to the rules were developed to make the new rules work 
better. The numerous exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are good examples of 
this process. From time to time, legal reformers have attempted to replace 
old rules with more modern ones. Some prestigious national organiza-
tions, such as the American Law Institute and the National Conference 

 
Introduction 
9
of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, have solicited input from the 
leading scholars in the field and attempted to draft model laws. 
Unfortunately, our federal system of government makes systemwide 
reform nearly impossible. Except where the U.S. Constitution is control-
ling, each state is free to enact its own rules of evidence and other laws. 
Somewhere in the legislative process the model codes are frequently 
altered or amended. Therefore, in evidence, as in many areas of the law, 
each state’s law is unique.
Sources of Evidence Law
Evidence law reflects both historical evolution and the strengths and weak-
nesses of our federal system of government. Both statutory law and case 
law have definite impacts; federal law and state law interact.
United States Constitution
As you learned in high school, the U.S. Constitution is the supreme law 
of the land. But there is very little in the Constitution that has a direct 
bearing on evidence. Several provisions of the Bill of Rights, however, do 
restrict the actions of government in criminal prosecutions. Although 
early Supreme Court decisions found no connection between these pro-
tections and the admission of evidence, the mid-twentieth century saw a 
reversal of those rulings. 
Generally speaking, nothing obtained in violation of the defendant’s 
constitutional rights may be used at trial. Later chapters of this book 
deal with how specific provisions of the Bill of Rights are currently being 
applied in criminal trials.
The U.S. Constitution is not static. Each year, the U.S. Supreme Court 
rules on a variety of cases. Every one of these decisions, in some small 
way, interprets the Constitution, Bill of Rights, or federal laws. This pro-
cess has allowed the Constitution to be a living document. The Fourth 
Amendment is a prime example of this process. As recently as 1948, it was 
believed that the amendment did not apply to the states. The rulings of the 
Supreme Court have so drastically altered this view that many have nearly 
forgotten that the Fourth Amendment has not always been applied to acts 
of state government.
Where there are no provisions of the Constitution or Bill of Rights 
involved, our federal system allows each state to enact its own rules of 
evidence. The common heritage of English law in most of the states has 
resulted in a great deal of similarity. Even so, there are many differences.

10 
Chapter 1
United States Supreme Court
Evidence is only one of the many topics addressed each year in the opin-
ions of the U.S. Supreme Court. Two important functions of the Supreme 
Court should be noted: (1) The Court is the final arbiter of the meaning 
of the U.S. Constitution, and (2) the Court acts as supervisor of the fed-
eral court system. Rulings of the Court that interpret the Constitution are 
binding on all federal and state courts. On the other hand, if the Court is 
acting in its supervisory capacity, the decision does not control the state 
courts.
When ruling on the meaning of the Constitution, the Supreme Court 
has the authority to overrule any court in the nation. It also has the power 
to overrule its own prior decisions. Gradual changes can be seen in the 
Court’s decisions as justices retire and are replaced.
The Court is very selective about which cases it hears. It obviously 
does not have the time to review every case filed in the United States. 
The vast majority of appeals to the U.S. Supreme Court and requests for 
review are denied. This means the Court does not hold a hearing on the 
cases. It does not mean that the Court agreed with the rulings of the lower 
courts. Refusal to hear a case sets no legal precedent. Due to the enormous 
number of requests received by the Court, only a small percentage can be 
heard each year.
Federal Courts
The federal courts hear cases involving violations of federal statutes. A 
panel of three judges at a U.S. Court of Appeals can rule on the constitu-
tionality of state and federal laws. If the U.S. Supreme Court has not made 
a definitive statement on a particular issue, the federal Court of Appeals 
decision is binding on all states within its boundaries. This may cause 
confusion because the 13 Courts of Appeals can make conflicting rulings. 
Ultimately, the problem will be resolved by a U.S. Supreme Court case on 
point. Such a case takes precedence over the lower court decision.
Federal Rules of Evidence
The Federal Rules of Evidence are laws governing the admission of evi-
dence in federal courts. They are enacted by Congress in the same manner 
as any other federal regulations. A comprehensive set of rules of evidence 
for federal courts were adopted by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1972. They 
were forwarded to Congress, where they were duly enacted. The Federal 
Rules of Evidence became effective January 2, 1975. Some of the rules have 
been amended since then.

 
Introduction 
11
Enactment of the Federal Rules of Evidence was significant for several 
reasons. The rules represented a comprehensive set of rules designed to 
work together as a whole. The authors believed they incorporated the best 
of the old law and corrected the problems that had developed. The new 
rules replaced both the existing statutory and case law.
The process of developing the new Federal Rules of Evidence received a 
great deal of publicity within the legal profession. The drafting committee 
had input from nationally renowned judges, attorneys, and legislators. The 
final draft was viewed by many as the best evidence code ever drafted.
The new Federal Rules of Evidence immediately affected all federal 
courts—but the long-term impact was even greater. Many states imitated 
the federal rules. Some simply declared that the federal rules would be the 
binding law of evidence in their state. Nearly half of the states now take 
that approach. Additionally, many other states modeled portions of their 
evidence laws after the federal rules.
As with any other piece of legislation, the federal rules have been sub-
ject to court interpretation. Title 28 of the United States Code (Annotated)
lists the decisions of all federal courts that relate to the rules. The U.S. 
Constitution is controlling. When interpreting this type of legislation, the 
courts also consider the drafting committee’s comments that accompanied 
the legislation. If there was no comment, or the comment does not cover 
the question that is raised by the appeal, common law will also be consid-
ered. Due to the fact that the rules were enacted as a comprehensive pack-
age, the courts usually try to make their rulings reflect the overall purpose 
of the code if none of the above sources is controlling. 
State Rules of Evidence
Each state has the right to enact its own evidence code. As mentioned 
previously, many states now follow the Federal Rules of Evidence. Some, 
such as Arizona and California, have placed all their rules of evidence in 
one code. Determining the evidence law in states that follow either of these 
approaches is fairly easy.
Unfortunately, there are quite a number of states whose legislatures 
have not enacted comprehensive evidence codes. In these states, the law of 
evidence is spread over several codes and usually involves case law as well. 
For example, the law of privilege may be in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
but the “dying declaration” exception to the Hearsay Rule may be in the 
Penal Code. There may not be any specific legislation on many kinds of 
evidence. If a rule is needed, case law is the only place to look. This obvi-
ously complicates the task of discovering what law to apply to specific 
situations.

12 
Chapter 1
State Case Law
Each state is free, within Constitutional limits, to enact and interpret its 
own laws. The laws of other states are not binding, but they may influence 
the judge. Where there is no binding case law on a point, or where one side 
is seeking to modify the existing law, an attorney may try to convince the 
judge that case law from another state is persuasive. If the judge studies 
the case law presented and finds the reasoning sound, he or she may apply 
that same logic when making a decision in the current case. Although the 
case law of a sister state has no legal effect, it may informally affect the final 
outcome of the case.
Impact of Case Law
Our legal system is based on the concept that the legislature enacts laws 
but the courts have the right to interpret them. The courts also have the 
right to rule that a statute is invalid because it violates the state or federal 
constitution. The U.S. Supreme Court interprets the federal constitution. 
Those rulings apply to the entire country. State courts can also rule that a 
state law violates the U.S. Constitution. These rulings will stand until the 
U.S. Supreme Court has ruled in a contrary manner on a similar law.
Prior cases are considered binding. This is called stare decisis. These 
earlier decisions are what we are referring to when we talk about “case 
law.” The rule of a case will continue to be in effect until it is reversed, 
vacated, or overruled. A higher court can change the rule by making a new 
ruling on the same issue. This is done by reversing the original decision or 
making the new rule in a later case that presents the same issue. If there is 
no higher court, or the higher court has not ruled on the issue, the original 
court can change the case law in the same manner.
One problem that arises in using case law is that there is no automatic 
feedback from the courts to the legislature. Even though the U.S. Supreme 
Court or the highest court in the state has ruled that a code section is void, 
there is no way to change the code except for the legislature to pass a new 
law. This causes a delay in revising the codes. Sometimes the legislature 
does not follow through with the process and the codes retain invalid laws 
for years. This makes the study of case law very important. 
The highest court of the state (called the Supreme Court in most 
states and not to be confused with the U.S. Supreme Court) has authority 
over all of the state’s courts as long as its rulings do not violate the U.S. 
Constitution and Bill of Rights. Figure 1-1 illustrates the organization of 
the typical state judicial system. Below the high court are several appellate 

 
Introduction 
13
courts of equal authority. Each makes decisions that control the actions of 
all courts below it on the organizational chart. If a higher court has not 
ruled on an issue, the intermediate appellate courts may make their own 
rulings. These may differ from the decisions other courts of equal author-
ity have made on the same issue. When these differences occur, the lower 
courts must follow the decisions of the courts immediately above them.
The following examples refer to the organization chart in Figure 1-1. 
Suppose the state has divided the Court of Appeals into two districts. The 
Court of Appeals for the First District held that the physician–patient 
privilege does not apply in criminal trials. The Court of Appeals for 
the Second District held that the physician–patient privilege applies 
in criminal matters except when the doctor was consulted to help the 
patient commit a crime. If Defendant Doe commits a crime in a county 
whose trial courts must follow the precedents from the First District, the 
physician–patient privilege cannot be claimed. If Doe’s offense was perpe-
trated in a county located in the Second District, the privilege can be used 
unless the doctor helped Doe commit a crime. These discrepancies will 
continue until the state’s Supreme Court makes a ruling on the use of the 
physician–patient privilege in criminal cases or one of the District Courts 
changes its ruling.
Courts of Limited Jurisdiction
• Handle misdemeanor trials
• Handle felony arraignments and preliminary hearings
Courts of Appeal
(Organized geographically by districts)
State Supreme Court
Courts of General Jurisdiction
(Organized geographically, usually by county)
• Handle felony trials
• Appeals go to the Appellate Court for the district in which
the trial court is located
Figure 1-1
Typical State Judicial System

14 
Chapter 1
Each court has the power to reverse its earlier rulings as long as it con-
tinues to follow the rulings of the higher courts, including the U.S. Supreme 
Court. Again using the example of the physician–patient privilege, the 
Second District Court of Appeals could decide that the privilege does not 
apply in criminal cases. This would result in both the First District and the 
Second District having the same rule.
Review of Evidentiary Matters on Appeal
In most situations, evidentiary matters are considered on appeal only 
if the issue was raised in the trial court. Attorneys are expected to make 
objections before the evidence is introduced. This is done to make the 
trial more efficient—the trial judge has the chance to make a ruling 
and prevent inadmissible things from being introduced into evidence. 
Hopefully, the judge has made the correct rulings and a retrial can be 
avoided. It is part of our adversary system that you only have the right to 
exclude evidence if your attorney makes the proper objection at the right 
time.
Some questions regarding what evidence is admissible are decided 
during the trial, whereas others are customarily ruled on before the trial 
begins. Objections to specific questions asked a witness are usually made 
immediately after the question is asked. If one side claims that a witness 
should not be allowed to testify at all, arguments are usually heard before 
the witness takes the stand. On the other hand, questions related to the 
legality of a search, or attacks on the interrogation methods that produced 
a confession, are usually settled before the trial date.
When the judge’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence is challenged 
on appeal, the attorneys are required to submit briefs giving their legal 
arguments. Specific statutes and case law must be cited as authority for 
the court to make a ruling. The easiest example would be when one side 
can cite a case that is an exact match for the facts and issues of the present 
case. This is referred to as being “on all fours.” Otherwise, each side will 
try to persuade the judge regarding the appropriate way to interpret the 
law. Analogies will be drawn from prior decisions to the current case. An 
attorney may also base arguments on public policy, common law, or the 
intent of the legislature when it enacted the law. This last rationale is more 
commonly seen when the court is ruling on a new law. 
If the appellate court finds that the trial judge made an error, one 
question remains: Does the error justify reversal? Unless there is a substan-
tial likelihood that the error was serious enough to affect the outcome of 
the case, the “Harmless Error Rule” will be applied. 

 
Introduction 
15
The Harmless Error Rule Defined
The Harmless Error Rule states that an error will not cause a case to be reversed 
on appeal unless the appellate court believes the error was likely to affect the 
outcome of the case.
In other words, would the jury have been likely to arrive at a different 
verdict if the judge had made the correct ruling? In many cases, the con-
clusion is that the error had no impact on the verdict.
The Appellate Process
The side that loses in the trial court frequently appeals to a higher court. 
When a defendant is acquitted, double jeopardy prevents the prosecution 
from re-filing the charges; therefore, the prosecution rarely appeals. On 
the other hand, a conviction can be reversed on appeal, so defendants fre-
quently appeal. Under the American view of double jeopardy, a successful 
appeal by the defendant does not prevent the prosecution from refiling 
the charges. Therefore, some defendants who win appeals go free, whereas 
others are convicted again and serve sentences for their crimes. 
The basic rule is that a person who has been convicted is entitled to 
one appeal. If you follow the news, you know that sometimes there are 
many appeals in the same case. The entitlement to one appeal means that a 
person who cannot afford an appeal has the right to have the government 
pay for a lawyer and necessary documents for one appeal. Traffic tickets 
and other infractions do not qualify for appeals at government expense. 
Neither do appeals taken after the first one is complete; for example, the 
state government does not have to pay for appeals to the state’s highest 
court or appeals to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The appellate process starts when a Notice of Appeal is filed at the 
end of the trial. This is done in the trial court. All necessary documents 
are prepared and transferred to the appellate court. A clerk’s transcript 
and a reporter’s transcript, or their equivalents, are prepared. Most of 
the paperwork in the case will be copied and put in the clerk’s tran-
script. The reporter’s transcript includes a verbatim account of what 
was done during pretrial hearings as well as the trial and sentencing 
hearings. The verbal sparring between the attorneys and judge will be 
in the reporter’s transcript as well as a record of what the witnesses said 
in court under oath.
A different set of titles is used on appeal. Suppose the defendant in 
the trial court files an appeal because she believes the trial judge made 
an incorrect ruling on an evidentiary matter; specifically, the judge ruled 

16 
Chapter 1
that a witness could answer a question that the prosecution asked. The 
defendant will become the appellant (person who appeals). The prosecu-
tion will become the respondent (person that responds to the appellant). 
If the case goes to a higher level, the titles appellant and respondent will be 
used, but they will be assigned based on who filed the second appeal. After 
the direct appeals are over, the defendant may file actions such as habeas
corpus, which challenges the legality of confining the person, or a variety 
of civil suits. The titles will be different in these cases, too.
Both sides prepare a brief of the case. This brief must reference legal 
issues at trial that are found in either the clerk’s transcript or the reporter’s 
transcript. Some states allow pretrial issues, such as the legality of the 
arrest, to be included; others have separate hearings and appeals for pre-
trial issues. The appellant (defendant at trial) files the first brief and states 
the issues that the appellant wants the court to consider. This may involve 
constitutional issues, such as violation of Fourth Amendment when the 
arrest was made or a Sixth Amendment violation when the judge did not 
allow a witness to answer a question that the defense asked. The judge’s 
rulings on whether or not a witness can testify, and the content of the jury 
instructions, are among the most frequent issues appealed. Each issue 
appealed must be referenced to a specific page of one of the transcripts. 
When the appellant’s opening brief is complete, copies are given to the 
trial court judge, the appellate court judges, and the respondent. State 
rules determine how long the appellant has to complete the brief, but it is 
rarely more than 60 days.
The respondent answers (cites legal references, references to pages of 
the transcripts, and its own legal reasoning) the appellant’s issues. This 
will probably take at least 1 month and sometimes much longer. After the 
appellant’s opening brief and the respondent’s opening brief are complete, 
the appellate court will consider the case. Sometimes the case is considered 
solely on the briefs, whereas other times there will be a hearing. No wit-
nesses are called at the hearing before the Court of Appeals. All discussions 
are restricted to the evidence presented before the trial court and the legal 
reasoning presented to the appellate court. 
Often, the appellant will successfully point out an error that occurred 
in the trial court but still lose the appeal. This is because of the Harmless 
Error Rule. When the Supreme Court established this rule, it reasoned that 
a case should be reversed only if the appellate court was convinced that the 
errors contributed to the outcome of the case in a significant way.
There is no right to a second level of appeal. Assuming the side that 
loses the first appeal wants to take the case to a higher court, a formal 
brief is usually prepared stating the issues to be heard and presented to 

 
Introduction 
17
the higher court. The case is heard only if the judges of the higher court 
vote to hear the case. State law specifies how many votes are required. It is 
more difficult for the trial defendant at this level because the U.S. Supreme 
Court ruled that states do not have to provide an attorney to handle legal 
actions after the first appeal. 
How Legal Research Is Conducted
A variety of books are available in the law library to help you discover 
what the law is on any given issue. A great number of legal materials are 
available on the Internet. These resources take several forms. Some, such as 
American Jurisprudence (Am. Jur.), are similar to encyclopedias. They are 
carefully indexed for ease in finding the issue. They give a summary of the 
law with numerous footnotes. Treatises, such as McCormick on Evidence,
more closely resemble lengthy textbooks. They frequently are on only one 
subject, but they carefully explain it in minute detail.
Legal digests are organized by topic. They usually give short quotes 
from individual cases rather than a textbook-style explanation of the law. 
The annotated codes also use quotations from many cases. These quotes 
are usually listed immediately after the code section that they interpret. 
The researcher looks for the quotes that appear to be on point and then 
reads the cases. Cases are then checked to verify that they are still good 
precedent (currently prevailing law). Special books and databases are pub-
lished for this latter purpose.
Most cases can be found in two or more books. This is because the 
content of the opinions cannot be copyrighted. Judicial opinions are 
printed by the publishing company authorized by the state or federal gov-
ernment. They are published by other companies as well. The digests and 
other legal references frequently give all the places a case can be found. 
These are called parallel citations. Reading any one of these is sufficient 
because the full text of the case is given in each one.
For example, the opinions of the U.S. Supreme Court can be found in 
three series of books: United States Reports (U.S.), United States Supreme 
Court Reports, Lawyers Edition (L.Ed.), and Supreme Court Reporter 
(S.Ct.). If we wanted to look up the Miranda decision, we would first look 
up the citation: Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 16 L.Ed. 2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 
1602 (1966). We would then determine which books containing Supreme 
Court decisions are in our library. Law libraries frequently have all three, 
but other libraries may have only one. If the United States Reports are 
available, we look up the citation 384 U.S. 436: We find volume 384 and 

18 
Chapter 1
the Miranda case will start on page 436. We would find the same case in 
volume 86 of the Supreme Court Reporter on page 1602. The procedure 
for finding a case in United States Supreme Court Reports, Lawyers Edition,
is slightly different. The Lawyers Edition started with volume 1 and num-
bered consecutively, then a new series was started that also began with 
volume 1 and was numbered consecutively. The second set of volumes is 
called the “Second Series.” “Second Series” is printed on the spine of the 
book and “2d” appears in the citation. Thus, if we look up 16 L.Ed. 2d 694 
to find Miranda, we first find the second series of books for the United 
States Supreme Court, Lawyers Edition, then open volume 16 and look on 
page 694.
Cases from state courts and the lower federal courts are located in 
much the same way. Due to variations in publishing companies, not all 
cases from a state may be available from the same source. Some states have 
one set of publications for opinions from the highest court and another 
for lower appellate court cases. Some states do not publish all of the appel-
late court decisions. Unpublished decisions do not set precedents. Trial 
court opinions are not considered precedent and therefore are not usually 
published. Students should become familiar with how to find both the 
decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court and the published decisions of the 
courts in their state.
Computerized research materials are readily available. Penal codes and 
other statutes may be purchased on CD-ROM. Major publishers sell their 
digests, case reports, and other materials on CD-ROM. Subscriptions are 
available that provide frequent updates. Online services make codes, case 
law, and other materials for every state as well as the federal courts avail-
able. These Internet databases are updated almost daily. 
One of the advantages of computerized material is the speed with 
which an experienced researcher can locate material. Key word searches 
can be used to identify every case in the file that discusses a topic or every 
case that discusses a particular code section or case. General terms, such 
as due process or Fourth Amendment, are not useful because there are 
thousands of cases that use these words. To use the database efficiently, 
the person conducting the search must know the specific words or phrases 
used by the courts when discussing the topic. For example, a search of 
U.S. Supreme Court cases using “vehicle search based on probable cause” 
would produce every case that used exactly that phrase but miss cases in 
which the court used the phrase “car search based on probable cause.” 
Browsers can combine words and phrases, such as “arrest” and “exigent 
circumstances,” for more efficient searches. These search engines usually 

 
Introduction 
19
In a trial, evidence refers to all items that are admitted to prove any issue in the 
case. This includes testimony of sworn witnesses, documents, physical objects, 
and other items that are relevant to the case.
 
The prosecution bears the burden of proof in criminal cases. The jury must be 
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed the crime(s). 
The defense usually has the burden of persuasion when affirmative defenses are 
used.
 
The judge is the trier of law at trial. Selection of jury instructions is part of the 
duties of the trier of the law. The judge also rules on the admissibility of all items 
either side wants to use to prove its case. Judicial discretion is used to determine 
admissibility if there is no clear-cut law that applies.
 
The trier of the facts is the jury, or if there is no jury, the judge. The trier of facts 
determines credibility of witnesses, the weight to be given to testimony of each 
witness, how the facts match the definition of the crime, and if the prosecution 
has established the case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
Rules of evidence have changed over time. Whereas jurors were once selected 
on the basis of their personal knowledge of the case, we now try to have jurors 
who have no knowledge of the facts prior to trial. The procedures used in trial 
have generally become more formal. Exceptions to the rules of evidence have 
developed when specific rules have been shown to be too rigid.
 
The U.S. Supreme Court interprets the U.S. Constitution. These decisions 
are binding on all courts in the country. It also makes decisions that involve 
the Federal Rules of Evidence. These opinions are binding only on the federal 
courts.
 
Each state has the right to enact its own laws as long as those laws do not violate 
the U.S. Constitution. State courts interpret state laws and the state constitutions. 
Each state court is bound by the decisions of higher courts within the organiza-
tion of its own state court system. Opinions of other states may be considered in 
order to decide if the appellate courts agree with their reasoning, but they do not 
have any direct effect on decisions in any state except the one where they were 
issued.
 
Evidentiary issues usually must be raised at the trial court in order to preserve 
them for appeal. When an appellate court decides that there was an error at trial, 
the case is normally reversed only if the error is believed to have had an impact 
on the verdict.
 
Resources for legal research are available in book form, on CDs, and on the 
Internet. Codes and case law are available as well as digests and other tools. 
Summary
S u m m a r y
make it possible to download relevant materials from the Internet to a disk 
or directly into a word processor file for use in briefs and other materials. 
This saves a great deal of time.

20 
Chapter 1
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Define the general term evidence.
2.  Explain the term burden of proof.
3. Define what is meant by beyond a reasonable doubt.
4. Who has the burden of proof on affirmative defenses?
5. In a criminal trial, who is the trier of the law, who is the trier of fact, and 
what are their respective roles?
6. List three sources of law that govern evidence.
7. What is the role of the U.S. Supreme Court in determining the rules of 
evidence for federal courts and for state courts?
8. Define stare decisis and explain how it applies.
9. Describe the role of state courts in interpreting the laws of evidence.
10. Explain how the courts determine if a decision should be reversed based on 
a question of admissibility of evidence.
11. Define the term judicial discretion.
12. Explain the Harmless Error Rule.
13. Explain the basis for a court’s interpretation of a new statute.
14. What effect does the law of State “A” have on a court’s decision of a case 
tried in State “B”?
15. Explain how to find the opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court in Terry v. Ohio,
392 U.S. 1, 20 L.Ed. 2d 889, 88 S.Ct. 1868 (1968).
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Log on to the Internet and go to www.findlaw.com. Click on “For the Legal 
Profession” at the top of the page. Scroll down and click on “Newsletter 
Signup.” In the first column, put a check mark beside U.S. Supreme Court. In 
the third column, put a check mark on Legal News Headlines, Writ, and other 
items of your choice. After you have done this, go to the next web page and 
sign up and give your e-mail address. This will result in e-mails being sent to 
you every time a new issue is released. As items arrive in your e-mail, keep track 
of all of them that might relate to this course. If you do not have e-mail, you 
should go to the www.findlaw.com website at least once a week and look under 
the items you checked.
Today’s assignments: On the “Newsletter Signup” page of www.findlaw.com 
(second page), click on Writ (bottom of third column). Find a headline that 
interests you and scroll down to the article. Read one of the commentaries on 
the current issues of Writ. Write a 250-word (one-page) summary about the 
article that you read.

21
The Court Process
CHAPTER 2
Feature Case: Phil Spector
Music producer for the Beatles, Sony and Cher, and Ike and Tina Turner. 
Elected to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Phil Spector was arrested and 
charged with first-degree murder in February 2003. After a night on the 
town, Spector took actress Lana Clarkson to his mansion. Two hours 
later, the Brazilian-born chauffeur who was waiting in a limousine in 
front of the house heard a shot. Seconds later, Spector emerged from the 
house holding a gun. According to the chauffeur, he said, “I think I killed 
somebody.” Clarkson was found in the foyer of the house with a gunshot 
through her mouth. She was in a seated position on the floor with her 
purse over her shoulder. The defense claimed that she shot herself. The 
chauffeur’s testimony was questioned by the defense based on the fact 
that he spoke English with a heavy accent. It was inferred that he did not 
understand what Spector said moments after the gunshot. The chauffeur 
was adamant that he heard Spector correctly.
The prosecution presented three witnesses who had dated Spector. 
Each woman said that Spector, after drinking, threatened her with a gun 
when she said she was leaving his house. 
Forensic testimony focused on blood spatters, fibers, gunshot residue, 
DNA, and the path the bullet took when it killed Clarkson. Even here, 
there was controversy. Renowned forensic expert Dr. Henry Lee, who was 
testifying for the defense in this case, withheld evidence from the prosecu-
tion. This enabled the prosecution to cast doubt on his credibility.
After twelve days of deliberation, the jury was unable to reach a ver-
dict. They hung 10 to 2 in favor of conviction. The prosecution announced 
plans to try the case again.

22 
Chapter 2
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• List what evidence is considered by the prosecutor when filing criminal charges.
• Identify what evidence is needed at the preliminary hearing. 
• Identify the types of evidence considered by grand juries. 
• Explain what information the prosecutor must give the defense during discovery. 
• Describe what evidence the defense can use at suppression hearings. 
• Explain how juries are selected. 
• List the order of events at a criminal trial. 
• Describe what law and evidence juries are allowed to consider when they decide 
a case. 
• Explain what evidence can be considered at a sentencing hearing. 
• Identify what evidence can be used for an appeal of a criminal conviction.
Key Terms
•  Affidavit
•  Arraignment
•  Challenge for cause
•  Charge bargaining
•  Clerk’s transcript
•   Contemporaneous 
Objection Rule
•  Direct appeal
•  Direct examination
•  Discovery
•  Double jeopardy
• Habeas corpus
•  Harmless Error Rule
•   Hold the defendant to 
answer
•  Impeachment
•  Indictment
•  Information
•  Laying the foundation
•  Leading question
•  Peremptory challenges
•  Plea bargaining
•  Polling the jury
•  Preliminary hearing
• Prima facie case
•  Probable cause
•  Rebuttal
•  Rejoinder
•  Reporter’s transcript
•  Sequestered
•  Suppression hearing
• Voir dire
Introduction
The evidence that is required at various stages of any court proceeding 
varies according to the type of proceeding and the crime charged. In 
order to adequately prepare for each court appearance, it is necessary to 
understand what evidence will be needed at each stage of the proceed-
ing. It must be remembered that preparation of the case begins with the 
officer’s initial observations in the case, not when the prosecutor is doing 
the final preparation to take the case to court. For example, if an officer 
stops a car based on reasonable suspicion, the officer should make notes 
on all of the facts that were used to establish reasonable suspicion. If an 
arrest is made, the officer needs to record all facts used to establish prob-
able cause for that arrest.

 
The Court Process 
23
This chapter briefly discusses the different court proceedings in a 
criminal case, along with what evidence will be used. Issues relating to ille-
gal search and seizure and obtaining confessions are covered in Chapters 
10 through 14.
The Criminal Complaint
Criminal cases come to court from three main sources: the police, private 
persons (“citizen’s arrests”), and grand jury indictments. Some states 
allow police officers to bring misdemeanor cases directly to court. Others 
have the prosecutor’s office handle the filing of the first court documents 
for police and private persons. If an arrest warrant has been issued, it may 
serve in lieu of filing additional documents to charge the suspect with a 
crime. The grand jury procedure is somewhat different and will be out-
lined in a later section of this chapter. 
There are several variations of the procedure for cases brought to the 
prosecutor by the police. If the police made the arrest based on an arrest 
warrant, the application for the warrant will be the first official document 
filed with the court. Some states require the officer to obtain an arrest war-
rant after the arrest if none was issued earlier. If there is no arrest warrant, 
the complaint will be the first document filed. 
The prosecutor decides which cases should be filed and what crimes 
will be charged. In order to do this, he or she will need a report that clearly 
states the facts of the case and what information is available to the police. 
Although the Fourth Amendment establishes probable cause as the stan-
dard for arrest, there is no precise standard for the prosecutor to use when 
filing the charges. 
The following are some of the things the prosecutor will consider: 
1. How strong is the case against the suspect? 
2. Did police conduct their investigation thoroughly? 
3. Based on the facts in the police report, what crime was committed? 
4. Were the suspect’s constitutional rights violated? 
5. Are the witnesses credible?
The prosecutor does not want to file criminal charges against an inno-
cent person. Since most prosecutor’s offices are overworked, cases that do 
not appear to be “winnable” frequently are not filed.
The way a prosecutor handles the case at this stage varies. In the most seri-
ous cases, the prosecutor may interview witnesses prior to filing the charges. 
On the other hand, for misdemeanors the prosecutor may proceed after only 

24 
Chapter 2
reading the police report. Many states allow the prosecutor to consider infor-
mation that is not given under oath or otherwise admissible in court. 
In some cities and counties, one officer takes all of the minor cases to 
the prosecutor at once, rather than having each arresting officer go to the 
prosecutor’s office. Other areas of the country require the arresting officer 
to personally swear out the complaint.
The complaint must state the facts for each charge. This includes at 
least a description of what crime was committed, where it occurred, and 
when. The description of the crime must cover every element in the defi-
nition of that crime; this is frequently done by using the wording from the 
penal code. At a minimum, the place where the crime occurred must show 
that the event occurred within the court’s jurisdiction. The date is needed 
to satisfy the statute of limitations. Figure 2-1 shows an example of how 
charges are listed in a complaint.
Some states have attempted to reduce paperwork by allowing specially 
formatted police reports to substitute for complaints. The traffic ticket is 
probably the most common example. Some states also use the citation in 
lieu of an arrest for misdemeanors and do not require the drafting of a 
formal complaint in these cases.
If the police seek an arrest warrant prior to taking the person into 
custody, the formal procedures for obtaining a warrant must be followed. 
These include making out an affidavit that includes all the facts of the 
case. The affidavit is made under oath. Normally, the prosecutor reviews 
the warrant application. The final decision on issuing the warrant must 
be made by a judge or magistrate. If the judge accepts the affidavit as suf-
ficient, the warrant will be issued. Arrest warrants frequently use the same 
Figure 2-1
Sample Complaint
Charges
COUNT I: John Smith is hereby charged with the violation of Section 459 of the Penal 
Code, burglary, in that on or about May 1, 2007, he entered a residence located at 123 
Main Street, Los Angeles, CA with the intent to steal.
COUNT II: John Smith is hereby charged with the violation of Section 242 of the Penal 
Code, battery, in that on or about May 1, 2007, he willfully, and without consent, hit Jane 
Jones. Said event occurred at 123 Main Street, Los Angeles, CA.
COUNT III: John Smith is hereby charged with the violation of Section 488 of the Penal 
Code, petty theft, in that on or about May 1, 2007, he took merchandise valued at 
$124.99 without consent and without paying for it from Lucky Market located at 125 
Main Street, Los Angeles, CA.

 
The Court Process 
25
type of wording as complaints. Many states allow the arrest warrant to take 
the place of the complaint after the arrest has been made.
When a private person wants to file charges, he or she is usually 
required to go to the prosecutor’s office and give all the information 
needed under oath. Some states require the prosecutor to file the charges 
requested by a private person; other jurisdictions give the prosecutor the 
right to decide if the cases should proceed. When the prosecutor files the 
case, the complaint is usually in the same format as the one used for cases 
handled by the police. The prosecutor handles the case from this point on 
in the same way as if the police had requested the complaint.
After the prosecutor decides what charges to file, the complaint will be 
typed and taken to the court clerk. The clerk’s office will handle the paper-
work, including scheduling the case for future court dates. Delivering the 
complaint to the clerk is called “filing the complaint.” Once the complaint 
has been filed, the suspect is legally known as the defendant.
Arraignment
The arraignment is the defendant’s first court appearance on the charge. 
Nationwide, a variety of names are used, such as the “first appearance” 
and “preliminary hearing.” To avoid confusion, it will be referred to as an 
arraignment in this text. It is a brief court proceeding with the following 
purposes: 
1. Inform the defendant what charges have been filed.
2. Make sure the defendant has an attorney.
3. Set bail.
4. Enter a plea.
5. Set the next court appearance. 
If the defendant does not have an attorney, the judge will try to deter-
mine if the defendant qualifies for a free, court-appointed lawyer or if 
the defendant wishes to represent him- or herself. This is a high priority 
because in many states the defendant cannot enter a plea without counsel 
or a formal waiver of the right to counsel.
At the arraignment, the defense may seek to dismiss the case because 
the complaint does not contain all the required information. This is a chal-
lenge to the wording of the complaint. Witnesses are usually not called; 
neither is the evidence in the case evaluated at the arraignment.
The defendant will be asked to enter a plea. Guilty and Not Guilty are 
the most common. If a defendant pleads Nolo Contendere (no contest), the 
criminal courts will treat the case the same as if a guilty plea was entered, 

26 
Chapter 2
but civil courts may treat it differently. Other pleas, such as Not Guilty by 
Reason of Insanity, are frequently entered at a later time because the attor-
ney needs more time to determine if they are appropriate.
The arraignment can also serve as a probable cause hearing. To qualify 
as a probable cause hearing, the arraignment must be held within 48 hours 
of arrest, and the judge must review sworn statements to determine if 
there is probable cause. A probable cause hearing is not required if a judge 
previously issued an arrest warrant for the defendant or if the defendant 
will not be held in custody pending trial. 
Preliminary Hearing
In most states, felony cases that have not been heard by a grand jury must 
have a preliminary hearing (also called a preliminary examination), unless 
the defense waives it. Statutes rarely require preliminary hearings in cases 
involving only misdemeanors. As with arraignments, names of the hearing 
may vary from state to state.
The preliminary hearing is a “mini-trial” without a jury. The defen-
dant is present with his or her attorney; the prosecutor represents the 
State. In many states, the preliminary hearing is held in a lower court than 
the one in which felony trials are conducted.
The primary purpose of the preliminary hearing is to have a judge 
hear the case and decide if there is enough evidence to
1. Prove that a crime was committed by the defendant, and 
2. Require the defendant to face trial on the charge.
In some states, this is done at the arraignment instead of holding a 
separate hearing at a later time. In cases in which an arrest warrant was not 
obtained, this is the first time a judge reviews the facts of the case.
Some states permit hearsay that would not otherwise be admissible at 
trial to be used at the preliminary hearing. For example, California allows 
police officers to testify to hearsay at the preliminary hearing even though 
the statement is not covered by an exception to the Hearsay Rule. This 
makes it possible to reduce the number of times the victim must appear 
in court.
In many cases, the preliminary hearing will also be the first time the 
witnesses are required to take an oath that what they are saying is true. The 
defense has the right to ask these witnesses questions for the purpose of 
showing that they have not been truthful or they are mistaken. By listening to 
all of the witnesses, the defense can also decide how strong a case the prosecu-
tor has. This information may become very helpful during plea bargaining.

 
The Court Process 
27
The defense also has the right to call witnesses. The defendant may testify 
in his or her own defense. It is very common for the defense to decide that it 
is not to its advantage to call any witnesses at this stage of the proceedings.
At the end of the preliminary hearing the judge decides if there 
is enough evidence to “hold the defendant to answer,” which means 
allowing the prosecution to go to trial on the charges. The prosecution’s 
evidence must establish that it is more likely than not that the defendant 
committed the crime charged. This is called a prima facie (on its face) 
case. The judge relies on what each witness said and whether or not he 
or she believes the witness was telling the truth. If there was more than 
one charge filed, the judge must make a decision on each felony charge. 
Assuming sufficient evidence was presented, at the end of the hearing the 
judge announces that the defendant is bound over for trial.
If the judge holds the defendant to answer, the prosecutor will prepare 
the appropriate form, usually called an “information.” The information is 
similar in form and wording to the complaint. If the judge does not hold 
the defendant to answer on all of the original felonies, the information will 
only contain the felonies authorized by the judge. The prosecutor may also 
drop charges from the case at this time. The information will be filed in the 
clerk’s office of the court where the trial will take place. A second arraign-
ment (at a higher court in some states) will be held on the information.
Grand Jury
The purpose of the grand jury in criminal cases is to take testimony, 
review evidence, and decide if the suspect should be charged with a crime. 
Grand juries have other duties as well, primarily verifying efficient and 
honest county government. The grand jury is composed of citizens, not 
prosecutors. 
Grand jurors are typically chosen by lot at a drawing held once each 
year. They come from lists of names submitted by judges, people who have 
volunteered for grand jury service, or the list from which trial jurors are 
selected. Each state is free to establish its own rules on how grand jurors 
are selected, provided there is no racial or gender discrimination involved. 
States also set the size of the grand jury and decide how many grand juries 
can be empanelled at the same time. 
For historical reasons, the grand jury operates separately from either 
the police or the prosecutor. The grand jury has the right to investigate 
criminal activity on its own, but in many states it rarely does this. The 
prosecutor can also present cases to a grand jury. This can be done either 
before or after the suspect is arrested.

28 
Chapter 2
No matter which route the case takes, the grand jury can call wit-
nesses and ask questions regarding the crime. The proceedings are held 
in secret; the suspect does not have to be informed that he or she is being 
investigated. The suspect does not have the right to be at the grand jury 
proceedings unless called to testify, and while testifying he or she does not 
have the right to have an attorney present in the grand jury room. He or 
she does not have the right to call witnesses, be present when others tes-
tify, or have an attorney cross-examine witnesses called by the prosecutor. 
Some states even refuse to give defendants a copy of the transcript of the 
grand jury proceedings after they have been indicted. State laws prohibit-
ing witnesses from discussing their testimony after they appear before the 
grand jury violate the First Amendment. The U.S. Supreme Court held 
that prosecutors are not required to present evidence to the grand jury 
that tends to show that the suspect is not guilty of the crime; some states 
have either statutes or case law that mandates that grand jurors receive this 
information. 
The minimum number of grand jurors who must vote for prosecution 
in a case is set by state law; unanimity is not required. Some states allow 
all charges to go to trial if the grand jury is convinced that any one of the 
alleged felonies was committed by the suspect. If the grand jury decides 
the suspect should be brought to trial, a document usually called a “True 
Bill of Indictment” will be filed with the court clerk. At this point, the 
defendant will be considered indicted. If the suspect is not in custody, a 
warrant will be issued and bail will be set (if the offense is bailable) by the 
court. An arraignment will be held on the indictment, usually in the court 
where the trial will be held.
Suppression Hearing
The purpose of a suppression hearing is to allow a judge to decide if 
evidence can be used at trial. Most states require the defense to make 
suppression motions prior to trial if they know of any legal grounds to 
object to evidence due to illegal search and seizure or an illegally obtained 
confession. Some states also allow other evidentiary issues to be decided 
at the suppression hearing. By knowing what evidence can be used before 
the trial starts, both sides can more efficiently plan their trial strategy. If 
enough of the evidence in the case is suppressed, the defense can success-
fully ask for the case to be dismissed. 
Unless local court rules state a time for the suppression hearing, the 
defense may schedule it anytime before trial. In practice, suppression hear-
ings are normally held after the preliminary hearing in felony cases. There are 

 
The Court Process 
29
two main reasons for this: If the case is dismissed at the preliminary hearing 
no suppression hearing will be necessary, and testimony given at the prelimi-
nary hearing may alert the defense to the need for a suppression hearing. 
The normal rules of evidence apply at suppression hearings. This gives 
both sides the right to call witnesses and cross-examine. If the issue is the 
admissibility of the defendant’s confession or the defendant is charged with 
possession of the item in question (for example, possession of marijuana), 
the defendant’s testimony at the suppression hearing cannot be introduced 
at trial. If this rule was not used, a person could not claim the Fourth or 
Fifth Amendment without admitting guilt. Many states allow the defense to 
submit the suppression motion solely on the transcript of the preliminary 
hearing if the defense believes the sworn testimony at that proceeding estab-
lished that the evidence was obtained illegally. The prosecution, of course, 
would have the right to call witnesses to refute the defense’s claim.
The judge will either make a decision on the motion at the time of the 
hearing or take the matter “under submission” and issue a ruling at a later 
date. Some states permit either party to appeal the ruling before trial. Due 
to the fact that this is done before the trial begins, the defense cannot claim 
double jeopardy if the decision is reversed on appeal.
Examples of Issues Heard at Suppression Hearings
•  Motion to suppress drugs found in the defendant’s pocket. Defense alleges that 
the police did not have probable cause to stop the defendant; therefore, the 
drugs were found during an illegal search.
•  Motion to suppress drugs found during search incident to an arrest. Defense 
alleges that there was no probable cause to arrest; therefore, the search was illegal.
•  Motion to suppress guns found during the execution of a search warrant. 
Defense alleges that the warrant should not have been issued because the facts 
in the affidavits do not state probable cause for the search.
•  Motion to suppress stolen jewelry found during the execution of a search 
warrant. Defense alleges that the officers improperly executed a warrant 
authorizing them to look for assault rifles; therefore, the jewelry found in a 
drawer was not legally seized.
•  Motion to suppress two kilograms of marijuana found during the execution 
of a warrant that authorized the search of the house. Defense claims that the 
police failed to comply with “knock-and-announce” before entering the house; 
therefore, the search that produced the marijuana was illegal.
•  Motion to suppress the defendant’s confession. Defense alleges that officers 
questioned the suspect after the arrest and Miranda warnings were not given 
until after the first incriminating statement was made.
•  Motion to suppress the defendant’s confession. Defense alleges that the officers 
continued to interrogate the defendant after she requested an attorney; 
therefore, the statements she made are inadmissible.

30 
Chapter 2
Discovery
The idea behind discovery is that each side should have ample warning of 
what the other side will present at trial. This should make the trial more 
efficient and promote the process of truth finding. It also reduces the 
number of times it is necessary to stop the trial so that either side can try 
to challenge surprise witnesses. The growing practice of pretrial discovery 
has eliminated most of the dramatic surprises at trial. 
Discovery (the right to know what evidence the other side has) varies 
greatly from state to state. There are two areas where the U.S. Supreme 
Court has required discovery: 
1. The name of an informant must be disclosed when the true identity 
of this person is necessary for the defendant’s case.
2.  The prosecution must disclose any evidence it has that tends to indi-
cate the defendant is not guilty. This material is often referred to as 
“Brady material” because the case of Brady v. Maryland established 
the rule.1
Until recently, discovery in criminal cases was largely one-sided. The 
prosecution had to disclose information to the defense, but the defense 
was allowed to withhold information from the prosecution. The reason for 
this was the interpretation of the Fifth Amendment protection against self-
incrimination. Neither side is required to disclose privileged information, 
such as legal opinions on what strategies it plans to use at trial. Reciprocal 
discovery is a growing trend. Both sides must disclose names of witnesses, 
physical evidence, copies of laboratory tests performed on evidence, and 
statements potential witnesses made to investigators. Statements by the 
defendant to his or her attorney are still considered exempt from discovery.
Examples of Items Covered by Discovery Rules in Many States
•  List of all witnesses (except the defendant) that each side intends to call.
•  Recorded statements made by people on the witness list except statements the 
defendant made to the defense attorney.
•  Itemized list of the physical evidence either side has in the case.
•  Results of lab tests performed on the evidence by either side that will be 
introduced in court.
•  Reports made by expert witnesses that are scheduled to testify in the case for 
either side.
•  Statements made by all co-defendants.
Requiring a defendant to notify the prosecution that an alibi defense is 
planned does not violate the privilege against self-incrimination. Disclosure 

 
The Court Process 
31
of where the defendant claims to have been at the time the crime was com-
mitted and the names of alibi witnesses has been upheld. Statutes that 
require both sides to make pretrial disclosure of intended witnesses have 
also been upheld.
Discovery can be conducted at either a formal or an informal level. 
Informal discovery is conducted by the attorneys without making requests 
in court. Where the courts or the legislature have established clear-cut 
rules on what must be given to the other side, it is common for the attor-
neys to exchange information that they know the court would order them 
to provide to the other side. 
Formal discovery motions are made in court for a variety of reasons, 
such as the following:
1. There is no established rule on releasing the information requested.
2. One side is claiming that the information should not be released.
3.
The attorneys do not have a good working relationship.
4.
A discovery issues needs to be preserved.
A formal discovery motion must state exactly what is wanted (for 
example, “all statements made by Mrs. Jones to the police”).
When the defense requests information from the prosecutor, the pros-
ecutor is responsible for disclosing what is in his or her file and what the 
police have in their files. Because it is the prosecutor’s duty to know what 
is in the police files, it is important that the police keep the prosecutor fully 
informed about the case. 
Failure to comply with discovery rules can result in the items being 
declared inadmissible in court or the judge not allowing a witness to take 
the stand. The prosecutor’s refusal to give information that the court 
ordered released can be grounds for dismissing the case. This applies even 
to cases in which the prosecutor intentionally refuses to name an informant 
for fear the informant will be killed. A case can also be dismissed because 
the prosecutor erroneously said information did not exist when, in fact, the 
police had it in their files but did not tell the prosecutor about it.
Plea Bargaining
Plea bargaining is the process whereby the prosecution and defense work 
out an agreement for the defendant to plead guilty to one or more charges 
without a trial. In return, the prosecutor usually agrees to drop some of the 
original charges or sentencing demands. When the agreement is reached 
before the charges are filed, the process is called “charge bargaining”;
after the charges are filed, the process is called “plea bargaining.” It is now 

32 
Chapter 2
recognized as a legitimate part of the legal system in many jurisdictions. 
In some states, as many as 97 percent of defendants use plea bargaining to 
avoid trials.
Either the prosecutor or the defense attorney may initiate the plea 
bargaining process. Many factors will be considered. One that is very 
important is the strength or weakness of the evidence in the case. Both 
sides will consider the police reports and testimony given at the prelimi-
nary hearing. Information from further investigations may be reviewed. 
The results of any laboratory tests will be scrutinized. Both sides will try 
to guess which witnesses the jury will believe. Nonevidentiary issues will 
also be considered; for example, what is the difference in the sentence if the 
defendant is convicted compared to if he or she agrees to the plea bargain? 
Are there mitigating circumstances that justify giving the defendant a less 
severe sentence? Is the court calendar so full that the case will be dismissed 
for lack of a speedy trial? Has the defendant worked as an informant or in 
some way helped the police and thereby “earned” special treatment?
The final result is an agreement that the defendant plead guilty to one 
or more crimes and the prosecutor dismiss the rest of the original charges. 
For example, if there were five counts of burglary, the defendant may plead 
guilty to two counts of burglary and the remaining three will be dismissed. 
If the original charge was for driving under the influence, the defendant 
may plead guilty to a lesser charge of reckless driving. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has set the following requirements for plea 
bargaining:
1.
The defendant must have an attorney during plea bargaining if he or 
she would have the right to one at trial on the same charges.
2.
There must be no threats or promises in the plea bargaining process.
Prior to accepting a plea bargain, the judge will ask questions to show 
that the defendant’s rights have been protected. It is also generally recog-
nized that the defendant has the right to withdraw a plea if the judge does 
not honor the agreement made by the prosecutor. Many states restrict plea 
bargaining, whereas others allow the prosecutor to enter into plea bargains 
on the charges but not on the sentence the defendant will receive.
The Trial
The trial is the highest-profile action in the criminal case. In reality, trials 
are relatively rare because of plea bargaining and pretrial dismissals. Trials 
in most states follow the same format: selection of the jury, opening state-
ments, prosecution witnesses, defense witnesses, rebuttal witnesses “called

 
The Court Process 
33
by either side,” closing statements, instructions on the law from the judge 
to the jury, jury deliberation, and verdict. Unique situations may arise that 
require departures from this format.
Jury Selection 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to a speedy trial by a jury of 
one’s peers in criminal cases. Although the U.S. Supreme Court has said 
this only applies to defendants facing more than 6 months in jail, many 
states provide jury trials in all criminal cases. Some states even allow 
jury trials for infractions. The defendant has the right to demand a jury. 
Although less commonly used, the prosecution also has this right. The case 
may be heard by a judge only if both the prosecution and the defense agree 
to waive the right to a jury. 
Historically, the criminal jury was composed of 12 people. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has ruled that the Sixth Amendment sets a minimum size of 
6 for juries in criminal cases. Each state legislature has the right to set the jury 
size as long as there are at least 6 jurors. Many states still require 12 jurors. 
The idea of a jury of our “peers” has been interpreted to mean that the 
jury must be from a cross section of the adult population. Discrimination 
on the basis of race or gender is not allowed in the jury selection process. 
The initial phase of jury selection is conducted by the jury commis-
sioner or someone at the courthouse who handles assembling jurors. A 
master list of everyone eligible for jury duty must be compiled. Traditionally, 
voter registration records were used for this purpose. More recently, the 
master jury lists have been enlarged in order to cover a greater portion of the 
population. Some states now combine voter registration and driver’s license 
information. 
Names of people to be called for jury duty are randomly selected from 
the master list. Each state has its own list of reasons a person may use to be 
legally excused from jury duty. Financial hardship, caused by loss of wages 
during jury duty, is commonly accepted in many jurisdictions. Those not 
exempt from jury duty will be told to report to the courthouse on a given 
date. The length of jury service varies. Some courts require jurors to attend 
daily for 1 or more months. Others require jurors to come in 1 day a week 
for 1 month, whereas some only ask for 1 day. Once selected to sit on a 
jury, they must serve until the trial is over, except when excused for cause 
by the judge. 
Prospective jurors spend a great deal of time waiting to be called to 
a courtroom. There is usually a jury assembly room where they can read, 
watch television, etc. When a judge is ready to start jury selection, the Jury 
Commissioner’s office is asked for a group of prospective jurors. Thirty 

34 
Chapter 2
people are frequently sent to the courtroom; the judge may ask for more if 
this does not turn out to be enough. Names may be drawn randomly each 
time a jury panel is requested or some other method, such as assigning 
jurors to groups before they arrive at the courthouse, may be used. 
Once in the courtroom, names are randomly drawn to fill the jury 
box. Prospective jurors take an oath to answer questions truthfully. Voir 
dire (the process of questioning to determine if a person is qualified) is 
conducted to determine if these people can consider the evidence in the 
case with open minds. Although voir dire was traditionally done by the 
attorneys, many states now allow the judge to ask the questions in order to 
save time. When jury questionnaires are used, a set of written questions is 
completed by each prospective juror and the answers are reviewed by the 
attorneys before voir dire begins.
Examples of Questions Jurors Are Asked during Voir Dire
1. Do you know the defendant in the case?
2. Do you know the victim in the case?
3. Do you know any of the people who will be called to testify?
4. Have you heard anything in the news about this case?
5. Do you believe that the police always arrest the right person?
6.  Do you understand that the defense does not have to prove that the defendant is 
innocent?
7.  Do you understand that the defendant does not have to testify? And that if he 
does not testify, you cannot hold it against him?
8. Have you been on a jury before today? If so, which side did you vote for?
The attorneys will ask the judge to dismiss anyone whose answers 
during voir dire indicate that he or she will not decide the case solely on 
the facts introduced at trial and the law as stated in the jury instructions. 
This request is called a “challenge for cause” and may be used as often as 
believed necessary. Reasons for being excused at this stage include racial 
bias against the defendant, belief that police only arrest the guilty, and 
exposure to pretrial publicity to the extent that the prospective juror has 
already formed a conclusion regarding the defendant’s guilt or innocence. 
In order to successfully challenge for cause, the attorney must convince the 
judge that the prospective juror will not base his or her decision on what 
occurs inside the courtroom. Generalities, such as friendship with a police 
officer or even being a police officer, are not enough.
If a juror is excused, a new name will be drawn. The new juror will be 
asked similar questions, and the attorneys will have a chance to challenge 
him or her. This process is repeated until there are enough people in the 
jury box to form a jury. 

 
The Court Process 
35
Next come the “peremptory challenges.” These are used to allow each 
side to replace jurors whom they subjectively feel cannot be fair. No reason 
need be stated for using a peremptory challenge, but a juror may not be 
excluded solely on the basis of race or gender. The prosecution and defense 
alternate in using their peremptory challenges. If a juror is excused, a new 
juror will be called, questioned, and possibly challenged. The jury selection 
is completed when either the maximum allowed peremptory challenges 
have been used or both sides agree to accept the people then seated in the 
jury box. 
State law establishes how many peremptory challenges there are in any 
given case. A typical state might allow each side 6 for misdemeanors, 12 for 
felonies, and 20 in death penalty cases. When there is more than one defendant, 
the procedure becomes more complicated. Generally, however, the number of 
challenges is increased in proportion to the number of defendants. 
Alternate jurors are normally selected last. They become members of 
the jury only if one or more jurors become unable to complete the trial 
due to illness or other reasons. Alternates also may be challenged for cause. 
A separate number of peremptory challenges to be used on alternates may 
be set by state law. 
Once the jury and alternates are selected, they take an oath to decide 
the case on the evidence admitted at trial and under the rules of law given 
them by the judge. “Jeopardy” attaches to the defendant(s) at this point. 
The trial officially starts when the jury is given the oath.
In most states, jurors are given paper and urged to take notes as the 
case is presented. They will be told that they are not to discuss the case 
with people who are not on the jury; discussions of the case among jurors 
should not start until deliberations at the end of the trial. Recent excesses 
by tabloid journalists in high-publicity cases have led some states to enact 
laws prohibiting jurors from accepting money for telling about the case 
even after the verdict is returned. The judge may order the jury “seques-
tered” if it is believed this is the best way to protect jurors from outside 
influences that might affect their vote. 
When a jury is sequestered, the bailiff keeps the jury together and pre-
vents all contact with nonjurors. In high-publicity cases, in which jurors 
may be prejudiced by media coverage, sequestering the jury may include 
housing them in a local hotel at night and requiring them to eat all of their 
meals together under the watchful eye of the bailiff. Due to the expense to 
the government and inconvenience to the jurors, sequestering of the jury is 
rarely done while testimony is being taken. It is common during delibera-
tions, however, to require the jury and bailiff to eat meals together without 
outsiders present, but jurors are allowed to go home each night.

36 
Chapter 2
The Courtroom Setting
The center of attention in the courtroom is a dais on which the judge’s 
desk and witness chair are located, usually enclosed by wood paneling. 
Facing the judge in the middle of the courtroom are two tables, one for 
the prosecution and the other for the defense. The prosecutor usually sits 
on the side of the room closest to the jury. There is usually a lectern for the 
attorneys to use when addressing the judge or questioning witnesses. The 
court clerk’s desk is usually at the side of the judge’s platform. If there is a 
court reporter, a small desk is usually located between the judge’s platform 
and the tables for the attorneys. The bailiff’s desk is frequently to one side 
of the room. The jury box is along one side of the room, perpendicular 
to the judge and attorneys. Facing the judge in the back of the room are 
seats for spectators and the press. Figure 2-2 illustrates the layout of a 
courtroom.
Technology is gradually coming to courtrooms, although the expense 
is still prohibitive for many jurisdictions. Where the only visual aids avail-
able in the past were chalkboards and easels with pads of newsprint, some 
courtrooms are now equipped with computer systems and large projec-
tion screens that make it possible for the jury to instantly see each item 
Figure 2-2
The Courtroom Setting
Witness
Jury
Box
Spectators and Press
Defense
Table
Judge
Clerk
Bailiff
Lectern
Prosecution
Table
Court
Reporter

 
The Court Process 
37
the attorneys and witnesses are discussing. The attorneys may be required 
to have all photographs and diagrams transferred to laser disk so that they 
can be shown in this manner. Videotapes may also be shown.
Another useful innovation is real-time stenographic reporting. In the 
past, the court reporter used the stenotype machine to keep a verbatim 
record of the proceedings, but only a person with special training could read 
the tape produced by the machine. Eventually, the notes were transcribed 
and included in the court record. Computerized stenotype machines use 
software that automatically generates a transcript. Some courtrooms are 
equipped with monitors so the judge and attorneys can review the exact 
wording of questions if an objection is made or the witness asks to have the 
question repeated. The monitor can replace a sign language interpreter if a 
witness who has a hearing impairment is testifying. Some systems also allow 
the attorneys to mark the transcript with reference notes; such markings 
are confidential and not visible to other parties viewing the transcript on 
other monitors. Printouts of the transcripts are available at the end of the 
court session so the attorneys can prepare for the next day. This system also 
facilitates the process if the jury makes a request to have the testimony of a 
witness read to them during deliberations.
Opening Statements
An opening statement is a speech an attorney makes to the jury. It is not
evidence in the case. Only evidence given at trial by witnesses under oath 
may be considered by the jury when they decide the case. 
The purpose of the opening statement is to introduce the jury to the 
case. Two things are usually discussed in the opening statement—the facts 
of the case and the role of the jury in deciding guilt or innocence. Opening 
statements are particularly important in long cases because the jurors need 
help fitting the pieces of the puzzle together, especially if the facts will not 
be presented in chronological order.
Opening statements are optional. If the case is tried without a jury, 
it is common for both sides to skip the opening statement. When there is 
a jury, the prosecutor will normally give an opening statement. This will 
usually be the first thing that happens after the jury is sworn in and the 
charges are read. 
Meanwhile, the defense has three options: (1) give an opening state-
ment immediately after the prosecutor, (2) give an opening statement after 
the prosecution has called all of its witnesses, or (3) not give an opening 
statement at all. The defense attorney will make a tactical decision on the 
best way to proceed in each case. 

38 
Chapter 2
The advantage of waiting to give an opening statement until after 
the prosecution has called its witnesses is that the presentation can be 
tailor-made for the evidence that has already been introduced against the 
defendant. It also allows the defendant to avoid revealing what the main 
defenses will be until after the prosecution has called all of its witnesses. 
The disadvantage of waiting is that the jurors will only hear the prosecu-
tion’s side of the case prior to listening to the witnesses. This may result in 
the jurors placing too much weight on their testimony.
Prosecution’s Case in Chief 
The prosecution presents its case first. During the prosecution’s case in 
chief, the prosecutor must establish every element of each crime charged 
beyond a reasonable doubt. Each witness will be called to the witness 
stand, given the oath, and asked questions. Questioning by the attorney 
who called the witness is called direct examination. During direct exami-
nation the attorney asks questions and the witness answers them. Questions 
are limited to things that are relevant to the case. A question that suggests 
the desired answer is called a leading question and is not usually allowed 
during direct examination; if such a question is asked, the opposing side 
may object. For example, on direct examination the prosecutor could ask, 
“What color shirt was he wearing?” It would be considered a leading ques-
tion to ask, “Was he wearing a blue shirt?” 
Questions are usually short and to the point so the witness can easily 
understand them. Argumentative questions, such as “Isn’t it true that you 
drove the getaway car while he went inside the liquor store to commit the 
robbery?” are not allowed. Normally, the witness will be asked specific 
questions and will not be allowed to tell what happened in story form. A 
question that asks the witness “Tell me what happened” is called a narra-
tive question and is rarely permitted.
Example of Direct Examination 
Prosecutor:   Where were you at 7:00 p.m. on August 27, 2007?
Witness: 
I was at John’s house watching the Angels game.
Prosecutor: 
Who was there with you? 
Witness: 
 John, my brother Bill, and some guy who is a friend of John but I 
don’t know his name.
Prosecutor: 
Was there an argument?
Witness: 
 Yes. John and Bill were yelling at each other about whether the 
umpire should have called a pitch a strike.
Prosecutor: 
Did you observe anything other than their shouting at each other?
Witness: 
Yes. John hit Bill.

 
The Court Process 
39
While the prosecutor is conducting direct examination of a witness, 
the defense may make objections to the questions asked. The proper 
time to object is immediately after the question is asked and before the 
witness has a chance to answer. This is called the Contemporaneous 
Objection Rule.
The purpose of the rule is to allow the judge to decide if the question is 
proper before the jury hears the witness’s answer. The attorney who made 
the objection will be required to state the legal rule that makes the ques-
tion improper (for example, hearsay or a leading question). The attorney 
who asked the question will have a chance to explain why the question 
should be permitted before the judge makes a final decision. If the judge 
agrees that the objection is valid, the ruling will be “objection sustained” 
and the witness will be instructed not to answer the question. If the objec-
tion is considered improper, the ruling will be “objection overruled” and 
the witness will be told to answer the question.
Example of Contemporaneous Objection Rule
Prosecutor:   Tell us what John said.
Defense: 
Objection, your Honor. Hearsay.
Prosecutor: 
 Your Honor, John is the defendant in this case. His statements are 
admissible under the admissions exception to the Hearsay Rule.
Judge: 
Objection overruled.
All evidence is introduced by calling witnesses to the stand. If any 
physical evidence, such as the murder weapon, is to be introduced into 
evidence, a witness must be called who can tell where the object was 
found and what happened to it since it was found. This is called laying 
the foundation. Once it has been shown that the object is relevant and it 
has been authenticated (shown that it has not been altered or tampered 
with), it will be given an identification number or letter. Frequently, 
objects introduced by one side are given numbers and the other side’s 
evidence is given letters. For example, the prosecution may introduce the 
murder weapon and it will be marked “People’s Exhibit 1,” whereas the 
defense introduces fingerprints found at the scene and they are marked 
“Defense’s Exhibit A.”
Example of Laying the Foundation to Admit Physical Evidence
Prosecutor:  Did John hit Bill with his bare hand?
Witness: 
No, he picked up a heavy ashtray and hit him with it.
Prosecutor: 
Can you describe the ashtray?
Witness: 
 Yes, it was about four inches square and maybe two inches deep. I 
think it was made of glass. It had an Angels logo on it.

40 
Chapter 2
Prosecutor: 
Is this the ashtray?
Witness: 
Yes.
Prosecutor: 
How can you tell?
Witness: 
 I gave it to John for his birthday because he was an Angels fan. I 
had it engraved “John, I hope your Angels win the series.” If you 
look on the back of the ashtray, that is what it says.
The Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses has been inter-
preted to mean that the defendant has the right to be present when 
prosecution witnesses testify. Reforms intended to ease the trauma child 
abuse victims suffer while testifying have had to comply with the Sixth 
Amendment. Screens or other physical barriers and closed circuit televi-
sion can be used so that witnesses do not have to look at the defendant 
only if there is a clear showing that the physical confrontation would cause 
severe emotional trauma. The need for these protective measures must be 
determined on a case-by-case basis. The defendant and jurors watch the 
victim testify via television monitors. Although closed circuit television 
can be used when necessary to protect the abuse victim, the child who is 
testifying must be available for normal cross-examination. 
After the prosecutor finishes questioning a witness, the defense attor-
ney will have the opportunity to do so. This is called cross-examination. 
The purposes of cross-examination are to
1.
Follow up on statements made during direct examination.
2.
Ask relevant questions that were not asked during direct 
examination.
3.
Show that the witness should not be believed.
The Sixth Amendment confrontation clause gives the defendant the 
constitutional right to cross-examine all prosecution witnesses. Figure 2-3 
shows how attorneys narrow the focus of a witness’s testimony during ques-
tioning. Cross-examination is considered essential in the search for the truth. 
Most states follow the rule that cross-examination is limited to the scope of 
the direct examination (plus impeachment; see Figure 2-3 and Chapter 5). 
This means that the cross-examination may only cover topics asked during 
direct examination. For example, if a prosecution witness testified about 
what happened during a robbery, the defense attorney could ask questions 
about details of the robbery that the prosecutor did not cover. However, the 
defense could not ask about some other crime, such as a burglary commit-
ted by the defendant on a different day. The jury has the job of deciding who 
is telling the truth. Therefore, a witness may be cross-examined to show why 

 
The Court Process 
41
he or she should not be believed. This is called impeachment. Any witness 
who takes the stand can be impeached. The following are some of the ways 
to impeach:
1. Showing that the witness is lying by submitting prior statements 
the witness made that are inconsistent with what he or she just 
said. 
2.
Calling witnesses to show that the person testifying has a reputation 
for dishonesty.
3.
Proving that the witness is biased and might be distorting the facts.
4.
Proving that the witness has a prior felony conviction.
If a witness is impeached, the attorney who called him or her may in 
turn attempt to show why the jury should believe the witness. This is called 
“rehabilitation.” Impeachment and rehabilitation are covered in more 
detail in Chapter 5. 
Figure 2-3
Narrowing Focus of Testimony
	
			
	
		
	

	
	
	


	

42 
Chapter 2
Example of Impeachment and Rehabilitation
Defense:   You testified that you heard John say, “If the Giants win I will kill you.” 
Where were you when this statement was made?
Witness: On the other side of the room, maybe 10 feet away.
Defense: Do you have a hearing impairment?
Witness: Yes, I have a moderate loss in my left ear.
Prosecutor  (after cross-examination is finished): Are you sure you heard what 
John said correctly?
Witness: Oh, yeah, he was shouting. You would have to be deaf not to hear him.
After cross-examination the attorney who called the witness will have 
the opportunity to ask the witness more questions. This is referred to as 
re-direct examination. There are strict limits on what can be done during 
re-direct. It can be used to rehabilitate a witness who has been impeached 
or to ask questions aimed at clarifying what the witness said during cross-
examination. Attorneys are not allowed to treat this as an opportunity 
to ask questions they forgot to ask earlier. After re-direct, the opposing 
attorney has a similar right to question the witness. This is referred to as 
re-cross-examination. The attorney conducting re-cross is allowed to ask 
questions to clarify information obtained during re-direct. Both re-direct 
and re-cross are optional and may be skipped if the attorney deems that 
further questioning is not necessary. 
The trial will proceed with the prosecutor calling witnesses and con-
ducting direct examination and the defense cross-examining them until 
the prosecutor is satisfied that each element (corpus delicti) of the crime(s) 
charged has been established beyond a reasonable doubt. The prosecutor 
is not required to call all possible witnesses, but the jury may decide that 
the case has not been proven if a person who apparently has important 
information is not called. When the prosecutor decides that no more wit-
nesses will be called, he or she will inform the judge that the prosecution 
“rests its case.”
Example of Prosecution Resting Its Case
Prosecutor:   No more questions for this witness. 
Judge: 
The witness may step down. Prosecutor, call your next witness.
Prosecutor: 
The prosecution rests.
Defense’s Case in Chief
Since the burden of proof in a criminal case rests with the prosecution, the 
defense is not required to prove anything. At the end of the prosecution’s 
case in chief, the defense may immediately make a motion to acquit the 

 
The Court Process 
43
defendant. This motion would be based on the prosecution’s failure to 
establish every element of the crime. The judge will normally grant such a 
request only if the prosecution has failed to introduce testimony regarding 
one or more elements of the crime.
The defense does not have to call any witnesses. The defense may use 
cross-examination of prosecution witnesses to show that the defendant 
should not be convicted. The defendant and his or her attorney will decide 
whether it is necessary to call defense witnesses. It must be kept in mind 
that any witnesses the defense calls can be cross-examined and possibly 
impeached by the prosecution. This includes the defendant if he or she 
decides to testify. The defense may rely on the fact that the prosecution did 
not prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
If the defense does call witnesses (which is usually the case), the defense 
attorney will conduct the direct examination of each witness followed by 
cross-examination by the prosecutor. One unique choice for the defense 
is calling character witnesses. The defense has the right to introduce evi-
dence that the defendant has a good reputation for honesty, integrity, and 
other relevant traits. The defense hopes the jury will conclude that since 
the defendant is a “good person,” he or she could not have committed the 
crime. If the defense does call character witnesses, the prosecution will be 
allowed to cross-examine them regarding both the defendant’s character 
and the credibility of the character witness. The prosecution will also be 
allowed to call its own character witnesses during rebuttal to show that the 
defendant, in fact, has a poor reputation.
Example of Use of Character Witness
Defense Attorney:   Mr. Jones, are you familiar with the reputation of John, the 
defendant in this case?
Witness: 
Yes.
Defense Attorney: 
 On what do you base your conclusions about his 
reputation?
Witness: 
 I have lived next door to him for the last 5 years. Most of the 
neighbors are friendly and I have talked to them about John.
Defense Attorney: 
 Based on these contacts with the neighbors, what is John’s 
reputation?
Witness: 
 Everyone thinks he is a good guy. He is very involved with 
his children. He is very gentle with them. He never gets 
angry. He is very helpful when someone is having trouble 
fixing something. If he gives you his word, he keeps it.
Once the defense has called all of its witnesses and they have been 
cross-examined, the defense rests.

44 
Chapter 2
Rebuttal and Rejoinder
Sometimes defense witnesses raise new issues, such as alibi or character. 
Rebuttal gives the prosecution a chance to call witnesses on these new 
issues. It is not used to fill gaps in the case accidentally left by the pros-
ecution during the case in chief. The judge has the power to decide if the 
prosecution may call rebuttal witnesses. If rebuttal witnesses are called, the 
defense may cross-examine them.
Rejoinder is the calling of witnesses by the defense to attack the evi-
dence introduced by the prosecution during rebuttal. If the judge allows 
rejoinder, the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine.
Closing Arguments and Summation
Closing arguments (also called summations) resemble opening statements 
in many ways. The main difference is that the attorneys may discuss only 
the evidence actually introduced during trial. The closing argument is each 
attorney’s last chance to persuade the jurors to find for his or her side.
In most states, the prosecution goes first. It will review the evidence 
and emphasize everything that points to the defendant’s guilt. The defense 
follows, trying to show that the prosecution has not proven guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt. The defense will stress its witnesses’ versions of the facts 
and point out weaknesses in the prosecution’s case. Many states allow the 
prosecution to reply after the defense has given its closing statement, pro-
vided the defense called witnesses during its case in chief. The reason for 
this is that the prosecution has such a heavy burden of proof.
Jury Instructions
Near the end of the case the judge will meet with the attorneys and select 
applicable jury instructions. Jury instructions are statements of law that 
will be read to the jury to tell them what rules to use when deciding the 
case. Important terms will be defined, such as “beyond a reasonable doubt,” 
“malice,” and “competency of a witness.” Each crime will be defined. The 
jury will be told it has the right to decide which witnesses to believe and 
how important each witness’s testimony was. The process of discussing the 
facts and voting on the verdicts will be explained.
Each attorney will prepare a list of jury instructions that he or she 
wants given. The individual instructions may be taken from a published 
book of jury instructions or written by the attorney. The instructions 
are usually based on the wording of prior court decisions or statutes. At 
their conference the judge will review prosecution and defense requests. 
Instructions requested by both sides will be included and given to the jury. 

 
The Court Process 
45
If one side objects to the other’s request, the judge will hear arguments 
from both sides and make a ruling. If no one has requested key instruc-
tions, the judge has the responsibility to add these instructions to the list.
Example of a Jury Instruction for Unarmed Bank Robbery
Based on U.S. Court of Appeals for First Circuit 
Model Criminal Jury Instructions for 18 U.S.C. § 2113(a)
The defendant is accused of robbing the [bank, savings and loan association, or 
credit union]. It is against federal law to rob a federally insured [bank, savings 
and loan association, or credit union]. For you to find the defendant guilty of 
this crime, you must be convinced that the Government has proven each of these 
things beyond a reasonable doubt:
First, that the defendant intentionally took money belonging to the [bank, 
savings and loan association, or credit union], from a [bank, savings and loan 
association, or credit union] employee or from the [bank, savings and loan 
association, or credit union] while a [bank, savings and loan association, or 
credit union] employee was present; 
Second, that the defendant used intimidation or force and violence when he did 
so; and
Third, that at that time, the deposits of the [bank, savings and loan association, 
or credit union] were insured by the [_______]. [The parties have so stipulated.]
Intimidation is actions or words used for the purpose of making someone else 
fear bodily harm if he or she resists. The actual courage or timidity of the victim 
is irrelevant. The actions or words must be such as to intimidate an ordinary, 
reasonable person.
After closing arguments, the judge will give the instructions to the 
jury. In some states this is done by reading the prepared statements. These 
states frequently give the jury a copy of the instructions to take to the jury 
room during deliberations. Other states allow the judge to instruct the jury 
about the case in a more informal manner.
Jury Deliberations
The judge will instruct the jurors regarding the selection of a foreman before 
they start deliberating the case. They will be told to discuss all the evidence 
before voting on any of the charges. Each charge must be voted on separately.
Jury deliberations normally take place in the jury room, which is 
usually located near the courtroom where the trial was held. The exhibits 
that were introduced into evidence are usually sent to the jury room. No 

46 
Chapter 2
one except the jurors is allowed in the jury room during deliberations. 
Alternate jurors are not present during deliberations unless they have 
taken the place of jurors who have been excused due to illness or other 
emergency. If a juror is excused after deliberations have begun, an alter-
nate will be appointed, and the jury will be instructed to start delibera-
tions over. Traditionally, total secrecy surrounded jury deliberations to the 
point that jurors could not even be called at a later time to testify about 
jury misconduct. Some states have changed this rule and now allow jurors 
to testify if the defendant moves to have a conviction reversed due to jury 
misconduct.
The jurors should discuss the case and consider each other’s view-
points. If there is disagreement about what a witness said, the jury can ask 
to have the verbatim record of key points of the testimony read to them. 
The judge will normally meet with the attorneys and discuss what should 
be said in response to these types of questions. Reading of testimony or 
giving additional instructions for the jury will be formally done in the 
courtroom with the prosecutor, defendant, and defense attorney present. 
Jurors will then return to the jury room.
The deliberation process allows the jurors to discuss the case and 
vote on each charge. If the vote is not decisive, they may continue the 
discussion and voting process. No time limits are set; deliberations may 
run from a few minutes to several days. Usually, the jury will finally agree 
on the outcome of the case; in other words, reach a verdict. Historically, 
criminal cases required a unanimous verdict. The U.S. Supreme Court has 
held that the Sixth Amendment only requires a unanimous verdict when 
the state uses six-member juries. When larger juries are used, unanimity is 
not necessary. The Supreme Court has approved verdicts of 9-3, 10-2, and 
11-1. Each state’s legislature must determine which standard will be used. 
Most states still require unanimous verdicts.
If the jurors cannot reach a verdict (that is, are “deadlocked”), the jury 
foreman will notify the judge of the problem. At this point, neither side 
is told what the last vote was. The jurors return to the courtroom and the 
judge will ask questions to determine if there is any chance that the jurors 
can discuss the case further and reach a verdict. If any of the jurors indi-
cates he or she might change his or her mind, the jury will be sent back for 
more deliberations. If the judge believes there is no chance of reaching a 
verdict, the jury will be dismissed and the trial will be over. This is referred 
to as having a “hung jury.”

 
The Court Process 
47
Example of Jury Instruction Used When Jury Cannot Reach a Verdict
Based on U.S. Court of Appeals for Ninth Circuit Model Criminal 
Jury Instructions
Members of the jury, you have advised that you have been unable to agree upon a 
verdict in this case. I have decided to suggest a few thoughts to you.
As jurors, you have a duty to discuss the case with one another and to deliberate 
in an effort to reach a unanimous verdict if each of you can do so without 
violating your individual judgment and conscience. Each of you must decide the 
case for yourself, but only after you consider the evidence impartially with your 
fellow jurors. During your deliberations, you should not hesitate to reexamine 
your own views and change your opinion if you become persuaded that it is 
wrong. However, you should not change an honest belief as to the weight or 
effect of the evidence solely because of the opinions of your fellow jurors or for 
the mere purpose of returning a verdict.
All of you are equally honest and conscientious jurors who have heard the same 
evidence. All of you share an equal desire to arrive at a verdict. Each of you 
should ask yourself whether you should question the correctness of your present 
position.
I remind you that in your deliberations you are to consider the instructions I 
have given you as a whole. You should not single out any part of any instruction, 
including this one, and ignore others. They are all equally important.
You may now retire and continue your deliberations.
The defense usually requests that the charges be dismissed. If the case is 
dismissed the prosecutor cannot re-file the case. The judge rarely dismisses 
the charges unless the jury verdict was overwhelmingly in favor of the defen-
dant (10-2, for example). If the charges are not dismissed, the prosecutor 
will have the right to re-file a case that was dismissed if he or she believes it 
is worth the additional time and effort.
Verdict
When the jury reaches a final decision, the foreman notifies the judge that 
a verdict has been reached. The defendant and all the attorneys will be told 
to return to the courtroom. Each charge and the corresponding verdict 
will be read. Figure 2-4 is an example of a verdict form that might be used 
in a trial. The attorneys have the right to ask each juror to state that he or 
she agrees with each verdict. This is called “polling the jury.” The purpose 

48 
Chapter 2
of polling the jury is to make sure that there has been no mistake. It also 
gives each juror one last chance to change his or her mind. After these 
procedures have been completed, the court clerk will officially enter the 
verdict on each count (charge) into the court records.
Sentencing
If the verdict is guilty on any of the charges, the next step is sentencing. In 
many states, sentencing does not occur on the day the verdict is read. The 
main reason for this is the request by the court for a pre-sentence investi-
gation report. Except when the statute gives the judge no choices regarding 
the sentence, this additional information will help the judge decide on the 
appropriate punishment. The exact content of these reports varies, but 
they usually include information on the defendant’s past life and prior 
convictions (called a “social history”), as well as any aggravating or miti-
gating circumstances in the present case. Depending on the seriousness of 
the crime and local court rules, procedures range from having a probation 
officer prepare the report while the defendant is free on bail to having a 
diagnostic study done while the defendant is confined in the reception 
center of the state prison. The defense is usually allowed to submit a simi-
lar report prepared by its own experts.
We the jury find the defendant, John Jones, Case No. CR-1234,
Guilty
Not Guilty
Of the crime of murder in the first degree, Penal Code Section 187.
Signed:
__________________________________
__________
Jury Foreman
Date
Figure 2-4
Example of a Verdict Form

 
The Court Process 
49
The purpose of the sentencing hearing is to determining what sen-
tence should be imposed. The judge frequently has the option to sentence 
the defendant to probation, fine, and jail or prison. The length of the 
prison sentence is decided by the judge. The Supreme Court, in a series of 
cases starting with Apprendi v. New Jersey (2000)2, increased the role of the 
jury in determining the defendant’s sentence. If the judge wants to impose 
a longer sentence than the norm that the legislature set for the crime, the 
only facts that judge can use are those the jurors unanimously agreed had 
been established at trial.
Both sides usually have the right to call witnesses at the sentencing 
hearing. The person making the pre-sentence investigation report may be 
called and cross-examined. Victims may be given the right to make a state-
ment to the judge. After reviewing all of the information, the judge will 
make a final decision at the sentencing hearing. Death penalty cases are 
somewhat unique because it is usually the jury, instead of the judge, that 
decides the sentence. Most states do not have juries sentence the defendant 
in non-capital cases.
Example of Judge Sentencing the Defendant
Judge:   Mr. Jones, you have been convicted of the crime of robbery. I find that 
you committed this crime intentionally and there were no mitigating 
circumstances. I therefore sentence you to serve 5 years in the state 
prison. You are to pay a fine of $5,000 and make restitution to the 
victim in the amount of $3,251, the amount you took during the 
robbery. I hereby remand you to the custody of the State Department of 
Corrections.
At the close of the sentencing hearing, the defense attorney frequently 
informs the judge that an appeal will be filed. The judge will then decide if 
the defendant should be allowed out on bail while the appeal is in progress. 
The attorneys will be permitted to introduce evidence that the defendant 
is (or is not) likely to leave the state to avoid serving the sentence or that 
he or she may commit additional crimes if bail is granted. Figure 2-5 sum-
marizes the stages of a trial.

50 
Chapter 2
Sentencing Hearing—often held at a later date
Rebuttal—witnesses called by prosecutor
Closing Arguments & Summation
Rejoinder—witnesses called by defense
Opening Statements
Prosecutor gives opening statement.
Defense attorney has option to give opening statement at this time.
Jury Selection
Prosecution’s Case in Chief
Prosecutor calls as many witnesses as believed necessary to establish guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt.
Defense cross examines witnesses. 
Prosecutor rests case.
Defense’s Case in Chief
Defense attorney has option to give opening statement at this time.
Defense calls as many witnesses as believed necessary to establish that the defendant
has not been proven guilty.
Defense rests case.
Prosecution cross examines witnesses.
Figure 2-5
The Trial
Appeal
There are several ways to change a guilty verdict. After the jury returns 
a guilty verdict, the defense attorney may ask the trial judge to set aside 
the verdict and grant a new trial or enter an acquittal. The most common 
appeal is made to a higher court based on what happened at the trial. This 
is called a “direct appeal.” Habeas corpus can also be used to seek reversal 
and is explained later in this section.
The following are the most common reasons for setting aside a convic-
tion: (1) The jury convicted the defendant even though the judge believes 

 
The Court Process 
51
no reasonable person could believe that he or she was guilty, or (2) the 
judge realizes there were legal errors committed during trial that are sure 
to result in a reversal on appeal. Double jeopardy prevents the prosecution 
from having the verdict set aside if the jury acquitted the defendant.
The direct appeal can be based only on what is included in the record 
of prior court hearings, including the preliminary hearing, any suppres-
sion hearings, and the trial. The record is frequently divided into two 
documents—the reporter’s transcript and the clerk’s transcript. The 
reporter’s transcript is a typed, verbatim record based on the notes the 
court reporter made at the proceeding (frequently with the help of a 
stenotype machine). It will include what the attorneys and judge said 
as well as what the witnesses said under oath. In courts in which court 
reporters are not used, the attorneys are usually required to meet and agree 
on a statement of what happened during the trial. This is frequently called 
a “settle statement of facts.” 
The clerk’s transcript includes copies of all documents filed with the 
court clerk during the case. This would include the complaint, informa-
tion, indictment, any motions made to suppress evidence, requests for 
jury instructions, and the entries of the clerk during court days. The daily 
entries list the names of the judge, defendant, and attorneys present, the 
purpose of the hearing, and the names of witnesses called (but not a sum-
mary of their testimony). During jury selection, the clerk’s record lists the 
names of every person called to the jury box, as well as the names of the 
jurors selected. If a juror is excused and replaced by an alternate, this event 
is also indicated.
Direct appeals must be filed within a short time after conviction. The 
time for appeal is set out in the state statutes or court rules. Notice of 
appeal is usually required within 30 days or less after the sentencing hear-
ing. The statutes or court rules also give the length of time the attorneys 
have to prepare briefs—30 days is common. The court can extend the 
length of time if the attorney makes a timely request and states a valid 
reason.
When the defense files a notice of appeal, the court will have the 
reporter’s transcript and clerk’s transcript prepared. Due to the expense 
of typing the reporter’s transcript, it is usually not made prior to this 
time. If the defendant cannot afford the transcripts, the government is 
required to pay for them. The defense reviews all of the transcripts and 
then prepares a brief that will be filed with the appellate court. The brief 
usually begins with a summary of the facts of the case, listing the page 
numbers where this information can be found in the transcripts. Legal 
arguments for reversing the conviction follow. Each reason for reversal is 

52 
Chapter 2
usually discussed separately and includes statutes, court cases, and other 
legal references in support of the argument.
The American legal system places great reliance on the jury’s ability to 
determine which witnesses are telling the truth. Therefore, cases are rarely 
reversed if the defense bases its appeal primarily on the credibility of wit-
nesses. Occasionally, a conviction is reversed because the court of appeals 
believes the case was so weak the jury should not have convicted. If a case 
is reversed on grounds of insufficient evidence, the legal consequences 
are the same as if the jury had acquitted the defendant. The prosecutor 
cannot re-file the case. Most appeals are based on legal problems with the 
case.
Examples of Issues That Can Be Raised on Appeal
•  Confession obtained in violation of Miranda rules.
• Search violated the Fourth Amendment.
• Improper jury instruction given by judge.
•  Judge improperly sustained objections and refused to allow a witness to testify 
on important questions. 
Examples of Issues That Cannot Be Raised on Appeal
•  Weight to be placed on testimony of individual witnesses.
•  Credibility of each witness.
•  Possible testimony of witnesses who were not called during trial.
Appellate courts often rule an error harmless even when the defense 
correctly points to errors that occurred at trial. The “Harmless Error 
Rule” allows the conviction to stand unless the court believes that the 
error had a substantial influence on the outcome of the case. If the con-
viction is reversed on one of these legal grounds, the prosecution has the 
right to re-file the case.
The defense can also appeal on the grounds that the judge improperly 
sentenced the defendant. If this is the only grounds for reversal, the case 
will be sent back to the trial court for a new sentencing hearing, but the 
conviction will still stand.
The defendant has the right to one appeal immediately after being 
convicted. The appellate court cannot refuse to review the case. If the 
defendant cannot afford to hire an attorney to handle the appeal, the 
court must appoint one for this purpose. After the first appeal, the court 
has the right to reject further appeals. Both the highest state court and 
the U.S. Supreme Court have formal procedures that allow the defendant 
to request review of the case, but only a small percentage of the cases are 

 
The Court Process 
53
given full hearings. In many states, the highest court handles the first 
appeal if the defendant was given a death sentence.
Habeas corpus is a separate civil lawsuit used to challenge illegal 
confinement. Being in jail, prison, or on probation or parole due to an 
improper conviction is considered to be illegal confinement. The defense 
files a Petition for a Writ of Habeas Corpus. The petition briefly states why 
the person filing the petition believes the defendant should be released. 
The prosecution must file a reply giving reasons the conviction is valid. If 
the judge reviewing the petition believes there are valid legal grounds to 
consider the case, a hearing will be held. At this hearing, unlike on direct 
appeal, both sides can call witnesses who will be subject to both direct and 
cross-examination. Another dissimilarity between habeas corpus and the 
direct appeal is that habeas corpus can be filed at any time as long as the 
defendant is still in custody; direct appeals are restricted to the time period 
immediately following the trial.
Examples of Issues That Should Be Raised by Habeas Corpus
•  Person was illegally arrested and is being held in county jail.
•  Person was placed in a mental hospital against his or her will and claims to be 
legally sane.
•  Person is in jail and has served the entire sentence but has not been released.
•  Defendant was denied his or her right to an attorney at trial because the 
defense attorney was incompetent. 
Examples of Issues That Should Not Be Raised by Habeas Corpus
•  The judge did not give proper jury instructions during the trial.
•  The evidence presented at trial was not sufficient to convict the defendant.
•  The defendant was illegally arrested and therefore should receive monetary 
payment from the arresting officer and police department.
Habeas corpus is usually the best way to request reversal on the grounds 
that the defense attorney at trial was incompetent. The hearing is usually 
needed to determine how much research and preparation the attorney did 
prior to trial. Habeas corpus has also been successfully used when the U.S. 
Supreme Court made retroactive rules that affected cases that were beyond 
the time limits for direct appeals. One such case was Gideon v. Wainwright,
which declared that a criminal defendant who cannot afford to hire an 
attorney has a constitutional right to have the state provide a free lawyer 
for his or her trial.

54 
Chapter 2
Summary
S u m m a r y
The prosecutor may consider all facts and evidence available when deciding what 
charges to file. At the preliminary hearing, witnesses must be called to testify 
regarding every element of each crime charged. In many states using a grand jury, 
testimony regarding all elements of all crimes must be presented.
 
Suppression hearings are based on testimony made under oath. This is taken 
from transcripts of previous hearings, such as the preliminary hearing, or wit-
nesses are called at the suppression hearing.
 
Attorneys exchange information during discovery. If a formal discovery 
motion is filed, it will contain legal references showing the right to receive what 
has been requested. Witnesses are not usually called at this hearing.
 
The trial process begins with jury selection. Jurors are under oath to truthfully 
answer questions regarding their ability to serve. Jurors who have already made up 
their minds about the defendant’s guilt are excused. Attorneys also have the right 
to remove a limited number of jurors for other reasons.
 
The attorneys may preview the evidence in the case during opening statements, 
but opening statements are not evidence in the case. The attorneys have a duty to 
discuss only evidence that they believe will be presented during the trial.
 
The prosecution must convince the jury beyond a reasonable doubt that the 
defendant committed the crimes charged. This is done by calling witnesses and 
introducing physical evidence. When the prosecutor calls a witness, he or she 
conducts the direct examination of that witness. The defense attorney will cross-
examine the witness in order to show the direct examination left out information 
and to attack the truthfulness of the witness.
 
After the prosecution has finished calling its witnesses, the defense may call 
witnesses. When the defense calls witnesses, the defense attorney conducts direct 
examination and the prosecutor will cross-examine. Since the prosecution has the 
burden of proof, the defense is not required to call any witnesses.
 
Closing statements are not evidence in the case. During closing statements the 
attorneys summarize the evidence, point out the weaknesses in the other side’s 
evidence, and urge the jury to vote for their side.
 
The jury will be given instructions that the judge and attorneys have selected. 
The jury will go into deliberations and decide the outcome of the case based on 
the legal rules provided in the jury instructions. If the jury is unable to reach a 
verdict (hung jury), the prosecutor may retry the case unless the judge dismisses 
the charges.
 
Witnesses may be called at the sentencing hearing. Their testimony is usually 
focused on facts the judge can use to decide what is an appropriate sentence. This 
frequently includes facts about prior crimes, physical trauma suffered by victims, 
and other information that would not be allowed at trial.
 
Neither the direct appeal nor the motion to set aside a verdict involve calling 
new witnesses. They are based on what happened at trial. Witnesses may be called 
at a habeas corpus hearing to show why the conviction is illegal.

 
The Court Process 
55
REVIEW QUESTIONS
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. What facts may the prosecutor consider when deciding what charges to file?
2. What is the standard of proof at the preliminary hearing?
3. What types of evidence may the prosecution and the defense introduce at 
the preliminary hearing?
4. Explain the role the grand jury serves in criminal cases.
5. What facts may the grand jurors consider when deciding what charges to 
include in the indictment?
6. What information must the prosecution and the defense exchange during 
discovery?
7. Discuss what evidence the defense may introduce at a suppression hearing.
8. Describe how juries are selected.
9. What is the purpose of the opening statement and the closing argument?
10. How does cross-examination differ from rebuttal evidence?
11. What is a jury instructed to do during deliberations?
12. Describe what happens if the jury cannot reach a verdict.
13. What evidence may be considered by the judge at the sentencing hearing?
14. What evidence may the judges consider when deciding a case on direct 
appeal?
15. What evidence may the judge consider when ruling on a Petition for Writ of 
Habeas Corpus?
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
On the Internet, go to www.cnn.com/crime. Find a case that interests you. Write 
a 250-word (one-page) summary of the case.
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Brady v. Maryland 373 U.S. 83, 10 L.Ed. 2d 215, 83 S.Ct. 1194 (1962).
 2. Apprendi v. New Jersey 530 U.S. 466, 147, L.Ed. 2d 435, 120 S.Ct. 2348 (2000).

This page intentionally left blank 

57
Types of Evidence
CHAPTER 3
Feature Case: Martha Stewart
Domestic diva. Star of her own TV show that tells millions of housewives 
and others charming tricks to make their homes showcases. Martha 
Stewart’s friend Samuel Waksai submitted an application to the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for a new colon cancer drug. Stock in his com-
pany rose to $75. When Waksai learned that his application for the drug 
would be denied, he and his family attempted to sell $7.5 million worth of 
stock in the company before the denial was made public. Martha’s stock 
broker heard of the sale and called her office, leaving a message that was 
logged in, suggesting that stock in the company would be trading for less. 
By the time Martha sold, the stock had dropped to $58. The next day, the 
FDA publicly disclosed the application was denied. Within 3 days the stock 
was selling for $43. The sale profited Martha approximately $51,000.
The FBI, Securities and Exchange Commission, and federal prosecu-
tor launched an investigation. Waksai, the owner of the company that 
produced the cancer drug, was prosecuted, convicted, and sent to prison 
for insider trading. Martha’s stock broker alleged that she had previously 
told him to sell the stock if it went below $60. If this was the reason for the 
sale, there was no crime. 
An interview with the FBI was set up. Phone calls were made between 
Martha and the stock broker before the interview. Martha changed an 
entry in the phone log. When Martha was interviewed by the FBI, she 
denied any conversation about the failed company or selling its stock. 
Martha made several public statements reiterating that she would be exon-
erated. Authorities extensively studied her phone records and documents 
related to her stock holdings but were unable to find sufficient evidence to 
prosecute her for insider trading.

58 
Chapter 3
Martha was charged with lying during an FBI interview and ultimately 
convicted. She served 4 months in federal prison.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define relevant and material evidence and explain when each is admissible in 
court.
• Define circumstantial evidence and explain how it differs from direct evidence.
• Explain the difference between testimonial and real evidence. 
• Define stipulation and judicial notice and explain how each applies in court.
• Describe presumptions and how they are used in court.
Key Terms
•  At issue
•  Circumstantial evidence
•  Conclusive presumption
•  Corroborative evidence
•  Cumulative evidence
•  Direct evidence
•  Documentary evidence
•  Inference
•  Judicial notice
•  Limited admissibility
•  Material evidence
•  Presumption
•  Probative value
•  Real evidence
•  Rebuttable presumption
•  Relevant evidence
•  Stipulation
•  Testimonial evidence
Relevant Evidence
In the study of the rules of evidence, there are several basic terms that must 
be understood before discussing specific issues. This chapter discusses the 
more important of these key terms. 
One of the basic concepts of evidence is that only relevant evidence is 
admissible in court. There are situations, however, in which even relevant 
evidence will not be admitted. One is when the evidence was obtained in 
violation of the defendant’s constitutional rights. This rule is discussed 
later in detail (see Chapter 10). Two other common reasons for excluding 
evidence are violations of the Hearsay Rule (see Chapter 8) or the fact that 
the information is privileged (see Chapter 9).
To put it as simply as possible, something is relevant if it tends to 
prove (or disprove) a disputed point or issue in the case. One of the keys 
to what is relevant is the question of what is “at issue” in the case. “At 
issue” refers to all disputed facts that are required to establish the elements 
of the crime(s) charged and the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt; facts necessary to establish the defense are also “at issue.” When the 
defendant enters a plea of “Not Guilty,” all the facts needed to establish the 

 
Types of Evidence 
59
crimes charged are, in effect, disputed. Evidence can be admitted to estab-
lish these facts. If the prosecution believes it is necessary, more than one 
witness may be called to testify about the same fact or event. On the other 
hand, if the defendant admits something, such as the prior conviction, the 
facts regarding the crime that resulted in that conviction are no longer in 
issue. No evidence can be admitted to prove facts that are not at issue.
Consider the Martha Stewart case at the beginning of the chapter. 
It is important to note that she was charged with lying to the FBI, not 
with insider stock trading. What was “at issue”? The issue in her trial was 
whether or not she told the truth when interviewed by the FBI. It is easy 
to become sidetracked with the precise time that phone calls were made, 
when Martha received word that the cancer drug was not being approved, 
etc. If Martha had been charged with insider trading, those facts would 
have been important because the exact time she learned of the company’s 
problems would have been “at issue.” But she was charged with inten-
tionally lying to the FBI. The facts that were “at issue” were the ones that 
showed that she knew she was not telling the FBI the truth.
Relevant Evidence Defined
Relevant evidence is any evidence that tends to prove or disprove any disputed 
fact in the case. It merely needs to show that it is more probable that the fact 
exists than it appeared before the evidence was introduced. No single piece of 
evidence has to make a fact appear more probable than not.
Another key to admissibility is probative value. This means that the 
evidence must make it appear that a fact probably occurred. Sometimes 
there is one piece of evidence that conclusively proves the case. This is rare, 
however. More commonly, there are a variety of pieces of evidence that, 
when considered together, convince the jury that the defendant is guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt. It is difficult to decide what weight any one piece 
of evidence will have in convincing the jury that the defendant is guilty or 
innocent. Any evidence that might have some impact on the jury has pro-
bative value. If an attorney makes an objection based on lack of relevance, 
the judge must decide if the evidence is likely to have any effect on the jury. 
If not, the evidence will not be admitted. This determination is made on a 
question-by-question basis during both direct and cross-examination.
Examples of Relevant Evidence in a Murder Trial
• Defendant’s fingerprints were on the murder weapon.
• Defendant bought the murder weapon the day before the victim died.
• The victim’s blood was found on the defendant’s hands.
• Defendant was the last person seen with the victim before her death.

60 
Chapter 3
•  Defendant was the beneficiary of a large life insurance policy on the life of the 
murder victim.
• Defendant had previously threatened to kill the victim.
• Defendant disappeared the day after the victim died.
Relevant evidence must also be “material.” There currently appear to 
be two different definitions of material: 
1. Evidence is material if it is logically connected with some fact that is 
at issue. 
2. Material evidence is evidence that is important to the case—it 
cannot be too remotely connected to the facts at issue. 
In practice, relevant evidence is material only if it meets both of these 
tests: 
1. It must be relevant to some fact that is at issue in the case, and
2. It must have more than just a remote connection to the fact.
There are several other limits to the admissibility of relevant evidence. 
These restrictions apply to evidence that does not have very great proba-
tive value. A balancing test is used to determine if the value of the evidence 
outweighs the problems it may cause at trial. As the Federal Rules of 
Evidence state, there are other reasons to exclude evidence.
Federal Rule 403. Exclusion of Relevant Evidence
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or 
misleading the jury, or by consideration of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
Relevant evidence is not admissible if it would be unduly prejudi-
cial due to its emotional impact on the jury. The court is cautious about 
admitting evidence if it would be likely to arouse either hostility or sym-
pathy toward either side. The defendant’s prior convictions are in this cat-
egory. In most cases, the prior conviction has only slight relevance, but the 
chance that the jury will believe that the defendant was more likely to have 
committed the current crime merely because of the prior conviction is 
great. Therefore, evidence of prior conviction is usually not admissible by 
the prosecution during its case in chief. If the defendant takes the witness 
stand, his or her prior record may be used to impeach. Prior convictions 
are also admissible at the sentencing hearing. 
On the other hand, pictures of the murder victim may arouse the 
hostility of the jury toward the defendant, but they are usually admissible 

 
Types of Evidence 
61
because of their greater relevance to the case. Even in these types of cases, 
prosecutors face restrictions on the number of photographs or their size 
(for example, limited to 8 × 10 inches); in the past, some judges allowed 
black-and-white pictures but not color photographs because they thought 
that the gruesome color pictures would inflame the jury.
Other reasons for rejecting relevant evidence are that it might distract 
the jury from the main issues of the case or that it would take too much 
court time to prove a fact that had only minimal relevance. An example of 
this is the court’s reluctance to allow testimony regarding laboratory tests 
that do not have a record of very high accuracy. In one case, a child had 
contracted a rare form of venereal disease when she was sexually molested. 
The court refused to admit the laboratory tests showing that the defendant 
had the same disease because the test could only show that there was a 
20% probability that a person had transmitted the disease to the victim. 
Another example is the limitation placed on calling a witness to impeach 
someone who has already testified. If the testimony is being questioned 
because of inconsistencies on minor details, the judge will not allow the 
opposing side to call another witness because this is unduly time-consuming 
and distracts the jury from the main issues of the case.
Cumulative evidence may also be excluded. Cumulative evidence 
merely restates what has already been admitted into evidence. For exam-
ple, if there were 10 eyewitnesses to the crime and they all gave basically 
the same account of what happened, their testimony would be cumula-
tive. How many eyewitnesses will be allowed to testify is up to the judge. 
Probably, after 2 or 3 have said the same thing, the judge would sustain 
an objection that the testimony is merely cumulative and should not be 
allowed. On the other hand, if their testimony corroborates what has 
already been introduced, it is usually admissible.
Examples of Cumulative Evidence
•  John testified that he was at 3rd and Main at 10:00 p.m. on November 3 and 
saw a man flee the scene in a Ford.
•  Henry testified that he was at 3rd and Main at 10:00 p.m. on November 3 and 
saw a man flee the scene in a red Ford sedan.
•  Jack testified that he was at 3rd and Main at 10:00 p.m. on November 3 and saw 
a man run from the store, get in a red car, and leave in a hurry.
The distinction is that cumulative evidence basically repeats the same 
thing that has already been introduced, whereas corroborative evidence 
supports the prior testimony by providing additional evidence to confirm 
what the previous witness has said, without merely duplicating it. Real 
evidence may be used to corroborate testimonial evidence. For example, a 

62 
Chapter 3
ballistics test that shows a gun has been fired corroborates the testimony 
of a witness who said she saw the defendant fire the gun.
Examples of Corroborative Evidence
•  Adam testified that he was at 1st and Cedar at midnight on November 3 and 
he saw a red car speed past. As it went by, someone threw an apparently empty 
bank bag out the window.
•  Sam testified that he walked through the intersection of 1st and Cedar at 11:55 
p.m. on November 2 on his way to buy cigarettes at the liquor store and there 
was nothing unusual on the ground. On his way home 10 minutes later, he 
found an empty bank bag in the street.
•  Tom testified that he was working at the liquor store on the corner of 2nd and 
Cedar and he remembers Sam buying cigarettes at a couple of minutes before 
midnight.
When there is a question about the admissibility of relevant evidence, 
the judge will be called upon to exercise discretion. Both sides will be 
allowed to argue why their requests should be granted. The judge will then 
make a ruling that may be appealed at the end of the trial. Such rulings are 
upheld as long as they are logical and do not violate common sense.
Evidence may be relevant if introduced for one purpose but irrelevant 
for some other purpose. This is called “limited admissibility.” For example, 
a prior statement of the defendant may be admitted to show inconsisten-
cies between what he or she testified to in court and what was said to the 
police. The purpose of introducing this earlier statement is to show that the 
defendant is lying, and it is relevant for this purpose. The same statement, 
however, may be irrelevant if used to show that the earlier statement is true 
and the in-court statement is false.
Examples of Relevant Evidence
•  Witness to bank robbery wrote down the license number of the “getaway” car. 
Records show that defendant owned the car with that license.
This evidence is relevant because it makes it more probable that the defendant 
committed the robbery. It is, however, far from conclusive. The defense can 
introduce evidence to show that the witness did not copy the license number 
correctly or that the defendant’s car was stolen the day before the robbery.
•  Five minutes after a theft, the defendant was stopped near the scene. Defendant 
had a unique ring in his pocket that had been taken in the theft.
This evidence is relevant because it makes it appear more probable that the 
defendant committed the theft. It is not conclusive. The defense can show that 
there is some other explanation for the defendant having the ring.
•  In a trial for rape, the defendant has admitted that he had sexual intercourse with 
the victim. His defense is based on his claim that the victim consented to the 

 
Types of Evidence 
63
sexual act. The prosecutor wants to admit evidence that the defendant matches the 
physical description given the police by the victim immediately after the crime.
Ordinarily this evidence would be relevant, but under the facts of this case it 
is not. Due to the defense of consent, the defendant has admitted that he is 
the person who had intercourse with the victim. His identity is not in issue. 
Therefore, evidence that shows that he is the person the victim described is not 
relevant.
•  In a prosecution for the theft of a TV from an apartment, the owner of the 
TV did not know the serial number for the TV. The defendant was discovered 
trying to sell a similar TV a month later.
This is relevant but very weak unless there is some distinctive marking on the 
TV that can identify it from thousands of similar TV sets manufactured at the 
same plant.
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence
One method of classifying evidence divides all evidence into two types: 
direct and circumstantial. A conviction can be based on either direct or 
circumstantial evidence or a combination of both. The defense attorney’s 
favorite argument, “It is only circumstantial evidence,” may be reassuring 
to the defendant, but it is legally possible to convict a person solely on the 
basis of circumstantial evidence.
Direct evidence of a fact in issue is always relevant. In a criminal case, 
direct evidence usually involves eyewitness testimony regarding the com-
mission of the crime. For example, it would be considered direct evidence 
if a witness testified that he saw the defendant shoot the murder victim. 
If the jury believes the witness is telling the truth, it has no choice but to 
conclude that the defendant shot the victim. On the other hand, it is only 
circumstantial evidence if the witness testified that he heard a gunshot and 
ran to the scene of the crime just in time to see the defendant run from 
the location with a smoking gun in her hand. This is not direct evidence 
because it is necessary to draw a conclusion from the facts given, namely 
that the person with the smoking gun is the same person who shot the 
victim. Even though the jury believes the witness, it can still conclude that 
someone else shot the victim and the defendant merely picked up the gun 
after the shooting and ran with it.
Direct Evidence Defined
Direct evidence is based on personal knowledge or observation of the person 
testifying. No inference or presumption is needed. If the testimony is believed by 
the jury, the fact it relates to is conclusively established.

64 
Chapter 3
Circumstantial Evidence Defined
Circumstantial evidence indirectly proves a fact. It requires the trier of fact to use 
at least one inference or presumption in order to conclude that the fact exists.
Circumstantial evidence may be so strong that it is nearly conclusive 
or so weak that it is immaterial. Admissibility of weak circumstantial evi-
dence is at the discretion of the judge.
An inference is a logical conclusion that a person can make based 
on a fact or group of facts. The jury decides when to draw inferences. A 
presumption is a conclusion that the law requires the jury to make. In the 
example of the woman with the smoking gun, it is a logical conclusion that 
she shot the victim if there was no one else at the shooting scene between 
the time the gunshot was heard and when she was observed running 
away with the smoking gun. The jury will make the final determination 
on whether to draw this conclusion. The defense may be able to offer a 
logical explanation for her conduct that convinces the jury that someone 
else actually shot the victim. If a presumption had been involved, the jury 
would have been told what conclusion the law required them to draw. 
(Presumptions are discussed in more detail later in this chapter.)
There are many common situations in which circumstantial evidence 
is frequently used in criminal cases. Some states have actually enacted 
these into law; others merely allow the jurors to use their common sense 
and draw the logical conclusions.
Examples of Direct and Circumstantial Evidence
• Fact: The defendant was seen running from the scene immediately after the 
crime occurred. 
 Inference: The defendant committed the crime.
• Fact: A man working at the scene of the robbery hid behind large boxes and 
watched as the robber shot the clerk who would not hand over the cash.
  Inference: None. This is direct evidence. The witness saw the entire event; if the 
jury believes him, there is no need for an inference.
• Fact: The defendant was the only person who knew the combination to the safe.
 Inference: The defendant opened the safe.
• Fact: The victim had a reputation for being an obnoxious bully. 
  Inference: The victim started the fight and the defendant was acting in self-
defense.
• Fact: Eyewitness saw the defendant put poison in the food and watched while 
the victim ate it. 
  Inference: None. This is direct evidence that the defendant poisoned the 
victim. If the jury believes the witness, there is no need for an inference.

 
Types of Evidence 
65
Direct and circumstantial evidence are discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 4.
Testimonial and Real Evidence
Another method of classifying evidence is by the way it is presented in 
court. There are a variety of terms that are used for this purpose. This 
book divides evidence into two types: testimonial and real. Note that this 
is a separate classification system. An item, such as the defendant’s gun 
that was found near the murder scene, can be correctly classified as both 
circumstantial evidence and real evidence.
The key concept in testimonial evidence is that a person is testifying 
under oath or affirmation.
Testimonial Evidence Defined
Testimonial evidence is evidence given by a competent witness while testifying 
under oath or affirmation in a court proceeding. Affidavits and depositions are 
frequently included in testimonial evidence.
Note: An affirmation is a solemn formal declaration used in place of an oath for 
those persons whose religious beliefs forbid oath-taking.
All evidence must be introduced through the testimony of a person on 
the witness stand. The verbal content of what the witness says is testimonial 
evidence. This includes both direct and cross-examination. If the witness 
tells about seeing the defendant shoot the victim, this is testimonial evidence. 
However, if the gun is admitted into evidence, the gun is real evidence.
A witness must be under oath or affirmation. This is the normal pro-
cedure at trial. A written statement made out of court under oath or affir-
mation is called an affidavit. A deposition is a pretrial procedure mainly 
used in civil cases. An attorney for each side and a stenographic reporter 
are usually present when a deposition is taken. The witness is placed under 
oath and asked questions. Cross-examination may be permitted; attorneys 
are allowed to make objections. In many states, the transcript of this ses-
sion may be read into evidence if the witness later becomes unavailable to 
testify. Testimonial evidence is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
There is some confusion regarding the correct term for objects that 
are admitted into evidence. Real evidence, physical evidence, demonstra-
tive evidence, and tangible evidence are all commonly used terms. Various 
authors define one term so that it includes the others. Students should 
be aware that the previous terms are frequently used interchangeably. 
Documentary evidence is a subgroup of real evidence (see Chapter 7).

66 
Chapter 3
Real Evidence Defined
Real evidence is anything (except testimonial evidence) that can be perceived 
with the five senses that tends to prove a fact that is at issue.
Many states only consider objects that are admitted into evidence as 
exhibits to be real evidence. Some authors use a broader approach and apply 
the term real evidence to items such as drawings on blackboards or butcher 
paper that were made while a witness was testifying but not formally intro-
duced into evidence. Real evidence is discussed in more detail in Chapters 
6 and 7.
Examples of Real Evidence
• Physical items: guns, knives, blood-soaked clothing, key to the safe deposit box
•  Documents: checks, contracts, letters, ransom notes, newspapers, maps, deeds, 
wills, fingerprint cards, computer files
• Exhibits made for trial: models, scale drawings, charts, demonstrations
•  Pictures: still photographs, enlargements, motion pictures, videos, digital 
images, photocopies, X-ray films, jpegs, etc.
Substitutes for Evidence
There are some situations in which the jury is specifically told what facts 
to believe rather than having the opposing sides introduce evidence on 
the issue. These can be divided into three categories: stipulations, judicial 
notice, and presumptions.
Stipulations
An agreement between the opposing attorneys to admit that one or more 
facts exist is called a stipulation. If the agreement is made before trial, the 
stipulation will usually be introduced in court in the form of a written 
document. When stipulations are reached during trial, they are usually 
stated orally for the record. The judge will tell the jurors that they must 
conclude that the stipulated fact exists and give it the same weight as if it 
had been proven during the trial. This statement may be made both at the 
time the stipulation is entered and again in the jury instructions.
Attorneys may agree to make a stipulation for a variety of reasons. 
Probably the most common is that one side knows the other side can easily 
prove the facts involved. For example, all the prosecution has to do to prove 
that the defendant has a prior conviction is to give the judge a certified copy 
of the conviction. For this reason, the defense frequently agrees to stipulate 
to the prior.

 
Types of Evidence 
67
Another reason for stipulating may be that the facts would prejudice 
the jury against the defendant. For example, the prosecutor is charging that 
the defendant has a prior felony conviction. Since the prior is for a grue-
some crime almost identical to the present one, the defendant does not want 
the jury to hear the details. By agreeing to stipulate to the prior, the defendant 
can keep the prosecution from telling the jury the details of the prior crime.
Stipulations are also made on minor points of the case. Both sides 
agree that proving these small details is too time-consuming; therefore, 
they stipulate to them.
Since stipulations involve a voluntary agreement between the attor-
neys, there are also cases in which there obviously should have been a stip-
ulation but there was none. This can be caused by antagonism between the 
attorneys, failure to communicate, or lack of preparation. Occasionally, it 
is a trial tactic.
Examples of Stipulations
•  The charges include the fact that the defendant has a prior conviction. The 
defense may be willing to stipulate that the prior conviction exists and prevent 
the prosecution from introducing details of that crime.
•  The event happened at 10:00 p.m. Both sides may be willing to stipulate that the 
crime occurred at night. Note: This fact could also come in under judicial notice.
•  In a drunk driving case, it may be stipulated that the emergency room staff 
used proper techniques in taking the blood sample from the defendant. 
Judicial Notice
Judicial notice is a procedure in which the judge, on his or her own 
authority, tells the jury to conclude that a fact exists. The jury is required 
to follow this instruction in civil cases, but it is only advisory in criminal 
cases. An attorney may request that the judge take judicial notice of some 
point or the judge may decide to do it without a request.
The idea behind judicial notice is that it is a waste of time to require 
proof of commonly known facts. Some states break this down and make 
it mandatory that judicial notice be taken, if requested, of the state’s own 
laws, the federal constitution, and well-known scientific facts. They let 
individual judges decide whether to take judicial notice of lesser known 
facts and out-of-state law.
As used in judicial notice, “commonly known facts” refers to facts that 
are well-known in the community, including the scientific community. 
The judge’s personal knowledge of the fact is not important. If the judge 
has a doubt about how well-known the fact is, it is the duty of the attorney 
who requested judicial notice to convince the judge that the fact qualifies. 

68 
Chapter 3
Judicial notice is not requested if the parties enter into a stipulation. 
On the other hand, if the attorneys know that the judge will automatically 
grant judicial notice, they may not bother to draft a stipulation. One side 
may request judicial notice because the other side refused to stipulate. In 
these cases, the opposing counsel may argue that judicial notice is not 
properly taken. It seems to be a contradiction that there could be dis-
pute on what are “commonly known facts.” The issues would most likely 
arise when the attorney requesting judicial notice is attempting to abuse 
the procedure or the attorney objecting to it is unfamiliar with local law 
on judicial notice. In the case of scientific facts, it is also common to see 
debates on the propriety of judicial notice when the scientific fact involved 
has been recently established or is still controversial.
The Federal Rules of Evidence provide a useful outline on the use of 
judicial notice. Rule 201 states the following:
(a) Scope of rule. This rule governs only judicial notice of adjudicative 
facts.
(b) Kinds of facts. A judicially noticed fact must be one not subject to 
reasonable dispute in that it is either (1) generally known within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the trial court or (2) capable of accurate 
and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot 
reasonably be questioned.
(c) When discretionary. A court may take judicial notice, whether 
requested or not.
(d) When mandatory. A court shall take judicial notice if requested by a 
party and supplied with the necessary information.
(e) Opportunity to be heard. A party is entitled upon timely request to 
an opportunity to be heard as to the propriety of taking judicial notice 
and the tenor of the matter noticed. In the absence of prior notifica-
tion, the request may be made after judicial notice has been taken.
(f) Time of taking notice. Judicial notice may be taken at any stage of 
the proceeding.
(g) Instructing jury. In a civil action or proceeding, the court shall 
instruct the jury to accept as conclusive any fact judicially noticed. In 
a criminal case, the court shall instruct the jury that it may, but is not 
required to, accept as conclusive any fact judicially noticed.
Examples of Items Subject to Judicial Notice
•  Law: U.S. Constitution, state constitution, United States Code, state codes. 
Out-of-state laws and foreign laws usually have to be shown to the judge before 
judicial notice is taken.

 
Types of Evidence 
69
• Court records and court rules.
•  Scientific facts: temperature at which water freezes, time of sunset and sunrise, 
probabilities of occurrences of various blood types, accuracy of properly 
maintained radar equipment used to determine the speed a car was traveling, 
high and low tides.
•  Local facts: which cities are in the court district, which streets run north–south, 
location of landmarks, fact that a given area is uninhabited.
Presumptions
When a presumption is involved, the judge instructs the jury to draw specific 
conclusions from the facts. Unlike stipulations and judicial notice, in order 
to use a presumption the attorney must convince the jury that at least some 
of the facts exist. When discussing presumptions, two terms are commonly 
used. The basic fact is that fact which must be established in order to use a 
presumption. The presumed fact is the fact that the judge will tell the jurors 
they must assume happened if the basic fact is established. Keep in mind 
that if the basic fact is not established, the presumption cannot be used.
Presumption Defined
A presumption is a conclusion that the law requires the jury to draw from facts 
that have been established at trial. The judge instructs the jurors when they are to 
use a presumption.
There are two constitutional limitations on presumptions in criminal 
cases: (1) A presumption must be based on a logical assumption rather 
than mere policy, and (2) when used by the prosecution, the basic fact 
must be established beyond a reasonable doubt. A presumption that a 
person intends the ordinary consequences of his or her voluntary acts 
is unconstitutional because the jury could believe it shifts the burden of 
persuasion to the defendant.
The following rather complicated presumptions have also been found 
to be unconstitutional: Intent to commit theft by fraud is presumed 
when there is a failure to return rental cars within 20 days of the owner’s 
demand, and a person is presumed to have embezzled a rental car if the car 
was not returned within 5 days of the expiration of the rental agreement.
Some states list specific presumptions in their codes and specify the 
effect of each presumption. Others rely on the common law or the local 
state’s case law. The Federal Rules of Evidence do not contain any pre-
sumptions for use in criminal cases.
Presumptions are generally divided into two types: conclusive and 
rebuttable. Rebuttable presumptions can be further divided into strong 

70 
Chapter 3
and weak. Which category a presumption falls into is governed by the 
social policy behind it. Not all states will find the same policy reason for 
a presumption, so it may not be considered to be in the same category in 
all states.
In its simplest form, a presumption requires the jury to conclude 
that the presumed fact is true if the jury believes the basic fact has been 
established. In all presumptions, the opposing side can try to convince the 
jury that the basic fact did not occur. This can be done by attacking the 
credibility of the witnesses who testified about the basic fact or present-
ing witnesses who are in a position to know that the fact never occurred. 
Figure 3-1 illustrates each of the presumptions.
The role of the presumed fact changes according to the social policy 
involved. In cases in which social policy is strongest (that is, conclusive 
presumptions) no one is allowed to refute the existence of the presumed 
fact, but attacks on the basic fact may be used to avoid the conclusion that 
	



					
			
	





					
	





		

 !	

"	#	
$
#	
"	#	
$
#	
"	#	
$
#	
Figure 3-1
Conclusive, Strong Rebuttable, and Weak Rebuttable Presumptions

 
Types of Evidence 
71
the presumption directs the jury to draw. There are very few conclusive 
presumptions.
When a rebuttable presumption is involved, the opposing side can 
attempt to disprove either the basic fact or the presumed fact. With a 
strong rebuttable presumption, many states give the opposing side the task 
of either disproving the basic fact or disproving the presumed fact. Merely 
casting doubt on the existence of the presumed fact is not enough. 
The lowest level of social policy is involved in weak rebuttable pre-
sumptions. These are usually created to expedite the trial rather than to 
enforce the interests of society. In these cases, the presumption completely 
disappears if the opposing side has introduced evidence to disprove the 
presumed fact; the jury will not even be told that the presumption exists.
It is helpful to work through several presumptions in order to under-
stand how they operate. First, consider the conclusive presumption that a 
child born to a married couple who are living together was fathered by the 
husband unless the husband is impotent or sterile. There is a strong social 
policy favoring the legitimacy of children that resulted in the creation of 
this presumption. Sometimes it resulted in a man being ruled the father of 
a child when blood tests established a high probability that he was not the 
father. With advances in DNA testing making it scientifically possible to 
disprove paternity, and a lowering of the social stigma of illegitimacy, there 
has been pressure on state legislatures to do away with this presumption. 
Now let’s examine a strong rebuttable presumption. A presumption 
that many states place in this category is that a person who has disap-
peared and has not been heard from in 5 years is presumed to be dead. 
The basic fact is that a person has disappeared and not been heard from in 
5 years. The presumed fact is that the person is dead. The purpose of this 
presumption is to allow property rights to be settled among the heirs of 
the person who disappeared and to allow the remaining spouse to remarry. 
It is not used as a basis for homicide prosecutions.
The party that wishes to use this presumption must establish that the 
person has disappeared and not been heard from in 5 years. If this is done, 
and the other side introduces no evidence on the issue, the jury must con-
clude that the person in question is dead. 
The opposing side can attack the presumption in two ways: show that 
the person has been heard from during the past 5 years (disprove the basic 
fact) or show that the person is not dead (disprove the presumed fact). 
Testimony from people who claim to have seen the person recently can 
be used to attack the basic fact. Evidence that there was a motive for the 
disappearance, such as escaping prosecution for a serious felony, can be 
used to attack the presumed fact. 

72 
Chapter 3
The jurors are usually instructed that if they believe the person has 
disappeared and has not been heard from, they must conclude that he 
or she is dead unless they believe the other side’s explanation for the 
disappearance.
The next illustration involves a weak rebuttable presumption: A letter 
that is properly mailed (correctly addressed, stamped, and put in the U.S. 
mail) is presumed to reach its destination. This is a presumption estab-
lished solely to facilitate normal business transactions because it would be 
very difficult for the person who mails a letter to prove that it reached its 
destination.
Everyone knows that the mail service is not perfect, but it is easier 
to start with the general assumption that a letter will get to its destina-
tion. If the opposing side tries to show that the letter was not correctly 
mailed—for example, it was mailed to the wrong address (attacks the 
basic fact)—the jury will be instructed that if they believe the letter was 
correctly mailed they must conclude that it got to its destination. During 
deliberations, the jury will have to decide if the letter was mailed correctly. 
On the other hand, if the opposing side introduces testimony that the 
letter never reached the addressee, the presumption ceases to exist, and the 
jury will not even be told about the presumption.
Summary
S u m m a r y
Only relevant evidence can be admitted in court. This means that the evidence 
must tend to prove something that is required in the case. Not only must it be 
relevant but also the value of the evidence must be sufficient to make the evidence 
material.
 
Evidence can be divided into direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence proves 
the point without the need to draw any conclusions. Circumstantial evidence 
requires the jury to draw a conclusion that some relevant fact occurred.
 
Another system of classification divides evidence into two categories: testi-
monial and real. Testimonial evidence covers what witnesses say under oath or 
affirmation. Real evidence includes all types of tangible objects.
 
There are three main substitutes for evidence. The opposing attorneys may 
agree that a fact exists without proving it to the jury. This is called a stipulation. 
A judge may take official notice of commonly known facts. Judicial notice is the 
name for this procedure. Presumptions require the jury to draw specific conclu-
sions if certain basic facts have been established. In all of these situations, the 
jury is told to assume that a fact has been proven when in fact it has not been. 
This is done to expedite the trial and, in some cases, to protect strong social 
policies.

 
Types of Evidence 
73
1. Define relevant and material evidence and explain how they differ. 
2. List two situations in which relevant evidence would not be admissible in 
court.
3. Define direct and circumstantial evidence and give two examples of each. 
4. Define testimonial and real evidence and give two examples of each.
5. Compare and contrast stipulation and judicial notice, and give two 
examples of facts that could be judicially noticed. 
6. Define inference and give an example of its application. 
7. Differentiate between a rebuttable presumption and a conclusive 
presumption. 
8. Give an example of a conclusive presumption and a rebuttable presumption.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Go to www.cnn.com/crime and click on a case that is currently being tried. Read 
all you can about that case at the website. Write a 250-word (one-page) paper 
identifying each piece of evidence as direct, circumstantial, testimonial, real, 
document, stipulation, judicial notice, and presumption.
Note:
 1. Many items will fit in more that one of the previous categories. 
2.  You may not be able to find something for every one of the previous 
categories.

This page intentionally left blank 

75
Direct and 
Circumstantial Evidence
CHAPTER 4
Feature Case: Kobe Bryant
Star player for the Los Angeles Lakers. Charged with rape of a Colorado 
hotel concierge in July 2003. Faced 4 years to life in prison if convicted. 
Throughout the proceedings, Kobe Bryant maintained that it had been 
consensual sex.
When the victim was taken to the hospital the day following the 
sexual encounter for an examination (commonly called a “rape kit”), she 
had bruises on her neck and in the vaginal area. Her undergarments were 
sent to the laboratory for testing and it was discovered that there was 
evidence that she had had multiple sex partners. The defense argued that 
the evidence indicated the victim had three sex partners, one possibly in 
the interval between leaving Bryant and arriving at the hospital for the 
rape exam, and any one of the three could have inflicted the injuries. The 
defense appealed to the Colorado Supreme Court and won the right to 
question the victim about her past sexual history despite the Colorado 
“Rape Shield Law” that made a rape victim’s past inadmissible.
As the trial approached, the victim became reluctant to testify or 
participate in the trial in any way. After jury selection was under way, a 
settlement was reached and the charges were dropped on September 1, 
2004. Bryant issued the following statement: “Although I truly believe this 
encounter between us was consensual, I recognize now that she did not and 
does not view this incident the same way I did. After months of reviewing 
discovery, listening to her attorney, and even her testimony in person, I now 
understand how she feels that she did not consent to this encounter.”

76 
Chapter 4
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define both direct and circumstantial evidence.
• Explain how the jury determines the weight to be given to the testimony of each 
witness.
• Describe circumstantial evidence that can be used to show modus operandi and
to establish motive.
• Identify situations in which the defendant’s knowledge or skills can be used as 
circumstantial evidence of guilt.
• Describe the types of situations in which the defendant’s acts prior to the crime 
may be used in evidence.
• Identify situations in which the defendant’s acts after the crime was committed 
can be used as circumstantial evidence of guilt.
• Explain when character evidence is admissible at trial and describe how character 
is established at trial.
Key Terms
•  Character
•  Circumstantial evidence
•  Credibility of the witness
•  Direct evidence
•  Matter of law
• Modus operandi
•  Reputation
•   Weight of each piece of 
evidence
Myths about Direct and 
Circumstantial Evidence
Facts about Direct and 
Circumstantial Evidence
A conviction cannot be based on 
circumstantial evidence.
There is no rule that mandates which types 
of evidence are used to convict.
Direct evidence is given more weight than 
circumstantial evidence.
The jury decides how much weight will 
be placed on each piece of evidence. The 
credibility of the witness has a lot to do 
with the weight the jury assigns to the 
evidence.
Direct evidence means a physical object—
the murder weapon, the ransom note, etc.
Direct evidence is based on firsthand 
knowledge—personal knowledge or 
observation of the person testifying.
Circumstantial evidence means hearsay and 
rumors surrounding the case.
Circumstantial evidence means testimony 
that indirectly proves a fact—the jury must 
use an inference to connect circumstantial 
evidence to the commission of the crime.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
77
Basic Definitions
In Chapter 3, we briefly discussed direct and circumstantial evidence. The 
following were the key definitions:
Direct Evidence Defined
Direct evidence is based on personal knowledge or observation of the person 
testifying. No inference or presumption is needed. If the testimony is believed by 
the jury, the fact it relates to is conclusively established.
Circumstantial Evidence Defined
Circumstantial evidence indirectly proves a fact. It requires the trier of the facts 
to use an inference or presumption in order to conclude that the fact exists.
Direct evidence will be admissible if it was legally obtained and is 
not privileged. Circumstantial evidence is admitted at the discretion of 
the judge. The judge considers whether the evidence is relevant and bal-
ances other factors such as the amount of time it will take to introduce the 
evidence, confusion that may result from the evidence, and the possibility 
that the evidence may be unduly prejudicial. Direct and/or circumstan-
tial evidence can be used to establish guilt. The law does not favor direct 
evidence over circumstantial. The jury decides whether the fact has been 
established.
Weight of Evidence
In American courts, questions of law are decided by the judge. Questions 
of fact are decided by the jury, unless the trial is being heard by a judge 
without a jury. Stipulations and items judicially noticed are determined as 
a “matter of law” by the judge; the jury decides all disputed facts.
The jury, as trier of the facts, is given the duty to decide the effect and 
weight of each piece of evidence. This requires the jury to decide which 
evidence to believe if there is a conflict in the facts. If there is more than 
one possible interpretation of the facts, the jury has to decide which one is 
correct. The jury also decides what inferences to draw from circumstantial 
evidence and which witnesses should be believed.
When direct evidence is introduced, the jury’s main function is to 
decide the credibility of the witness. This usually revolves around two 
factors: the demeanor of the witness and the likelihood that what the 
witness said could have happened. Demeanor includes all types of body 

78 
Chapter 4
language. The jury also considers whether the witness was evasive or 
antagonistic. Common sense may be applied to the facts in order to decide 
if it was possible for the events in question to occur in the manner the wit-
ness described. Facts disclosed during impeachment, such as personal bias 
or prior felony convictions of the witness, may also be considered. Jury 
instructions usually explain all of this. Impeachment is covered in detail 
in Chapter 5.
Examples of Ways to Test Credibility of a Witness
•  The witness refused to look at the prosecutor or the jury.
•  The witness gave evasive answers and refused to be pinned down on details.
•  The witness cooperated with one side but was very hostile toward the attorney 
for the opposing side.
•  The witness previously told the police a totally different story than he gave 
while testifying.
•  The witness has previously been convicted for perjury.
•  The witness has previously been convicted for any crime involving truthfulness.
Circumstantial evidence is more difficult to evaluate. The jury must 
decide the credibility of the witness, what inference should be drawn from 
the evidence, and the weight to be given to each piece of evidence. There is 
frequently more than one inference that can be drawn from the facts, and 
sometimes the possible conclusions are quite contradictory. Also, individual 
jurors will have different ideas on the correct weight for various pieces of 
evidence. All of these conclusions are obviously affected by the credibility 
of the witnesses. These issues must be resolved during jury deliberations. 
The jurors are told to listen to each other’s opinions and try to reach a 
consensus. Lengthy discussions and many ballots may be required. If an 
impasse occurs, the judge may intervene with additional instructions on 
the need to consider all points of view in order to reach a verdict, but the 
jurors are the only ones who can decide what conclusions to reach.
Circumstantial Evidence of Ability 
to Commit the Crime
Some crimes are committed in a manner that indicates that the suspect had 
special skills or abilities that the average person would not have had. The 
more unique the skill, the stronger the inference that the defendant is the one 
who committed the crime if he or she has that skill. Obviously, the case must 
be based on more than this one inference. The prosecutor hopes that the jury 
will conclude that the defendant is guilty if the defendant has the rare skill or 
ability that was required to commit the crime. The defense can also use the 

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
79
reverse of this approach. If the crime was committed by a person with a spe-
cial skill or ability, the fact that the defendant does not have the requisite skill 
or ability can be used to infer that the defendant did not commit the crime.
Skills and Technical Knowledge
Most street crimes require few special skills or technical knowledge, but 
there are circumstances in which even these crimes are committed in such a 
way that the suspect must have had some specialized training or experience. 
On the other hand, most white-collar crimes require uncommon skills or 
technical knowledge.
For example, “safe cracking” is a skill that the average person does not 
have. In a case in which an unauthorized person opened a locked safe, 
the fact that the defendant has been known to “crack” safes in the past 
is relevant. This circumstantial evidence is not conclusive, of course, but 
combined with other admissible evidence it may convince the jury that 
the defendant committed the crime. The opposite approach can also be 
used by the defense. If the defense attorney can convince the jury that the 
defendant has no idea how to open a safe, the jury would likely conclude 
that the defendant did not commit the crime (at least not alone).
Computer crimes are another example. Many elaborate embezzlement 
schemes are accomplished by altering a company’s computer software. 
High-tech extortion plots may involve the unauthorized use of computer 
access codes or the placing of “logic bombs” and “viruses” in a software 
program. The Internet may be used to obtain credit card numbers. These 
crimes require advanced programming techniques that the average person 
does not possess. In these types of cases, the fact that the defendant had 
the ability to do sophisticated programming is very relevant circumstan-
tial evidence. Other examples of skills that can be used as circumstantial 
evidence include etching and printing (counterfeiting cases), locksmithing 
(burglary without signs of forced entry), bookkeeping (embezzlement), 
and advanced training in electronics (entry by avoiding a highly sophisti-
cated alarm system).
Examples of Skills and Technical Knowledge Needed to Commit the 
Crime
•  The burglar bypassed an elaborate alarm system in order to enter the building.
•  The door was opened with a “lock pick.”
•  Someone programmed the company computer to pay invoices submitted by a 
fictitious business.
•  The artists made and sold paintings that looked exactly like famous masterpieces.
•  Identity theft.

80 
Chapter 4
Means to Accomplish the Crime
The fact that the defendant had the means to accomplish the crime can 
also be used as circumstantial evidence if the average person would not 
have access to the necessary equipment or location. A simple example of 
this is if the defendant owned a gun that was the same caliber as the bullet 
taken from the body of the murder victim. If the bullet is damaged so 
that no further testing can be done, and there are many similar guns, the 
inference would be weak. On the other hand, if a ballistics test matches the 
bullet to the defendant’s gun, the inference would be strong.
Examples of Means to Accomplish a Crime
•  A person who worked at a company making explosives would have access to 
the chemicals necessary to manufacture bombs.
•  A person caught with a lock pick in his or her possession may have committed 
a burglary without leaving signs of forcible entry.
•  A person who had a large quantity of small, clear plastic envelopes might be 
selling illegal drugs.
•  A person has the combination to the safe that was opened without any sign of 
prying or other physical damage.
•  A person owns a rare gun that is the same make and model as the one used to 
commit the crime.
•  A person was recently fired by the business that was burglarized and still has a 
key to the back door.
In a similar manner, the fact that the defendant had a stolen pass 
key for the area where the theft occurred can be used as circumstantial 
evidence that the suspect was in the area; unauthorized possession of the 
password for a computer that has been tampered with is circumstantial 
evidence that the defendant illegally used the computer; and possession 
of someone else’s credit card numbers or telephone calling card numbers 
is circumstantial evidence that the defendant made the unauthorized 
charges.
Physical Capacity
Physical capacity can also be used to infer guilt in some cases. An obvious 
example is the defendant’s height, if the physical facts show that only a 
very tall person could have committed the crime. The ability to run very 
fast, or the fact that the defendant is disabled and could not possibly have 
run that fast, can also be used if the situation makes speed relevant. The 
ability to lift heavy weights would be relevant if the suspect carried away 
heavy objects, or impotence may be relevant in sex crime cases.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
81
Examples of Physical Capacity to Commit the Crime
•  The burglar carried 50-pound bags out of the building.
•  The burglar entered the building through a window that would only open a 
few inches.
•  The suspect outran the victim.
•  The victim was severely injured by karate kicks to his head.
•  The kidnapper picked up the victim and carried her a substantial distance.
Mental Capacity
Mental capacity may also be relevant. This is probably obvious if the defen-
dant is pleading “not guilty by reason of insanity” or “diminished capacity.” 
Juvenile cases may turn on the maturity and mental capacity of the child. 
Specific intent crimes and crimes requiring premeditation also make mental 
capacity more important.
On the other hand, since adults are presumed to know things that 
are common knowledge, the defense may need to establish that the 
defendant has minimal mental capacity and, therefore, did not know 
something that was obvious to everyone else. The facts of a crime may 
also make mental capacity relevant. It can be inferred that sophisticated 
crimes could only have been committed by very intelligent people. 
Childish pranks may be circumstantial evidence that the suspect was 
an adult with below average mental capacity or that juveniles were the 
culprits.
Examples of Mental Capacity to Commit the Crime
•  The defendant developed a very sophisticated plot to kill the victim.
•  The defendant used a very complicated chemical formula to manufacture 
illegal drugs.
•  The defendant memorized 20 ten-digit account numbers.
•  The ransom demand note was written in perfect Shakespearean English.
•  The adult suspect acted like a 7-year-old.
Circumstantial Evidence of Intent
Circumstantial evidence is frequently needed to establish intent. This is 
doubly true in specific intent crimes. The two most common approaches 
to establishing intent are modus operandi and motive. Definitions used 
for these items vary from state to state.

82 
Chapter 4
Modus Operandi
Modus operandi literally means the method of operation. Many crimi-
nals become creatures of habit and rather methodically commit the same 
crimes repeatedly in the same way. When this happens, the prosecutor can 
introduce evidence of the defendant’s prior crimes that were substantially 
similar to the current one and let the jury conclude that the defendant 
also committed the crime he or she is now charged with. The fact that the 
defendant has been previously charged with violation of the same penal 
code section is not enough. There must be a great similarity in the method 
of committing the crime. If there are many common features, the jury 
will be more likely to infer that the defendant also committed the crime 
for which he or she is now on trial. The prosecutor may also be allowed 
to introduce evidence of very similar crimes committed by the defendant, 
even if the defendant was never charged with those offenses.
The judge has the discretion to admit or reject this type of circum-
stantial evidence. The normal rule is that prior crimes are not admissible. 
The jury should not infer that the defendant is guilty merely because he 
or she has been guilty of other crimes. The prosecutor must convince the 
judge that the method of committing the crime was sufficiently unusual to 
amount to the defendant putting his or her “signature” on it.
An example would be the person who enters liquor stores late at night, 
asks for a specific brand of cigarettes, and, while the clerk is getting the 
cigarettes, pulls a gun and demands all the money in the cash register. 
The combination of time of day, type of store, and diversionary technique 
make this person’s crimes distinctive. The prosecutor will be allowed to 
introduce evidence so the jury can see that the defendant has committed 
very similar crimes in the past. Based on this, the jurors will be allowed 
to conclude, if they see fit, that the defendant also committed the current 
liquor store robbery.
In a case involving a woman who was charged with bank robbery, the 
judge ruled that her prior conviction for bank robbery was admissible 
because there were very few women who rob banks. Normally, the prosecu-
tor will have to show several common features of the past and present crimes 
in order to convince the judge that the prior offenses can be introduced.
Examples of Modus Operandi—Same Method Used on Several 
Occasions
•  A rape suspect frequented “singles bars” and offered to take the victim to 
dinner. On their “dinner date” he suddenly told the victim he would cook 
dinner for them. Once they had entered his apartment, he became very 
aggressive and raped the victim if she did not consent.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
83
•  The suspect knocked on the front door. If anyone answered, he asked for Fred. 
When told that no one by that name lived there, he asked to use the phone. 
Once inside, he stole expensive items.
•  A man walked in parks where children frequently played. He would approach 
a child, show the child a picture of a puppy, and tell the child he had lost his 
puppy. The child was asked to help find the puppy. If the child went to an 
isolated spot with the man, he would molest the child.
•  The suspect avoided burglar alarms by entering through the roof. He used a 
grappling hook to scale the wall and then chopped a hole in the roof.
Motive
Motive does not have to be proven by the prosecution unless it is included 
in the definition of the crime. Even though it is not an element of the crime, 
it may be a key to convincing the jury that the defendant is guilty. This is 
particularly true when there is no direct evidence in the case. Depending 
on the facts of the case, possible motives could include hate, prejudice, 
revenge, retaliation, greed, lust, profit, economic need, love, and mercy.
Greed is a motive in many crimes. In a murder case, it usually means 
the criminal will profit financially from the death of the victim. This could 
include being hired to commit murder, inheriting money or something 
else of value from the victim, being the beneficiary of the victim’s life 
insurance policy, eliminating business competitors, and preventing the 
victim or witness from reporting a crime. Any of these could be used as 
circumstantial evidence of intent to kill.
Hatred and prejudice also motivate many criminals. Hatred may be 
obvious if there has been a long-running feud between the victim and 
the suspect. Racial prejudice may appear as the motive in other cases. Less 
obvious examples include gang violence and terrorism. Love and mercy 
may even be motives. “Lovers’ triangles” (and other geometric patterns) 
can erupt into violence and even murder. Euthanasia, or mercy killing, may 
be based on the belief that a loved one should not be allowed to suffer.
Motive may also be important if the defendant is claiming that a 
murder was committed in self-defense or in the heat of passion. Evidence 
that there was a motive for the killing, such as revenge, jealousy, or hate, 
may help convince the jury that an opportunistic defendant’s claim to 
mitigating circumstances is not valid.
Examples of Motive to Commit the Crime
•  Husband was involved in an affair and wanted a divorce. The divorce was never 
complete because the couple could not agree on a property settlement. Wife 
was found dead.

84 
Chapter 4
•  A business owner was deeply in debt. He falsified inventory records to show 
that many expensive items were stored in the warehouse. He took out a fire 
insurance policy. Two weeks later the warehouse burned to the ground.
•  A woman had a double indemnity life insurance policy that paid twice as much 
if death was by natural causes but did not pay anything if death was by suicide. 
Her husband, who was the beneficiary of the insurance policy, hid evidence 
that indicated the woman took her own life.
•  A husband and wife were in the midst of a fierce custody battle. The wife 
coached one of the children to tell a police officer that the father had sexually 
abused him.
•  A defendant had been charged with capital murder. Only one witness could 
positively identify the defendant as the killer. Someone killed the witness.
Threats
The fact that the defendant has threatened to commit the crime is circum-
stantial evidence that he or she committed the crime. Although a person 
may make threats without planning to carry them out, the fact that the 
threat was made has some probative value. Specific threats will carry more 
weight than vague ones. How recently the threat was made, the credibility 
of the person reporting it, and other circumstances surrounding it will also 
be relevant. On the other hand, if it can be shown that someone else threat-
ened to commit the crime, the defense can try to convince the jury that the 
other person committed the crime and the defendant is innocent.
Threats may also be relevant in self-defense cases. The standard used to 
determine if self-defense justified the use of force is whether a reasonable 
person would have used the same amount of force in the same circumstances. 
Jurors may consider the fact that the victim had previously threatened to 
harm the defendant. The question becomes what force would a reasonable 
person who had received the same threat believe was necessary to protect 
him- or herself when confronted by the person who made the threats.
Examples of Relevant Threats to Commit the Crime
•  Two days before the victim’s death, the victim and suspect got into a fight. The 
suspect shouted, “I’ll kill you for that!”
•  A battered woman told her batterer that she was going to leave him. He made 
a menacing gesture and said, “If you ever leave me you will never see your kids 
again!” The next day the children disappeared.
•  A bully continually threatened another high school student. He taunted, “I’m 
going to kill you!” One day the bully approached the student with his hand in 
his jacket pocket simulating a gun. Believing the bully was about to shoot him, 
the student grabbed a rock and hit the bully in the head.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
85
•  Someone repeatedly phoned and in a loud whisper said, “You won’t live to see 
the morning sun.” At approximately 2:00 a.m., someone tried to open the back 
door. The person who received the calls became very frightened and fired a rifle 
through the door.
•  An employee was caught stealing. He told the security staff that if he got fired 
they would pay for it. A week later, someone slashed the tires on all the cars in 
the area where the security staff parked.
Circumstantial Evidence of Guilt
What the suspect does following the crime may also be circumstantial 
evidence of guilt. Flight to avoid prosecution, attempts to hide evidence, 
possession of stolen property, sudden wealth, and attempts to silence wit-
nesses are commonly put in this category.
Although the average juror probably considers the fact that the defen-
dant has invoked the Fifth Amendment to be evidence of guilt, the U.S. 
Supreme Court has made it clear that the jury must not draw this conclu-
sion.1 Invoking Miranda rights also comes under the same protection.2
The Court’s reasoning was that constitutional rights would be meaningless 
if the jury could conclude that a person is guilty if he or she used them.
Flight to Avoid Punishment
This category includes almost anything a suspect does to avoid convic-
tion and serving a sentence. Probably the first to come to mind is fleeing 
from the scene of the crime. Later attempts to flee to avoid arrest are also 
included. Hiding raises a similar inference. After arrest, the more common 
ways to avoid punishment include jumping bail and attempts to escape 
from jail.
Examples of Flight to Avoid Punishment
•  The suspect ran from the scene immediately after the crime.
•  The suspect fled the country after being released on bail.
•  The police tried to arrest the suspect on an outstanding warrant. The suspect 
attacked the officer and escaped.
Concealing Evidence
Hiding or concealing evidence raises an inference of guilt, as does destroy-
ing evidence. Falsifying evidence or tampering with it can also be used to 
infer guilt.

86 
Chapter 4
Many fact patterns raise this type of inference. Some, such as arson to 
conceal theft or staging an auto accident to hide the fact that the victim 
had been murdered, involve detailed planning and can only be disproved 
by testimony from expert witnesses. Others, such as throwing a ski mask in 
a trash can while running from the scene of a robbery, can be more easily 
established.
The defendant may try to hide evidence from the jury by asking wit-
nesses to lie at trial. This information can be used as circumstantial evidence 
of guilt. The fact that the defendant tried to get a witness to alter testimony 
is admissible whether or not the witness agreed. It does not matter if the 
witness was willing to cooperate with the defendant, or if bribery, extortion, 
or some other means was used to get the witness to comply. The fact that 
the prosecutor does not plan to file charges for the perjury (lying under 
oath) or subornation of perjury (recruiting someone to lie under oath) is 
irrelevant.
Tampering with real (physical) evidence also raises an inference of 
guilt. This includes altering the evidence in the case or manufacturing 
evidence for use at trial.
Examples of Concealing Evidence
•  The suspect killed the victim and set the house on fire to hide the murder.
•  The suspect carved a hole in the wall, hid the evidence, and then paneled the 
wall to hide the hole.
•  The suspect gave evidence to a friend and told him to hide it.
Possession of Stolen Property
In a theft case, the fact that the defendant was in possession of something 
taken during the theft is circumstantial evidence that the defendant was 
the thief. The inference is much stronger if the defendant had the prop-
erty immediately after the theft. Receiving stolen property (called theft by 
possession in some states), rather than theft, may be a more appropriate 
charge when there is a substantial time lag between the theft and the dis-
covery that the defendant had the property.
Examples of Possession of Stolen Property
•  The suspect was stopped approximately 1 mile from the scene of the robbery. 
When he searched the suspect, the officer found cash in his pocket that was 
exactly equal to the amount stolen.
•  The suspect had shiny new rims on his car that matched the description of 
ones stolen approximately 1 week ago. He stated that he had received the 

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
87
rims as a birthday gift from his girlfriend but could not give the name of his 
girlfriend.
•  The suspect was wearing an antique ring that matched the description of one 
stolen in a recent home-invasion robbery.
Sudden Wealth
The fact that the suspect suddenly had a lot of money soon after a property 
crime occurred can be used as circumstantial evidence. This is also true if 
the defendant profited from a violent crime such as murder. The prosecu-
tor will ask the jury to infer that the money came from committing the 
crime. The jury may be told how much the defendant earns (or that he 
or she was unemployed), the defendant’s normal spending habits, or that 
he or she recently tried to obtain charity or loans because he or she had 
no money. The defense will attempt to convince the jury that there was a 
legal source for this sudden wealth. Evidence that the defendant inherited 
a large sum of money from a recently deceased relative, won the lottery, or 
even won the money by gambling may be introduced into evidence.
Examples of Sudden Wealth
•  The suspect, who was unemployed, went to his favorite bar and paid cash for 
several rounds of drinks for everyone present.
•  The suspect, who worked at a low-paying job, deposited $10,000 in cash into 
his checking account.
•  The suspect, who previously took the bus to work, suddenly started driving an 
expensive automobile.
Threatening Witnesses
If the defendant threatens or abuses the victim or witnesses in order to 
prevent prosecution and conviction, it can be inferred that the defendant is 
guilty. Killing the victim, either during the original crime or later, in order to 
prevent the victim from testifying is the most extreme case. The same infer-
ence also applies if threats were used in an attempt to prevent the victim or 
witness from reporting the crime, to pressure the victim to drop the charges, 
or to prevent the victim or witness from testifying in court. It does not 
matter if the defendant makes the threats or if he or she has someone else do 
it. The jury will decide how much weight the threats should be given based 
on what the defendant did.
These types of activities frequently amount to separate crimes. Their 
use as circumstantial evidence is separate from any prosecution for intimi-
dating witnesses.

88 
Chapter 4
Examples of Threatening Witnesses
•  Prior to leaving the scene of the crime, the robber told the victim, “You call the 
police and I’ll come back and kill you!”
•  Someone believed to be the defendant telephoned a person who had been 
subpoenaed to testify at trial and said in a menacing voice, “You’d better not 
show up in court if you love your kids.”
•  John, the defendant, had friends talk to the potential witness on several 
occasions. These friends appeared to be armed and they said, “We want what is 
best for John.”
Character
“Character witnesses” are used to try to convince the jury that a person did 
something consistent with his or her character. Most states use reputation 
as evidence of character. For example, if a person has the reputation for 
telling the truth, the jury may infer that the person is currently telling the 
truth. This is circumstantial evidence, and the jury will have to decide how 
much weight to give the character evidence.
In most states, character witnesses are only allowed to testify about a 
person’s reputation. Reputation is what other people believe about a per-
son’s character. Character describes what a person’s moral traits really are. 
In some cases, there may be a major difference between what the person is 
and what others believe he or she is.
The most common rule is that the character witness may only testify 
about what he or she knows of a person’s reputation in the “community.” 
Community usually means neighborhood, but it can also refer to a group 
of people who work together. To testify about reputation in the com-
munity, the character witness must tell what he or she has heard other 
people say. The personal opinion of this witness is not admissible under 
the traditional rule. 
Some states have expanded the traditional rule and allow character 
witnesses to give their personal opinion of a person’s character. This gives 
the jury more information to use when drawing a conclusion.
The use of character witnesses is restricted to three basic situations:
1.
The defendant may try to use his or her good character to convince 
the jury that he or she did not commit a crime.
2.
Specific character traits of the defendant may be used to infer that 
the defendant did (or did not) commit the crime.
3.
Specific character traits of the victim may be used when relevant to 
the crime.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
89
The Defendant’s Character in General
The prosecution is not allowed to attack the defendant’s character unless 
the defendant has placed character at issue. If the defense called character 
witnesses, the prosecution may call character witnesses during rebuttal. 
The prosecution’s character witnesses will testify that the defendant’s 
reputation is not what the defense witnesses said it was. For example, the 
defendant may call his priest to testify that the defendant has a reputa-
tion for being an honest, law-abiding citizen. The prosecutor may call the 
defendant’s former business partner, who testifies that the defendant has a 
reputation for being a lying thief.
Cross-examination can be used effectively on character witnesses. 
Since the witness is supposed to be telling the jury what the defendant’s 
reputation is in the community, showing that the character witness does 
not know what very many people think of the defendant reduces the 
impact of the testimony. The testimony of a character witness is also weak-
ened if it is shown that the witness knows the defendant has done things 
that are inconsistent with his or her reputation. It is also easy to impeach 
many defense character witnesses for bias. Since the defendant’s friends 
and family frequently testify about his or her good reputation, they prob-
ably view things in the light most favorable to the defendant. The character 
witnesses may also be shown to be liars. The defense, of course, will use the 
same tactics to impeach the prosecution’s character witnesses.
Examples of Evidence on Defendant’s Character in General
•  The defendant calls her pastor to testify that she is an outstanding member of 
the congregation and does many acts of charity.
•  The prosecutor calls character witness after the pastor testifies. The prosecution 
witness states that the defendant is known to be a hypocrite who goes to 
church regularly but otherwise leads the life of a hardened criminal.
•  The defendant calls a character witness who testifies that the prosecution’s 
character witness has the reputation for being a liar.
Specific Character Traits of the Defendant
In some trials, one of the defendant’s specific character traits may be rel-
evant. Since this evidence is relevant to a specific issue, it can be raised by 
either side. The prosecution does not have to wait for the defense to call 
character witnesses first.
The use of specific character traits is most common in trials for violent 
crimes. If the trial is based on the defendant’s killing his wife after finding 
out that she was having an affair, the defense may try to use his reputation 

90 
Chapter 4
for going into jealous rages in an attempt to reduce the murder charge 
to voluntary manslaughter. The defendant’s reputation as a bully may 
be useful for the prosecution if the defendant is claiming that he or she 
acted in self-defense. On the other hand, the defense may try to establish 
a reputation for being timid to show that the defendant would never have 
started the fight.
The defendant’s reputation for being cautious or reckless may also be 
relevant in some cases. If the defendant is charged with manslaughter based 
on gross negligence, his or her reputation for being reckless may be very dam-
aging to a defense based on the contention that the defendant was acting with 
due care when the death occurred. The defense could use the reverse of this if 
it could show that the defendant had a reputation for being careful.
Examples of Evidence of Specific Character Traits of the Defendant
•  The defendant is charged with murder and claims self-defense. The defense 
calls character witnesses who testify that the defendant is known to be a gentle 
person who never becomes violent.
•  The prosecution then calls a character witness who testifies that the defendant 
has the reputation for threatening anyone who disagrees with him.
•  The defense calls character witnesses who testify that on several occasions they 
heard that someone violently attacked the defendant but the defendant did not 
return the assault.
Character Traits of the Victim
Sometimes the character of the crime victim may be relevant. This is most 
common in cases in which the defense is based on self-defense. If it can be 
shown that the victim was a violent person, it is much easier to convince 
the jury that the defendant acted in self-defense. The inference would be 
even stronger if the victim’s reputation included being a bully. The pros-
ecution can use the reverse of this approach; for example, showing the jury 
that the victim had a reputation for being a nonviolent person may defeat 
the self-defense claim.
At one time, the reputation of a rape victim was considered to be at 
issue. The oldest cases allowed the jury to conclude that the woman who 
was single and not a virgin would consent to sex with almost anyone. More 
recently, the reputation of the rape victim for being promiscuous has been 
used to infer that she consented. This type of questioning is now usually 
reserved for rape cases in which the defendant admits having sex with 
the victim but claims that she consented. Some states now refuse to allow 
questions about the sex life of the victim unless there was a prior relation-
ship between the defendant and the victim.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
91
Examples of Relevant Character Traits of the Victim
•  The defendant is charged with murder and claims self-defense. The defense 
introduced a character witness who testified that the victim had the reputation 
of being very violent and getting angry very quickly.
•  The defendant is charged with rape. The defense calls character witnesses who 
state that the victim has a reputation for making false accusations against men 
she dates.
•  The defendant is a battered woman charged with killing her batterer. The 
defense introduced character evidence that the victim was violent and had 
beaten several of his former girlfriends.
Other Acts Evidence
“Other acts evidence” includes a variety of situations in which prior actions 
of the defendant are relevant to the current case. In these situations, the 
prior acts can be used to infer that he or she committed the crime alleged 
in the current trial. Normally, the defendant’s history is not admissible. 
The use of this type of evidence is permitted in response to specific issues 
raised by the defense. Since introduction of this type of evidence is con-
trary to the normal rules, the judge must first decide whether the evidence 
is relevant and then whether the value of the evidence is outweighed by the 
potential prejudice against the defendant.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 404(b) combines a number of rules 
that are discussed in this book under separate headings.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 404(b): Other Crimes, Wrongs, or 
Other Acts
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character 
of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, 
be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, 
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident, provided 
that upon request by the accused, the prosecution in a criminal case shall provide 
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses pretrial 
notice on good cause shown, of the general nature of any such evidence it intends 
to introduce at trial.
Identity
Prior similar crimes can be used to infer that the witness correctly identi-
fied the defendant. The defendant does not have to have been arrested or 
charged with the prior crime as long as the prosecutor can call a credible 

92 
Chapter 4
witness who can convince the jury that the defendant committed the 
crimes.
Circumstantial evidence is most commonly used in this way when an 
eyewitness claims that he or she saw the defendant commit the crime, but 
the defendant claims that it is a case of mistaken identity. This method 
of establishing identity is very similar to the use of prior crimes to show 
modus operandi. Unless there is a great deal of similarity between the cur-
rent offense and the prior acts, the judge will not allow the prosecutor to 
admit the prior crimes because they would be unduly prejudicial to the 
defendant.
Example of Other Acts Evidence Used to Prove Identity
•  A 72-year-old man is on trial for bank robbery. He claims the witness wrongly 
identified him as the robber. The prosecution is allowed to show that robberies 
by senior citizens are very rare and the defendant has been arrested for two 
bank robberies in the past 3 years.
•  The defendant is charged in an elaborate fraud scene. The prosecution was only 
able to tie him to the crime by the use of fingerprints found on the documents 
involved. The defendant claims there is an innocent explanation for how 
the fingerprints were placed on the documents. The prosecution introduces 
evidence that the suspect has been involved in the same type of fraud scheme 
in three states.
Habit or Custom
The fact that the defendant had a habit or custom of doing something can 
be used to infer that he or she did it when the crime was committed. The 
victim’s habits and customs can also be used to show that he or she was not 
voluntarily involved in criminal conduct. Habits and customs are easily 
confused with character traits. Habits and customs are more specific than 
character traits. A person’s character may include being a liar; lying about 
one’s age can be a habit.
In most states, evidence is admissible if the person’s habit or custom 
is so strong that it becomes a semiautomatic response to a particular type 
of situation. This creates stronger circumstantial evidence than a charac-
ter trait would. Since the potential for prejudicial impact is less, the judge 
is usually more likely to admit it if it is relevant to the case. The habit or 
custom does not have to relate to doing criminal acts. It merely needs to 
be relevant to the way in which the crime was committed. This type of 
evidence can also be used to infer that the defendant did not commit the 
crime because it was his or her habit or custom to act in a different way 
than the way the person committing the crime acted.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
93
Habitual neatness could be relevant, for example, if the suspect went 
to great lengths to clean up after the crime was committed. A person’s 
obsession for punctuality could be used to infer that he or she would 
be at a scheduled appointment unless forced to go somewhere else. In a 
homicide case in which the body has not been recovered, habit or custom 
could be used to show that a missing person did not voluntarily leave town 
without telling anyone.
Examples of Other Acts Evidence to Prove Habit or Custom
•  The victim was a very tidy housekeeper. When the police were called to the 
scene, the house was a mess and the victim was gone. The prosecution asked 
the jurors to infer that the victim was forced to leave the scene against her will.
•  The victim was an elderly man who was very frugal. The prosecution asked 
the jury to infer that the large check written on the victim’s account for an 
extravagant gift was not written by the victim.
•  The victim was an old lady who was inseparable from her dog. After her house 
burned down, her dog was found dead inside with a bullet hole in his head. 
Police were never able to locate the old lady or her remains. The prosecution 
asked the jury to infer that the lady was kidnapped. 
Lack of Accident
In some cases, the defendant admits doing the criminal act but claims it 
was done accidentally. In these situations, the defendant’s prior acts can be 
used to show that the current crime was not an accident.
A good example would be a theft case in which the defendant knew 
that the victim carried something very valuable in his or her briefcase and 
attempted to switch briefcases with the victim. The defense might try to 
prove that picking up the victim’s briefcase was an honest mistake. This 
defense could be very convincing until the prosecutor calls a witness who 
testifies that the defendant pulled a similar switch a few months ago.
Another example would be the burglar who was caught in a secluded 
area of Al’s Market soon after closing time. His or her claim of not knowing 
that the store had closed could be countered by testimony of an employee 
of Bob’s Grocery who caught the defendant soon after the defendant had 
committed a similar burglary by hiding in Bob’s Grocery at closing time.
Examples of Other Acts Evidence Used to Show Lack of Accident
•  The defendant was charged with carrying a concealed weapon and claimed 
he did not know the law covered the type of weapon he had. The prosecution 
showed that the defendant had previously been convicted for carrying the same 
model of a handgun.

94 
Chapter 4
•  The defendant was at a party and left with an expensive coat that was not hers. 
She claimed it was an innocent mistake. The prosecution introduced evidence 
to show that similar incidents had occurred at two other parties the defendant 
attended that year.
Prior False Claims
If a person has previously filed false claims, it can be inferred that the 
current claim is also false. In fraud cases, it may be very helpful to show 
that the defendant has previously filed false claims in order to recover on 
insurance policies. Some states also allow the prosecutor to show that the 
defendant has repeatedly filed claims and ask the jury to conclude that 
this is evidence that the current claims are false. This, of course, is weaker 
evidence than the situation in which it can be shown that at least one of 
the prior claims was actually fraudulent.
A different use of this type of evidence is to discredit the complaining 
witness. If the witness can be shown to have previously made a false report 
of a crime, or falsely accused a person of committing a crime, it can be 
inferred that the present allegations are also untrue. This type of evidence 
usually comes out during cross-examination if the attorney has done his or 
her homework. Asking this type of question would only support the cred-
ibility of the witness if it turned out that no prior reports had been made.
Examples of Other Acts Evidence—Prior False Claims
•  The defendant was charged with staging a traffic accident in order to defraud 
an insurance company. He claimed it was an accident. The prosecution 
introduced evidence that the defendant had been involved in three similar 
accidents and filed excessive claims in each case.
•  The defendant was on trial for rape. The defense introduced evidence that the 
alleged victim had previously filed police reports for rape and then withdrew 
them when confronted with conflicting evidence.
Offers to Plead Guilty
If the jury knew that the defendant had tried to plea bargain, it would be 
likely to conclude that the defendant was guilty. Although this is a very logi-
cal conclusion, there are strong policy reasons for denying the jury access to 
this information. Making offers to plead guilty admissible would interfere 
with nearly all attempts to plea bargain. The need to expedite court proceed-
ings through the use of plea bargaining is considered much more important 
than allowing the jury to know this evidence. For this reason, most states do 

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
95
not allow the introduction of any testimony about attempts to plea bargain 
or the fact that the defendant entered a guilty plea but for some reason was 
allowed to withdraw it. A similar public policy usually covers attempts to 
settle civil cases. The Supreme Court held that statements made during plea 
negotiations are admissible, however, if there is an agreement between the 
defendant and prosecutor that stipulates that the statements can be used 
in court if the defendant fails to follow through with the actions he or she 
promised to take. This type of procedure is used when the prosecution offers 
a plea bargain in exchange for the defendant giving information about other 
suspects involved in the crime or acting as an undercover operative.
Circumstantial Evidence Involving the Victim
The victim’s injuries can provide circumstantial evidence that a crime 
occurred. This usually requires testimony of an expert witness to explain 
that the injuries are inconsistent with the defense’s theory of the case. For 
example, in a rape case in which consent of the victim is claimed, a medi-
cal expert may testify that the genital bruises sustained by the victim rarely 
occur during consensual intercourse. 
Parents frequently claim that an abused child was injured accidentally. 
An expert can testify that the X-rays show broken bones that were at differ-
ent stages of healing. This is consistent with the battered child syndrome 
and indicates that there were multiple violent attacks on the child.3 From 
this it can be inferred that the latest injuries were the result of battering 
and were not accidental. This type of evidence is admissible even though 
the defendant has not been previously charged with child abuse. The 
Supreme Court held that it is not necessary to establish beyond a reason-
able doubt that the defendant has previously beaten the child.4
In addition to the physical evidence of the battered child syndrome, 
psychological evidence may also be introduced. This focuses on the child’s 
behavior toward the abuser and others. Experts in psychology may testify to 
help the jurors understand the types of behavior that frequently result. For 
example, the abused child frequently is very loving and protective toward the 
abusive parent. Jurors might conclude that this is a sign that the parent is a 
loving parent while the behavior may be an attempt to prevent future abuse.
Behavior of the victim can be used to infer that the crime occurred. Not 
all victims conform to popular stereotypes of how a victim should behave, 
however. Many courts allow expert witnesses to testify about the Rape Trauma 
Syndrome and the Battered Woman Syndrome. The expert witness cannot 
positively state that the crime occurred, but he or she can explain common 
symptoms so that the jury can make inferences from the victim’s conduct.

96 
Chapter 4
The Rape Trauma Syndrome is used by the prosecution to overcome 
jurors’ stereotypes of how victims react after being raped. Symptoms 
include withdrawal from the external world, sleep disorders, exaggerated 
startle responses, guilt, memory impairment, difficulty concentrating, and 
avoidance of stimuli that make the victim recall the rape.5
The Battered Woman Syndrome has become an issue in the defense 
of women who kill (or attempt to kill) their abusive partners. This final 
act of aggression may come while the man is sleeping and clearly does not 
qualify as self-defense. In courts allowing this defense, expert testimony 
focuses on studies that show that battered women may accept abuse for 
years, downplay episodes of violence, defend the abuser by claiming he 
was justified in beating her, rarely report abuse to family or the police, and 
pass up chances to flee until some event causes them to strike back and kill. 
The mental state of the typical abused woman is used to explain why the 
defendant feared for her life when she used deadly force.6
Examples of Circumstantial Evidence Involving the Victim
•  In a trial for child abuse, X-rays are introduced that show numerous fractures. 
The expert witness concludes that the child was beaten on numerous occasions 
based on the state of healing shown for each broken bone.
•  In a trial for sexually molesting a 3-year-old girl, witnesses may testify that the 
girl’s behavior was very sexually oriented. An expert witness may testify that the 
behavior was not normal for a child that age, and that such behavior usually 
indicates the child has been involved in sexual activities.
•  In a trial of a wife charged with the murder of a husband, the defense claims 
that the wife acted in self-defense. The defense may introduce evidence that 
the husband had physically abused the wife on many occasions. An expert 
witness may testify that a battered woman frequently becomes hypervigilant 
and interprets small signs of aggression as indicators that a serious beating is 
about to happen. 
Rape Shield Laws
Prior to the 1970s, it was a common defense tactic in rape trials to dredge 
up a rape victim’s prior sexual history. The inference that the jury was 
encouraged to draw was that if a woman had ever been sexually active, 
it was more likely that she consented to sex with the defendant. This 
approach was taken in stranger rape cases as well as when a person alleged 
that a prior intimate had committed rape.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
97
Legislatures were called on to enact laws to stop this practice. Those 
laws are referred to as Rape Shield Laws. Some are found in the Evidence 
Code, and others are found in the Penal Code. Just as there are similarities 
in them, minor differences are also present. For the purposes of this book, 
the one in the Federal Rules of Evidence will be discussed.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 412: Sex Offense Cases; Relevance 
of Alleged Victim’s Past Sexual Behavior or Alleged Sexual 
Predisposition
(a) Evidence generally inadmissible. The following evidence is not admissible in a 
civil or criminal proceeding involving alleged sexual misconduct except as pro-
vided in subdivisions (b) and (c):
 
(1)  Evidence offered to prove that any alleged victim engaged in other sexual 
behavior.
 
(2)  Evidence offered to prove any alleged victim’s sexual predisposition.
(b) Exceptions.
 
(1)  In a criminal case, the following evidence is admissible, if otherwise admis-
sible under these rules:
 
 
(A)  Evidence of specific instances of sexual behavior by the alleged victim 
offered to prove that a person other than the accused was the source of 
semen, injury, or other physical evidence;
 
 
(B)  Evidence of specific instances of sexual behavior by the alleged victim 
with respect to the person accused of the sexual misconduct offered by 
the accused to prove consent or by the prosecution; and
 
 
(C)  Evidence the exclusion of which would violate the constitutional rights 
of the defendant.
 
(2) [This exception applies to civil cases and is not reproduced in this text.]
(c)  [This section sets out the procedures for determining if this evidence should be 
admitted and is not reproduced in this text.]
Exceptions (A) and (B) are meant to balance the constitutional right to 
present a defense against the privacy rights of the victim. This is another 
way of determining if the evidence is relevant. In the Kobe Bryant case, the 
Colorado Supreme Court made a ruling similar to exception (A) of the 
federal code because it was necessary, based on the physical evidence, to 
account for other possible sources of the victim’s injuries. Sub (B) applies 
to cases in which the victim and the defendant had previously been inti-
mates. It is assumed that these cases are the ones in which it is most likely 
that there would be a false rape allegation; therefore, the evidence of their 
relationship is admissible. The final subdivision, (C), leaves the judge the 
option to make appropriate rulings in unusual cases that do not fit under 
the other subsections.

98 
Chapter 4
Summary
S u m m a r y
Circumstantial evidence may be used to establish any element of a crime. It is 
usually weaker than direct evidence because the jury must infer that a fact exists 
in addition to assessing the credibility of the witness. The jury must also decide 
the weight to be given to each fact introduced into evidence.
 
Circumstantial evidence can be used to show that the defendant had the ability 
to commit the crime. This is done when the crime is committed in such a manner 
that the suspect must have had some ability that the average person would not 
possess. Examples include special skills, technical knowledge, tools to accomplish 
the crime, access to the location where the crime occurred, or unusual physical or 
mental capacity.
 
Prior crimes, which are very similar to the current one, can be used to infer that 
the defendant also committed the present crime. The modus operandi needs to be 
quite distinctive to be used in this manner.
 
Motive can also be used as circumstantial evidence of guilt. A wide variety of 
motives can be involved in crimes. Greed, hatred, and jealousy are among the 
most common.
 
Prior threats can be used to show that the defendant probably committed the 
crime. Only fairly recent threats would carry much weight.
 
Attempts to avoid apprehension after the crime may be used to show guilt. 
These include flight from the crime scene, attempts to avoid arrest or trial, and 
intimidating witnesses.
 
Possession of the fruits of the crime infers guilt. Sudden wealth can also be 
used to indicate that a person profited from the crime.
 
Character witnesses may be called by the defense to establish that the defen-
dant has a good reputation. The inference is that a person with a good character 
would not commit the crime. Once the defense has placed character at issue, the 
prosecution may also call character witnesses. In some crimes, specific character 
traits may be at issue; if so, either side may introduce character evidence on the 
relevant trait. The character of the victim is frequently relevant if self-defense 
is raised. Attacking the character of rape victims is now more restricted than in 
the past.
 
Some defenses may make additional circumstantial evidence relevant. 
Alleging mistaken identity will make evidence that the defendant committed 
very similar crimes in the past admissible. Habits and customs may be admis-
sible if they are so firmly established that they are nearly automatic responses. 
Prior acts may be relevant to show that the current crime was not done by acci-
dent or mistake. The fact that a person has previously filed false claims, either to 
collect on an insurance policy or as crime reports, can be used to infer that the 
current claim is also false.
 
There is a strong policy reason, based on judicial efficiency, to exclude evidence 
that the defendant attempted to plea bargain the charges or that the defendant 
withdrew a plea bargain. It is not admissible because allowing this evidence into 
court would result in many more cases going to trial.

 
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence 
99
REVIEW QUESTIONS
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Define and compare direct evidence and circumstantial evidence.
2. Explain how the jury decides what weight to give each fact in evidence.
3.  List three technical skills and three means of accomplishing the crime that 
can be used as circumstantial evidence. Describe a crime in which each 
would be relevant.
4.  When can physical and mental capacity be used as circumstantial evidence? 
Give three examples of each.
5.  Define modus operandi. Explain how it may be used as circumstantial 
evidence.
6.  When is motive relevant? Give three examples of how motive can be used to 
infer guilt.
7.  Explain how (1) threats, (2) flight from the scene, and (3) attempts to 
destroy evidence can be used as circumstantial evidence. Give two situations 
in which each may be relevant.
8.  Explain what evidence a “character witness” may present to the jury and 
when the defendant’s general character is admissible.
9.  Explain what evidence a “character witness” may present to the jury and 
when the defendant’s general character is admissible evidence.
10.  When is the prosecution allowed to call “character witnesses,” and when are 
the defendant’s specific character traits admissible? 
11. Under what circumstances is the victim’s character admissible? Explain.
12.  What circumstantial evidence is admissible if the defendant is claiming 
mistaken identity? Explain.
13. Distinguish “habit” and “character.” Explain when “habit” is admissible.
14.  What evidence can be used to discredit the defendant’s claim that the crime 
was accidentally committed without criminal intent? Explain.
15.  When, if ever, is the fact admissible that (1) the defendant previously 
attempted to make false claims under an insurance policy or (2) the 
defendant offered to plead guilty to the crime? Explain.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Go to www.findlaw.com for Legal Professionals. Click on Legal News. Scroll down 
to US Law. Read a story about a case. Write a 250-word (one-page) report iden-
tifying the various types of circumstantial evidence mentioned.

100 
Chapter 4
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Griffin v. California 380 U.S. 609, 14 L.Ed. 2d 106, 85 S.Ct. 1229 (1962).
 2. Wainwright v. Greenfield 474 U.S. 284, 88 L.Ed. 2d 623, 106 S.Ct. 634 (1985).
 3. Sylvia I. Mignon, Calvin J. Larson, and William M. Holmes, Family Abuse: Consequences, Theories, 
and Responses (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2002); Harvey Wallace, Family Violence: Legal, Medical and 
Social Perspectives, 3rd ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2002), Chapter 2.
 4. Estelle v. McGuire, 502 U.S. 62 (1991).
 5. Tammi D. Kolski, Michael Avriette, and Arthur E. Jongsma, Jr., The Crisis Counseling and 
Traumatic Events Treatment Planner (New York: Wiley, 2001); Sylvia I. Mignon, Calvin J. Larson, 
and William M. Holmes, Family Abuse: Consequences, Theories, and Responses (Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 2002), Chapter 3; Harvey Wallace, Family Violence: Legal, Medical and Social Perspectives,
3rd ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2002), Chapter 13.
 6. Lenore E. Walker, The Battered Woman Syndrome, 2nd ed. (New York: Springer, 2000); Mark 
Costanzo and Stuart Oskamp, eds., Violence and the Law (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994); 
Harvey Wallace, Family Violence: Legal, Medical and Social Perspectives, 3rd ed. (Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 2002), Chapter 8.

101
Witnesses
CHAPTER 5
Feature Case: Andrea Yates
Andrea Yates had five children and a miscarriage during her 8-year mar-
riage to Rusty Yates. In June 1999, Andrea attempted suicide by taking 
an overdose of pills. She was briefly hospitalized, diagnosed as having a 
major depressive disorder, and given antidepressants. Once she returned 
home, she quit taking her medications, began self-mutilating, and refused 
to feed her children because she believed they were eating too much. She 
also began having hallucinations but did not seek psychiatric help. In July 
1999, Andrea put a knife to her neck and begged Rusty to let her die. She 
was again hospitalized, this time remaining in a catatonic state for 10 days. 
Prior to her release, her doctor warned that another baby might bring on 
more episodes of psychotic behavior. 
In March 2000, at her husband’s urging, Andrea became pregnant 
again and stopped taking her antipsychotic medication. Mary was born in 
November 2000. On March 12, 2001, Andrea’s father died and her mental 
state immediately began to deteriorate. She stopped talking, refused liq-
uids, mutilated herself, and would not feed Mary. She also frantically read 
the Bible. By the end of March, Andrea was back in a psychiatric hospital, 
but after brief treatment her doctor decided she was not psychotic and 
released her. Andrea returned to the hospital in May. This time she spent 
10 days in the hospital. At her last follow-up visit, she was told to think 
positive thoughts and see a psychologist. Two days later, after Rusty left for 
work, Andrea filled the bathtub with water and systematically drowned the 

102 
Chapter 5
three youngest boys and then Mary, the baby. The oldest boy saw Mary 
floating in the tub and ran away. Andrea caught him, dragged him to the 
bathroom, overcame his desperate resistance, and held him down until he 
was dead. The three youngest boys were found in a neat row on Andrea’s 
bed with Mary in their arms; the oldest was left floating in the tub. Andrea 
called Rusty and asked him to come home. She then called 911 and, in a 
nearly incoherent conversation, asked for a police officer. She later con-
fessed, stating that she was not a good mother, that the children were “not 
developing correctly,” and she needed to be punished.
Andrea Yates was charged with capital murder. The trial lasted 3 weeks 
and included the testimony of doctors who had treated Andrea as well as 
expert witnesses. A psychiatrist testified that shortly before the killings, an 
episode of the Law & Order TV show had aired featuring a woman who 
drowned her children and was acquitted of murder by reason of insanity. 
Andrea was convicted but the jurors recommended life in prison rather 
than the death penalty.
An appeal was based on 19 trial errors. One of the most serious was 
the fact that the episode of Law & Order referred to at trial did not exist. 
The conviction was reversed. The case was tried again in 2006. Andrea was 
found Not Guilty by Reason of Insanity.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define competency of a witness and give examples of incompetent witnesses.
• Explain the process of impeaching and rehabilitating a witness. List five ways a 
witness can be impeached.
• Explain the legal methods of refreshing the memory of a witness. Describe 
the process of introducing reports if the witness has no memory of the events 
described in the reports.
• State the Opinion Rule and explain its application.
• Explain the prerequisites for allowing an expert witness to testify.
• List three types of evidence that require the testimony of an expert witness.
• Explain what a lay witness is allowed to testify about.
Key Terms
•  Competent witness
•  Corroboration
•  Expert witness
•  Hypothetical questions
•  Impeachment
•  Lay witness
•  Opinion Rule
•   Past Recollection Recorded 
Exception
•   Present Memory 
Refreshed Rule
•  Rehabilitation
• Voir dire

 
Witnesses 
103
  Myths about Witnesses at Trial
Facts about Witnesses at Trial
Only people older than the age of 7 
years can testify at a criminal trial. 
There is no specific age limit. The person who 
testifies at a trial must be able to understand 
the duty to tell the truth and be able to 
communicate with the jury.
Any witness at a trial can testify about 
his or her personal opinions on what 
happened.
Expert witnesses are allowed to give their 
opinions.
Lay witnesses can only testify about the facts 
they observed with their five senses.
Impeachment means the witness is not 
allowed to testify.
Impeachment means that during cross-
examination the attorney established one or 
more reasons the jury should not believe what 
the witness testified about. 
During deliberations, the jurors will decide 
whether or not to believe each witness.
Hypothetical questions are not allowed 
at a criminal trial.
Expert witnesses may be asked hypothetical 
questions—to state their expert opinion about 
the facts that have been introduced in the trial.
Lay witnesses are not allowed to answer 
hypothetical questions.
Expert witnesses must have a Ph.D. 
and teach at prestigious universities.
Expert witnesses must have education and 
training in the field they are testifying about. 
There is no requirement that experts always 
have a Ph.D.
There is no requirement that they teach at a 
college or university.
Competency of Witness
All evidence is introduced at trial by the testimony of a witness. Therefore, 
the role of the witness in the criminal justice system is very important. 
This chapter addresses the following five key issues related to the trial 
witness:
1. Who is competent to testify
2. How the credibility of a witness is attacked
3. What can be done if the witness’s memory is faulty 
4. What a lay person is allowed to testify about 
5. How and when expert witnesses are used
Every witness who testifies in court must be competent. In addition to 
being competent, the witness must possess relevant information. The stan-
dard for competency to testify refers to the person’s ability to communicate 

104 
Chapter 5
with the jury. It is not equivalent to the test used to determine if the defen-
dant is mentally competent to stand trial.
Competent Witness Defined
A competent witness is a person who
1. Understands the duty to tell the truth 
2. Can narrate the events in question
Competence is the first issue addressed. If a person is not competent, 
he or she will not be allowed to testify. If the witness is competent, the 
adversary system unfolds. The attorney who called the witness asks ques-
tions. Opposing counsel should object if the question calls for an answer 
the witness is not qualified to answer. The judge rules on the objections. 
The jurors who watch this interplay must decide whether they believe the 
witness and how much weight to give the testimony.
Duty to Tell the Truth
The most common oath administered to witnesses today includes the tradi-
tional promise to “tell the truth, the whole truth, so help me God.” Although 
each witness must understand the duty to tell the truth, neither the Bible 
nor swearing is currently mandatory. For the person who is an agnostic 
or atheist, swearing on the Bible may be a meaningless gesture. Also, some 
people have religious beliefs against taking an oath on the Bible. As discussed 
in Chapter 3, an “affirmation” is administered instead of an oath in such 
instances.
The purpose of the oath or affirmation is to make it clear to a witness 
that he or she is testifying under penalty of perjury. The witness swears 
to tell the truth, but the jurors decide whether to believe the witness. No 
immediate action is taken if the witness is suspected of lying while on 
the stand. If the witness knowingly lies about a material matter, perjury 
charges may be filed at a later time. The threat of being punished in this 
manner is commonly assumed to be sufficient to keep witnesses from 
lying. The truth is, however, that some witnesses lie but prosecutors rarely 
file perjury charges. In most situations, administering an oath or affirma-
tion is all that is done to qualify a witness. There is a common exception 
in cases involving children as witnesses. Young children do not understand 
the meaning of the term “under penalty of perjury.” So the attorney who 
calls a child as a witness usually has the task of showing the court that the 
witness knows that he or she is required to tell the truth. Simple questions 
are asked in language that a child can understand. A typical line of ques-
tioning focuses on the fact that the child has been taught that it is wrong to 

 
Witnesses 
105
tell a lie. Once it is established that the child knows that lying is wrong and 
he or she will be punished for lying, the testimony is usually allowed.
A related problem is posed by the person who cannot distinguish 
fact from fantasy. Again, children pose the most frequent problem. Young 
children frequently have very active imaginations. They may have invisible 
friends who are quite real to them. Unfortunately, when a child is a crime 
victim, this same creativity that is a healthy part of childhood may result 
in a serious injustice. It is the task of the prosecutor to convince the judge, 
and later the jury, that the child is able to differentiate between fact and 
fantasy and to testify about events that actually took place.
Senility and certain types of mental illness can result in the inability 
to tell fact from fiction. The questions asked in court to determine if a 
witness knows what the truth is are not based on medical or psychiatric 
diagnosis. Factual questions are used in order to show that the potential 
witness is out of touch with reality. This is done before the person testifies 
in the presence of the jury.
Some courts have ruled that a person who has been hypnotized cannot 
testify about things discussed while under hypnosis. Proponents of hyp-
nosis claim that a person can recall things under hypnosis that he or she 
cannot remember in the conscious state. Opponents claim that during 
hypnosis information can be embedded in a person’s memory. When this 
occurs in hypnosis, the person believes that he or she is recalling what 
was previously observed but cannot distinguish between what actually 
happened and what was added to memory during hypnosis. Courts that 
exclude testimony enhanced by hypnosis usually exclude only testimony 
about topics that were covered in a hypnotic session. Statements made to 
the police before hypnosis are usually admissible. Controversy about the 
use of hypnosis will probably continue until there is conclusive scientific 
evidence on the effects of hypnosis on memory.
Ability to Narrate
To be a witness, a person must be able to communicate with the judge and 
jury and must be able to tell about the events in question. This is referred 
to as the ability to narrate.
Several problems may be raised. Probably the most obvious is the abil-
ity to coherently answer questions. To do this, the witness must have the 
ability to understand the questions. Severely mentally retarded persons, 
very young children, and people with certain other types of physical and 
mental illness may not be able to do this.
Other more practical problems may be raised. For example, the wit-
ness may not be able to speak English. This is usually solved by using an 

106 
Chapter 5
interpreter or translator. The witness will need an interpreter or translator 
to understand the questions, and the judge, jury, and defendant may need 
a translation of the answers. A similar problem arises if a witness speaks 
through sign language. Again, interpreters are the solution.
Procedure to Establish Competency
If there is a question of the witness’s competency, a hearing will be held 
before the person takes the stand. The jury leaves the courtroom during 
this session. Questions will be asked of the witness to determine if he or 
she is competent to testify. This is called voir dire. The side wishing to call 
the witness will bear the burden of convincing the judge that the person is 
competent. Opposing counsel will be allowed to cross-examine.
This screening process is limited to the two key questions of 
competency—knowing that there is a duty to tell the truth and being able 
to narrate. The fact that one side suspects that the witness will commit per-
jury is not grounds to prevent that person from taking the stand. Neither 
is the fact that a prospective witness has a severe personality disorder, as 
long as it does not affect the ability to narrate. Some states do not allow a 
witness to testify if he or she has previously been convicted of perjury.
Testimony taken during voir dire is not used to prove any of the issues 
in the case. If the person is found competent, he or she will then be put on 
the witness stand in the presence of the jury. Direct and cross-examination 
will proceed as with any other witness.
Impeachment
One of the key functions of cross-examination is convincing the jury that 
they should not believe the other side’s witnesses; this is called impeach-
ment. In some situations, witnesses may be called solely for the purpose 
of impeaching someone who has already testified.
A witness is impeached by asking questions. If the answers indicate that 
the witness lacks credibility, those answers will be emphasized by the oppos-
ing attorney during closing arguments. The witness is not asked to leave the 
witness stand, nor is he or she prevented from testifying at future trials.
The opposing attorney must make a tactical decision on impeach-
ment. Although each witness may be attacked with any or all of the six 
impeachment methods, questioning usually focuses on one or two that are 
believed to be the most effective. Both the vulnerability of the witness and 
the impact on the jury must be considered. Trying to intimidate a witness 
who has the jury’s sympathy may backfire. Every witness, including the 

 
Witnesses 
107
defendant (if he or she takes the stand), is subject to impeachment. This 
frequently discourages defendants in criminal cases from taking the stand 
if they have prior records. The prosecution is rarely allowed to show the 
defendant’s past if he or she does not take the stand, but if the defendant 
does take the stand, both prior convictions and crimes that never went to 
trial may be admissible.
Impeachment Defined
Impeachment is the process of attacking the credibility of a witness. Six main 
methods of impeachment are allowed: 
1. Bias or prejudice
2. Prior felony convictions
3. Immoral acts and uncharged crimes
4. Prior inconsistent statements
5. Inability to observe
6. Reputation
Bias or Prejudice
If a person is biased or prejudiced, either for or against one side of the case, 
it can be inferred that he or she cannot testify objectively. This includes 
bias or prejudice toward a defendant, a witness, one of the attorneys, or 
the police. Bias and prejudice, as used in impeachment, have very broad 
definitions.
A person can be biased due to friendship. Even though the witness has 
sworn to tell the truth, if he or she is called to testify against a close friend 
there may be a conscious or unconscious distortion of the facts. This 
friendship is a proper subject for cross-examination. The jury will have to 
decide if the witness was truthful or allowed the friendship to affect his or 
her testimony.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—Friendship
Prosecutor:   Mr. Green, you just testified that John, the defendant, was at your 
house on the evening of November 15.
Mr. Green: 
Yes.
Prosecutor: 
How well do you know John?
Mr. Green: 
We have been friends for about 5 years.
Prosecutor: 
Is John your best friend?
Mr. Green: 
Yes.
Prosecutor: 
Would you try to help John if he were in trouble?
Mr. Green: 
Well, yes, I would do whatever I could.

108 
Chapter 5
Hatred and lesser degrees of animosity toward a party to the case may 
also cause a witness to distort the facts. During cross-examination, ques-
tions may be asked to explore bad feelings between the witness and others 
concerned with the case. Once again, the jury has the task of deciding how 
these personal feelings may have affected the testimony.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—Hatred
Defense: 
 Mr. Brown, you testified that John hit you on November 15. Did 
you know John prior to November 15?
Mr. Brown:  Yes.
Defense: 
Describe your prior encounters with John.
Mr. Brown: John dated my sister Mary for about a year. 
Defense: 
During that year did you and John become friends?
Mr. Brown: No.
Defense: 
Why didn’t you become friends?
Mr. Brown:  He done my sister wrong. He cheated on her and he hit her several 
times.
Defense: 
Describe your feelings toward John.
Mr. Brown: I hate him. I hope he gets what’s coming to him.
Family ties are generally assumed to form strong bonds that would 
cause a witness to testify more favorably toward a relative. Obviously, some 
family feuds result in just the opposite bias. Cross-examination is once 
again the key to discovering the extent of the distortion.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—Family Ties
Prosecution: 
 Mrs. White, you just testified that you observed a fight on 
November 15. Did you know any of the people involved?
Mrs. White: 
I know John but not the other guys.
Prosecution: 
How well do you know John?
Mrs. White: 
He is my son.
Prosecution: 
Do you have a good relationship with your son John?
Mrs. White: 
Yes. He is a very good boy.
Prosecution:   Do you believe it is a mother’s duty to provide love and support 
for her children?
Mrs. White: 
 Yes, I do. There isn’t anything I wouldn’t do to help my children.
Racial prejudice can also cause a witness to distort the truth. Questions 
regarding racial bias would only be allowed if the facts of the case indi-
cate they are relevant (e.g., the victim and/or defendant are from differ-
ent racial groups than the witness or there is evidence that the witness is 
prejudiced about his or her own racial group). Prejudice toward the police 
officer or one of the attorneys might also be involved. However, the fact 

 
Witnesses 
109
that the witness is a bigot is not admissible if there are no aspects of the 
case that are likely to cause him or her to distort the facts.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—
Racial Prejudice
Defense: 
 Mr. Allen, you just testified that John, the defendant who is sitting 
over there, was the man that started the fight.
Mr. Allen: 
Yes. That is exactly what he did.
Defense: 
And you are sure it was John?
Mr. Allen: 
Absolutely.
Defense: 
Mr. Allen, are you prejudiced against African Americans?
Mr. Allen: 
No.
Defense: 
Have you ever said, “They all look alike to me”?
Mr. Allen:  Yeah, I’ve said that.
Other forms of bias or prejudice may arise in individual cases. Sexual 
biases may be relevant. For example, the witness may testify in a very criti-
cal manner at a rape trial because of a belief that women should not go 
to bars alone. Sexual preference may also become grounds for impeach-
ment. A witness with very strong feelings on this topic (either anti- or 
pro-homosexuality) can be cross-examined on these attitudes if they are 
relevant.
Any relationship with the defendant, or anyone else in the case, that 
could result in a financial impact on the witness can also be used to 
impeach. This is based on the idea that a person would possibly alter tes-
timony if he or she would be harmed (or helped) financially. For example, 
an employee may not be able to be totally objective on the witness stand if 
he or she fears being fired because of what was said. Whether consciously 
or unconsciously, a witness might also alter the facts if he or she could be 
promoted, earn a commission from a sale, or make a profit in the stock 
market if the side calling him or her wins the case.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—Financial Gain 
Defense: 
Mr. Smith, are you the owner of the building involved in this case?
Mr. Smith:  Yes.
Defense: 
Did you operate a business at that location?
Mr. Smith: Yes. A video game store.
Defense: 
Was your business profitable?
Mr. Smith: Don’t I wish. We have been losing money for over a year.
Defense: 
Did you have fire insurance on the building and its contents?
Mr. Smith: Yes. I always pay my insurance premiums.
Defense: 
 Has your insurance paid you for fire damages caused by the crime 
we are discussing today?

110 
Chapter 5
Mr. Smith: Yes.
Defense: 
How much were you paid?
Mr. Smith: $51,000.
The list of possible biases is quite long (age, occupation, regional, reli-
gious, educational, etc.). Only the facts of the case determine what could be 
relevant in any one case. If there is a question of relevance, the attorneys will 
debate the issue with the judge outside the hearing of the witness and jury.
Motive to distort the truth or fabricate evidence can also be inferred 
from the fact that the witness is being paid to testify. The jury is more likely 
to conclude the payment influenced the testimony when a large amount 
of money is at stake. Expert witnesses can be impeached by showing the 
fees they receive for testifying. This also applies to the person who provides 
evidence in hopes of receiving a reward the city posted for information 
leading to a conviction. The witness who has accepted money from a 
journalist for information about the case fits into this category. Paid police 
informants are also suspect. Entering into a plea bargain in exchange for 
testifying against a co-conspirator also implies a motive.
Example of Impeachment Based on Bias or Prejudice—Motive 
Defense: 
 Mr. Johnson, you just testified that you observed the fight 
involving John, the defendant in this case. What were you doing 
when the fight started?
Mr. Johnson:  I was talking to John.
Defense: 
So you knew John prior to the events in question?
Mr. Johnson: 
Yes, we were friends.
Defense: 
Have you ever been arrested?
Mr. Johnson: 
Yes.
Defense: 
When and for what charges?
Mr. Johnson: 
 I was arrested at the same time John was. They said they were 
going to charge me with battery.
Defense: 
Did they take you to court on the battery?
Mr. Johnson: 
 No. They told me that they wouldn’t file the charges if I testified 
against John at his trial.
Prior Felony Convictions
We have a long history of distrusting convicts. At one time, anyone con-
victed of a felony was considered untrustworthy and not allowed to testify 
in court. Although most states now allow everyone to testify, impeachment 
is permitted on prior felony convictions even if the prior crime is totally 
unrelated to the current case.

 
Witnesses 
111
Prior convictions may be introduced at trial for two very different pur-
poses. They may come in as “other acts” evidence, mentioned in Chapter 4. 
When used in this manner, they imply that the defendant is guilty because 
the defendant has done very similar acts in the past. A separate use of 
felony convictions is to impeach a witness. Anyone who takes the stand 
is subject to impeachment. On cross-examination, opposing counsel can 
ask about prior felony convictions and thus undermine the credibility of 
the witness. The threat of impeachment is one of the main reasons why 
defendants with criminal records frequently do not testify at their own 
trials.
The Federal Rules of Evidence allow prior felony convictions to 
be used to impeach but give the judge discretion to not allow them. 
Misdemeanor convictions that involve dishonesty or false statements are 
also admissible for impeachment. If it has been 10 years since the person 
was released from prison, the conviction is not admissible unless the judge 
determines that there is a special reason that warrants telling the jury 
about the conviction.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 609: Impeachment by Evidence of 
Conviction of Crime
(a) General rule. For the purpose of attacking the credibility of a witness,
 
(1)  evidence that a witness other than an accused has been convicted of a crime 
shall be admitted, subject to Rule 403 [Exclusion of Relevant Evidence on 
Grounds of Prejudice, Confusion, or Waste of Time], if the crime was pun-
ishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under 
which the witness was convicted, and evidence that an accused has been 
convicted of such a crime shall be admitted if the court determines that the 
probative value of admitting this evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect to 
the accused; and
 
(2)  evidence that any witness has been convicted of a crime shall be admitted if 
it involves dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the punishment.
Most states allow impeachment on prior felony convictions. If the 
conviction was for a crime committed in another state, it must be similar 
to a felony as defined by the law of the state where the trial is held. Some 
states allow impeachment on crimes of moral turpitude. Moral turpitude 
usually includes all felonies, plus misdemeanors involving dishonesty. A 
few states include all criminal convictions as grounds for impeachment. 
Probably the newest, and least used, rule is that impeachment based on 
prior convictions is limited to crimes relevant to honesty on the witness 
stand. Truthfulness of the witness is always relevant, but violence would 
not be considered relevant to honesty.

112 
Chapter 5
Example of Impeachment Based on Prior Felony Conviction 
Prosecutor:   Mr. Adams, you just testified that John was provoked into hitting 
the victim.
Mr. Adams: 
Yes. That’s what I said.
Prosecutor: 
Mr. Adams, have you ever been convicted?
Mr. Adams: 
Uhh, yes, I was. But only once.
Prosecutor: 
And was this conviction for a felony?
Mr. Adams: 
Yes.
Even when all prior felony convictions are admissible to impeach, judi-
cial discretion can be used to exclude this evidence. Most commonly, this is 
done if the conviction is very old and the witness has had no other convic-
tions. Some states have enacted laws that limit this type of impeachment to 
crimes that occurred in the past 10 years (some use 5 years or some other 
number). Even where there is no specific law, judicial discretion can be used 
to prevent attacks on a witness with a long record of exemplary conduct.
If a witness denies a prior conviction, another witness may be called 
to show the jury that the conviction exists. This witness would usually 
testify about the court records on the conviction. A certified copy of those 
records might even be admitted into evidence.
Uncharged Crimes and Immoral Acts
Even crimes that did not result in convictions can be used to impeach. Immoral 
acts that do not violate any penal laws can also be used. The judge has more dis-
cretion since the use of this evidence is very time-consuming and may confuse 
the jury. Also, the witness has not had the right to a trial on the prior acts.
Generally, the same types of restrictions apply here as with prior 
convictions. The acts must be relevant to the truthfulness of the witness. 
Minor crimes are usually inadmissible. If a person has lived a law-abiding 
life for many years, old crimes are normally inadmissible.
Crimes that were charged but resulted in neither a conviction nor an 
acquittal may be used. In some situations, cases dropped due to proce-
dural errors may be admissible. Good faith errors on searches and seizures 
would be in this category. Some states even allow impeachment based on 
convictions where the witness received a pardon.
Example of Impeachment Based on Uncharged Crimes 
and Immoral Acts
Prosecutor:   Ms. Young, you testified that you are an in-home aide for elderly 
patients. How many people have you cared for?
Ms. Young: 
About 20, I guess.

 
Witnesses 
113
Prosecutor: 
 And in caring for those 20 people, have you ever taken any of their 
possessions home?
Ms. Young: 
Well, yes, I do that once in a while.
Prosecutor: 
Did the patients give you permission to do that?
Ms. Young: 
Not specifically.
Prosecutor: 
So, you stole from your clients?
Ms. Young: 
 Hey, that’s not the same as stealing. I never got arrested or anything.
Prior Inconsistent Statements
A witness can be impeached if he or she has previously made any statement 
that is inconsistent with the testimony at trial. The statement does not have 
to totally contradict the testimony; it merely needs to show that there is a 
reason to suspect the accuracy of the testimony.
The appropriate procedure is to ask the witness if he or she made a 
specific statement. The date, place, and name of the person to whom the 
statement was made are also given so that the witness has a fair chance to 
remember the event. If the witness denies making the statement, the judge 
may allow another witness to be called to testify about the statement in 
question. It is misconduct for an attorney to ask a witness about a prior 
statement unless the statement is believed to have been made.
Example of Impeachment Based on Prior Inconsistent Statements
Prosecutor:   Mrs. White, you just testified that John was at your house on the 
evening of November 15.
Mrs. White: Yes, he sure was.
Prosecutor: 
 Please think back to November 16. On that morning didn’t you tell 
your friend Mabel that you visited your sister the night before?
Mrs. White: I sure don’t remember saying that. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that statements obtained in viola-
tion of Miranda may be used to impeach. The only restriction is that no 
coercion was used to obtain the statement. Most states follow this rule.
Inability to Observe
The credibility of a witness is weak if he or she was not able to clearly observe 
the events in question. Impeachment is used to raise this question. Inability 
to observe usually has one of the following causes: (1) physical handicaps 
of the witness, (2) obstruction at the scene, or (3) the witness was too far 
away to see or hear the event in question. Sometimes more than one of 
these problems arise at the same time; for example, the witness might have a 
physical handicap (bad eyesight) and also be too far away to see clearly.

114 
Chapter 5
Since a witness can testify about anything observed with the five senses, 
a defect in any of these senses that is relevant to the case may be grounds 
for impeachment. For example, the eyesight of a person who identified 
the defendant at the scene could be challenged, though a hearing problem 
cannot be used to attack testimony about what the witness saw. The jury 
usually is not very impressed with minor impairments.
Suppose the witness claims to have observed a drug sale while stand-
ing across the street. A witness with 20/20 vision is more likely to have seen 
the transaction clearly than a person whose vision is 20/400. Poor vision 
may be irrelevant if the person wore proper corrective lenses.
Example of Impeachment Based on Inability to Observe—Physical 
Problem of Witness
Defense: 
 Mr. Allen, you testified that you saw John start the fight. Where were 
you sitting at the time you made this observation?
Mr. Allen:  I was on my front porch.
Defense: 
 How far is it from your front porch to the spot where the fight 
started?
Mr. Allen: 
Maybe 50 feet.
Defense: 
Mr. Allen, have you had your eyes checked lately?
Mr. Allen: 
About 6 months ago.
Defense: 
What did your doctor tell you about your eyesight?
Mr. Allen: 
He said I needed new glasses really, really bad.
Defense: 
And did you get new glasses?
Mr. Allen: 
No. They cost too much.
The second problem is not with the witness but, rather, the layout of the crime 
scene. Something may be blocking the view, muffling sounds, etc. Weather and 
lighting conditions are important. Simple examples would be that there was 
a tree in the way, a bus drove by at the crucial moment, or it was a dark and 
stormy night. It might turn out that there was no window on the side of the 
building where the observation allegedly was made. Both of these avenues of 
impeachment require the police and attorneys to do their homework.
Example of Impeachment Based on Inability to Observe—
Obstruction of View
Prosecutor:   Ms. Morris, you testified that you saw John being attacked before he 
hit anyone. Where were you at the time you made that observation?
Ms. Morris: I was sitting in a chair in my front yard.
Prosecutor: Why were you in your front yard?
Ms. Morris:  We were having a party and there were too many people to fit in 
the house. Anyway, it was hot in the house.
Prosecutor: And you were sitting down.

 
Witnesses 
115
Ms. Morris: Yes. I was lucky. Most of the people had to stand up.
Prosecutor: Were there any people between you and where John was?
Ms. Morris: Yeah. A whole bunch of people.
Prosecutor: And they were standing up while you were sitting down?
Ms. Morris: Yeah.
Prosecutor:  With all those people in the way, how could you tell what was 
happening to John?
Ms. Morris: I got little glimpses when someone moved.
Reputation
Impeachment based on reputation is usually restricted to the trait of hon-
esty (also called truth and veracity). The credibility of a witness is easily 
diminished if it is shown that other people believe the witness is a liar.
As discussed in the previous chapter, reputation is usually shown by 
the testimony of people who claim to know what the community thinks 
about someone. For impeachment, the question rests on the general repu-
tation of the witness for honesty.
Example of Impeachment Based on Reputation
Prosecutor:   Mr. Evans, do you know Mr. Brown who is a witness in this case?
Mr. Evans: 
I don’t know him personally.
Prosecutor: 
Are you familiar with his reputation?
Mr. Evans: 
Yes. I’ve heard a lot of people talk about him.
Prosecutor: 
Have you heard people talk about Mr. Brown’s honesty?
Mr. Evans: 
 Yes. I’ve heard a whole lot of people say that he is a liar. No one 
trusts him.
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is the restoration of the credibility of a witness. Once a wit-
ness has been impeached, the side that originally called the witness will try 
to convince the jury that their witness testified truthfully and should be 
believed. Redirect examination is usually used to attempt to rehabilitate 
witnesses. Sometimes the judge will allow new witnesses to be called to sup-
port the credibility of an impeached witness. Figure 5-1 shows the relation-
ship of testimony to the impeachment and rehabilitation of witnesses.
Where impeachment focused on prior criminal conduct, rehabilita-
tion frequently tries to publicize good deeds. If possible, the years of exem-
plary conduct since the last serious offense will be emphasized. Sometimes 
an attorney decides that the best defense is a strong offense. The witness’s 

116 
Chapter 5
unsavory past may be acknowledged during direct examination so the 
impeachment will lack dramatic effect. Another tactic is to try to show 
that the witness can be objective despite a criminal record. The nature and 
extent of the criminal acts will probably be the most significant facts used 
to determine what rehabilitation will be attempted.
Example of Rehabilitation Based on Good Behavior 
Defense: 
 Mr. Williams, you just testified that you have a prior felony 
conviction. When did that conviction occur?
Mr. Williams:  In 1988.
Defense: 
Was that your only conviction?
Mr. Williams: 
Yes.
Defense: 
 And in the 20-plus years since that conviction, have you ever 
been arrested?
Mr. Williams: 
No.
Defense: 
 In that 20-plus year period, have you committed any crimes for 
which you were not arrested?
Mr. Williams: 
No.
Three common approaches are used to rehabilitate a witness who was 
impeached by prior inconsistent statements. One is to try to convince the 
jury that there was a reason for lying earlier, but the witness is telling the 
truth now. These reasons might include fear of the police, intimidation by 
a co-defendant, or misunderstanding the questions. A second method of 
rehabilitation is to show that the statement used to impeach was taken out of 
context. The attorney may attempt to show there really was no inconsistency 



%	


&
	


Figure 5-1
Impeachment and Rehabilitation of Witnesses

 
Witnesses 
117
with testimony that tells about the whole conversation. The third method is 
to introduce statements that were made before the inconsistent statement. 
If these statements are consistent with the trial testimony, the witness may 
be rehabilitated.
Example of Rehabilitation Based on Witnesses Currently Telling 
the Truth 
Prosecution:   Ms. Benson, you just admitted to the defense attorney that you told 
the police, on the night we are discussing in this case, that John was 
not involved in the fight. Was your statement to the police true?
Ms. Benson: 
No.
Prosecution: Why did you tell the police something that was not true?
Ms. Benson: 
I was afraid. 
Prosecution: Why were you afraid?
Ms. Benson: 
 John’s friend was standing there. About 10 feet from me. And he 
kept staring at me and making a fist.
Prosecution: So why did you lie to the police?
Ms. Benson: 
 I was afraid that I would get beat up if I told the police that John 
was involved.
A wide array of approaches can be used when the impeachment was 
based on inability to observe. Sometimes the witness explodes when 
attacked on cross-examination. For example, the elderly neighbor who is 
asked about wearing a hearing aid replies, “Even a deaf person could have 
heard them, the way they were shouting.” Asking further questions in this 
type of situation is not necessary. More commonly, rehabilitation will take 
the form of asking the witness questions in order to show that the physical 
handicaps emphasized on cross-examination are not such severe impedi-
ments to the ability to observe as they might seem.
Example of Rehabilitation Based on Lack of Impairment by Handicap
Prosecution:   Mr. Allen, you just testified that you did not get new glasses 
when your doctor recommended them. Are you nearsighted or 
farsighted?
Mr. Allen: 
I am farsighted.
Prosecution: Does that mean you can see things that are far away?
Mr. Allen: 
 Yes. I can drive and see things just fine but I can’t read a book 
without glasses. It’s just stuff that is near to me, like within 5 feet, 
that I can’t read.
Sometimes expert witnesses are called if the ability of one witness to 
observe is crucial to the case. These experts might discuss how lighting or 

118 
Chapter 5
distance would affect the ability to observe. Models may be constructed 
to demonstrate that a person at a given location could, or could not, have 
observed events in question.
Example of Rehabilitation by Use of Expert Witness 
Prosecution: Dr. Davis, is Mr. Allen one of your patients?
Dr. Davis: 
Yes.
Prosecution: When did you last give Mr. Allen an eye examination?
Dr. Davis: 
About 6 months ago.
Prosecution: Was Mr. Allen nearsighted or farsighted?
Dr. Davis: 
He is farsighted.
Prosecution: Please explain what farsighted means.
Dr. Davis: 
 In layman’s terms, it means that a person is unable to focus 
properly on items that are close to the person. There is no 
impairment of vision for things that are far away.
Prosecution:   Based on your examination of Mr. Allen, could he clearly see an 
event that occurred 20 feet from where he was standing?
Dr. Davis: 
Yes.
If reputation was used to impeach, there are usually two possible 
methods of rehabilitation. The credibility of the impeaching witness can 
be attacked. This is done during cross-examination. The other approach 
is to call reputation witnesses and try to convince the jury that these wit-
nesses, who testify about a very good reputation, are the most credible. 
Example of Rehabilitation Based on Reputation
Defense: 
Mr. Franks, do you know Ms. Benson who testified in this case?
Mr. Franks:  Yes.
Defense: 
And do you know what other people say about Ms. Benson?
Mr. Franks:  Yes. We work at the same store so I know a lot of people who know 
Ms. Benson.
Defense: 
 Based on what the people you work with say, what is Ms. Benson’s 
reputation?
Mr. Franks: They think she is honest. Everybody trusts her.
Table 5-1 summarizes the methods used to impeach and rehabilitate 
witnesses.
Corroboration
The credibility of a witness is stronger if there is additional evidence to sup-
port the witness’s testimony. This supporting evidence is called corroboration.
Either the testimony of another witness or physical evidence may be used.

 
Witnesses 
119
There are a few situations in which corroboration is mandatory. One 
involves the testimony of an accomplice. When one party to the crime 
testifies against the other, there is always the suspicion that this was done 
to reduce his or her own culpability. Due to this motive to falsify, a person 
cannot be convicted based solely on the testimony of an accomplice; there 
must be corroboration.
Many states also follow the common law rule that there must be some 
corroboration in cases of false pretenses. A few still follow the old rule that 
required corroboration in rape cases, although this has been highly criti-
cized; nearly all other crimes can be established solely on the testimony of 
the victim.
Where corroboration is mandatory, the law usually does not require 
that all of the testimony be supported by other evidence. Most states 
merely require that there be some additional evidence to show that the 
testimony is true. 
Even when corroboration is not required, both sides frequently try to 
introduce as much evidence as possible to corroborate the testimony of 
their witnesses. Although the judge normally instructs the jury that neither 
T A B L E  5-1  Summary of Impeachment and Rehabilitation 
of Witnesses
 
Impeach 
Rehabilitate
Bias, Prejudice,  
Show that witness may be  
Show that despite apparent 
Motive 
less than objective. 
reason to distort the truth, the 
 
 
witness is being objective.
Prior Felony  
Introduce evidence that  
Show that defendant led moral 
Convictions 
witness has prior conviction. 
life after conviction.
Immoral Acts and  
Ask questions about immoral  
Testimony to show that despite 
Uncharged Crimes 
act and uncharged crimes that  
past immoral acts and 
 
indicate the witness may not be  
uncharged crimes, the witness 
 
testifying to truth. 
is currently telling the truth.
Prior Inconsistent  
Introduce statement that is  
Introduce prior statements that 
Statement 
inconsistent with testimony  
are consistent with testimony 
 
at trial. 
at trial.
Inability to Perceive 
Show bad eyesight, hearing, etc. 
Show that witness wore 
 
and/or 
glasses, hearing aid, etc.
 
Show layout, distance, etc.  
Show that there were no 
 
made it impossible to hear,  
obstructions, etc.
 
see, etc. 
Reputation 
 “Character witness” testifies  
“Character witness” testifies 
 
about reputation for lack . 
about reputation for honesty.
 
of honesty

120 
Chapter 5
party is required to introduce all possible evidence in the case, strong cor-
roboration is likely to convince the jury that the witness should be believed. 
The jurors still retain the power, however, to reject the evidence because 
they do not believe either the original witness or the witness called for 
corroboration.
Example of Corroboration
Bob testified that he was at the corner of Third and Main at 7:30 p.m. on 
November 15 and saw John hit Sam. Bob said John was wearing black leather 
gloves at the time.
The following items were introduced to corroborate Bob’s testimony:
•  A parking ticket that was dated November 15 at 7:29 p.m. It indicated that a car 
owned by Bob was parked at an expired meter in front of the store located at 301 N. 
Main Street. A city map shows that 301 N. Main Street is the first building north of 
the intersection of Third and Main.
• A sales receipt that shows that John bought a pair of black leather gloves.
•  Laboratory tests that show that DNA tests done on tissue samples removed from a 
pair of black leather gloves match a DNA sample taken from Sam.
•  Testimony by Tom that he was also at Third and Main at 7:30 p.m. on November 15 
and he saw Bob there.
Corroboration must be distinguished from cumulative evidence. 
Evidence is corroborative if it confirms previous testimony by the use of 
another source. For example, Mr. Jones testified that he saw the defendant 
choke the murder victim. This would be corroborated by the autopsy 
report that indicated that there were bruises around the victim’s neck. 
Physical evidence, such as the rope that the witness saw the defendant 
place around the victim’s neck, could also be used to corroborate the testi-
mony. Cumulative evidence merely repeats what was said. If another wit-
ness was called who testified that he or she also saw the defendant choke 
the victim, this evidence would be cumulative. The judge usually allows 
several eyewitnesses to testify even though it is cumulative but will eventu-
ally refuse to let additional witnesses take the stand on this issue.
Memory Failures
It is not uncommon, especially when there is a long period between the 
crime and the trial, for a person to forget details of the case. This includes 
victims, witnesses to the crime, and the police officers. When this happens, 
it will be necessary to attempt to refresh the person’s memory. This can be 

 
Witnesses 
121
done either before taking the witness stand or by asking appropriate ques-
tions during direct or cross-examination.
The basic rule is that anything can be used to refresh memory. 
Witnesses must, however, be able to testify from memory and not merely 
repeat what was used to refresh their memory. Cross-examination is used 
to attempt to point out that the testimony is not accurate. It can also be 
used to show that the witness was coached to the point that the current 
testimony was memorized or that the attorney told the witness what to say 
and what not to say.
Although unusual things may be used to refresh the witness’s memory, 
the most common thing used is the report written about the event. Notes 
that were taken in a field notebook can also be used. For this reason, it is 
important that police officers take accurate notes and that they are not 
destroyed until all possibility of a trial (or retrial) has passed.
So far, we have described what is called the Present Memory Refreshed 
Rule. The witness now remembers the events in question and can testify. 
Sometimes the attempt to refresh memory fails. When this happens, it may 
still be possible to introduce reports written near the time of the event in 
question. This is done through the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to 
the Hearsay Rule. The following are the basic requirements for the admission 
of these reports:
1. The statement would be admissible if the declarant testified at the 
current trial.
2. The witness currently has insufficient present recollection to testify 
fully and accurately.
3. The report was made at a time when the facts were fresh in the 
memory of the witness.
4. The report was made by the witness, someone under his or her 
direction, or by another person for the purpose of recording the 
witness’s statement.
5. The witness can testify that the report was a true statement of the 
facts.
6. The report is authenticated as accurate.
The key to using Past Recollection Recorded is that an accurate report 
was made at a time when the events were fresh in the witness’s memory. 
The legislature does not set a maximum length of time; the jury makes 
the decision after listening to direct and cross-examination. This topic 
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8. Table 5-2 shows the differences 
between present memory refreshed and past recollection recorded.

122 
Chapter 5
Unavailable Witnesses
Sometimes a witness is not available to testify at trial. This can happen for 
a variety of reasons (e.g., death, relocation, or the witness has gone into 
hiding). Under the Hearsay Rule exception for former testimony, state-
ments made under oath at a prior court hearing in the same case may be 
introduced at trial if the witness is not available to testify at the subsequent 
trial or hearing. This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Many states have established other procedures to preserve testimony if it is 
believed that a material witness will be unavailable at trial. Some allow sworn 
testimony to be recorded on videotape for later use at trial. Others take sworn 
statements in a manner similar to depositions that are taken during discovery 
in civil cases. State laws vary on whether the opposing side is allowed to be 
present and cross-examine the witness when the statements are obtained.
A material witness can be arrested and detained in the county jail until 
trial. This is an extreme measure and usually requires a court hearing. 
A judge usually can require the material witness to post bond in lieu of 
being jailed if it appears this will be sufficient to guarantee appearance at 
trial. Some states permit the prosecution to have material witnesses jailed 
if it appears flight is a serious risk but do not provide similar measures to 
prevent defense witnesses from leaving the jurisdiction.
Types of Witnesses
The general meaning of “witness” is someone who observed something. 
When we talk about a witness at a trial, we mean the person who has been 
sworn and takes the witness stand. There are two main types of witnesses: 
lay witnesses and expert witnesses.
In most trials there are far more lay witnesses than experts. Lay wit-
nesses saw the crime occur, talked to the suspect before or after the crime, 
T A B L E  5-2  A Witness’s Present Memory Refreshed 
and Past Recollection Recorded
Present Memory Refreshed 
Past Recollection Recorded
Event 
Event
Memory dims 
Memory dims
Read report, etc. to refresh memory 
Read report, etc. to refresh memory
Memory revived 
Memory still inadequate
Testify in court from memory 
 Introduce document written near time of 
original event 

 
Witnesses 
123
or otherwise observed what happened and/or gave information to the 
police. The fact that a person routinely testifies in court as an expert does 
not affect his or her ability to testify as a lay witness if he or she saw the 
crime occur. For example, if a forensic pathologist observed a robbery 
while driving to work, he or she would be allowed to testify about the rob-
bery as a lay witness. If he or she did the autopsy on the robbery–murder 
victim, he or she may also be called as an expert.
Lay Witness Defined
A lay witness is a person who observed an event that is relevant to the case 
on trial. Lay witnesses are allowed to testify about any relevant event that was 
observed with one or more of the five senses (sight, hearing, smell, touch, or 
taste). Lay witnesses are not allowed to give opinions. 
Expert witnesses are called to help the jury understand the evidence. They 
are in court to explain things to the jury. Experts are not allowed if the facts 
can be understood by the jurors without their help. There are a wide variety 
of specialties in which experts can be useful at trial. Some require extensive 
education, whereas others are based on specialized training and experience.
Testimony by Experts: Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 702
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact 
[jury] to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness quali-
fied as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify 
thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if
 
(1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data,
 
(2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and
 
(3)  the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of 
the case.
Federal Rule 702 sets out two prerequisites that must be satisfied 
before an expert witness is allowed to take the witness stand. First, the jury 
needs help in interpreting scientific, technical, or other specialized facts. 
Second, the person who will testify is qualified to testify about these facts. 
These are referred to as the foundation for calling an expert witness. The 
side that wants to call the expert has the responsibility to lay the founda-
tion for that witness to testify. If the opposing side challenges the need for 
the expert, a hearing will be held without the jury present to determine if 
an expert will be allowed to testify. This same type of hearing can be used 
to challenge the test on the grounds that it is too new to be trustworthy, or 
that it has not been recognized by an appropriate group of scientists. 

124 
Chapter 5
After the jury has returned to the courtroom, the opposing side will 
try to show that the person who is testifying is either not competent in the 
field or has made mistakes in conducting tests for the trial. The accuracy 
of the equipment used, as well as human error in conducting the tests, can 
be attacked on cross-examination.
Opinion Rule
The jury, or the judge if the jury has been waived, is the trier of the facts. 
For this reason, the general rule is that only facts may be introduced into 
evidence. Opinions of the witnesses are not admissible because it is the 
function of the trier of the facts to analyze the evidence. This is called 
the Opinion Rule. The trial process revolves around asking specific ques-
tions in order to obtain concrete answers. The Opinion Rule fits into 
this by seeking to eliminate testimony not directly relating to the facts. 
Conclusions are left to the jury. In practice, however, the rule really is that 
lay witnesses are generally not permitted to draw conclusions, but expert 
witnesses may give their professional opinions.
Lay Witnesses
Even the Opinion Rule has exceptions. Whereas the older view was that lay 
witnesses were only allowed to express opinions when they were absolutely 
necessary, the more common practice today is to allow opinions for the 
sake of convenience. Some courts go so far as to follow Wigmore’s view 
that lay opinions should only be rejected if they have no value to the jury.1
Much is left to the discretion of the trial judge.
Opinion Testimony of Lay Witness Defined: Federal Rules of 
Evidence, Rule 701
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness’s testimony in the form of 
opinions or inferences is limited to opinions or inferences which are: 
 
(a) Rationally based on the perception of the witness, and
 
(b)  Helpful to a clear understanding of the witness’s testimony or the determina-
tion of the facts in issue, and
 
(c)  Not based on scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge within the 
scope of Rule 702.
Some statements of opinion are so common that we do not realize they are 
opinions. For example, an eyewitness attends a lineup and identifies the defen-
dant. This is really a statement of the witness that it is his or her opinion that 
the defendant is the person that he or she saw committing the crime. Another 

 
Witnesses 
125
example would be the statement, “He was drunk.” This is an opinion. The facts 
may have been that the person smelled of alcohol, had watery eyes, slurred 
speech, unsteady gait, poor muscular coordination, and did not talk rationally. 
Nearly all courts would allow both of these opinions into evidence.
A wide variety of lay opinions may actually be admissible, including 
the following:
• Identification of someone’s handwriting.
•  Statements about the emotional state of someone (he or she was sad, 
angry, happy, etc.). 
•  Statements about the physical condition of someone (e.g., he or she 
was weak, strong, sick, or drunk). 
• Voice identification. 
•  General statements about mental condition (e.g., he or she was coher-
ent, smart, seemed to have low intelligence, etc.). 
• Identity of a person based on in-person lineup or looking at a 
photograph.
• General statements about speed of vehicles (e.g., he or she was going 
too fast). 
If one or more of these opinions is given, additional questions are usually 
asked so the jury will know the basis for forming the opinion. Cross-examina-
tion can also be used to show that there was an inadequate basis for the opin-
ion or that a different conclusion could have been drawn. Table 5-3 presents 
examples of opinion testimony allowed and not allowed by a lay witness.
Expert Witnesses
Expert witnesses are allowed to give opinions based on their professional judg-
ment. Even though experts have broader rights than lay witnesses, there are 
still some areas in which they are not allowed to testify. Table 5-4 compares 
examples of testimony by a lay witness with testimony by an expert witness.
T A B L E  5-3  Opinion Testimony by Lay Witness
Allowed 
Not Allowed
The man had bloodshot eyes and  
The man was drunk.
staggered when he tried to walk.
The man was disoriented and incoherent. 
The man was crazy.
The man carefully aimed before  
The man maliciously killed the victim.
shooting the gun.
The car was driving faster than the other  
The car was going 85 miles per hour.
cars and left skid marks when it tried to stop. 

126 
Chapter 5
Experts’ testimony cannot invade issues that the judge or jury is 
required to decide. This means that they usually may not state conclusions 
on legal issues. For example, a psychiatrist may state a diagnosis (paranoid 
schizophrenia), but in most states he or she cannot testify that a person is 
criminally insane.
Experts are only allowed to testify if they are needed. If the facts can 
be understood by lay jurors, no expert witness will be allowed. Things that 
are common knowledge do not require an expert to interpret them. Before 
a judge will allow an expert to testify, he or she must be convinced that 
there is a sufficiently established body of knowledge on the subject. Even 
then, the courts may be reluctant to allow testimony. Psychiatrists have 
developed many diagnoses, including the 47XYY (abnormal male chro-
mosome) syndrome, which the courts have been very reluctant to accept.
For years, most state and the federal courts followed Frye v. United States
(D.C. Cir. 1923), which held that a scientific technique was admissible in 
court only if it was “generally accepted” as reliable in the relevant scientific 
community.2 This test focuses on opinions of large groups of scientists; in 
many cases, it looks at the official position of professional organizations, 
such as the American Academy of Forensic Medicine. The Supreme Court 
in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (1993) adopted a new stan-
dard for use with the Federal Rules of Evidence: The judge must make a 
preliminary assessment that the reasoning or methodology underlying the 
testimony is scientifically valid and that the reasoning or methodology prop-
erly can be applied to the facts in issue.3 This allows new tests to be used at 
trial that have not become established in the scientific community. The trial 
judge makes the key ruling on whether the test provides relevant informa-
tion. In practice, a hearing is held without the jury present and attorneys for 
T A B L E  5-4  Comparison of Testimony by a Lay Witness 
and an Expert Witness
Lay Witness 
Expert Witness
The man smelled of alcohol and failed 
The man’s blood alcohol was 0.12%.
the field sobriety test.
The man hid from everyone and said he was 
The man suffered from paranoid
protecting himself from invisible rays. 
schizophrenia.
The car was going faster than the other 
Based on the skid marks, the car was
cars and was unable to stop before hitting 
going 74 miles per hour.
the tree.
There was a man at the scene of the crime 
DNA tests on blood found at the scene and
who looks just like the defendant. 
a sample taken from the defendant indicate
 
that the blood came from the same person. 

 
Witnesses 
127
both sides call expert witnesses who testify about the new test. After listen-
ing to the experts for both sides and reading briefs that the attorneys wrote, 
the judge makes a ruling on whether or not the new test will be admissible. 
The Daubert decision is binding on the federal courts. State courts are free 
to decide whether to adopt the Daubert rule; many states still use the Frye
standard.
Sometimes the courts refuse to accept a new technique as sufficiently 
accurate. The polygraph is a good example. Although many people believe 
a well-trained polygraph operator can accurately test for deception, the 
courts have been very reluctant to accept polygraph results in criminal 
cases. Opponents argue strongly that there are too many errors to justify 
giving the jury information that may sound like it is conclusive evidence 
that a person lied. Many states refuse to admit the results of polygraph 
examinations.
Still other types of expert testimony are excluded because the courts 
refuse to believe there is any “scientific” basis for the opinion. Psychics and 
astrologers would be in this class.
Foundation for Expert Witness
In order to use an expert witness at trial, a foundation must be laid that 
establishes three main things:
1. The jury needs the help of an expert.
2. There is a recognized area of expertise that applies.
3. The person called to testify has the appropriate background to qual-
ify as an expert.
The court will first address the Frye and Daubert issues. In most cases, the 
tests that are used are well established and do not require a separate hear-
ing. The next step focuses on the qualifications of the person who is being 
called to testify. The exact qualifications vary with the type of expertise. In 
a few situations, the legislature sets qualifications, such as being a licensed 
psychologist with 5 years of clinical experience. Most often, there is no rule 
that requires advanced college degrees, and in some areas, such as accident 
reconstruction and ballistic examinations, a combination of training and 
experience is required. In other areas, such as the probabilities involved 
in a pyramid scheme or the chance of two people having the same DNA, 
purely theoretical study may be sufficient. The jury is given the task of 
deciding which expert witness to believe. To do this, the jury will decide 
which expert is best qualified, did the appropriate test accurately, and 
interpreted the results correctly. 

128 
Chapter 5
Even if a person is an expert, he or she cannot give opinions on many 
things. The testimony must be restricted to factual descriptions of observa-
tions, much as a lay witness does, and opinions within the area of his or her 
expertise. Opinions that are outside the area of expertise are not allowed.
Experts do not have a special right to use privileged communications, 
such as statements made to a doctor or lawyer. They can base their opin-
ions on these statements only if the privilege has been waived or there is 
an exception to the privilege that applies in the case. See Chapter 9 for a 
detailed discussion of privileged communications.
Voir Dire of Experts
The expert will be subjected to voir dire to establish his or her qualifica-
tions before testifying unless the opposing side is willing to accept the wit-
ness without a challenge. Voir dire is done without the jury present. The 
side calling the expert will ask relevant questions to show that the witness 
has the necessary education and experience. Opposing counsel can cross-
examine and attempt to show that the expert does not qualify.
Examination of Expert Witnesses
Immediately after the expert witness takes the stand, questions will usu-
ally be asked regarding his or her professional background, education, and 
training. Since this has already been covered in voir dire, the only function 
of these questions is to impress the jury. It is common to have experts 
called by both sides in a case. Therefore, the jury needs to know about the 
expert’s qualifications to help them decide how much weight should be 
given to the testimony.
On direct examination, the expert may be asked about his or her inspec-
tion and testing of the evidence in the case. Opinions based on this evidence 
may be given. Additionally, experts may be asked hypothetical questions.
Hypothetical questions ask the witness to draw conclusions based on the 
facts given in the question. Prior to asking a hypothetical question, all of 
the facts used in the question must have been admitted into evidence via 
testimony of witnesses (either lay witnesses or expert witnesses).
It is not necessary that the witness has personally examined any of the 
evidence in a hypothetical question. For example, a civil engineer might 
be asked, “Would it be safe to drive a car with good tires on a dry surface 
at 55 miles per hour if there was a 10% downhill grade with a 90-degree 
turn that was banked 5 degrees?” The engineer would be allowed to give a 
professional opinion even though he or she had never seen the curve that 
was actually involved in the case.

 
Witnesses 
129
Examples of Hypothetical Questions
•  “Based on your microscopic examination of the slides containing lung tissue 
specimens that were prepared during the autopsy, is it your professional opinion 
that the victim was dead prior to being placed in water?” 
•  “Based on the fact that the room in question was illuminated with a 60-watt 
bulb and there were no windows, would you conclude that a person with normal 
eyesight could accurately determine if the currency was counterfeit?”
•  “Based on the testimony regarding the defendant’s prior mental illness, the defendant’s 
repeated claims that he was from Mars, and the fact that the defendant repeatedly 
said, ‘You are the devil!’ prior to shooting the victim, would you conclude that the 
defendant understood the nature and quality of his acts?” 
In addition to the normal methods of cross-examination, experts may 
be questioned regarding the sources of information used to form their 
conclusions. The expert may be asked who he or she considers the leading 
authors and texts in the field. This also includes asking if he or she has 
read specific books or articles. If he or she admits reading a given work, 
questioning may continue on why the expert agrees or disagrees with the 
opinions stated in it.
Some experts always testify for the defense, whereas others always tes-
tify for the prosecution. This can be used to impeach for bias. The amount 
of the expert’s fee is also subject to cross-examination. If the fee appears 
too large, the jury may discredit the testimony.
Examples of Expert Testimony
Insanity
A lay witness can describe symptoms that he or she observed, but an 
expert witness is required in order to introduce diagnosis of mental disor-
ders. The expert can explain the effect of the condition on the personality 
and how it probably affected the defendant’s actions. Opinions can also 
be given on the defendant’s ability to form criminal intent, premeditation, 
or to comprehend what was going on. Although the expert psychiatrist 
or psychologist usually examines the defendant, hypothetical questions 
are also utilized. In most states, the expert may not testify that a person is 
criminally insane because this is a legal, not medical, opinion.
Consider the Andrea Yates case. As long as the psychiatrists told the 
jury their professional opinions regarding Andrea’s psychotic state, the 
testimony was admissible. This rule applies even though the opinions 
of two experts are in direct conflict with each other. The jurors have the 
responsibility to listen to all of the testimony and then decide which wit-
nesses to believe. The expert testimony that caused Andrea’s conviction to 

130 
Chapter 5
be reversed was statements about something that had not occurred—that 
is, testimony that there had been a recent TV show that featured a plot 
similar to what Andrea had done. Later, it was determined that although a 
producer may have considered such a script, it was never on TV, therefore 
allowing the jury to consider the expert’s conclusion that Andrea was not 
insane because she had the mental capacity to copy the plot was a serious 
error that required reversal.
Examples of Expert Witness Testimony on Issue of Defendant’s 
Sanity
•  “Based on my diagnostic interview of the defendant which lasted 6 hours, I 
diagnosed the defendant as having a bipolar disorder. Due to this condition I believe 
the defendant knew what he was doing but could not premeditate the murder.”
•  “After reviewing the reports submitting by the two court-appointed psychiatrists, it 
is my professional opinion that the defendant suffers from severe depression with 
suicidal tendencies. It is my opinion that the defendant planned to commit suicide 
and was unaware that any other person was in the area.”
Ballistics
Firearms tests can often reveal if a recovered slug could have been fired 
from a specific gun, depending on the condition of the slug. The pattern of 
lands and grooves in the barrel of the gun imprints a pattern on the bullet 
as it leaves the gun. Since manufacturers use the same configuration in 
all their guns, the pattern can be used to state what type of gun was used. 
Microscopic comparison of the recovered slug and one that was test-fired 
is required to make a positive match. Firing pin marks on the shell casing 
can often be matched with a suspect gun.
Examples of Expert Witness Testimony about a Ballistics Test
•  “After comparing Exhibit A, the bullet recovered from the victim, with Exhibit B, 
the bullet that was test-fired from the gun found in the possession of the defendant, 
it is my opinion that the two bullets were fired from the same gun.”
•  “I have studied the two bullets, Exhibits C and D, under a comparison microscope 
and it is my professional opinion that the two bullets were not fired from the same 
weapon.”
Blood and Tissue Matching
Blood testing is important because the blood contains substances that 
can be used to match blood samples to saliva, tears, perspiration, semen, 
vaginal fluids, mucus, gastric contents, etc. In the past, blood testing was 

 
Witnesses 
131
limited to typing by the ABO system. If the suspect did not have the 
appropriate blood type, he or she could be eliminated, but if there was a 
match it still was not possible to indicate that the suspect committed the 
crime. If the suspect had type A blood, test results were not very useful 
because type A is present in 40% of the U.S. public.
Today, we have much more sophisticated tests. For example, scientific 
analysis of the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecule found in all cells 
reveals the body’s genetic code and can identify blood, hair, semen, or skin 
left at the crime scene as accurately as fingerprints. Each state will decide 
on the admissibility of each new technique as it becomes recognized in its 
respective scientific community.
Examples of Expert Witness Testimony on DNA Testing
•  “As I have explained, DNA testing was done on semen recovered from the victim 
when the rape kit was done at the emergency room. Similar tests were performed 
on a blood sample taken from the defendant at the time of booking. Based on these 
tests, there is a 1 in 20 million chance that the two samples came from two different 
individuals.”
•  “DNA tests were performed on blood samples taken from the rape victim, the 
defendant, and the child born to the rape victim. Based on these tests I can 
conclusively state that the defendant is not the father of this child.” 
Summary
S u m m a r y
All trial witnesses must be competent. This means that they must understand the 
duty to tell the truth and be able to answer questions about the events in issue. If 
there is doubt about the competency of a witness, a voir dire examination will be 
conducted.
 
The truthfulness of each witness is in issue. The opposing side may ask ques-
tions for the purpose of convincing the jurors that they should not believe the 
witness. This is referred to as impeachment. A witness can be impeached because 
he or she is biased or prejudiced toward a person involved in the case. The prior 
crimes committed by the witness, whether or not there has been a conviction, can 
be used to infer that current testimony is not true. Prior statements that are incon-
sistent with what the witness said during direct examination may be used to show 
that the current testimony is not true. A witness can be impeached because he or 
she could not have accurately observed the events in question. The reputation of 
the witness for untruthfulness can also be used to impeach.
 
If a witness is impeached, the side that called the witness will have a chance to 
attempt to convince the jury that the testimony should be believed anyway. This is 
called rehabilitation and is usually done on redirect examination.

132 
Chapter 5
 
When a witness cannot remember the events in question, attempts may be 
made to refresh his or her memory. If this is successful, the witness will testify just 
like any other witness. Memory problems, of course, will probably be emphasized 
on cross-examination. If the memory cannot be refreshed, an accurate report made 
by the witness near the time of the event may be used instead of testimony.
 
Testimony can be corroborated by another witness or physical objects related 
to the case. Very few cases require corroboration, but attorneys frequently intro-
duce this additional evidence to help support their case.
 
A lay witness is allowed to testify about anything observed with the five senses. 
Opinions are allowed only if they are expressions in such common usage that the 
jury will understand. Even then, a good attorney will ask the witness to explain 
what facts led to the conclusion.
 
Expert witnesses are allowed to express professional opinions. Before an expert 
can testify, it must be established that the jury needs assistance with the facts. It 
also must be shown that there is a recognized body of knowledge that applies.
 
Each expert must show that he or she has the necessary education and experi-
ence to qualify as an expert. On the witness stand, the expert can testify about the 
facts and give opinions. Hypothetical questions may be used so the expert can give 
an opinion even if he or she has not personally examined the evidence. 
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
1. Define competency of a witness, and explain the procedure for establishing 
the competency of a witness.
2. Give two examples of incompetent witnesses. Explain why each one is 
incompetent.
3. Define impeachment. Explain how impeachment is done, and give six ways a 
witness can be impeached.
4. Define rehabilitation of a witness, and give two examples of how a witness 
can be rehabilitated.
5. Explain how the memory of a witness can legally be refreshed, and list 
the requirements for introducing a document under the Past Recollection 
Recorded Rule.
6. State the Opinion Rule, and explain how it affects testimony.
7. Explain what a lay witness may testify about, and give three examples of 
opinions a lay witness can give.
8. When is an expert witness used in a criminal case? What arguments must be 
made to the judge before a specific type of expert witness may be called to 
the stand?
9. What is the purpose of voir dire of an expert witness? Why are the 
qualifications of an expert witness given to the jury?
10. Explain what hypothetical questions are, and tell how they are used.
11. Give three examples of how an expert witness can be impeached.
12. Give three examples of the use of expert witnesses in criminal trials. 

 
Witnesses 
133
Find an expert witness, or a consulting agency that provides expert witnesses, for 
criminal trials in your state. Write a 250-word (one-page) report on the types 
of evidence this expert witness can testify about in court.
To find the information for this report: 
If you know a person who testifies as an expert witness, you may interview 
that person and base your report on what you learned from the interview. 
If not, go to the “For Legal Professionals” page at www.findlaw.com. Find 
the section on expert witnesses. Select a specialty frequently used in criminal 
trials. Find a consulting agency that provides experts in your state and read 
the material that it has posted on the web. Base your report on what you 
read. 
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Wigmore is a famous legal scholar on the subject of evidence.
 2. Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (D.C. Cir. 1923).
 3. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 125 L.Ed. 2d 469, 113 S.Ct. 2786 
(1993).  


135
Crime Scene Evidence 
and Experiments
CHAPTER 6
Feature Case: Scott Peterson
Scott Peterson was convicted for the murder of Laci Peterson, his wife, and 
Connor, his unborn son. Laci, who was 8 months pregnant, was last seen on 
December 24, 2002, in Modesto, California. Midmorning, a neighbor found 
the Peterson family dog running loose in the neighborhood wearing a collar 
and muddy leash. Laci’s car was in the driveway and her purse, cell phone, 
and keys were in their usual spot in the bedroom. At the time, Scott had 
taken his boat on a fishing trip in San Francisco Bay. The police were called 
at 6 p.m. The police, neighbors, and friends searched the area on foot, in all-
terrain vehicles and police vehicles, and by helicopter. The search widened 
to cover several counties. No trace of Laci was found. Police suspected foul 
play because it was totally out of character for Laci to go off alone without 
contacting anyone. During the investigation, police discovered that Scott 
had had numerous infidelities. He met Amber Frey, his current mistress, 
2 weeks before Laci disappeared, and he told Amber that he was a widower. 
When Amber discovered that Scott’s wife was missing, she allowed the 
police to record her phone calls with Scott. She testified for the prosecution 
at trial and some of the recorded calls were played for the jury.
On April 13, 2003, the decomposed body of a late-term male fetus 
with umbilical cord attached washed up on the shore of San Francisco Bay 
approximately 3 miles from where Scott claimed to have gone fishing. One 
day later, the body of a recently pregnant woman washed up approximately 
1 mile from where the baby was found. Due to the decomposition of the 
body, it was impossible to determine the woman’s cause of death. DNA 
tests showed that the bodies were those of Laci and Connor Peterson. 

136 
Chapter 6
Scott was arrested 5 days later in La Jolla, California (near the California–
Mexico border). At the time, he had $10,000 in cash, four cell phones, camp-
ing equipment, a gun, a map showing how to get to his mistress’s workplace, 
Viagra, and his brother’s driver’s license. His hair and goatee had been dyed. 
The police believed Scott was planning on fleeing to Mexico. Biological 
samples were taken from Scott. Based on a theory that Scott had suffocated 
or strangled Laci in their home and disposed of the body while on his sup-
posed fishing trip, the police searched the couple’s house, Scott’s truck, a tool 
box in the back of his truck, his warehouse, and his boat. The only piece of 
forensic evidence recovered was a single hair found in his boat.
The trial began in January 2004. The prosecution presented circum-
stantial evidence that Laci had been killed by Scott. Witnesses testified 
about Scott’s behavior (almost immediately selling Laci’s car, changing his 
appearance, adding hardcore pornographic channels to his cable service, 
and attempting to sell the house), which indicated that Scott knew Laci was 
not coming home. A hydrologist with the U.S. Geological Survey who was 
an expert on tides was called as an expert witness. He testified that the tidal 
systems in San Francisco were sufficiently chaotic to account for Laci and 
Connor’s bodies washing up at the locations where they were found. The 
affair with Amber Frey was not presented as a motive to kill Laci. Instead, 
it was presented as evidence of Scott’s character.
The defense based its case on lack of direct evidence. It also suggested 
that Connor’s body indicated that he was full-term. The defense theorized 
that Laci had been kidnapped, held until she gave birth, and then both Laci 
and Connor had been dumped into the bay. Prosecution medical experts 
were able to prove that Connor was not full-term and he had died at the 
same time that Laci died. The medical expert called by the defense tried 
to show that Connor died 1 week later than the prosecution claimed. On 
cross-examination, the witness became confused and also admitted that 
there were no medical records that supported his theory.
The jury convicted Scott of first-degree murder. Scott is now in San 
Quentin prison on death row. He has never admitted guilt.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Properly mark and package real evidence found during the investigation of a 
criminal case.
• Maintain the chain of custody for real evidence found at a crime scene.
• Explain the importance of scientific evidence in a criminal case.
• Describe how the prosecutor lays the foundation for the admission of crime scene 
evidence, experiments, and models.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
137
• List commonly accepted laboratory tests used in criminal cases, and explain their 
respective evidentiary value.
• Explain what conditions must be met before experiments can be introduced into 
evidence.
• Describe common types of experiments used in criminal trials.
• Explain the most common conditions that must be met before a model or 
diagram can be introduced into evidence.
Key Terms
•  Ballistics expert
•  Blood alcohol
•  Blood typing
•  Chain of custody
•  DNA testing
•  Experiment
•  Laying the foundation
•  Latent prints
•  Real evidence
Myths about Crime Scene Evidence 
and Experiments
Facts about Crime Scene Evidence 
and Experiments
All cases are solved by DNA tests.
DNA tests can only be done on biological 
evidence (blood, semen, etc.). Although 
newer DNA tests make it possible to do 
tests on smaller sized evidence samples, 
there are still many cases in which no DNA 
is found.
Crime scene investigators solve most of the 
cases.
Some cases are solved by scientific tests, but 
in many cases no tests are performed. There 
are two main reasons for this: There is no 
physical evidence to test in many cases, and 
there are not enough forensic labs to handle 
all of the samples from convicted felons in 
order to make a comprehensive database 
for “cold” DNA testing.
The police can bring anyone who is a 
suspect to the emergency room to take 
DNA samples.
The police must have probable cause to 
arrest in order to take a person to the station 
or emergency room. Samples could be taken 
in the field if there is reasonable suspicion 
the person has committed a crime, but this 
is limited to fingerprints and mug shots.
New scientific tests are admissible in federal 
court only if they are accepted by a majority 
of the professional groups in that branch 
of science.
In federal court the judge determines if a 
newly developed test is sufficiently reliable 
to be admitted in evidence in a criminal 
trial.
Once a new scientific test is accepted in 
federal court, it is automatically admissible 
in all state courts.
Each state determines the admissibility of 
scientific tests in its courts.

138 
Chapter 6
Introduction
In Chapter 3, we defined real evidence to include anything that can be 
perceived with the five senses except trial testimony. This includes physical 
items, documents, exhibits, and pictures. Since this is such a broad cat-
egory, it will be divided into two chapters. Evidence recovered at the crime 
scene and by criminal investigations, scientific evidence, experiments, 
models, and diagrams are discussed in this chapter. Chapter 7 discusses 
documents, pictures, models, and exhibits.
All types of real evidence have two things in common: They must 
be marked and formally introduced into evidence, and the attorney who 
wishes to introduce them must lay a foundation to establish the admis-
sibility of the items in question.
The formal process of marking evidence has four steps. First, the item 
must be shown to opposing counsel before testimony about it is introduced. 
This gives the attorney a chance to see what is to be discussed and form 
appropriate questions. Second, the side that intends to introduce the item 
has the court clerk assign it a number (or letter) for identification purposes. 
Third, the foundation is laid to establish that the item is admissible. Lastly, a 
formal request is made to admit it into evidence. If the judge rules that the 
item is admissible, it is given an exhibit number (or letter) and becomes evi-
dence in the case. The following example illustrates the process involved for 
the prosecution to introduce the murder weapon (e.g., a gun) into evidence.
Example of Introduction of Evidence 
Prosecutor shows gun to defense attorney and allows him or her to examine it if 
desired.
Prosecutor:   Your Honor, the prosecution requests that the clerk mark this 
.38-caliber Smith & Wesson revolver for identification as People’s 
No. 1. (Gun is given to clerk, who attaches tag to gun with “People’s 
No. 1” written on it.)
Prosecutor calls witness(es) and lays foundation to show that the gun is the one 
found at crime scene and that ballistic tests show that the slug test-fired from this 
gun matches the slug removed from the victim’s body.
Defense cross-examines and raises objections to admission of the gun into 
evidence.
Prosecutor:   Your Honor, the prosecution requests that the gun which was marked 
for identification as People’s No. 1 be admitted into evidence as 
Exhibit No. 1.
Defense: 
[May make objection.]
Judge: 
 [Rules on objection; allows evidence if no objection or objection 
overruled] Let the gun be received into evidence as Exhibit No. 1. 
(Clerk attaches tag that reads “Exhibit No. 1.”)

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
139
Exhibits that have been admitted into evidence may be examined by 
the jury and can usually be taken to the jury room during deliberations. 
The two requests to mark the gun, first for identification and later as 
an exhibit, appear to be a waste of time. The reason for marking it twice is 
that not all items displayed during trial will be admitted into evidence. To 
keep the trial record straight, all of those items are marked for identifica-
tion purposes. The prosecutor or defense attorney may use something to 
illustrate a point or help a witness describe an event but not ask to have 
it introduced as evidence in the case. Opposing counsel may successfully 
argue that the item is inadmissible. Sometimes the testimony of several 
witnesses is needed to lay the foundation. Assigning the identification 
number the first time any testimony is given about the item makes it easier 
to determine which piece of evidence is being discussed. By the time all of 
the witnesses have testified and the foundation for admitting the item into 
evidence is complete, one or more other items may have been introduced 
into evidence. Most judges like to have the exhibits numbered in chrono-
logical order; to do this, exhibit numbers are not assigned until the judge 
rules the item is admissible. To avoid confusion, one side usually uses 
letters and the other numbers. For example, the prosecution might begin 
with “1,” whereas the defense starts with “A.” If a large number of exhibits 
is anticipated, each side will be assigned a block of numbers, such as 100 
to 299 for the prosecution and 300 to 599 for the defense.
Crime Scene Evidence
All items that are admitted as exhibits must be authenticated. Authentication 
means to show that an item is genuine. To authenticate evidence found at 
the crime scene, or during other parts of the investigation of the case, it is 
necessary to show that the item is the same one described by the witness. 
The item needs to be in the same condition that it was in at the time it was 
found by the police unless it was necessary to conduct laboratory tests on 
it. If tests have altered its appearance, this must be explained to the jury. 
Careful handling of evidence and accurate report writing are crucial. Most 
police department procedure manuals give detailed instructions on how to 
handle many different types of crime scene evidence. 
For example, at the crime scene it is very important to protect evidence 
so that it is not destroyed or damaged. Restricting public access to the area 
is important to prevent people from stepping on evidence, handling it, or 
removing it from the scene. Officers must also be careful not to accidentally 
damage potential evidence. No one should be allowed to try to clean up 
the area before the investigation is completed because evidence could be 
destroyed.

140 
Chapter 6
The police usually try to save everything that might have evidentiary 
value. The prosecutor will make the final decision on what is needed at 
trial. Things that are not properly preserved will not be admissible. It is 
much better to have many items in the evidence locker that are not used than 
to discover that something that is needed was not kept.
The series of questions that the attorney asks witnesses in order to 
establish that a piece of real evidence is admissible is called “laying the 
foundation.” The first step in laying the foundation for the admission 
of crime scene evidence is to have someone identify the object and tes-
tify about where the item was found. For example, “Yes, this is the gun 
that I took from the defendant’s pocket at the time of the arrest.” If the 
item has a serial number or some other unique form of identification, 
this process is easier. Merely describing it, even in rather specific terms 
(Smith & Wesson .38-caliber revolver), is usually not good enough if 
there were more than one of these items made. After the piece of evi-
dence has been identified, one or more witnesses will be needed to tes-
tify about what has been done with it since it was taken into the custody 
of the police.
The most common solution to this problem of identifying an object 
is to make a mark, usually the officer’s initials, on the item at the time it 
was originally collected. It is very important, however, that identifying 
marks are only made in locations where they do not interfere with the 
use of the item as evidence. Marks should not be placed where they will 
be in the way when laboratory tests are done. Extreme caution must also 
be used to preserve fingerprints, traces of blood, etc. that may be on an 
object.
The officer needs to be familiar with what laboratory tests may be done 
in order to be able to handle crime scene evidence properly. For example, 
blood-stained clothing needs to be air-dried before packaging because 
mold and mildew that grow in airtight containers where damp clothing is 
stored can interfere with tests for blood types. On the other hand, charred 
remains from a suspected arson fire need to be stored in airtight contain-
ers immediately to avoid evaporation of gasoline or other volatile fluids 
used to start the fire. Knowing the types of tests that can be performed will 
also help the officer decide what evidence should be collected.
Before collecting and packaging evidence for storage, the officer 
should make a detailed record of the crime scene with clear indications 
of where each item was found. This can be done by sketching the loca-
tion, taking photographs of the area, or making detailed notes. Ideally, all 
three will be done. Figure 6-1 is an example of a police sketch of a crime 
scene.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
141
Sketches should be to scale, with all relevant facts, such as locations of 
doors, windows, and furniture, included. Distances between key objects 
should be noted in the drawing. The points of the compass are usually 
included to help orient the viewer. Photographs also need to show these 
facts. Additionally, photographs need to have something in them that 
clearly indicates the size of the items shown. A ruler is frequently placed 
near the object that is the focus of the picture for this purpose.
The process of packaging evidence for storage is very important. The evi-
dence needs to be preserved for trial so that it will not be damaged, evaporate, 
or be contaminated by other things. Each piece of evidence must be packaged 
individually. It is useful to have a variety of clean envelopes and containers on 
hand for this purpose. Appropriate packing materials, such as sterile cotton, 
should also be kept on hand. Extra precautions may need to be taken to avoid 
damaging the evidence if it will be mailed to the crime laboratory.
Figure 6-1
Typical Police Sketch of Homicide Crime Scene

142 
Chapter 6
The evidence should be marked or tagged and the container should 
have the necessary identification information on it because the evidence 
may be removed from the envelope for examination and laboratory tests. 
Each container should be labeled so that it is not necessary to open it to 
find out what is inside. This reduces the chance of losing or damaging 
the evidence. There should also be space (either on the envelope or on a 
form attached to the package containing the evidence) so that each person 
who handles it can indicate the time, date, and reason for having it. This 
detailed procedure is used to establish the “chain of custody” (also called 
chain of possession or continuity of possession). It will be necessary to 
account for everyone who has had possession of the evidence in order to 
show the judge and jury that the evidence has not been tampered with. 
Figure 6-2 illustrates the appropriate steps for collecting evidence at a 
crime scene.
Scientific Evidence
The modern forensics laboratory can perform a wide variety of scientific 
tests. Forensic evidence can be used to establish the elements of the crime, 
conclusively associate the defendant with the crime, and/or help recon-
struct the crime. 
Figure 6-2
Collecting Evidence at a Crime Scene

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
143
Evidence found at the crime scene can be sent to a forensics labora-
tory for testing. If evidence samples, such as blood or urine, are needed 
so that tests can be performed, the suspect’s Fourth Amendment rights 
must be honored. If the suspect is not already in custody, the police must 
have probable cause in order to bring the person to an emergency room 
or other facility to take the samples. This is frequently done in “drunk 
driving” cases. A person can be detained in the field based on reasonable 
suspicion, but the person cannot be transported to another location. 
If there is no probable cause to arrest, it may be necessary to obtain 
a search warrant in order to obtain the samples needed for a specific test. 
The judge will weigh the need for the tests against the potential danger to 
the suspect when obtaining the evidence. Blood and urine samples are low 
risk and routinely granted as long as there is probable cause to connect 
the suspect to the crime. More invasive tests, such as surgery to retrieve 
a bullet from the suspect’s torso for ballistic tests, may be denied if the 
surgery poses a danger of serious injury.
Types of Cases Commonly Using Scientific Evidence
Research by Peterson1 showed that police are far more likely to clear a case 
if scientific evidence is gathered and analyzed. Prosecutors are less likely to 
plea bargain in these cases, and judges tend to give more severe sentences. 
Results of a survey suggested that jurors gave scientific evidence serious con-
sideration but that it usually was not the key element in deciding the case.
Peterson also reported on a nationwide survey of crime labs. Approximately 
two thirds of their caseloads involved drugs, narcotics, and drunk driving 
cases. Only approximately one fourth of their work was related to crimes 
against persons or property.
Forensic evidence was used in nearly all murder and drug possession 
cases. Use in rape prosecutions varied considerably between the jurisdic-
tions (from 30% to 70%). Burglary, robbery, and attempted murder or 
aggravated battery cases were less likely to have tests from a crime labora-
tory introduced.
Laying the Foundation
The foundation for the introduction of scientific evidence involves successfully 
answering three questions: (1) Is this a valid scientific test? (2) Was accurate 
equipment used for the test? and (3) Was the test performed in an appropriate 
manner by a qualified person?
The first question, which requires the side offering the test results to 
establish the scientific validity of the test, is in many ways similar to the 

144 
Chapter 6
requirement that expert witnesses may only be called if there is a valid 
field of scientific knowledge. This is no problem when a test has become 
widely accepted. In fact, in those situations it is rare for either side to even 
ask questions about the scientific basis for the test. Fingerprint compari-
sons are a good example of a well-established test. Newer tests must be 
carefully explained to the judge. This is done on voir dire. Expert wit-
nesses will be called to provide the necessary background on the test and 
explain the scientific principles behind it. The federal courts and many 
state courts allow the judge to determine if the test is sufficiently reli-
able to be admitted. The judge considers the following factors: whether 
a theory or technique presents scientific knowledge that will assist the 
jury, whether it has been subjected to peer review and published in 
professional journals, the known or potential rate of errors, and how 
widespread the acceptance of the test is. See discussion of the Frye and 
Daubert cases in Chapter 5.
The opposing side can cross-examine and call its own experts. After 
the witnesses have given their testimony, the judge will decide if the test is 
sufficiently accepted in the appropriate scientific community. Due to the 
highly technical nature of these scientific explanations, they are seldom 
repeated for the jury. Table 6-1 reviews what must be done in court when 
an expert witness testifies.
Any test can be attacked on the basis of faulty equipment. States fre-
quently require certain types of equipment, such as the machines designed 
to measure breath alcohol, to be checked regularly and to be certified as 
accurate. Failure to have the machines tested can cast doubt on the test 
results. If the results appear to be wrong, the opposing side will attempt 
to show defects in the test equipment even if routine testing and main-
tenance have been done. This tactic may be used merely because the test 
results are damaging to its case. Doing this is the equivalent of impeaching 
the laboratory equipment. Although the trend in discovery is to share evi-
dence and require each side to reveal the results of laboratory tests before 
trial, there is no duty to preserve evidence in order to allow the other side 
to perform tests on it.
Human error can also cause inaccurate test results. The side introduc-
ing the test will call the technician who performed it. Questions will be 
asked to show that the technician has had the appropriate training and 
that the test was done correctly. The questions will try to point out the 
skill of the operator and how carefully the required procedures were fol-
lowed. Cross-examination will be used to try to show that deviations from 
the required testing procedures could cause the results to be inaccurate. 
Redirect can be used to try to establish that minor mistakes made during 

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
145
T A B L E  6-1  Summary of Procedures Used When Expert 
Witness Testifies in Court
Side Calling 
the Expert Witness
Opposing Side
Establish that jury needs 
the assistance of an expert 
in order to understand the 
evidence.
Voir dire hearing 
Present arguments to judge
explaining why the jury will 
not be able to understand 
the evidence.
Voir dire hearing 
Present arguments to 
judge explaining why 
the jury will be able to 
understand the evidence.
Establish that there is a 
“science” that can be 
introduced at trial that will 
help the jury understand 
the facts of the case. Note:
This step will be skipped if a 
well-established test will be 
introduced.
Voir dire hearing 
Establish scientific validity of 
test used, based on either 
Frye or Daubert (depending 
on which test is used in the 
court district).
Voir dire hearing 
Establish that the test 
does not have scientific 
validity based on 
either Frye or Daubert
(depending on which 
test is used in the court 
district).
Establish that an expert 
witness should be allowed 
to testify.
Voir dire hearing 
Put the expert on the 
witness stand and ask 
questions about education, 
training, and experience in 
the area that he or she will 
testify about if allowed to 
testify in front of the jury.
Voir dire hearing 
Cross-examine the expert 
and show that he or 
she does not have the 
education, training, and 
experience in the area 
needed to testify in front 
of the jury.
Expert testifies during trial.
At trial, ask questions to show 
1. Qualifications of expert. 
2. Correct facts were used. 
3. Equipment used for the 
tests was appropriate and 
accurate.
4. Appropriate tests were 
done.
5. Tests were done properly. 
6. Interpretation of test 
results was correct.
At trial, ask questions on 
cross-examination to show 
1. Expert is not qualified. 
2. Wrong facts were used 
or facts that were used 
were insufficient. 
3. Equipment that was 
used was not appropriate 
and/or the equipment 
did not produce accurate 
results. 
4. Wrong tests were done.
5. Tests were not done 
properly. 
6. Test results were not 
correctly interpreted.
the test were not likely to affect the results. Sometimes expert witnesses 
will be called to testify about the effect of procedural errors on the test 
results. Table 6-2 summarizes what must be done in court to introduce 
test results.

146 
Chapter 6
Commonly Accepted Scientific Tests
Many scientific tests are so well established that they are admitted at trial 
without a challenge to their validity. This does not mean that the oppos-
ing side will not challenge the equipment used or the way the test was 
performed. This section discusses the basis for accepting a few of the most 
common scientific tests.
Fingerprints2
Use of fingerprints for identification purposes in the United States dates 
back to 1901 when the New York City Civil Service Commission first used 
T A B L E
6-2 Introducing Results of Scientific Tests during 
Trial
Side That Wants to 
Introduce the Evidence
Side That Wants to Prevent 
Introduction of the 
Evidence
New lab test
Jurisdiction using Frye
Introduce facts during voir
dire to show that the test 
is recognized as valid in the 
scientific community.
Jurisdiction using Daubert
Introduce facts during voir dire
so judge can determine that the 
test has scientific validity.
Jurisdiction using Frye
Introduce facts during voir
dire to show that test is not 
recognized as valid in scientific 
community.
Jurisdiction using Daubert
Introduce facts during voir dire
so judge will not conclude that 
the test has scientific validity.
Lab test in 
common usage
Ask judge to have lab test report 
marked as evidence and then 
introduce testimony about it.
Object and state facts indicating 
that the test is not recognized as 
valid.
Competency of 
person who did 
the test
Introduce testimony and 
documents to show that the 
person was properly trained to 
conduct the test.
Introduce testimony and 
documents to show that the 
person was not properly trained 
to conduct the test.
Accuracy of 
equipment used 
to conduct test
Introduce testimony and 
documents to show that the 
equipment used to conduct the 
test is working properly and 
has been checked recently for 
accuracy.
Introduce testimony and 
documents to show that the 
equipment is not working properly 
and/or has not been checked 
recently for accuracy.
Test performed 
properly
Introduce testimony by person 
who did test to show how the test 
was conducted.
Introduce testimony by person 
who did test or an expert to show 
that the test was not conducted 
properly.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
147
fingerprints for certifying all civil service applicants. Law enforcement 
began using fingerprints soon thereafter. Centralized fingerprint files, which 
evolved into the National Crime Information Center files maintained by the 
FBI today, were started in 1924.
Fingerprint identification is based on three key principles: (1) A fin-
gerprint is an individual characteristic, (2) fingerprints remain unchanged 
during an individual’s lifetime, and (3) fingerprints have general ridge pat-
terns that permit them to be systematically classified.
Identification of a fingerprint is based on a study of the ridge pattern 
characteristics. Both the number and the relative location of the character-
istics are considered. In the approximately 90 years that fingerprints have 
been collected, no two have been found that were identical.
The typical fingerprint may have as many as 150 ridge characteristics. 
There has been considerable debate about how many ridge comparisons 
must match before it can be concluded that the fingerprints are from the 
same person. Some experts have said anywhere from 8 to 16. In 1973, the 
International Association for Identification concluded that there is no 
number that can answer this question in all cases. The final determination 
is based on the experience, skill, and knowledge of the fingerprint expert.
The ridge characteristics of the finger are formed where the epidermis 
and dermis meet. Perspiration, salts, and skin oil on the fingertips com-
bine to leave a pattern on surfaces that the skin touches. An injury must 
produce a scar that goes 1 or 2 millimeters beneath the skin’s surface to 
affect the fingerprint. Even then, there are usually enough matching points 
left to allow an expert to make a comparison. Also, a scar can be used for 
identification purposes.
There are three classes of fingerprints: loops (60% to 65% of the pop-
ulation), whorls (30% to 35% of the population), and arches (5% of the 
population). Each of these classes can be subdivided into distinct groups. 
Figure 6-3 shows the six common fingerprint patterns. Classification sys-
tems, used to help locate fingerprints on file, were based on the presence 
of one type of pattern on each of the 10 fingers. Such classification systems 
are now largely replaced by automated filing and searching.
In the past, individual prints had to be compared to prints on file 
by skilled fingerprint examiners. Now, advanced computer technology is 
making it easier to match single prints. Flying spot scanners can be used 
to input fingerprints. All ridge characteristics are given numeric identifiers 
that can be compared with those already in the database.
A separate question that must be answered when fingerprints are 
used in court relates to how the prints were preserved. The easier part of 
the answer relates to how the comparison set of prints was obtained. This 

148 
Chapter 6
focuses on the act of making the fingerprint card that was used. Many 
attorneys do not question this, but some demand testimony about the 
procedure used to roll the comparison prints.
Fingerprints that are recovered at the crime scene or from other evi-
dence are commonly called “latent” (not developed) prints. A detailed 
explanation of how the latent prints were recovered is usually required. 
For many years, prints on hard, nonabsorbent surfaces (e.g., mirrors, 
glass, and painted surfaces) were obtained by applying fingerprint 
powder to the surface with a camel-hair brush. The powder stuck to the 
skin oil in the fingerprint, thus making it visible. The fingerprint, as seen 
by the pattern in the powder, was photographed. It was also preserved 
by “lifting” it from the surface with a special adhesive tape (which may 
be clear or opaque) made for this purpose. If the object with the print 
on it is small enough, the actual object bearing the print may be kept for 
evidence. 
Prints on porous surfaces (paper, cardboard, etc.) were obtained by 
the use of iodine fuming, ninhydrin, and silver nitrate. Laser light has been 
discovered to produce fluorescent fingerprints that can be photographed. 
Ninhydrin development, laser techniques, and cyanoacrylic ester fuming 
are now routinely used to obtain fingerprints on both porous and nonpo-
rous surfaces.
Loop
Pocket Loop
Plain Whorl
Plain Arch
Tented Arch
Double Loop
Figure 6-3
Six Common Fingerprint Patterns

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
149
Caution must be taken, of course, when collecting and processing 
latent prints to avoid contaminating them with the fingerprints of inves-
tigators or others at the crime scene. The victim’s attempts to clean the 
crime scene may also destroy valuable prints. Additionally, investigators 
must be aware of other types of laboratory tests that may be needed in the 
case because fingerprint powder or other substances used to develop latent 
prints may interfere with another test that must be performed.
Blood Alcohol3
The most common use of blood alcohol testing is in drunk driving cases. 
It is also used in cases in which intoxication is an element of the crime and 
in other cases in which the defendant’s sobriety has a bearing on criminal 
intent.
Alcohol is absorbed into the body from the stomach and small intes-
tine. Although it does not require digestion, absorption will be delayed 
if there is any food in the stomach. Alcohol is rapidly absorbed into the 
body’s blood and circulatory system and distributed to all parts of the 
body. The molecular structure and weight of alcohol is such that it is 
able to cross cell membranes by a simple diffusion process. It can quickly 
achieve equilibrium in the body. The result is that alcohol rapidly becomes 
associated with all parts of the body in concentrations proportionate to 
body water content. It is therefore possible to estimate the total alcohol 
content of the body using a small sample of the blood.
The most common test for alcohol is done on breath samples; blood 
alcohol tests are also common. Capillary and arterial blood give the best 
prediction of brain alcohol concentration. Blood samples should be taken 
by qualified medical personnel (e.g., doctor, nurse, and laboratory techni-
cian) and witnessed by a law enforcement officer. Special procedures are 
required, such as cleansing the skin with alcohol-free disinfectant, before 
taking the blood sample.
Kits are available with all the necessary supplies including chemicals 
to preserve the specimen until it reaches the laboratory. The chain of cus-
tody for the blood sample must be recorded. Having an officer witness the 
taking of the blood sample will eliminate the need to have the person who 
drew the sample testify in court.
Blood alcohol test results state the percentage of alcohol in the blood. 
Many states use the 0.08% level as conclusive evidence of driving under the 
influence; a lower standard may apply to juveniles. The number of drinks 
that it takes to achieve any specific level of alcohol in the blood varies with 
the weight of the person. Approximately one drink per hour can be removed 
from the body by the normal metabolic process.

150 
Chapter 6
Blood Typing4
There are many questions that a forensic serologist can help to answer: Is 
it blood? If so, is it human blood? If it is human blood, what group does 
it belong to? Can additional information be obtained by testing that will 
help identify the source of the blood? DNA testing is the most accurate 
way to determine if blood matches, but this type of testing is expensive and 
takes several days or weeks. Blood typing is inexpensive and can be done 
quickly; therefore, it is still in use.
Tests performed on a stain to determine if it is blood generally are 
based on the presence of blood cells or compounds characteristic of blood. 
These include erythrocytes and leukocytes, blood serum proteins, and 
hemoglobin and its derivatives.
Once it has been determined that the sample is blood, the next step 
is to determine if it is human blood. If it is not, laboratory tests can also 
determine what species of animal the blood is from. Most of these tests 
are based on the response of the immune system to foreign substances in 
the blood.
Blood typing is done on human blood. The ABO system is the most 
common. Four major blood groups are used: A (41% of U.S. population), 
B (10%), AB (4%), and O (45%). The smallest subgroup in this system is 
present in 0.5% of the population.
Another blood group system is based on the Rh factor of the blood. 
This is totally separate from the ABO system. There are eight Rh determi-
nants in common use. Their frequency in the U.S. population ranges from 
33.2% for one of the Rh+ subgroups to very rare occurrences in three of 
the Rh- subgroups. Forensic laboratories in the United States do not rely 
heavily on the Rh system.
A third blood group system is also in use. The MN system has nine 
categories. The frequency of these blood types in the U.S. Caucasian popu-
lation ranges from 24% (MNS group) to 1% (NS group). This system is 
separate from both the ABO and the Rh systems.
Each of these three blood typing systems has the same problem in 
court. If the defendant has a different blood type from the one found at 
the crime scene, it can be shown that it was not his or her blood. The tests 
cannot conclusively show that the blood came from one specific indi-
vidual. Unless the suspect has a very rare blood type, the test only points 
to a large segment of the population. Scientists are constantly seeking 
better blood grouping systems so that blood can be identified on a more 
individualized basis.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
151
DNA Testing5
Identical DNA molecules are found in each cell of a person’s body. With 
the exception of identical twins, each individual’s DNA is unique. Whereas 
some DNA tests require a blood stain the size of a quarter or a semen stain 
the size of a dime to determine if the evidence found at the crime scene 
matches a sample extracted from a criminal suspect, other DNA tests can 
be done on minute samples. Due to the uniformity of DNA throughout 
the body, a semen sample found at the crime scene can be matched to a 
blood sample taken at a clinical laboratory.
The laboratory tests to match DNA samples are very complex and 
the details are not discussed in this text. Once the tests have been com-
pleted, the matching is done both by visual inspection and by computer 
matching. The complete results of the test are sometimes called a “DNA 
profile.” Comparison calculations are given in two forms: a statement that 
there is (or is not) a match and a probability calculation for such a match. 
For example, there is a 1 in 7 million chance that the match would have 
occurred at random.
DNA testing, first used in criminal prosecutions in 1985, is now 
admissible in all states. It is most commonly used in sexual assault cases 
in which semen samples are available and violent crime scenes where 
blood samples can be retrieved; however, DNA can be used on any type 
of biological evidence left by the perpetrator. Tests are now available to 
compare DNA from plants. DNA also has been used to establish that a 
person did not commit a crime. The Innocence Project has utilized DNA 
tests between 1989 and 2007 to obtained the reversal of more than 200 
convictions and the release of inmates serving prison sentences for crimes 
they did not commit. 
Although the scientific principle involved is unchallenged, there are a 
variety of errors that can occur. First, the sample recovered from the crime 
scene may be contaminated by bacteria, virus, or other nonhuman DNA. It 
may also be contaminated by detergents, salt, and cleaning fluids. Second, the 
laboratory equipment, gel, enzymes, and DNA probe used in the test may 
be contaminated. These errors may result in DNA prints that are fuzzy or 
blurred. Although the major part of the matching technique is computerized, 
a technician makes the final determination that the total pattern matches; 
this means the technician’s subjective impression is part of the matching pro-
cess. Some authors estimate that the error rate caused by all of these factors is 
between 1% and 4%. Finally, and subject to the most controversy, the prob-
ability calculation has been attacked because the current database is too small 

152 
Chapter 6
and based on a nonrandom sample. Each testing laboratory maintains its 
own database; most are developed from samples obtained from blood banks 
and hospitals. DNA patterns vary for different racial groups and subgroups. 
The result is that the databases currently being used may not adequately 
reflect the variety of racial groups in the U.S. population.
Five types of DNA testing are discussed here to give you an idea of 
what resources are available (from www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_
Genome/elsi/forensics.shtml, accessed June 5, 2007). Keep in mind that time, 
money, and availability of DNA laboratories restrict the number of samples 
that can be tested.
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP)
This was one of the original DNA analyses used in forensic investigation. 
It is not used as much now because it requires a larger DNA sample (as 
large as a quarter) to conduct the test. Samples degraded by environmental 
factors, such as dirt or mold, do not work as well for RFLP.
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Analysis
This test reproduces the cells in the sample until there are enough to con-
duct a DNA test. It can be done on a sample as small as a few cells. This test 
is not harmed by environmental factors, but great care must be exercised 
to avoid contamination by other biological materials when collecting and 
preserving the sample.
Short Tandem Repeat (STR)
STR technology is used to evaluate specific regions (loci) within nuclear 
DNA. Variability in STR regions can be used to distinguish one DNA pro-
file from another. The FBI uses a standard set of 13 specific STR regions for 
CODIS, the database that can be operated at the local, state, and national 
level for convicted offenders, unsolved crime scene evidence, and missing 
persons. The odds of two individuals having the same 13-loci DNA profile 
are approximately 1 in 1 billion.
Mitochondrial DNA Analysis (mtDNA)
This test can be used on samples that cannot be submitted for RFLP, PCR, or 
STR analysis because it does not rely on nuclear DNA. mtDNA analysis uses 
DNA extracted from another cellular organelle called mitochondrion and can 
be used to test hair, bones, and teeth. All mothers have the same mitochondrial 
DNA as their daughters; therefore, mtDNA analysis can be done on cells of 
unidentified human remains and any female relative of a missing person.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
153
Y-Chromosome Analysis
The Y chromosome is passed directly from father to son, so the analysis of 
the genetic markers on the Y chromosome is useful for tracing relation-
ships among males or for analyzing biological evidence involving multiple 
male contributors.
Identification of Controlled Substances6
In cases involving possession, distribution, or manufacture of controlled sub-
stances, laboratory analysis plays a major role. Testing for controlled substances 
is essentially qualitative and quantitative organic chemical analysis. As the 
number of drug cases has increased the demand on the forensic laboratory, new 
techniques have been developed to do the job faster and more accurately.
A variety of tests may be employed to identify a substance. These usu-
ally start with screening tests, but they may also include separation tests, 
confirmatory tests, and quantitative analysis.
Samples are frequently tested rather than the whole quantity of sus-
pected drugs. This is almost always the case when there was a large seizure. 
Laboratories follow different approaches to this problem. Some test a given 
percentage of the evidence. Others do screening tests on a large number of 
samples, but if the screening tests indicate that only one substance is pres-
ent, further testing is only done on a small sample.
Representative sampling techniques are important. This is always true 
when only a sample is tested, but it is even more important when illegally 
manufactured drugs are in question because of the lack of knowledge about 
their source. The evidence seized may not be homogeneous. Therefore, it 
is important to make sure that the sample comes from different locations 
within the seized containers. A visual inspection of both the sample and 
the entire quantity seized is useful to ensure that the mathematical for-
mula used produces a truly representative sample. These techniques need 
to be applied to solid substances, such as bricks of marijuana, as well as 
large barrels of pills.
When marked tablets are sent for analysis, the marks, along with the 
color and shape of the tablets, may provide presumptive evidence of their 
content. Laboratories vary with regard to the amount of testing that is 
done on these samples. One screening test may be sufficient if there is a 
known tablet available for comparison that has the same appearance. The 
appearance of numerous counterfeit or “look-alike” drugs increases the 
need to carefully test all samples. Due to the fact that capsules are easily 
tampered with, the presumption arising from their physical appearance is 
not as strong as the one for tablets.

154 
Chapter 6
If the quantity of drugs submitted for examination is very small (e.g., 
residue in a pipe), it may be necessary to perform tests in a different order 
than usual. Those tests that can be done on small quantities of the ques-
tioned material and have a high degree of accuracy are done first. Screening 
tests that destroy the test substance, or tests that have a low probability of 
conclusively identifying the sample, may not be used at all.
Three main types of screening tests are used: spot tests, microscopic 
tests, and ultraviolet spectrophotometry. Based on the results of these 
tests, the chemist will select one or more appropriate tests to identify the 
substance. Additional tests may be done to confirm the identity of the 
substance tested.
Infrared spectrophotometry is the most popular because it is the least 
expensive and easiest to use. Scientists also give gas chromatography–mass 
spectrometry high ratings because it requires only micrograms of material 
to do the test. Test instruments are frequently connected to computers that 
store extensive libraries of data on known compounds for comparison.
Due to the wide variety of tests that are now in use, individual crime 
labs may not be using the same tests. The fact that one specific test that has 
a high degree of accuracy was not used may be emphasized by the defense. 
It does not necessarily indicate that the lab work was shoddy.
Identification of Firearms7
Firearms can be identified from their fired bullets and cartridges. The fire-
arms examiner is commonly called a ballistics expert, even though techni-
cally ballistics refers to the motion of projectiles rather than matching the 
expelled object to the weapon.
Pistols (revolvers, “semiautomatics,” and “automatics”), rifles, assault 
rifles (i.e., automatic rifles such as the M-16), machine guns, and subma-
chine guns are rifled firearms. Their barrels have spiraling lands and grooves 
that leave patterns of parallel scratches, called striations or striae, on the 
projectile. Shotguns, on the other hand, have smooth-bore barrels and do 
not leave striations.
The history of modern firearms examination in the United States began 
with Dr. Albert Llewellyn Hall in 1900. His technique of pushing, rather 
than firing, bullets through the weapon’s barrel was in use until after World 
War I. A 1902 appellate case affirmed the use of firearms identification evi-
dence in court, but the practice did not become commonly accepted until 
the 1930s. The admission of testimony regarding marks on fired cartridges 
began in 1906 and gained acceptance much faster than other methods of 
firearms identification.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
155
Microscopic examinations of recovered bullets can be useful even if 
no weapon has been recovered. They can show the caliber of the gun and 
many facts about the barrel of the weapon involved. If more than one 
bullet was recovered, it may also be possible to determine whether more 
than one gun was used.
Prior to testing a weapon for identification purposes, it should be 
checked for latent prints and trace evidence, such as blood, bits of skin or 
fat that may have been deposited on it if the gun was fired at close range. 
Recovered bullets should also be checked for these substances. Fibers from 
the pocket in which it was carried may also be present.
Preliminary examination of the weapon should cover make or manu-
facturer, type of weapon, caliber, serial number, model, number of shots, 
and barrel length. Prior to test firing, the functioning of the weapon’s 
action and the operation of any safeties should be checked. One purpose 
of this is to determine if it is safe to test-fire the weapon; another is to 
refute any defense claim that the gun went off accidentally. Determination 
of the trigger’s pull is also important for this purpose.
If the examiner determines that the bullet recovered from the crime 
scene has the same characteristics as the suspect’s weapon, and the gun 
passed the safety check, the gun will be test-fired into a bullet trap. Cotton 
waste or cotton waste soaked in oil is frequently used in a bullet trap; water 
traps are also used. The ammunition used to test-fire the gun should match 
that used in the crime as closely as possible. A comparison microscope and 
special bullet holders allow the examiner to simultaneously view a bullet 
recovered at the crime scene and one test-fired into the bullet trap.
The examination typically begins with careful checking for land impres-
sions near the base of the bullets. It should then systematically proceed to 
check the land impressions on one bullet with those on the comparison 
sample until the entire surface of both bullets has been covered. The bullets 
are rotated synchronously to determine if there are matching striation pat-
terns. Other distinctive markings, such as skid and shaving marks caused 
inside the barrel, may also be noted.
Rust in the barrel causes problems because rust particles can cause 
striations. Each firing may disturb the rust and result in different stria-
tions. Alterations in the barrel, including shortening, flattening, or bend-
ing, also cause variations in the striation pattern. Studies have shown 
that some guns, particularly .22 caliber rifles, may not produce identical 
striations, even when there has been no damage to the gun. Particularly 
in automatics and very inexpensive handguns (e.g., “Saturday night spe-
cials”), the firing of large numbers of bullets may cause wear that makes 
comparisons difficult.

156 
Chapter 6
Due to the fact that striations are caused by imperfections in the 
metal used to manufacture a gun, the marks left on a bullet are unique. 
Unfortunately, there is no exact standard for the number of striations that 
must match before it can be concluded that the bullets were fired from the 
same gun. If there is a match between the recovered bullet and the test-fired 
one, it can conclusively be stated that they came from the same gun.
The factors mentioned in the preceding paragraph indicate that two 
bullets can be fired by the same gun and not have exactly the same mark-
ings. The fact they do not match is not conclusive evidence that the bullets 
were fired from different guns. One study showed that only approximately 
20% of the striations on bullets fired from the same weapon matched. This 
means that many comparisons will result in inconclusive evidence.
If a shotgun cartridge or shells from an automatic were recovered, the 
examination should also begin with a check for latent prints and trace evi-
dence. The initial examination with a low-powered microscope should note 
the size, shape, and type of cartridge. Size and position of the firing pin 
impression and location of extractor and ejector marks are also important. 
These can be used to determine the make and model of weapons that could 
have fired the cartridge. This is complicated by adapters that can be used to 
fire certain types of cartridges from guns designed for different ammuni-
tion. Alterations that may have been made to the weapon also interfere with 
accurate comparisons.
If these preliminary examinations indicate the cartridge could have 
been fired from the weapon in question, microscopic comparisons will be 
made of the recovered cartridge and one that was test-fired. The test-fired 
cartridge should be as similar as possible to the one in question. Special 
holders are used so that the cartridges can be mounted on a comparison 
microscope. Firing pin impressions, firing pin drag marks, and breech-
block marks are usually compared first.
A match of these markings indicates that the same weapon was involved. 
Extractor and ejector marks, chambering marks, and magazine marks are 
compared next. These can indicate that the cartridges were run through 
the action of the same gun. A variety of problems may arise: (1) Reloaded 
cartridges may bear markings from more than one gun, (2) low-powered 
cartridges may not produce enough force to be marked, and (3) the extrac-
tor may not grip the cartridge with enough force to mark it.
Other Forensic Specialties and Tests
A variety of forensic tests are listed here. This is not a complete list of every 
type of forensic evidence used in court. 

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
157
Forensic Anthropology8
Investigators frequently turn to forensic anthropologists for help in iden-
tifying human skeletal remains and decomposing bodies. The trained 
anthropologist works with pathologists and odontologists to estimate age, 
sex, ancestry, stature, and unique bony features of the deceased. Specialists 
in facial reconstruction may make three-dimensional sculptures of the 
face based on a portion of a skull. 
Age Progression Photography and Models9
Pictures of children may accurately portray what they looked like at the time 
they were last seen, but after a few years the pictures are nearly useless. Age 
progression software is used to make a picture of what the child will look 
like as a teenager. This helps when searching for missing children who have 
been gone for a long time.
Geographic Profiling10
This technique operates on the assumption that serial murderers (or 
rapists) balance their desire to kill (or rape) far from home and avoid 
recognition with their desire to remain in familiar territory. Mapping of 
the locations of serial crimes is facilitated by software developed for this 
purpose. It is estimated that use of the software helps police narrow their 
target zone by 95%.
Forensic Footwear Analysis11
Making plaster casts of footprints dates back nearly 100 years. Current 
advancement in this technique focuses on details in the wear pattern of the 
shoe to estimate the height, weight, and physical impairments of the suspect.
Digital Image Processing12
Many new techniques and software are available to help investigators 
improve the quality of pictures. What were once discarded as blurry pic-
tures can now be enhanced so that an identification can be made.
Forensic Accounting13
This specialty is used in fraud and embezzlement cases to establish that 
financial records have been falsified or altered. Although some accountants 
are able to do this type of work, a Certified Fraud Examiner or a Fraud 
Certified Public Accountant has extensive training and experience in this 
type of work and makes a good witness in court.

158 
Chapter 6
Computing/Digital Forensics14
When an investigation involves the possibility that evidence has been stored 
on a computer, it is important to call someone who is specifically trained in 
this area. Police officers should not boot up the computer and try to find the 
information on their own because the computer may be set to automatically 
erase files if a stranger logs on. Unskilled detectives can also delete important 
files or alter them. The dates the files were used may be important; this data 
would be changed by merely opening the file.
The specialist in this field has extensive training in recovering data 
as well as many other ways to search the computer. A Certified Forensics 
Computer Examiner, or someone with similar credentials, is highly trained 
in this area. A person who specializes in computing/digital forensics can 
determine if files have been deleted from a computer or other digital device. 
Hidden files can also be found. This includes searching for pictures, docu-
ments, and e-mail messages. 
Other Forensic Specialties
Almost any specialty has a forensic component—for example, forensic 
economics, forensic engineering, forensic linguistics, forensic photography, 
forensic psychiatry, and forensic psychology. If an investigator believes 
assistance is required, a search should be made for a person with appropri-
ate expertise. When the case is prepared for court, it may be necessary to 
search for an expert who works in the field and is familiar with testifying 
in court.
Tests That Are Not Commonly Accepted
Scientific tests must be accepted in their field before the courts are willing 
to allow their use at trial. The amount of evidence needed to show that a 
test is valid is left to the judge in most state courts and the federal courts. 
For this reason, newly developed tests are usually not admissible. Since the 
determination is made on a state-by-state basis, there is usually no nation-
wide agreement on the use of a test during its developmental stages. There 
have also been some instances in which courts initially accepted a test but, 
based on research published at a later time, decided the test was no longer 
admissible. Spectrographic voice recognition (“voiceprints”) and hypnoti-
cally refreshed memory fall into this category.
Some tests have been in use for many years but are still rejected by 
many courts. This section discusses two of them: polygraph examinations 
and hypnosis.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
159
Polygraph15
The principal features of the polygraph are its ability to record changes in 
respiration, blood pressure, and pulse. Attachments can be added to record 
galvanic skin reflex (perspiration in hands), muscular movements, and pres-
sures. Use of only one of these features is considered to be inadequate.
The skill of the polygraph examiner is of utmost importance. An intern-
ship is required in which the trainee can make frequent observations of an 
expert conducting polygraph examinations, as well as perform the proce-
dure personally. Ideally, the polygraph examiner should have a minimum of 
6 months of training.
The test should be conducted in a quiet, private location. Outside 
noise should be eliminated where possible. Police investigators should not 
be allowed to be present during the exam.
A pretest interview is done to explain the procedure to the subject. It is 
also used to gather information for test questions. Questions asked during 
the polygraph examination fall into three categories: control questions, rel-
evant questions, and irrelevant questions. Control questions are designed to 
illicit a dishonest response to something that is not relevant to the case. This 
shows what the body’s response is to lying. Relevant questions relate to the 
matter under investigation. Irrelevant questions have no bearing on the case 
but give the examiner the chance to see the subject’s response to questioning. 
During the pretest interview, the subject is usually told what the irrelevant 
questions will be.
An assessment of truthfulness is made by comparing the responses 
to control questions with those to relevant questions. Deception is indi-
cated if there is a greater response to the relevant questions than to the 
control questions. A good examiner should be able to discount the effects 
of nervousness. This is done in two ways: (1) The pretest interview is 
designed to relax the subject, and (2) nervousness should be indicated by 
uniformly irregular polygraph tracings—nerves have a similar effect on 
control, relevant, and irrelevant questions.
It is estimated that truthfulness/dishonesty are clearly indicated in 
approximately 25% of the cases. In 5% to 10% of the cases, even a highly 
trained examiner will not be able to make a conclusive analysis. The 
remaining 65% to 70% of the cases yield subtle indications of truthfulness/
dishonesty that trained examiners cannot fully explain to nonexperts.
There are sizable numbers of experts on each side of the argument 
about polygraph examinations. In 2002, the National Research Council 
of the National Academy of Sciences published a report finding that 
polygraph testing has a weak scientific basis and that insufficient attempts 

160 
Chapter 6
have been made to verify the results. The council concluded that poly-
graph tests should not be used for national security purposes. 
The high frequency of inconclusive results makes the courts distrust the 
polygraph. Judges also fear that jurors will attach too much weight to the 
results of a polygraph examination. Although states vary in their approaches 
to the admissibility of polygraph tests, most refuse to admit them. Some allow 
them in criminal cases if there was a pretest stipulation by both sides that 
the results may be used in court. When this type of stipulation is made, the 
polygraph examiner usually must be agreed upon in advance by both sides. 
If the suspect is in custody at the time of the examination, Miranda waivers 
must be obtained in addition to any other stipulations that are made.
Hypnosis16
Hypnosis is commonly described as a trancelike state in which the subject 
is unconsciously responsive to the suggestions and commands of the hyp-
notist. It is this state of suggestibility that concerns the courts.
Numerous articles were written in the 1970s and 1980s about the 
effectiveness of hypnosis in criminal investigations. Some authors claim 
that new information can be obtained under hypnosis in 60% to 90% of 
cases. At least 5,000 police officers have been trained to conduct hypnosis. 
Hypnosis has been used in criminal cases as far back as 1898, but most 
courts are still hesitant to admit the testimony.
The U.S. Supreme Court, in Rock v. Arkansas (1987)17, reversed a 
manslaughter conviction in which the state had a rule that hypnotically 
refreshed testimony is always inadmissible because it is unreliable. The only 
statements that were admissible were those Rock made to her doctor prior 
to hypnotic treatment. In this case, the defense appealed on the grounds 
that the defendant had not been allowed to testify because she had been 
hypnotized at her attorney’s suggestion. The Supreme Court balked at an 
absolute rule that prevented a defendant from exercising Due Process and 
Sixth Amendment rights without consideration of the facts of the case.
Several state court decisions allowed testimony from hypnotically 
refreshed memory, but the majority view is that this type of testimony is 
inadmissible. For example, a pair of cases decided by the New York Court 
of Appeal (People v. Hults [1990] and People v. Schreiner [1991])18 reaffirm 
the state’s rule that posthypnotic statements (including testimony in court) 
cannot be used by the prosecution to establish the defendant’s guilt or by 
the defense for impeachment. The states that still allow posthypnotic testi-
mony impose safeguards, such as videotaping of the hypnotic session and 
detailed records of the information that was given to the hypnotist before 
the session(s) began. A psychiatrist or psychologist trained and experienced 
in hypnosis is usually mandated. 

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
161
Psychiatrists sometimes make a different use of hypnosis when trying 
to evaluate competency to stand trial and “not guilty by reason of insanity” 
cases. Due to the fact that this technique is recognized in the field of psy-
chiatry, it is admissible on the mental issues if the proper foundation has 
been laid. The foundation must include the following: (1) a showing that 
hypnosis is reliable for this purpose, and (2) a showing that the witness is 
qualified as an expert on the psychiatric use of hypnosis. This testimony is 
not used to establish guilt or innocence, but has limited admissibility on 
the issue of the mental state of the defendant.
Experiments
The ideal experiment screens out all extraneous variables so that the 
experimenter can measure the impact of one factor. Although there are 
numerous situations that lend themselves to experiments in criminal trials, 
few experiments are introduced in court. This is largely due to attorneys’ 
lack of knowledge in this area. Some experiments are quite simple, such as 
going to the crime scene under lighting conditions that are similar to those 
that existed at the time of the crime to determine if the stop sign is visible, 
or having someone walk from one location to another to determine if is 
possible to cover the distance in the time stated by the defendant. Others 
are very complex and require expensive equipment such as electron micro-
scopes and X-ray analyzers.
Some basic concepts apply to experiments. One is that the conditions 
must be similar to those that existed when the event in question occurred. 
Although this similarity is meant to control outside variables, courts are fre-
quently very flexible when it comes to admitting experiments that were not 
conducted under totally similar conditions. Second, the experiments must be 
based on sound scientific principles. This is the same basic criteria that applies 
to all uses of expert witnesses and scientific evidence. Both the testing proce-
dure and the equipment used must conform to standards generally accepted 
in the scientific community. Third, the judge may refuse to admit experimen-
tal evidence if it will be confusing to the jury or take up an undue amount of 
time at trial. The weight to be given to an experiment is left to the jury.
The Federal Rules of Evidence and some states do not distinguish between 
experiments and other types of evidence. The normal rules of relevance are 
used to judge admissibility.
The normal procedure for introducing experiments is the following: 
(1) have either the person conducting the experiment or someone who 
witnessed it take the stand, (2) lay the foundation, and (3) ask questions so 
that the witness can present the results of the experiment. The foundation 
should include that (1) the witness is familiar with the facts of the case, 

162 
Chapter 6
(2) the witness knows how to use the equipment used in the experiment, 
(3) the witness compares the actual event with the results of the experi-
ment, and (4) the witness believes the experiment fairly simulates the 
events in question.
In a number of cases, a bowl of ice cream has been found at the crime 
scene. The assumption is that the person who was eating the ice cream was 
interrupted and left without finishing it. Determining the time between this 
interruption and the arrival of someone who discovered the bowl of ice 
cream will help establish the time of the crime. Absent a witness who knows 
the length of time involved, an experiment may be done to determine the 
length of time the ice cream sat on the table. Obviously, the room tempera-
ture should be the same as it was when the incident occurred. A number of 
other factors must also be controlled: temperature of the ice cream when 
it was placed in the bowl, amount of ice cream, size of bowl, etc. It is also 
important to use the same brand and flavor of ice cream if possible. This is 
important because the ingredients used to make ice cream are not always the 
same, and in commercially prepared ice cream, stabilizers are added to slow 
the melting process. If there are facts that indicate how long the ice cream had 
been out of the freezer before the crime occurred, the results of the experi-
ment will give a better estimate of when the crime occurred. Otherwise, the 
results will provide an interval during which the crime occurred.
Establishing how long it takes ice cream to melt sounds like a simple 
task, but it is important to treat it as a carefully controlled experiment if 
the results are to be used in court. It is also important because the oppos-
ing side will be allowed to point out procedural errors in an effort to con-
vince the jury that they should disregard the results of the experiment.
Experiments may be conducted to determine if it is possible to have 
committed a crime in a particular manner. For example, the prosecution may 
believe that the defendant packed the body of the murder victim in ice to pre-
vent rigor mortis from setting in until after the defendant was able to establish 
an alibi.19 A pathologist would be consulted to determine all the necessary 
conditions that would need to be set up for the experiment. An object similar 
in size, weight, and retention of body heat to the victim’s body would be used 
with the body temperature of a living person. It would then be packed in ice 
and placed in a room in which the temperature was kept the same as the con-
ditions where the body was believed to have been placed by the defendant.
At trial, the effect of temperature changes on rigor mortis would be 
established by an expert witness. A comparison would be made between 
what would be expected under the temperature present at the time of the 
crime and what happened when the body was packed in ice under those 
same weather conditions.

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
163
Test crashing of automobiles also is included within the category of 
experiments. Cars are set to collide under the same road conditions as were 
alleged in the case (e.g., weather, road surface, incline, angle, banking of the 
curve, and speed of the vehicle). Based on the results of the test crash, it 
may be demonstrated that one version of the facts is impossible. Due to the 
expense of this type of experiment, it is rarely done. Models may be used 
instead. Computer simulations are becoming more popular.
Summary
S u m m a r y
All real evidence must be marked before it can be introduced into evidence. The 
attorney must also lay a foundation to show that it is admissible. Evidence recov-
ered at a crime scene must be carefully handled so that it is not damaged. Detailed 
records must be kept to show where it was found and what has been done with it 
since it was taken into police custody.
 
The foundation for scientific evidence includes a showing that the test used is 
valid, the person doing it is well trained, and the equipment used is accurate. The 
exact procedures used during the test are also subject to challenge.
 
There are many scientific tests that are currently recognized by the courts. 
Among the most common are fingerprint comparisons, blood alcohol and DNA 
tests, and tests to identify drugs.
 
Latent print identification is based on the fact that each person has unique 
fingerprints. The prints recovered at the crime scene are compared with a set of 
fingerprints on file. If a match is found, it conclusively establishes that the person 
left the prints at the scene. There may, of course, be innocent explanations of how 
the prints got there.
 
When alcohol enters the human body, it is rapidly distributed throughout the 
entire system in the same proportion. Blood tests can be used to establish the level 
of intoxication because the sample taken reflects the alcohol content of all parts of 
the body.
 
Laboratory tests can be done to determine if a stain was made by human blood. 
If it was, the blood type may also be determined. Although traditional tests have 
been able to identify a person’s blood type, this has not been very useful in many 
cases because a large proportion of the population has the same blood type. The 
fact that the blood types did not match can establish that the blood was from a 
different person. DNA testing provides a method that can conclusively identify 
one person as the source of blood, semen, or other body fluids.
 
Many tests have been developed to identify drugs. Caution should be taken to 
test an adequate sample of the seized drugs. This is especially true when illegally 
manufactured drugs are involved because clandestine drug labs do not have the 
same quality controls that the legitimate drug industry uses.
 
In many cases, bullets and cartridges can be tested to determine if they were 
fired from a particular gun. Microscopic examinations are done to compare 

164 
Chapter 6
unique patterns that are left when the bullet exits the barrel or the cartridge is 
processed through the firing chamber. An exact match indicates that the gun that 
was test-fired is the same one used in the crime. Unfortunately, the fact that an 
exact match was not observed cannot exclude a gun.
 
The polygraph has not been accepted by most courts. The conflicting views of 
experts on the reliability of the polygraph have caused the courts to doubt its reli-
ability. The situation is similar for hypnosis. Although once claimed to enhance 
memory, it is now largely discredited.
 
Experiments must be conducted under similar conditions to those that existed 
when the event in question occurred. 
REVIEW QUESTIONS
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1.  Explain what should be done to protect evidence at a crime scene, and list 
three things that should be done to document the scene before evidence is 
removed.
2.  Describe how various items of crime scene evidence should be identified 
and packaged for storage.
3.  Define chain of custody, and explain how it is maintained for trial.
4. What scientific tests are most commonly introduced in criminal trials?
5. What foundation must be laid for the admission of a piece of evidence 
found at the crime scene and for the admission of the results of a scientific 
test?
6. Explain the scientific basis for fingerprint identification.
7. Explain the reason why blood tests can accurately show alcohol levels in the 
body.
8. Describe how blood typing can be used in a criminal case.
9. Explain what can be determined by conducting scientific tests on bullets 
and cartridges.
10. Explain how DNA testing can be used to identify the defendant as the 
person who committed the crime.
11.  Explain why the courts rarely admit polygraph test results and seldom 
permit witnesses to testify after having been hypnotized.
12.  Define experiment and give two examples of experiments that could be used 
in criminal trials.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Enter “DNA testing” in Google or another search engine. Find a DNA lab in your 
area that publishes its price list.
Write a 250-word (one-page) report on the types of DNA testing that the lab does 
and what it charges for each type of test. 

 
Crime Scene Evidence and Experiments 
165
Notes
N o t e s
 1.  Joseph L. Peterson, “Use of Forensic Evidence by the Police and Courts,” Research in Brief
(Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice, October 1987).
 2. Richard Saferstein, “Fingerprints,” Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic Science, 9th ed. 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, (2006), Chapter 14; H. C. Lee and R. E. Gaensslen (Eds.), 
Advances in Fingerprint Technology, 2nd ed. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001); “Fingerprint,” 
downloaded June 9, 2007 from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fingerprint.
 3. Richard Saferstein, “Blood Alcohol,” Forensic Science Handbook, vol. I, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002), Chapter 12.
 4. Richard Saferstein, “Blood Typing,” Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic Science, 9th ed. 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2006), Chapter 12; G. Nordenson, Gale Encyclopedia of 
Medicine: Blood Typing and Crossmatching [Digital] (Farmington Hills, MI: Thomas Gale, 2004).
 5. S. M. Gerber and R. Saferstein (Eds.), “DNA,” More Chemistry and Crime: From Marsh Arsenic 
Test to DNA Profile (Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 2003); R. Saferstein, Forensic 
Science Handbook, vol. I, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001), Chapter 3; 
Human Genome Project. DNA Forensics. Downloaded June 5, 2007, from http://www.ornl.
gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/forensics.shtml; U.S. Department of Justice, “Using 
DNA to Solve Crimes,” DNA Policy Book. Downloaded June 5, 2007, from http://www.usdoj.
gov/ag/dnapolicybook_solve_crimes.htm; U.S. Department of Justice, “Using DNA to Protect 
the Innocent,” DNA Policy Book. Downloaded June 5, 2007, from http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/
dnapolicybook_protect_innocent.htm; U.S. Department of Justice, “Using DNA to Identify 
Missing Persons,” DNA Policy Book. Downloaded June 5, 2007, from http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/
dnapolicybook_miss_persons.htm; K. Ramsland, “All about DNA Revolution.” Downloaded June 
6, 2007, from http://www.crimelibrary.com/criminal_mind/forensics/dna/1.html; The New York 
Times, “DNA Reversals Hit 200” (May 26, 2007).
 6. Richard Saferstein,  “Identifying Controlled Substances,” Forensic Science Handbook, vol. II, 2nd 
ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004), Chapter 3.
 7. F. J. Jury, J. Weller, and J. S. Hatcher, “Identifying Firearms,” Firearms Investigation Identification 
and Evidence (Philadelphia: Ray Riling Arms Books, 2006); R. Quertermous and S. Quertermous, 
Modern Guns: Identification & Values, 14th ed. (Paducah, KY: Collector Books, 2002); National 
Institute of Justice, The Future of Forensic DNA Testing (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Justice, 2000); G. W. Steadman, Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories (Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, 1998).
 8. M. Nafte, “Forensic Anthropologists,” Flesh and Bone: An Introduction to Forensic Anthropology,
2nd ed. (Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2007); S. N. Byers, Introduction to Forensic 
Anthropology: A Textbook, 2nd ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2004); B. Greenbert and J. C. 
Kunich, Entomology and the Law: Flies as Forensic Indicators (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002); K. Ramsland, “The Body Farm: Tennessee Anthropology Research 
Facility,” Time of Death. Downloaded June 6, 2007, from http://www.crimelibrary.com/
criminal_mind/forensics/time/2.html; R. Locke, “The Body Farm,” Discovering Archaeology
(March/April 2000).
 9. R. H. Walton (ed.), “Age Progression,” Cold Case Homicides: Practical Investigative Techniques
(Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2006); S. Irsay, “Missing Faces: Age-Progression and Facial 
Recognition Techniques,” Hidden Traces. Downloaded on June 6, 2007, from http://www.courttv.
com/news/hiddentraces/boyinthebox/recon_side1.html.
 10. F. Wang (ed.), “Geographic Profile,” Geographic Information Systems and Crime Analysis (Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global, 2005); D. K. Rossmo, Geographic Profiling (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1999); 
C. Lewis, “In the Search for a Killer, a High-Tech Tool,” Trail of a Suburban Sniper. Downloaded 
June 6, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/news/sniper/100802_ctv.html; “Profiling and 
Geography.” Downloaded June 8, 2007, from http://www.crimelibrary.com/criminal_mind/

166 
Chapter 6
profiling/geographic/2.html; “The Global Positioning System,” Forensic Files. Downloaded June 
5, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/onair/shows/forensicfiles/techniques/gps.html. 
 11.  W. J. Bodziak, “Forensic Footwear Analysis,” Footwear Impression Evidence (Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, 1995); “Casting of Shoeprints.” Downloaded June 5, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/
onair/shows/forensicfiles/techniques/casting.html; “Characteristics of Shoeprints.” Downloaded 
June 9, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/onair/shows/forensicfiles/techniques/print.html; 
“Forensic Footwear Analysis.” Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Forensic_footwear_evidence.
 12.  P. Jones, “Digital Imaging,” Practical Forensic Digital Imaging: Applications and Techniques
(Practical Aspects of Criminal & Forensic Investigation) (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2008); E. Casey, 
Digital Evidence and Computer Crime (San Diego: Academic Press, 2000); H. L. Blitzer and J. 
Jacobia, Forensic Digital Imaging and Photography (with CD-ROM) (San Diego: Academic Press, 
2001; “Digital Image Processing.” Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/onair/
shows/forensicfiles/techniques/digital_image.html; “A Short Introduction to Digital Processing.” 
Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://web.uct.ac.za/depts/physics/laser/hanbury/intro_ip.html.
 13.  T. Singleton, A. J. Singleton, G. J. Bologna, and R. J. Linquist, “Forensic Accounting,” Fraud Auditing and 
Forensic Accounting, 3rd ed. (New York: Wiley, 2006); T. W.Golden, S. L. Skalak, and M. M. Clayton, A
Guide to Forensic Accounting Investigation(New York: Wiley, 2005); “Forensic Accounting.” Downloaded 
June 9, 2007, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forensic_accounting. “Forensic Accounting: Litigation 
Support.” Downloaded on June 9, 2007, from http://www.forensicaccounting.com.
 14.  K. J. Jones, R. Bejtlich, and C. W. Rose, “Computing/Digital Evidence,” Real Digital Forensics: 
Computer Security and Incident Response (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2005); B. Carrier, File System 
Forensic Analysis (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2005); “Gathering Electronic Evidence.” Downloaded 
June 9, 2007, from http://www.nz-lawsoc.org.nz/lawtalk/564wolfe.htm; “Computer Forensics.” 
Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_forensics; “Information 
Forensics.” Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_forensics; 
P. Gutmann, “Secure Deletion of Data from Magnetic and Solid-State Memory,” Journal of 
Digital Evidence 2(2) (2003); B. Carrier and E. H. Spafford, “Getting Physical with the Digital 
Investigation Process,” Journal of Digital Evidence 2(2) (2003); Xiaoyun Wang and Hongbo Yu, 
“How to Break MD5 and Other Hash Functions,” paper presented at EUROCRYPT 2005 (2005); 
“Computer Forensic Services.” Downloaded June 9, 2007, from http://www.protiviti.com/portal/
site/pro-us/menuitem.a4be00474b124842bdd22d10f5ffbfa0; “Providing Expert Computer 
Forensics Analysis, Electronic Discovery and Computer Expert Testimony.” Downloaded June 9, 
2007, from http://www.evestigate.com; “Digital Discovery in the Criminal Context.” Downloaded 
June 9, 2007, from http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/digitaldiscovery/digdisc_library_3.html.
 15.  P. A. Granhag and L. A. Stromwall (eds.), “Polygraph,” The Detection of Deception in Forensic 
Contexts (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005); Committee to Review the 
Scientific Evidence on the Polygraph, The Polygraph and Lie Detection (Washington, DC: National 
Research Council, 2002); M. H. Moore, C. V. Petrie, and A. A. Braga (Eds.), The Polygraph and 
Lie Detection (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2003; K. Alder, The Lie Detectors: The 
History of an American Obsession (New York: Free Press, 2007).
 16.  “Forensic Hypnosis: What Is It?” Subconsciously Speaking 19(5): 11 (Royal Oak, MI: Infinity 
Institute International, September 1, 2004); M. L. Eisen, J. A. Quas, and G. S. Goodman (Eds.), 
Memory and Suggestibility in the Forensic Interview, LEA’s Personality and Clinical Psychology 
Series (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001); A. W. Newman and J. W. Thompson Jr., “The Rise and Fall 
of Forensic Hypnosis in Criminal Investigation,” Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry 
and the Law 29(1): 74–85 (2001); H. V. Hall and J. Poirier, Detecting Malingering and Deception: 
Forensic Distortion Analysis, 2nd ed. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2000).
17.  Rock v. Arkansas 479 U.S.1079, 94 L.Ed. 2d 136,107 S.Ct, 1276 (1987).
 18.  People v. Hults 76 N.Y. 2d 190, 556 N.E. 2d 1077, 557 N.Y.S. 2d 270 (1990); People v. Schreiner 77 
N.Y. 2d 733, 573 N.E. 2d 552, 570 N.Y.S. 2d 464 (1991).
 19.  D. Lucy, “Experiments,” Introduction to Statistics for Forensic Scientists (New York: Wiley, 2006); 
A. Field and G. J. Hole, How to Design and Report Experiments (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2003). 

167
Documentary Evidence, 
Models, Maps,
and Diagrams
CHAPTER 7
Feature Case: Enron
Once one of the most respected natural gas, electricity, and communi-
cations companies in the country, its name became synonymous with 
scandal. It also tainted President Bush and other political candidates 
whom it had supported with large donations. Enron’s stock, which had 
been considered “blue chip,” fell from a high of more than $90.00 to 
30 cents.
For years there were persistent rumors of bribery and political pres-
sure by Enron in order to secure contracts in Central America, South 
America, Africa, India, and the Philippines. There were a series of 
scandals throughout the 1990s involving Enron’s irregular accounting 
procedures that bordered on fraud. Enron created offshore “off-the-
books” companies that it used to avoid taxes and make its main busi-
ness appear very profitable. Company losses were transferred to these 
companies while profits were shown on the Enron balance sheets. Each 
quarter management had to find additional ways to hide losses and make 
it appear that the company was more profitable than before. As these 
“paper profits” grew, bookkeeping became more “creative,” and company 

168 
Chapter 7
stock hit new highs. Arthur Anderson, one of the country’s largest and 
most respected accounting firms, certified balance sheets without men-
tion of these shenanigans.
Executives, who knew of the fraudulent bookkeeping and were afraid 
that Enron’s stock would crash, began using insider information to trade 
millions of dollars worth of Enron stock at huge profits. Kenneth Lay, 
Enron CEO, sold $90 million worth of stock he owned. At the same 
time, investors were told that their stock would continue to climb, pos-
sibly to $140 per share. As stock prices started to fall, investors were told 
the shares would rebound. Lay remained calm in public and thereby 
convinced investors that all was well. Investors trusted him and bought 
more stock even though their shares had already lost approximately 75% 
of their value.
Enron filed for bankruptcy on December 2, 2001. It was the largest 
bankruptcy ever filed in the United States. More than 4,000 employees 
lost their jobs, their pensions, 401k’s, and college funds that they had 
established for their children. On January 9, 2002, the U.S. Department 
of Justice announced it would pursue a criminal investigation of Enron. 
Voluminous amounts of accounting records and computer files had to be 
retrieved, studied, summarized, and indexed.
Lay and numerous high-ranking executives of Enron were indicted in 
federal court for various forms of fraudulent bookkeeping, stock fraud, 
and insider trading. Many accepted plea bargains. Lay’s case went to trial. 
The jury convicted him on all six counts. He died of a heart attack before 
his sentencing hearing.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Describe how documents are authenticated in court.
• Identify what a forensics documents examiner can determine from a document.
• Define the Best Evidence Rule.
• Recognize the foundation necessary for admitting photographs into evidence.
Key Terms
•  Ancient documents
•  Authentication
•   Documentary
evidence
•   Forensics document 
examiner
•  Parol evidence
•   Posed picture (photograph)
•  Primary evidence
•  Secondary evidence
•  Self-authenticating

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
169
Myths about Documentary Evidence, 
Models, Maps, and Diagrams
Facts about Documentary Evidence, 
Models, Maps, and Diagrams
The category of documentary evidence only 
covers documents that the parties intended 
to have legal consequences.
All types of documents are covered by this 
category regardless of the intent of the 
parties making the document.
Only notarized documents are admissible in 
court.
It is easier to authenticate a notarized 
document, but the fact that the document 
is not notarized will not prevent it from 
being admitted at trial.
The term “document” only covers things 
written on paper.
The term “document” covers things 
written on paper as well as photographs, 
microfiches, audio recordings, videos, and 
things on CDs and DVDs.
Photographs, models, maps, and diagrams 
are admissible at trial only if the person who 
made them testifies.
Photographs, models, maps, and diagrams 
can be admitted at trial as long as 
someone testifies who is able to state that 
the item to be introduced is an accurate 
presentation of the real thing.
Definitions Used to Describe Documents
In the Federal Rules of Evidence, the definition of “writing” is considerably 
different than what is used in everyday conversation. Make sure you keep 
it in mind while you study this chapter.
Definitions of Writings and Photographs
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 1001(1) and (2)
For purposes of this article, the following definitions are applicable:
1. Writings and recordings. “Writings” and “recordings” consist of letters, words, 
or numbers, or their equivalent, set down by handwriting, typewriting, printing, 
photostating, photographing, magnetic impulse, mechanical or electronic record-
ing, or other forms of data compilation.
2. Photographs. “Photographs” include still photographs, X-ray films, videotapes, 
and motion pictures.
Authentication
In addition to being relevant, all types of documents must be authenticated to 
be admissible as evidence. When we are discussing documentary evidence,
the term authentication means that the party who wants the document to 
be admitted at trial must establish that the document is what it claims to be. 

170 
Chapter 7
Authentication must not be confused with the document being accurate. For 
example, suppose I take a piece of paper, write “4  2  9,” and sign it. It is 
obvious that my addition is not correct (not accurate). However, if that piece 
of paper is introduced in court, you could authenticate it. The fact that I did 
not add the numbers correctly will help you authenticate it.
The reason for the authentication requirement is to prevent a person 
from fraudulently claiming a document was created. Authentication also 
protects in situations in which a person claims that a proposed contract is 
binding when in fact the negotiations on the contract broke down and no 
contract was ever finalized. 
Federal Rules of Evidence Rule 901 provides a long list of ways to 
authenticate documents. Note that it explicitly states that the list is intended 
“by way of illustration only” and is “not by way of limitation.” This means 
that the list contains examples of ways to authenticate a document, but the 
list was not intended to be complete. An attorney in a criminal case can 
devise additional ways to show that a document is authentic. Even though 
the new method the attorney proposes is not included in Rule 901, the 
judge has the power to rule that the new method of authentication can be 
used in trial if there is a valid basis for the new rule.
Requirement of Authentication for Identification
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 901
(a) General provision
 
 The requirement of authentication or identification as a condition precedent 
to admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the 
matter in question is what its proponent claims.
(b) Illustrations
 
 By way of illustration only, and not by way of limitation, the following are examples 
of authentication or identification conforming with the requirements of this rule:
 
(1)  Testimony of witness with knowledge. Testimony that a matter is what it is 
claimed to be.
 
(2)  Nonexpert opinion on handwriting. Nonexpert opinion as to the genuine-
ness of handwriting, based on familiarity not acquired for purposes of the 
litigation.
 
(3)  Comparison by trier or expert witness. Comparison by the trier of fact or 
by expert witnesses with specimens which have been authenticated.
 
(4)  Distinctive characteristics and the like. Appearance, contents, substance, 
internal patterns, or other distinctive characteristics, taken in conjunction 
with circumstances.
 
(5)  Voice identification. Identification of a voice, whether heard firsthand or 
through mechanical or electronic transmission or recording, by opinion 
based on hearing the voice at any time under circumstances connecting it 
with the alleged speaker.

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
171
 
(6)  Telephone conversations. Telephone conversations, by evidence that a call 
was made to the number assigned at the time by the telephone company to a 
particular person or business, if 
 
 
(A)  in the case of a person, circumstances, including self-identification, 
show the person answering to be the one called, or 
 
 
(B)  in the case of a business, the call was made to a place of business and the 
conversation related to business reasonably transacted over the telephone.
 
(7)  Public records or reports. Evidence that a writing authorized by law to be 
recorded or filed and in fact recorded or filed in a public office, or a pur-
ported public record, report, statement, or data compilation, in any form, is 
from the public office where items of this nature are kept.
 
(8)  Ancient documents or data compilation. Evidence that a document or data 
compilation, in any form, 
 
 
(A)  is in such condition as to create no suspicion concerning its authenticity, 
 
 
(B)  was in a place where it, if authentic, would likely be, and 
 
 
(C)  has been in existence 20 years or more at the time it is offered.
 
(9)  Process or system. Evidence describing a process or system used to produce 
a result and showing that the process or system produces an accurate result.
 
(10)  Methods provided by statute or rule. Any method of authentication or 
identification provided by Act of Congress or by other rules prescribed by 
the Supreme Court pursuant to statutory authority.
Self-Authenticating Documents
Self-authenticating documents are those that the law automatically assumes 
were made for their apparent purpose. Usually a seal or some other indication 
of authenticity is on, or attached to, the document. Even with self-authenticating 
documents, the opposing side can show that they are fraudulent.
Rule 902 of the Federal Rules of Evidence lists 12 types of self-
authenticating documents:
 1. Domestic public documents under seal
 2. Domestic public documents not under seal
 3. Foreign public documents
 4. Certified copies of public records
 5. Official publications
 6. Newspapers and periodicals
 7. Trade inscriptions and the like
 8. Acknowledged documents
 9. Commercial paper and related documents
10. Presumptions under Acts of Congress
11. Certified domestic records of regularly conducted activity
12. Certified foreign records of regularly conducted activity
The most commonly used of these items are discussed here.

172 
Chapter 7
Sealed Government Documents
As used here, government documents include all public documents that 
are made by the federal, state, or local government. These government 
documents are self-authenticating if they bear an official seal and are 
signed by someone who states the document is genuine. Government 
documents are also self-authenticating if they have a signed and sealed 
statement attached that states that the original signature is genuine. 
Government documents from foreign countries are self-authenticating if 
they are either sealed or accompanied by a certificate of genuineness that 
is signed by an appropriate person and sealed.
Certified copies of public records are also self-authenticating. A cer-
tified copy is usually signed by someone working in the clerk’s office. A 
paragraph is usually added to the document that states that it is a true 
copy of an official document. It is then signed and, in many states, sealed. 
Births, deaths, marriages, and divorces are usually established by certified 
copies. Prior convictions are also introduced into evidence by producing a 
certified copy of the original court record of the conviction.
Examples of Sealed Government Documents
•  Judge’s order convicting the defendant of a crime
The court order must bear a seal of the court and a signed statement that the 
document is a true copy of the original.
•  Death certificate
Death certificates are usually signed by an attending physician or coroner and 
filed with a designated agency. When an “official” copy is requested, a clerk 
pulls the original, photocopies it, and attaches a certification to the photocopy 
stating that the copy is a true copy of the original death certificate.
•  Birth certificate
Doctor that delivers the baby is normally required to file a birth certificate 
with a designated agency. When an “official” copy is requested, a clerk pulls the 
original, photocopies it, and attaches a certification to the photocopy stating 
that the copy is a true copy of the original birth certificate.
Notarized Documents
Notarized documents may be self-authenticating. The statement added by 
the notary public usually states what the notary is declaring to be authen-
tic. In many cases, the notary asks to see identification, such as a driver’s 
license, and then notarizes the signature as being genuine. Sometimes a 
notary will state that the document is intended to be a deed or some other 
document. If so, the document is self-authenticating for that purpose.

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
173
Examples of Notarized Documents
•  A deed signed by a person who is selling a parcel of land
The person who is selling the property signs the deed in the presence of the 
notary public. The notary verifies the identification of the person who signed 
the deed, and either inserts a statement at the bottom of the deed stating that 
the identity of the person was verified or signs a statement on a separate piece 
of paper and staples that form to the deed.
•  A promissory note
A promissory note is a legal document in which one person acknowledges 
receiving money from another and promises to pay the money back. The note 
is signed in the presence of the notary. The notary verifies the identification of 
the person who signed the note, and either inserts a statement at the bottom 
of the promissory note stating that the identity of the person was verified or 
signs a statement on a separate piece of paper and staples that form to the 
promissory note. 
Acknowledged Documents
The exact form of an acknowledgment is governed by state law (or federal 
law if made in a federal enclave). Wills are usually acknowledged. The 
person making the will must show the will to the witness and state that 
this document is intended to be his or her will. The witness then signs 
or acknowledges the will. The witness does not have to read the will or 
know what is in it. He or she needs to know only that the document was 
intended to be the maker’s will.
Example of an Acknowledged Document
A will that is prepared by an attorney normally has a place on the last page where 
the witnesses sign the will. It also has a place for an acknowledgment.
To acknowledge a will, the person whose will it is must show the document to 
witnesses and say, “This is my will,” or an equivalent statement. If a lawyer prepared 
the will, there usually will be a short paragraph explaining that the person making 
the will declared that this document was his or her will. The main reasons for 
having an acknowledgment in a will is to have witnesses who can testify that the 
person knew that the document was his or her will (was mentally competent) and 
that there was no undue influence used in order to get the person to sign the will.
Official Publications
Official government publications are self-authenticating. These docu-
ments include the officially published codes and case reporter. In many 
states, there is more than one publisher selling copies of the state’s codes. 

174 
Chapter 7
Law firms may purchase the one that has the best price. If it becomes nec-
essary to take a volume of the code to court to prove the content of a code 
section, it is important to either take the official publication to court or to 
double check the unofficial one to make sure it matches the official one.
When it is necessary to establish a penal code section in court, the 
bound volume may be handed to the judge. Due to the fact that the judge 
can take judicial notice of all codes of the state where the court is located, 
it is rare for this to be done except when a law from another state is ques-
tioned. Although the judge may be shown the bound volume when a case 
is cited for precedent, it is more common for the attorneys to quote from 
the case and give the citation for the case in their briefs.
Examples of Official Publications 
•  A book, published by the official state publisher, titled California Penal Code.
This book contains the wording of the penal code sections taken directly from 
the legislation that was signed by the governor.
•  A book, published by the official state publisher, titled Illinois Appellate Reports.
This book contains the official reports on the appellate court’s decisions on 
appeals that it heard. In some states, all appellate court decisions are bound in 
one set of volumes. In others, there is one set of books for the Court of Appeals 
and another for the state’s Supreme Court.
Other Self-Authenticating Documents
A variety of other documents are usually considered to have such a 
minimal likelihood of forgery that they are considered self-authenticating. 
Newspapers and periodicals are in this group. Note that the newspaper is 
self-authenticating but that does not guarantee that the stories are accu-
rately reported. So are brand-name labels fastened to merchandise to show 
the name of the manufacturer. Commercial documents, such as letters of 
credit, are self-authenticating if they comply with the requirements stated 
in the Uniform Commercial Code.
Examples of Other Self-Authenticating Documents
•  The page of the New York Times for the date in question giving the closing 
figures for stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
•  The page of the Chicago Tribune giving the weather for the local area for the 
day in question.
•  A city sign, posted 500 feet before the crash site, reading “Speed Limit 55 Miles 
per Hour.”

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
175
Documents Requiring Authentication
There are a variety of ways to authenticate documents. All of them are 
subject to challenge by the opposing side. The jury makes the final deci-
sion on authenticity.
Testimony of a Witness
The most obvious way to authenticate a document is to call one or more 
witnesses who can testify about the making of the document in question. 
If the document has been in the possession of the police, witnesses will 
also need to establish the chain of custody.
Examples of Using Testimony of a Witness to Authenticate a 
Document
•  Friend of victim testified that she was at the victim’s house and saw the 
extortion victim write a check to the person who was threatening him.
•  Bank teller states that he observed the victim endorse the check before asking 
the teller to cash it.
•  Caregiver for elderly woman testified that she was familiar with the woman’s 
handwriting. She said that the signature of the feeble woman was now very 
difficult to read because her hand shook when she wrote, but she was positive 
that the signature on the check was the signature of the woman she cared for.
Lay Opinion on Handwriting
If any part of the document is handwritten (including the signature), 
anyone who is familiar with the handwriting of the person in question or 
who saw it being written or signed may authenticate it.
Examples of Using Lay Opinion to Authenticate a Document
•  The witness states that the person who allegedly wrote the letter has been a 
friend for 10 years, and he recognizes the handwriting on the envelope to be 
that of his friend.
•  A secretary testifies that she worked for the same boss for several years and she 
frequently signed her boss’s name on letters and other unofficial documents. 
She testifies that the signature on the memo was her handwriting and not her 
boss’s.
•  The daughter of the deceased testifies that she was familiar with her father’s 
handwriting. When shown a deed purporting to give a large tract of land to a 
person who had befriended her father for a very short period of time, she states 
that the signature was not her father’s signature.

176 
Chapter 7
“Handwriting Expert”
A written document can also be authenticated by the testimony of a 
forensics documents examiner (formerly called a handwriting expert). 
To do this, it is usually necessary to provide the expert with a handwrit-
ing exemplar (sample) made by the person who allegedly wrote the 
document. More details on this type of authentication are given later in 
this chapter.
Examples of Using a “Forensics Document Examiner” to Authenticate 
a Document
•  A forensics documents examiner testifies that she compared the allegedly 
forged check with a handwriting exemplar provided by the defendant, and it is 
her professional opinion that the defendant forged the signature on the check.
•  A forensics documents examiner testifies that he examined the document and, 
in his expert opinion, the written portions of the document were made by 
more than one person.
Distinctive Characteristics
A document can be authenticated by showing that it contained distinctive 
characteristics, such as words, phrases, or “doodles,” used by the person 
who allegedly made the document. The fact that it contains information 
known only to the maker, or a very small group of people, can also be 
used.
Examples of Using Distinctive Characteristics to Authenticate a 
Document
•  Wife testifies that the signature on the check was not made by her husband 
because her husband’s signature, although difficult to read, was very distinctive 
and not similar to the one on the forged check.
•  Secretary testifies that she does not believe the will in question was prepared 
by the lawyer she works for because when he dictated a will, he always started 
with the phrase “being of sound mind and having the intent to distribute my 
earthly possessions to my loved ones” rather than the phrase found on the will 
in question.
Public Records
The fact that a report was made and filed in accordance with local law can 
be used to show that the event occurred. Police reports fall in this category. 
Since it is a crime to make a false police report, it is assumed that the event 
reported actually happened. Obviously, not all reports made to the police 
are true.

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
177
Examples of Using Public Records to Establish That an Event Occurred
•  Birth certificate, signed by doctor who delivered the baby and filed with the 
county’s Recorder of Vital Statistics.
•  Death certificate, signed by personal physician of the deceased and filed with 
the state’s Department of Vital Statistics.
•  Report of suspected child abuse filed by a school teacher who is a mandated 
reporter of child abuse.
Ancient Documents
Ancient documents are accepted without authentication if they appear to 
be genuine and the document has been treated as if it were what it claims 
to be. A document appears to be genuine if there is no sign of alteration 
or forgery. The fact that the people who made the document have kept the 
document in an appropriate place, such as a safe deposit box, also shows 
they believed it was genuine.
At common law, a document had to be at least 30 years old to qualify 
as an ancient document. Many states still use this rule. Others have estab-
lished a shorter time period. The Federal Rules of Evidence require the 
document to be 20 years old.
Examples of the Use of the Ancient Documents Rule
•  Entry in family Bible stating that John and Martha were married on July 15, 1956. 
John and Martha lived together as husband and wife until John died in 2002.
•  Deed dated August 1, 1957, stating that John and Martha purchased a house at 
123 N. Main Street. John and Martha lived in this house for 40 years and paid 
off the mortgage.
Process or System Used
Some documents can only be authenticated by reliance on the process or 
system used to make them. The most common example of this is the X-ray. 
The court must rely on the technology involved in the X-ray machine. 
No independent proof of what the bones look like is usually available. 
Computer printouts are also subject to reliance on the operating system 
and software that produced them.
Forensics Documents Examiners1
A questioned documents examiner may testify if the authenticity of a doc-
ument is challenged. When we mention questioned documents, we usually 
think of forged checks. The term can be used to apply to a broader range of 
things, including anything on paper, fabric, cardboard, or even written on 

178 
Chapter 7
walls. Although the most common cases involve written or typed materi-
als, pictures, graffiti, and other forms of graphic presentations can also be 
examined. Fake passports, diplomas, and trademarks may be involved in 
a criminal case.
The forensics documents examiner evaluates the following in order to 
determine the document’s  validity: (1) handwriting (cursive and print-
ing) and signatures; (2) typewriters, photocopiers, laser printers, and fax 
machines; (3) check writers, rubber stamps, price markers, and label makers; 
(4) printing processes; (5) ink, pencil, and paper; (6) alterations, additions, 
erasures, and obliterations; (7) indentations; and (8) sequence of strokes.
The questioned document should be delivered to the examiner in the 
same condition it was found. It should not be folded, cut, torn, marked, 
paper-clipped, or stapled. Documents should be kept in stiff, transparent 
folders or envelopes. They should be stored at room temperature in a dark 
place and delivered to the forensics lab as soon as possible. The chain of 
custody must also be maintained.
Handwriting Comparisons
As a child learns to write, his or her handwriting takes on habitual shapes 
and patterns. These form a unique subconscious pattern. Variations exist 
in angularity, slope, speed, pressure, letter and word spacing, relative 
dimensions of letters, connections, pen movements, writing skill, and 
finger dexterity. Additionally, a person may develop distinctive habits of 
arranging his or her writing on the page—margins, spacing, crowding, 
insertions, and alignments. Spelling, punctuation, phrasing, and grammar 
may also help identify the writer. 
In order to determine who wrote a questioned document, the exam-
iner must have an adequate sample of the suspect’s handwriting. If 
possible, a handwriting exemplar should be obtained from the suspect. 
The normal procedure is to tell the suspect to copy, in his or her own 
handwriting, a paragraph provided by the examiner that contains all the 
letters in the alphabet. One sample may have from 500 to 1,000 different 
individual characteristics. A suspect cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment 
privilege against self-incrimination as grounds for refusing to provide an 
exemplar. A law enforcement agency cannot pick up the suspect and take 
him or her to the station in order to obtain the exemplar unless there is 
either probable cause to arrest the suspect or he or she consents to go to 
the station.
All handwriting characteristics found in the sample must be compared 
with those in the document in question. Although any one characteristic 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
179
of the perpetrator’s handwriting could be found in someone else’s writ-
ing, the combination of many similar characteristics indicates that the 
suspect wrote both documents. The examiner will be able to make a more 
valid comparison if there is a large sample of the suspect’s handwriting. 
If possible, the exemplar should be made with the same type of writing 
instrument (ballpoint pen, pencil, crayon, etc.) used in the questioned 
document. Exemplars made for the purpose of comparisons may not be 
useful if the suspect is intentionally trying to alter his or her normal writ-
ing style. Even then, if the exemplar is long enough, the suspect usually 
reverts to some of his or her normal handwriting characteristics.
As with fingerprint and ballistic comparisons, the number of matching 
characteristics is important in handwriting comparisons. Unfortunately, 
there is no specific number of matching characteristics that is used to 
show a positive comparison. The skill of the examiner and the facts of the 
individual case are used as the basis for the expert opinion. Obviously, 
if there are only a few matching characteristics, the opposing side will 
attempt to convince the jury that the expert’s conclusion is wrong.
Typewriting Comparisons
The most common questions involving typewriter comparisons are the 
following: What make and model of typewriter was used to make the doc-
ument? and Was the document typed on a specific typewriter? For many 
years there were only two common type sizes used on typewriters (pica 
and elite), but there were many minor variations between the typefaces 
used on different makes and models of typewriters. 
Fifty years ago, typewriter companies made their own typebars. Most 
of these could be distinguished by comparing the document in question 
with a complete reference collection of typefaces used in typewriters. In 
a kidnapping, for example, this process could be used to determine if the 
model of typewriter the defendant owns could have been used to type the 
ransom note. 
Today, many typewriter companies outsource the production of type-
bars. The result of this change is that different makes of typewriters may 
have the same typefaces. The use of interchangeable typing elements and 
daisy wheels has further complicated this process because one typewriter 
can use more than one typeface. This also makes it possible to destroy the 
element used to type a document without harming the typewriter. The 
advent of computer printers resulted in fewer documents being prepared 
on typewriters and necessitated the development of different comparison 
techniques.

180 
Chapter 7
Matching the document with one specific typewriter is based on the 
fact that the use of a typewriter, like all mechanical devices, results in wear 
and damage to moving parts. This results in unique type patterns. There 
may be variations in vertical and horizontal alignment of the letters (i.e., 
too high, too low, or too far to one side), perpendicular misalignment (i.e., 
letter leans to one side), or one or more of the characters may have a defect. 
An exemplar is made on the typewriter in question and then compared to 
the questioned document. Ideally, the exemplar should be made with the 
same typewriter ribbon as the questioned document. If the typewriter 
has variable touch control, the exemplar should include portions made at 
each setting. If it is not possible to make an exemplar on the typewriter in 
question, an examiner may be able to work from other documents known 
to have been typed on the same machine.
Alterations, Erasures, and Obliterations
Documents may be altered to change their meaning, alter the original 
intent of the maker, alter important dates, or perpetrate forgery. Erasers, 
sandpaper, razor blades, and knives are used for this purpose. All of these 
methods cause disturbances in the upper fibers of the paper that are 
apparent when the document is examined under a microscope. Although 
the microscope can show that an erasure has been made, it cannot show 
what the original document said if the erasure removed the original con-
tents. If chemicals were used to obliterate portions of the original docu-
ments, tests can usually be performed to show what was removed. Infrared 
photography can also be used to reveal the contents of documents that 
have been charred in a fire.
Comparisons of Paper and Ink
Exact determination of the age of the ink used in a document is very dif-
ficult, but it is frequently possible to determine that two different inks 
were used in a document. If the two inks contain chemicals used in the 
manufacture of ink at different time periods, it is possible to state that part 
of the document was written at a later date. Many sophisticated tests have 
been developed for this purpose. A common problem in ink identification 
is that there is very little ink available for testing unless the handwritten 
portion of the document was lengthy.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) maintains an 
ink library. For many years, ink manufacturers have given samples of 
their ink to the library on a periodic basis. Every time a new ink is used, 
a sample is also sent to ATF. By comparing an ink sample to information 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
181
in the library, it is possible to determine the approximate date when the 
ink was made. This is useful when trying to establish that a document 
was backdated or a forgery was made long after the year it is claimed to 
have been made. Since 1968, ATF has also encouraged ink manufacturers 
to add unique, nontoxic, chemically recognizable substances to their ink 
each year. When this is done, it is possible to determine the exact year the 
ink was manufactured.
The ink in typewriter ribbons can be tested in much the same manner 
as ink from pens. When the ink was manufactured and who manufactured 
it can be determined. It may also be possible to show that two different 
ribbons were used to type one document.
Although it may be possible to determine when the ink was manu-
factured, there is no reliable system to determine when a document was 
written. To determine how long ink has been on a document, it would be 
necessary to show temperature, humidity, and exposure to light and han-
dling since the document was made. Testing is almost always impossible 
because all of these variables are seldom known.
Paper may be matched based on general composition, dates on forms, 
cutting marks, and thickness. The presence of synthetic brighteners, 
adhesive components, and synthetic fibers may also give some indication 
of when the paper was made. The exact formula used for paper varies 
enough that it is frequently possible to tell that two pieces of paper were 
not manufactured by the same company. Watermarks are imprinted on 
paper to identify the manufacturer. Since some manufacturers change 
watermarks yearly, these marks can be used to date a document. It is 
important to note that being able to determine the date the paper and ink 
were manufactured merely sets a starting point; it does not establish the 
date the document was written.
Introducing the Contents of Documents
The Best Evidence Rule was first established in approximately 1700. Its 
purpose was to prevent fraud. The origins of the rule date back to a time 
when the only way to make a duplicate was to copy the document by hand. 
In the process of copying, mistakes could be made either intentionally or 
accidentally. It was also believed that the document was a more accurate 
source of what was written down than the memories of the people who 
made the document. The Federal Rules of Evidence and many states no 
longer use the title “Best Evidence Rule,” but most utilize the same concepts 
for establishing the admissibility of the contents of a document. 

182 
Chapter 7
The law of evidence prefers that the original document be introduced 
in court when the content of the document is at issue. The same rule 
applies to all types of documentary evidence. Whether a letter, book, pho-
tograph, videotape, audiotape, or X-ray is involved, the original must be 
produced in court or accounted for. If for some reason it is necessary to 
show that the document was made, but proof of the contents of the docu-
ment is not required, the rules in this section do not apply.
The Federal Rules of Evidence summarize the key terms used when 
introducing all types of documents. Pay careful attention to the definitions 
of writings, recordings, and photographs because these definitions do not 
reflect the way the same words are used in daily conversations.
Definitions Used in Court for Contents of Writings, Recordings,
and Photographs
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 1001
For purposes of this article, the following definitions are applicable:
1. Writings and recordings. “Writings” and “recordings” consist of letters, words, 
or numbers, or their equivalent, set down by handwriting, typewriting, printing, 
photostating, photographing, magnetic impulse, mechanical or electronic record-
ing, or other form of data compilation.
2. Photographs. “Photographs” include still photographs, X-ray films, videotapes, 
and motion pictures.
3. Original. An “original” of a writing or recording is the writing or recording itself 
or any counterpart intended to have the same effect by a person executing or 
issuing it. An “original” of a photograph includes the negative or any print there-
from. If data are stored in a computer or similar device, any printout or other 
output readable by sight, shown to reflect the data accurately, is an “original.”
4. Duplicate. A “duplicate” is a counterpart produced by the same impression as 
the original, or from the same matrix, or by means of photography, including 
enlargements and miniatures, or by mechanical or electronic re-recording, or by 
chemical reproduction, or by other equivalent techniques that accurately repro-
duce the original.
Primary Evidence
The original document or a duplicate is considered primary evidence
when the contents of the document are at issue in the case. The “original” 
is the document itself and any copies that the person making the document 
intended to have the same effect as the original. “Duplicate” (sometimes 
called duplicate original) refers to copies made with the same stroke of the 
pen (carbon copies), produced from the same negative or offset master, 
printed from the same set of fixed type, etc. The idea is that the contents are 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
183
exactly the same. Photocopies made in the normal course of business are 
now generally accepted as duplicates. Microfilms and microfiches usually 
receive similar treatment. Note that the photocopies, microfilms, and micro-
fiches need to be made in the normal course of business. Copies made for 
personal use, outside the business environment, are not admissible.
Definitions of Original and Duplicates
Based on the Federal Rules of Evidence
Rule 1002. Requirement of Original
To prove the content of a writing, recording, or photograph, the original writing, 
recording, or photograph is required, except as otherwise provided in these rules or 
by Act of Congress.
Rule 1003. Admissibility of Duplicates
A duplicate is admissible to the same extent as an original unless
1.  A genuine question is raised as to the authenticity of the original or 
2.  In the circumstances it would be unfair to admit the duplicate in lieu of the original.
It would be very impractical to remove the original of a public record 
from the file and take it to court. For this reason, certified copies of public 
records, such as birth certificates, are usually admitted as originals.
Definition of Public Records When Establishing the Contents of the 
Document
Based on Federal Rules of Evidence
Rule 1005. Public Records
The contents of an official record, or of a document authorized to be recorded 
or filed and actually recorded or filed, including data compilations in any form, 
if otherwise admissible, may be proved by copy, certified as correct in accordance 
with Rule 902, or testified to be correct by a witness who has compared it with the 
original. If a copy which complies with the foregoing cannot be obtained by the 
exercise of reasonable diligence, then other evidence of the contents may be given.
Business records are often treated in a similar manner. If the custodian 
of the records prepares an affidavit stating that the photocopy is a true 
copy of the original, the original does not have to be sent to court. Some 
states require the custodian of the record to testify in court, whereas others 
allow the introduction of the documents based on the affidavit alone. This 
procedure does not apply to cases in which it is alleged that the business 
records have been altered.

184 
Chapter 7
Examples of Primary Evidence Used to Establish the Content of a 
Document
• The ransom note received by the parents of the kidnapped child.
•  A photocopy of the original contract signed by the parties if the copy was made 
in the normal course of business.
• A carbonless copy of a sales receipt.
• A printout of a text message.
•  The small printed receipt that the ATM dispenses after a customer is finished 
using the machine.
Most courts now admit duplicates in place of originals unless there is 
some indication that the original has been altered or for some other reason 
it would be unfair to admit the duplicate. Duplicates must be authenti-
cated before they are accepted into evidence.
Computerized information storage obviously does not fit the original 
rule. Providing the jury with a floppy disk, flash drive, computer chip, or 
magnetic tape would be useless. Either by statute or by court decisions, a 
computer printout is now admissible to show the content of information 
and software stored in the computer. If the computer-generated document 
involved is lengthy, a summary of the contents may be used in court rather 
than introducing all of the material and asking the jury to analyze it. This 
procedure is used only if the opposing attorney is given ample time to 
review the original document and verify that the summary is accurate.
If there is any allegation that a printout is unreliable or does not accu-
rately show the information in question, the opposing side is allowed to 
introduce its own evidence on the issue. Both sides may call expert wit-
nesses to explain how the computer processes data. When authenticity is 
in doubt, some states require the side introducing the computerized infor-
mation to carry the burden of proof on the validity of the printout.
Sometimes the defense refuses to produce a document. The prosecu-
tion would file a Motion for Discovery asking the judge to order produc-
tion of the document. If the defense still has not produced the document 
by the time the case goes to court, the prosecution would be allowed to 
introduce testimony about the contents of the document. The same pro-
cess would be used if the defense had unsuccessfully sought to obtain a 
document that is in the hands of the prosecution.
Secondary Evidence
Secondary evidence includes all other evidence that can be produced 
to establish the content of the original. This may be documents, such 
as the rough draft of a contract, or testimony about what was stated in 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
185
the document. The Federal Rules of Evidence provide a summary of the 
rules on introducing secondary evidence.
Use of Secondary Evidence to Establish the Contents of Documents
Based on Federal Rules of Evidence
Rule 1004. Admissibility of Secondary Evidence at Trial 
The original is not required, and other evidence of the contents of a writing, 
recording, or photograph is admissible if
1. Originals lost or destroyed. All originals are lost or have been destroyed, unless 
the proponent lost or destroyed them in bad faith; or
2. Original not obtainable. No original can be obtained by any available judicial 
process or procedure; or
3. Original in possession of opponent. At a time when an original was under the 
control of the party against whom offered, that party was put on notice, by the 
pleadings or otherwise, that the contents would be a subject of proof at the hear-
ing, and that party does not produce the original at the hearing; or
4. Collateral matters. The writing, recording, or photograph is not closely related 
to a controlling issue.
Testimony introduced to show the contents of a document is called 
parol (pronounced the same as parole) evidence. Parol evidence is not 
allowed to show the information in public records unless it is impossible to 
obtain certified copies. The majority of states follow the “American Rule,” 
which prefers certain types of secondary evidence to others. Written copies, 
even rough drafts, are preferred rather than oral testimony. Immediate 
copies are usually preferred to more remote ones. The exact order of pref-
erence varies from state to state. The remaining states follow the “English 
Rule,” which does not recognize degrees of secondary evidence. This allows 
any type of secondary evidence to be used when primary evidence is not 
available due to one of the reasons listed in the following discussion. The 
Federal Rules of Evidence follow the English Rule.
Examples of Secondary Evidence Used to Establish the Content of a 
Document
• The rough draft of a contract with penciled notes made by both parties.
•  The disc from the dictating machine that the secretary used to type the 
contract.
•  Testimony from the head accountant for the company that was the victim of 
embezzlement about the content of checks that the company did not authorize 
to be drawn on its account.
•  Copies made from the bank’s microfiche of checks that the bookkeeper 
destroyed.

186 
Chapter 7
One of the keys to convincing the judge to allow you to introduce 
secondary evidence is establishing that it is not your fault that the original 
is not available. If someone destroyed the original with the intent of pre-
venting its use at trial, the opposing side will not have much trouble intro-
ducing secondary evidence. In the same vein, if it is impossible to obtain 
the document by using a subpoena duces tecum because the document has 
been taken out of state by the opposing party, it will be much easier to con-
vince the judge that you should be able to introduce secondary evidence. 
The same policy would apply if the opposing side has the document and 
refuses to submit to the judge’s discovery orders. On the other hand, if one 
side wants to introduce secondary evidence on a point that is not closely 
related to an important issue in the case, the judge is not likely to allow the 
use of this kind of evidence during trial.
When the contents of a large volume of records are relevant to the 
case, it is usually possible to present summaries, charts based on all of the 
records involved, or otherwise make it possible for the judge and jury to 
review them more quickly. If this is done, the opposing side must have 
the opportunity to review the original and verify that what is presented in 
court is accurate and not misleading.
Photographic Evidence2
Photographs must meet several requirements before they can be introduced 
into evidence. As is the case with every exhibit an attorney asks the judge 
to allow at trial, the content of the photo must be relevant to the case. The 
photos must accurately portray the scene; shots taken at angles that distort 
the scene will not be admissible. The requirements of the “Best Evidence 
Rule” must be met because photographs are documents. Although we nor-
mally think of still pictures when we use the term photograph, the same term 
applies to motion pictures and videotapes. X-rays are also photographs, but 
their admissibility is governed by the rules applied to scientific evidence.
Criteria for Admitting Photographic Evidence at Trial
1. Photo must be relevant to some point that is “at issue” in the trial.
2. Photo must accurately portray the scene.
3. Best Evidence Rule (or modern equivalent) must be satisfied.
4. Photo must not be unduly prejudicial.
The prosecutor or defense attorney cannot introduce pictures into 
evidence without laying the foundation for them. Pictures can either illus-
trate the testimony of a witness or be independent evidence in the case. 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
187
In both situations, it will be necessary to call witnesses to testify about what 
the jury will see in the pictures.
The proper foundation must be established before a photograph can 
be admitted into evidence. To do this, a witness must state that the photo-
graph accurately depicts the scene as it existed when the photograph was 
taken; it must also accurately depict a scene that is relevant to the trial. 
Any witness who was at the scene can testify that the photo meets these 
criteria if he or she has a good memory of the details shown in the picture. 
It is not necessary to call the photographer to the witness stand. The judge 
retains the right to refuse to admit pictures that might confuse the jury or 
be unduly prejudicial. The number of photographs of the same scene that 
can be admitted is also within the discretion of the judge. Photographs 
that are merely cumulative are not admissible.
In some of the older cases, judges were cautious about introducing 
color photographs and enlargements for fear of swaying the jury. As color 
TV became a common feature in nearly every home, judges became less 
concerned about inflaming the jury. Now all forms of photography are 
judged by the same standards. They must accurately portray the scene 
without causing undue prejudice. Gruesome pictures taken at murder 
scenes cause the most problems. Pictures that emphasize the gory nature 
of the crime may be excluded because of their prejudicial impact on the 
jury. In these cases, the judge may limit the number of photographs that 
can be introduced. 
Another problem with pictures is visual distortion. The angle of the 
camera, lighting, and other factors may result in deceptive representations of 
the scene. For example, an ordinary flight of stairs may appear very steep if 
the camera angle is altered; or the lighting at the time the picture was taken 
may indicate that visibility at the crime scene was much better (or worse) 
than it actually was at the time the crime occurred. The opposing side has 
the right to object to the admission of pictures that do not accurately show 
the facts. If there is no objection, the photographs will be admitted.
Enlargements and close-ups pose similar problems. Field evidence 
technicians usually include a ruler or some other standard-sized item in 
a picture as a point of reference. Aerial photographs are covered by the 
same considerations. The jury must be able to relate the picture to the total 
crime scene. These types of photographs are generally admissible as long 
as the picture will not mislead the jury.
Sometimes one side claims the pictures have been altered and do not 
represent the facts. This can be done by retouching the negative or super-
imposing one picture on another. It is usually necessary to call an expert 
witness to show that these techniques have been used.

188 
Chapter 7
Computer software has made it possible to alter photographs. These 
programs, some of which cost less than $100, make it possible to retouch 
photographs so that tampering cannot be detected. Photographs can be 
altered pixel by pixel. Possible alterations may be as slight as changing the 
shading or as overtly misleading as adding or removing a person or clean-
ing up a scene or a bloody victim. This potential for alteration makes it 
exceedingly important to maintain the chain of possession for both the 
photograph and the negative (if there is one) in order to show that the 
photograph introduced in court is tamper-free. One permissible use of 
altered photographs is to ask a witness during cross-examination to iden-
tify the photograph and then point out that the witness is so unobservant 
that he or she identified a picture in which important details had been 
changed.
More recently, motion picture or video reenactments of the crime 
have been produced. Videotapes of a drunk driving suspect taking the 
field sobriety test are now quite common. Whereas older court deci-
sions required expert testimony about the process used to produce these 
films, they are now accepted without question. The accuracy of the facts 
depicted in the films must still be established by testimony at trial prior 
to admitting the films. If there is a question regarding the accuracy of the 
pictures or their prejudicial impact, the judge will usually preview the film 
out of the presence of the jury. In rare cases, it will be necessary to call 
expert witnesses who have examined the film to testify on whether or not 
the film has been spliced or altered.
Sound recordings are treated in the same manner as photographs. 
They must be relevant and meet the requirements for introducing the con-
tents of documents. The tape used at trial must be accurate, and editing 
must not substantially alter the content of the conversation. Audiotapes of 
nonverbal sounds can also be used at trial. For example, a tape recording 
may contain the sound of screeching tires, screaming, or moaning and 
groaning.
Posed pictures are sometimes made to illustrate the facts of the case. 
For example, investigators may want pictures of the swollen, black-and-
blue face of a battered wife. To give the bruises maximum impact, an 
investigator would need to photograph the victim 1 or 2 days after the 
assault because bruises do not turn “black and blue” immediately. Part of 
the foundation for these types of pictures will be testimony about when 
and where the photographs were taken. The pictures are usually admitted 
into evidence if they accurately reflect the testimony in the case. If they 
unfairly show controversial facts to the advantage of one side, they are 
frequently excluded.

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
189
Some cases even use animation to show the same events from differ-
ent perspectives. Animation produced by computers is subject to the same 
foundation as any other computer-generated document. As advancing 
technology makes it possible to produce new audiovisual aids, the rules 
of evidence gradually develop methods to introduce them for the benefit 
of the jury.
Models, Maps, and Diagrams3
Most courts allow the witness to use models, maps, and diagrams to illus-
trate his or her testimony. Some states permit these objects to be formally 
introduced into evidence, whereas others do not. Each judge usually 
retains a great deal of discretion on this matter. Whenever models, maps, 
or diagrams are used, it is important for the attorney to state for the record 
what the witness was pointing to (e.g., “Let the record show that the wit-
ness pointed to the northeast corner of the intersection”). If this is not 
done, the record on appeal will be very confusing (i.e., the witness said “I 
was here, he was there”). This also applies when the witness places marks 
on the drawings to indicate where someone was standing or the location 
of an important object.
Witnesses are frequently allowed to use a chalkboard or chart paper to 
draw the crime scene. After this is done, the attorneys will ask questions 
related to the drawing. The drawing, if the witness has basic drawing skills, 
usually helps the jury visualize the location. When this type of drawing is 
done, it is rarely to scale. For this reason, it frequently is not introduced 
into evidence. The better practice is to have the drawing on paper or some 
other medium that can be saved for later reference if there are any addi-
tional questions. This also preserves it for appeal.
If scale drawings are desired, they are usually made before trial. They 
are made large enough so the jury can see them while the witness is tes-
tifying. If the police reports included the exact dimensions of the scene 
and where all relevant objects were located, the drawing could be based 
on these measurements. Otherwise, someone will have to go to the crime 
scene and take appropriate measurements. Since everything is to scale, 
judges are usually willing to admit the drawing into evidence after it has 
been authenticated.
Sometimes scale models are used. Examples could be the models 
that architects use to show proposed buildings and their surroundings 
or a three-dimensional model showing the inside of a room with all the 
furnishings done to scale. Anatomical models are also used to show the 
trajectory of bullets or the effects of other murder weapons. A key reason 

190 
Chapter 7
for admitting these types of models is to help the jury. The fact that they 
are to scale is important, but the judge can still decide that they are inad-
missible if he or she believes the models would confuse the jurors more 
than help them.
Maps may be used to show the location of various places that are 
relevant to the case. Official survey maps, road maps, or maps drawn spe-
cifically for the trial can be used. Computer software is available that can 
generate street maps for most cities in the United States. Sometimes aerial 
photographs that show the relevant streets and buildings are introduced 
into evidence. Maps that are to scale are usually admissible.
Computer-generated diagrams and three-dimensional animated 
videos are now commonly used at trial. These types of demonstrative evi-
dence, like their noncomputerized counterparts, must meet two require-
ments: They must be made to scale from evidence that is admitted in the 
case, and they must be relevant. For example, a defense attorney might 
produce a three-dimensional drawing depicting the positions of the 
attacker and the victim at the time the victim used a gun in self-defense. 
A program called Mannequin Designer, which creates three-dimensional 
human forms that can be positioned in virtually any manner and viewed 
from any angle, could be used for this purpose. For such a diagram to 
be admissible, the defense must show that the actual dimensions of the 
people depicted were entered accurately into the computer, the positions 
accurately reflect the facts of the case, and the software and hardware are 
reliable and accurate.
Summary
S u m m a r y
All documents must be authenticated (i.e., shown that they are what they claim to 
be). Many documents that bear seals, have acknowledgments, or are notarized are 
self-authenticating. Official government publications are also self-authenticating. 
When it is necessary to authenticate a document, several methods may be used: 
(1) testimony of a witness who has knowledge of the circumstances surround-
ing the making of the document; (2) testimony (expert or lay witnesses) that the 
handwriting in the document matches that of a specific person; (3) distinctive 
characteristics of the document; (4) document is public record; (5) the Ancient 
Document Rule applies; or (6) the process or system used to make the document 
is established in court.
 
A forensic document examiner may testify about the authenticity of a docu-
ment. This expert can determine if the handwriting in the document matches that 
in an exemplar. Typewriter comparisons can also be made. Both ink and paper 
can be compared to establish their source and possible date. Computer-generated 

 
Documentary Evidence, Models, Maps, and Diagrams 
191
printouts made with ink jet, dot matrix, or laser printers can be compared. Tests 
can also be done to determine if a document has been altered or erased.
 
The Best Evidence Rule requires the original document to be introduced into 
evidence. Duplicates, such as carbon copies, are only admissible if the original 
is unavailable. Modern statutes have relaxed the rules on duplicates, especially 
for photocopies. When the original and duplicates are not available, secondary 
evidence may be admissible. Witnesses may testify (parol evidence) about the 
content of the document, but courts usually give preference to written documents 
that indicate the content of the missing original.
 
Photographs are admissible if they are relevant, satisfy the Best Evidence Rule, 
and are not unduly prejudicial. A witness must establish that the photograph 
accurately shows the scene, but the photographer is not required to testify. Color 
pictures, close-ups, enlargements, posed pictures, motion pictures, and video-
tapes are all admissible as long as they accurately represent relevant facts in the 
case. The judge has the discretion to refuse to admit photographs if they distort 
the facts.
 
Maps, models, and diagrams may be admitted into evidence if they are relevant 
and to scale. Witnesses may be allowed to draw on a chalkboard or butcher chart 
paper to help illustrate their testimony even if it is not done to scale, but these 
drawings are not usually admitted into evidence.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Define authentication. List three types of documents that are self-
authenticating, and describe how a prosecutor authenticates the prior 
convictions of the defendant.
 2. List five ways to authenticate a document.
 3. Can a lay witness authenticate a handwritten document? Explain.
 4. Explain how a forensics document examiner determines if a document and 
a handwriting exemplar were made by the same person.
 5. Explain how a forensics document examiner can determine what make and 
model typewriter was used to make a document and how he or she can 
determine if a document was typed on the suspected typewriter.
 6. How does a forensics document examiner determine if a document has 
been altered after it was originally made?
 7. What evidence can a forensics document examiner find by examining the 
paper and ink used to make a document?
 8. What is the Best Evidence Rule? When using this rule, what is primary 
evidence? What is secondary evidence?
 9. Under the Best Evidence Rule, when may parol evidence be used to establish 
the contents of a document?
10. What foundation is necessary for the admission of a photograph?
11. Who determines how many and what type of photographs of the crime 
scene are admissible? What is the basis for this decision?
12. Are posed photographs admissible? Explain.

192 
Chapter 7
Go to www.cnn.com/crime. Look for a case that has some documentary evidence. 
If you have trouble finding a current case, go to www.crimelibrary.com and 
type the word document in the search box. Write a one-page (250-word) report 
pointing out the documentary evidence and discussing whether it is admissible 
in court.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Notes
N o t e s
 1. K. Koppenhaver, Forensic Document Examination, Principles and Practice (Totowa, NJ: Humana 
Press, 2007); R. Saferstein, Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic Sciences, 9th ed. (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2006); D. Ellen, Scientific Examination of Documents: Methods and 
Techniques, 3rd ed. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2005); R. Saferstein (Ed.), Forensic Science 
Handbook, vol. I, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001), Chapter 13; J. Levinson, 
Questioned Documents: A Lawyer’s Handbook (San Diego: Academic Press, 2001); R. Morris, 
Forensic Handwriting Identification: Fundamental Concepts and Principles (San Diego: Academic 
Press, 2000); “Questioned Document Examination.” Downloaded June 10, 2007, from http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Questioned_document_examination.
 2. H. L. Blitzer and J. Jacobia, Forensic Digital Imaging and Photography (San Diego: Academic 
Press, 2001); S. S. Phillips, C. Squiers, and M. Haworth-Booth, Police Pictures: The Photograph as 
Evidence (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1997); R. P. Siljander and D. D. Fredrickson, Applied 
Police and Fire Photography, 2nd ed. (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1997); S. Staggs, Crime 
Scene & Evidence Photographer’s Guide (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1997). 
 3. M. Pollitt and S. Shenoi (Eds.), Advances in Digital Forensics: IFIP International Conference on 
Digital Forensics, National Center for Forensic Science, Orlando, Florida, February 13–16, 2005
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 2005); S. P. Breaux, “Is Forensic Animation Right for Your Case? 
As the Capabilities of Computer Animation Grow, So Does Their Use at Trial. Here’s How to 
Determine Whether This Tool Can Enhance Your Case Presentation,” Trial 39(12): 66(2003); 
M. Reith, C. Carr, and G. Gunsch, “An Examination of Digital Forensic Models,” International 
Journal of Digital Evidence 1(3)(2002); J. C. Russ, Forensic Uses of Digital Imaging (Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, 2001; West Group, Forensic Animation Evidence (Eagan, MN: West Group, 1999); 
B. Galvin, “Photogrammetry Mapping for Crime Scenes.” Downloaded June 12, 2007, from 
http://www.policeone.com/police-products/investigation/accident-investigation/articles/128028/; 
R. S. C. Leong, “Digital Forensics Investigation Framework That Incorporate Legal Issues.” 
Downloaded June 12, 2007, from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_
udi=B7CW4-4KCPVBY-3&_user=10&_coverDate=09%2F30%2F2006&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_
orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=1
0&md5=d9a4a118af1c2bc71f2f680c23c09d5c; S. Peisert, M. Bishop, S. Karin, and K. Marzullo, 
“Toward Models for Forensic Analysis.” Downloaded June 13, 2007, from www.cs.ucsd.edu/
groups/sysnet/miscpapers/PBKM-SADFE2007-ForensicModels.pdf. 

193
Hearsay and Its 
Exceptions
CHAPTER 8
Feature Case: Robert Blake
Robert Blake was a child star who appeared in “Our Gang” short features. 
He was a 1967 Oscar nominee for “In Cold Blood,” and he was the star of 
the long-running “Baretta” TV show. He was charged with the May 2001 
murder of his wife, Bonny Lee Bakley.
Blake met Bonny in 1999. She became pregnant as the result of a one-
night stand. They married after DNA tests confirmed parentage, but they 
lived in adjacent houses. Blake obtained a permit to carry a concealed 
weapon after Bonny claimed that a man was stalking her.
On May 4, 2001, they went out to dinner. After a pleasant meal, they 
walked back to their car. Blake opened the door for Bonny and then hur-
ried back to the restaurant to get his gun. While Blake was gone to retrieve 
the gun, someone shot Bonny in the head.
Sixteen LAPD detectives were assigned to the case. Blake was interviewed 
three times in the first 2 days. Small discrepancies were found between his 
statements. Several days later, a Walther .38 PPK with its serial numbers par-
tially filed off was found in a dumpster near the location of Bonny’s murder. 
Ballistics tests revealed that the newly found gun was the murder weapon, 
not the one that Blake carried the night of the murder.
In April 2002, Robert Blake and Earle Caldwell, his bodyguard, were 
arrested. Blake was charged with murder, conspiracy to commit murder, 
and two counts of solicitation; Caldwell was charged with conspiracy to 
commit murder. The District Attorney alleged that Blake was the trigger 
man but did not seek the death penalty. 

194 
Chapter 8
Witnesses at the preliminary hearing testified that between October 
1999 and April 2001, Blake approached five people requesting their help 
with either killing Bonny or having her arrested and sent to prison. Twelve 
different plans had been floated by Blake, one almost identical to the way 
Bonny died. 
During the 4-month trial, no eyewitnesses or blood or DNA evidence 
linked Blake to the crime. Tests on Blake’s clothing showed no trace of 
Bonny’s blood; insignificant amounts of gunpowder were found on his 
hands and boots. 
The prosecution relied heavily on the testimony of two ex-stuntmen 
who claimed that Blake offered to pay them to kill Bonny. The defense 
impeached these witnesses based on their heavy drug use, hallucina-
tions, and delusions. Other witnesses testified that Blake made statements 
indicating that he wanted Bonny dead. The defense successfully cross-
examined these witnesses, pointing out their motives for testifying against 
Blake. Witnesses who saw Blake on the evening of the shooting testified 
about Blake’s bizarre behavior. Blake did not testify at trial. Instead, the 
defense showed the jury a video of Barbara Walters interviewing Blake, 
during which he denied killing his wife.
After 36 hours of deliberation, the jury acquitted Blake on the charge 
of murdering his wife and one count of solicitation. Caldwell was also 
acquitted.
Bonny’s family filed a wrongful death suit against Blake in civil court. 
The jury awarded them $30 million. Blake filed for bankruptcy.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define hearsay.
• List the requirements for the use of admissions and confessions.
• Identify three types of declarations against interest.
• Explain how to identify spontaneous statements and contemporaneous 
declarations.
• List the requirements for making a dying declaration admissible.
• Identify what falls under the Business Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule.
• Explain what is admissible hearsay to show character.
• Identify what is admissible as former testimony.
• Describe what prior statements are admissible to impeach and rehabilitate.
• Explain what is admissible as ancient documents. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
195
Basic Hearsay Definitions
Our legal system usually requires that a case be decided solely on the basis 
of sworn testimony given in the presence of the trial judge or jury. The 
general rule is that out-of-court statements may not be used as evidence 
unless they fall under one of the exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. This 
chapter defines hearsay and discusses 14 of the most common exceptions 
to the rule.
People frequently misuse the term hearsay. This makes it very impor-
tant for you to understand the term in its legal context. The definition 
in the Federal Rules of Evidence, which follows, has been adopted by 
approximately half of the 50 states.
•  Admissions Exception
•  Adoptive admission
•   Ancient Documents 
Exception
•  Authorized admission
•   Business Records 
Exception
•   Contemporaneous 
declaration
•  Declarant
•   Declaration against 
interest
•  Double hearsay
•  Dying declaration
•  Excited utterance
•  Former testimony
•  Hearsay Rule
•  Negative hearsay
•   Past Recollection 
Recorded Exception
•  Present sense impression
•  Prior consistent statement
•   Prior inconsistent 
statement
•  Public Records Exception
•   Reputation 
Exception
•   Spontaneous statement
•  Statement
•  Tacit admission
Key Terms
Myths about Hearsay
 A person cannot be convicted based on 
hearsay.
Hearsay only applies to what people say. 
Hearsay only applies to what other people say.
 Things that defendants in a criminal case say 
are not hearsay.
 Most states have done away with the 
Hearsay Rule.
Facts about Hearsay
A conviction can be based on any type of 
admissible evidence, even hearsay.
Hearsay applies to both things that are said 
and things that are written down.
Hearsay applies to what everybody says 
when they are not under oath.
What the defendants say outside of court 
is hearsay, but there is an exception to the 
Hearsay Rule that makes these statements 
admissible.
Most states have expanded the exceptions 
to the Hearsay Rule so that more hearsay 
can be used in court.

196 
Chapter 8
To understand the Hearsay Rule, start by considering three things:
1. What is a statement?
2. Who is a declarant?
3. What is meant by “offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter 
asserted”?
A “statement” may include several types of communication: oral, 
written, recorded on audio- or videotape, and nonverbal. In fact, any-
thing a person says is a statement. So are his or her letters, business 
records, will, the deed to his or her house, etc. However, technically the 
legal word “statement” is even broader. It includes body movements done 
with the intent to communicate. Specifically, it includes actions such as 
shaking your head “no” or pointing in answer to the question, “Which 
way did he go?”
Statements are hearsay if they were not made in court at the hearing or 
trial that is currently being conducted. The common idea that “What you 
say is hearsay, but what I say is not” is not correct; statements originally 
made by a person while that person is not testifying in court are hearsay. 
This means that even the sworn testimony of the witness that was given 
at the preliminary hearing is hearsay when offered at the subsequent trial; 
the witness’s account of what he or she said while the crime was being 
committed is also hearsay.
The declarant is the person who made the statement. If the witness is 
telling what he or she heard someone else say, the person who originally 
made the statement is the declarant and the statement is hearsay. If the 
person on the witness stand is telling what he or she previously said, the 
witness is the declarant and the statement is also hearsay. It is important 
to determine who the declarant is. The facts surrounding the declarant’s 
statement are considered when determining if an exception to the Hearsay 
Rule applies. 
Something is “offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted” when 
the attorney wants the jury to believe the answer. Most testimony is admit-
ted for this purpose. Sometimes, however, an attorney will ask a question 
for some other reason.
Definitions of Basic Terms Used for Hearsay*
Statement
A “statement” is 
1. An oral or written assertion or 
2. Nonverbal conduct of a person, if it is intended by the person as an 
 
assertion.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
197
Declarant
A “declarant” is a person who makes a hearsay statement.
Hearsay
“Hearsay” is
1. A statement, 
2. Other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, 
3. Offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 801.
Examples of Statements That Are Hearsay 
•  Prosecutor asks a police officer to tell the jury what the defendant said during the 
interrogation. 
  This is offered to show the truth of the matter asserted—that the defendant 
committed the crime as described in the confession: It is hearsay.
•  Prosecutor wants to admit the note that was given to the teller during a bank 
robbery. This note says, “Hit the alarm button and you’re dead.” 
 This is a written document that contains hearsay. 
Examples of Statements That Are Not Hearsay
•  If the defense wants to show that the defendant was insane, it might try to admit 
the defendant’s statement, “I am Napoleon,” to show that the defendant obviously 
did not know who he was. 
  Since it is not used to show that it is true—in fact, it is was introduced for the purpose 
of showing that it is not true—the statement “I am Napoleon” is not hearsay.
•  Prosecutor asks the witness to repeat the defendant’s original alibi even though the 
defendant later changed her alibi. 
  The purpose of this is to show that the defendant is a liar, not to show that the 
original alibi was true. When used for this purpose, the original alibi is not hearsay.
The Hearsay Rule
The Hearsay Rule is very simple—hearsay is not admissible in court. There 
are, however, many exceptions to this rule that are discussed later in this 
chapter. Most statements are admissible in court if they fall under one or 
more exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. 
There are several reasons for the Hearsay Rule. The most important is 
a basic distrust of testimony that was not made under oath. Giving false 
testimony while under oath can be prosecuted as perjury. Since the hearsay 
statement was made without any fear of prosecution for perjury, it is not 
considered as trustworthy as statements that were made under oath. 

198 
Chapter 8
Another reason courts are suspicious of hearsay is that the jury did not 
see the person while he or she was making the hearsay statement. Demeanor 
provides many clues that help jurors decide if the witness is telling the truth. 
All of those clues are missing if the person who originally made the state-
ment does not testify. The fact that the person who originally made the state-
ment is not testifying at trial also means that the defense attorney will not be 
able to cross-examine. Cross-examination is a key to determining whether a 
witness is telling the truth. The defense can question the person who testi-
fied to make sure he or she is accurately repeating what was said, but that is 
a weak substitute. For all of these reasons, hearsay is distrusted.
The Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution gives the defense in 
a criminal trial the right to confront and cross-examine the people who 
accuse the defendant of a crime. This is called the Confrontation Clause. 
It includes the right to confront the people who told the police they saw 
the defendant commit the crime. When hearsay is improperly used at trial, 
the Sixth Amendment Confrontation Clause is violated. Judges are very 
cautious because erroneous rulings that allow the prosecution to admit 
hearsay have the potential for causing the conviction to be reversed due to 
a violation of the defendant’s constitutional rights. 
Despite the fact that there are very good arguments for not admitting 
hearsay into evidence, there are some situations in which out-of-court 
statements obviously should be used. These situations have been grouped 
together and form the exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. The exceptions to 
the Hearsay Rule that are used during criminal trials must be based on facts 
surrounding the making of the statement that show that the statement is 
trustworthy. Some are based on necessity, such as the dying declaration of 
the murder victim. Even so, these statements must be trustworthy.
Other exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are based on the concept of fair 
play. For example, it would be unfair to exclude the defendant’s confession 
solely because it was not made under oath. It would also be unfair to allow 
one side to introduce an edited version of an out-of-court statement but 
deny the opposing side the right to introduce the portions of that state-
ment that were intentionally left out.
Some states allow police officers to testify at the preliminary hear-
ing and/or before the grand jury about conversations with victims and 
witnesses even though the officers could not give the same testimony at 
trial due to the Hearsay Rule. The purpose of this procedure is twofold: It 
makes the process more efficient; and it minimizes the inconvenience for 
victims and witnesses of taking time off work to testify in court. It does 
not interfere with the defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights because the 
rule does not apply at trial. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
199
Testimonial Hearsay
In two cases, Crawford v. Washington (541 U.S. 36 (2004)) and Davis v. 
Washington (547 U.S. 813 (2006)), the Supreme Court restricted the pros-
ecutor’s right to introduce testimonial hearsay. The Court relied heavily on 
the intent of the drafters of the Bill of Rights (called the “original intent 
doctrine”) when it ruled that testimonial hearsay can be admitted at trial 
only if the person who made the hearsay statement testifies. 
In Davis (2006) (which contained the Supreme Court’s decisions on Davis 
v. Washington and Hammon v. Indiana), the Court explained its holdings:
A critical portion of this holding, and the portion central to resolution of 
the two cases now before us, is the phrase “testimonial statements.” Only 
statements of this sort cause the declarant to be a “witness” within the 
meaning of the Confrontation Clause. See id., at 51. It is the testimonial 
character of the statement that separates it from other hearsay that, while 
subject to traditional limitations upon hearsay evidence, is not subject to the 
Confrontation Clause. . . .
 
Without attempting to produce an exhaustive classification of all 
conceivable statements—or even all conceivable statements in response to 
police interrogation—as either testimonial or nontestimonial, it suffices to 
decide the present cases to hold as follows: Statements are nontestimonial 
when made in the course of police interrogation under circumstances 
objectively indicating that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to 
enable police assistance to meet an ongoing emergency. They are testimonial 
when the circumstances objectively indicate that there is no such ongoing 
emergency, and that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to establish 
or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution. (547 
U.S. 819–820 (2006))
Both cases considered by the Supreme Court in Davis were domestic vio-
lence cases. In the first one, portions of the 911 tape were played for the 
jurors. The distraught woman could be heard telling the operator that she 
had been hit and the assailant was leaving. The court ruled that this was 
nontestimonial because the intent was to obtain police assistance during 
an emergency.
In the second case, police officers responding to a domestic distur-
bance call found the victim alone on the front porch. She appeared “some-
what frightened” but told the police that “nothing was the matter.” The 
officers separated the parties and talked to them. After hearing the wife’s 
account, the officers asked her to fill out and sign a battery affidavit. Her 
handwritten affidavit said

200 
Chapter 8
Broke our Furnace & shoved me down on the floor into the broken glass. 
Hit me in the chest and threw me down. Broke our lamps & phone. Tore up 
my van where I couldn’t leave the house. Attacked my daughter.
Emphasizing that the emergency no longer existed, the Court ruled that 
the affidavit was testimonial evidence and should not have been used at 
trial because the person who made it did not appear in court. 
In the aftermath of the Court’s ruling in Crawford, advocates for 
domestic violence victims argued that there should be a different rule 
when the person who made the hearsay statement did not testify at trial 
because of fear of the defendant. The Supreme Court refused to make such 
a rule, but it pointed to a portion of the Crawford decision where it said, 
“One who obtains the absence of a witness by wrongdoing forfeits the 
constitutional right to confrontation” (541 U.S. at 62). Although the Court 
refused to establish rules on what types of wrongdoing qualify for forfei-
ture, it pointed to Federal Rules of Evidence that state that hearsay can be 
used in court if “a statement is offered against a party that has engaged 
or acquiesced in wrongdoing that was intended to, and did, procure the 
unavailability of the declarant as a witness” (Rule 804(b)(6)). The govern-
ment must prove the defendant’s wrongdoing by a preponderance of the 
evidence prior to introducing the hearsay.
Unavailability of the Hearsay Declarant
Several exceptions to the hearsay rule are based on the declarant not 
being available to testify in person. If the declarant is alive, the attorney 
who wants to introduce the statement is expected to conduct a thorough 
search for the witness and subpoena him or her to appear in court. This is 
referred to as exercising due diligence. The judge will not declare a witness 
unavailable if it appears that the side that wants to introduce the hearsay 
failed to use due diligence to find the declarant.
Unavailability is a requirement under three hearsay exceptions dis-
cussed in this chapter: Declaration against Interest, Dying Declaration, 
and Former Testimony. The Federal Rules of Evidence provide a list of five 
situations that are considered sufficient reasons to allow nontestimonial 
hearsay to be used in court even though the declarant could not be found. 
Most states will accept similar reasons as long as no testimonial hearsay 
is involved. When a prosecutor or defense attorney wants to introduce a 
hearsay statement made by an unavailable witness, the judge will require 
proof that one of these circumstances applies.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
201
Person Whose Hearsay Is Sought at Trial May Be Declared 
Unavailable for One of These Reasons*
“Unavailability as a witness” includes situations in which the declarant
1.  Is exempted by ruling of the court on the ground of privilege from testifying 
concerning the subject matter of the declarant’s statement; or
2.  Persists in refusing to testify concerning the subject matter of the declarant’s 
statement despite an order of the court to do so; or
3.  Testifies to a lack of memory of the subject matter of the declarant’s statement; 
or
4.  Is unable to be present or to testify at the hearing because of death or then exist-
ing physical or mental illness or infirmity; or
5.  Is absent from the hearing and the proponent of a hearsay statement has been 
unable to procure the declarant’s attendance by process or other reasonable 
means.
A declarant is not unavailable as a witness if exemption, refusal, claim of lack 
of memory, inability, or absence is due to the procurement or wrongdoing of 
the proponent of a statement for the purpose of preventing the witness from 
attending or testifying.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 804(a).
Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule
Only statements that fall under one of the exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 
are admissible in court. When prosecutors review a case involving hearsay 
to decide if there is enough evidence to convict, one of the things they 
are really looking for are statements that fit within the exceptions to the 
Hearsay Rule.
Several other points should be kept in mind. Hearsay varies greatly. 
Some is so convincing it constitutes key evidence in the case. Other state-
ments will be nearly frivolous. Finding the appropriate hearsay excep-
tion, so as to get certain evidence admitted, merely ensures that the jury 
will hear it. The jury, of course, will decide how much weight to give the 
evidence.
In some situations, more than one exception will apply. Examination 
of the requirements for the various exceptions may reveal technical rea-
sons why one will be more appropriate to use than another.
Sometimes we come upon “double hearsay.” Double hearsay is hear-
say included in another hearsay statement. For example, if Jane told you 
what Mary said, whatever Jane told you is hearsay. But if Jane is repeat-
ing what Mary said that Alice told her, the portion about what Alice said is 
double hearsay. The only time when these types of statements are admissible 

202 
Chapter 8
is when there is a hearsay exception that applies to what Mary told Jane 
and an exception that covers what Jane told you.
All 50 states do not follow exactly the same exceptions to the Hearsay 
Rule. Approximately half of the states follow the Hearsay Rules listed in the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. The others follow their own rules, which may 
not be the same as the federal rules. Each student must do research and 
discover what rules apply in his or her local state courts. The Federal Rules 
list at least 30 exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. The most commonly used 
exceptions are discussed in this chapter.
Admissions and Confessions
Out-of-court statements made by the defendant appear to be within the 
definition of hearsay and are treated that way by some states. The Federal 
Rules of Evidence declare that statements made by parties to the lawsuit are 
not hearsay (Rule 801(d)(2)), thus avoiding the need to create an exception 
to the hearsay rule in order to use them at trial. States following this approach 
include Louisiana, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Texas, 
and Wisconsin. Another approach is to use the standard definition of hear-
say but state that statements by the parties are not excluded by the Hearsay 
Rule—that is, create an exception to the Hearsay Rule that allows statements 
made by the parties to be introduced in court. California, Florida, Kentucky, 
Pennsylvania, and Tennessee are among the states that follow this approach.
Definition
Admissions Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement may be admissible under the Admissions Exception to the Hearsay 
Rule if it is used against a party to a law suit and the original statement falls 
under at least one of the following situations:
1. Admission of a Party
  Statement was made by person who is a party to the lawsuit.
OR
2. Adoptive (Tacit) Admission
   Party to the law suit adopted the statement or otherwise indicated a belief that the 
statement was true.
OR
3. Authorized Admission
   Statement was made by a person authorized by a party to the law suit to make 
statements concerning the subject matter.
OR

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
203
4. Admission by Agent
   Statement was made by a person who was the agent or servant of a party to the 
law suit, concerning a matter within the scope of the agency or employment, 
during the existence of the relationship.
OR
5. Admission by Co-conspirator
   Statement was made by a co-conspirator of a party to the law suit during the 
course of the conspiracy in furtherance of the conspiracy.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 801(d)(2).
Statements of a party (the defendant in a criminal case) will be 
admissible if the attorney establishes the appropriate foundation. This 
foundation for admissions is remarkably similar regardless of whether 
the statement must qualify under the Admissions Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule or the attorney introducing it must show that the statement 
is not considered hearsay. For that reason, it is important to understand 
the requirements for the Admissions Exception even when working in a 
state that does not recognize statements of parties as hearsay. Once the 
foundation is established, the statements are admissible even though 
there may not be any sign of their trustworthiness. The traditional ratio-
nale for allowing these statements to be considered by the jury is that a 
person would not make untrue statements that could be used against 
him or her.
Whereas admissions of a party may be used against the person making 
them, the reverse is not true. A party cannot introduce his or her own self-
serving statements to bolster the case. The only questions that must be con-
sidered in court are whether the person made the statement and whether the 
person was mentally competent when the statement was made. 
Admission of a Party
In a criminal case, the defendant is obviously a party to the lawsuit. The 
defendant’s confessions and other statements may be admitted under the 
Admission of a Party Exception to the Hearsay Rule. By pleading “not 
guilty,” the defendant denies committing the crime; therefore, any admis-
sion or confession the defendant made can be used against him or her. It 
is easy to remember that confessions can be admitted, but you must also 
remember that other statements that the defendant makes can also be used 
at trial. For example, during the first contact with the police, a suspect may 
give an alibi. Using hearsay terminology, this is an admission and it can be 
introduced at trial against the defendant. 

204 
Chapter 8
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under Admissions 
of a Party Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  On the morning after the crime occurred, the defendant told a friend, “I need you 
to cover for me. If anyone asks, tell them I was with you last night.”
•  After the police officer gave him the Miranda warnings, the defendant said, “Hey, I 
was there but I didn’t do anything.”
•  When questioned at his home the day after the crime, the defendant told the police, 
“I don’t know what you are talking about. Last night I went to visit my mother.” 
The police left the house without making an arrest.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Admissions 
of a Party Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The defendant in a child abuse case wants to introduce the following statement she 
made to her best friend: “I would never do anything to hurt my kids.”
  Self-serving statement—not admissible. Admissions can only be used against the 
person who made the statement.
•  The defendant’s neighbor told the police, “If you ask me, he’s guilty.”
  Statement is not an admission—it was made by a neighbor, not by someone who is a 
party to the case. It may be admissible under some other exception to the Hearsay Rule.
•  After the police gave him the Miranda warnings, the suspect said, “I refuse to talk 
about it.”
  Statement is an admission but the Supreme Court has specifically said that the 
fact that a person invoked the right to remain silent after being given the Miranda
warnings cannot be used against that person.
In addition to complying with the requirements of the Admissions 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule, confessions are only admissible at trial if 
the police comply with the suspect’s constitutional rights, such as giving 
Miranda warnings prior to custodial interrogation (see Chapter 14). 
When two or more defendants are being tried at the same time, it may 
be necessary to exclude confessions and/or admissions if the defendant 
who made these statements does not take the witness stand. Admitting a 
confession made by a defendant who decides not to testify would deny the 
co-defendant(s)’s Sixth Amendment right to cross-examine the person 
who made the statement. One solution to this problem is to “sanitize” the 
confession by removing all references to what the other defendant(s) did. 
Another solution is to have separate trials for the defendants.
Adoptive (Tacit) Admission
The Adoptive (Tacit) Admission applies when one person accepts a state-
ment made by someone else. The definition of adoptive admission uses 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
205
the phrase “manifested an adoption or belief in its truth.” A simpler way 
to say that is “the person acted as though he or she believed the statement 
was true.” This form of admission is based on the assumption that the 
statement was true because an innocent person would immediately deny a 
statement if it were untrue. 
In the context of a criminal case, the adoptive admission applies when 
someone alleges that a person committed a crime and the alleged criminal 
does not reply that he or she did not do it (or an equivalent response). The 
person who is alleged to have committed the crime must be present when 
the statement is made. If the alleged criminal says something like “Yes, it 
was me” or “I agree with you,” he or she is adopting the statement as true 
(i.e., making an adoptive admission). However, a person is not required 
to do anything that obvious. Actions that can be interpreted as showing a 
belief that the allegation is true are just as important. Failing to respond 
to the statement is considered an admission. Walking away without saying 
anything is considered a tacit admission. 
Most textbooks only apply the Adoptive Admission Exception to the 
period during which the individuals remain face-to-face. The modern 
interpretation of the Adoptive (Tacit) Admission rule does not consider 
it an admission if a person fails to reply to an allegation made during a 
phone call, e-mail, fax, or letter. 
Another situation in which failure to reply when confronted is not 
considered a tacit admission is when the person making the statement that 
alleges wrongdoing is an authority figure. The law recognizes that a person 
is more likely to remain silent in the presence of an authority figure. Police 
are considered authority figures; failure to respond to their allegations is 
not a tacit admission. Failure to admit a crime after being given Miranda
warnings is not a tacit admission because the person has the constitutional 
right to remain silent.
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under Adoptive (Tacit) 
Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The salesclerk confronted the 10-year-old who had just stolen a candy bar and said, 
“I saw you do that! Don’t you know it is wrong to steal?” The juvenile hung his head 
and didn’t say anything.
•  The juvenile’s mother said, “Go to your room, you know better than to steal!” The 
juvenile went to his room without saying anything.
•  The suspect stole a lawnmower from a neighbor who left his garage door open all 
night. The next day, the neighbor confronted him and said, “Why did you take it? 
Why?” The suspect quickly walked away without saying anything.

206 
Chapter 8
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Adoptive 
(Tacit) Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The police officer told the shoplifter, “You’re under arrest for theft.” The shoplifter 
didn’t say anything.
  The tacit admission exception to the Hearsay Rule does not apply when a person is 
confronted by an authority figure.
•  The neighbor told a convicted drug dealer’s mother, “Why does your kid do all 
those drugs?” The mother did not reply.
  The mother is not an agent of her child. Failure of the mother to reply is not a tacit 
admission.
•  The day after discovering the embezzlement, the employer called the bookkeeper 
and said, “I’ve always treated you right; why did you steal from me?”
 To be an adoptive (tacit) admission, that allegation must be made face-to-face.
Authorized Admission
An authorized admission is a statement made by a person who is autho-
rized to speak for a party to the law suit. In criminal cases, that means 
a person who is authorized to speak for the defendant. The exception 
means that if you authorized this agent to speak on your behalf, you are 
responsible for what the agent says—even if the agent says something 
incorrectly or something he or she was not authorized to say. For example, 
the president of a company is authorized to speak for the company, but the 
student intern is not. If the defendant in a criminal trial owned an apart-
ment building, hired someone to be the manager, and gave the manager 
the duties of making repairs, advertising vacancies, showing units to pro-
spective tenants, signing leases, collecting rent money, and evicting tenants 
who did not pay rent, the manager would be authorized to speak on behalf 
of the defendant as long as the discussion was about the apartment build-
ing. A person hired to make repairs, but not given all of these duties, would 
not be an agent of the owner. 
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under Authorized 
Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The head of the public relations office of the company sent a letter to customers 
who had been victims of fraudulent advertising. The letter said, “We wish 
to apologize to our customers. The person responsible for the problem has 
been fired. In the future, you can rely on our ads.” Criminal charges were filed 
against the corporation for fraud. The press release can be used at trial against 
the corporation as an authorized admission that the corporation engaged in 
misleading advertising.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
207
•  The store manager told the lady who slipped and fell while shopping, “I’m very 
sorry you got hurt. I’ll tell my janitors to use a different kind of wax next time so 
the floors won’t be so slippery.” The lady later sued the store. The store manager’s 
statement can be introduced against the company at a civil trial.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Authorized 
Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The cashier in the parts department told a customer who was returning a defective 
part, “I’m not surprised it didn’t fit. We get a lot of that ‘cause the company’s so 
cheap. It buys knock-off parts just to save a few bucks.”
 The cashier is not authorized to make statements on behalf of the company.
•  The union leader said, “We are going on strike because XYZ Company always 
overloads its trucks. Those heavy trucks create a risk for our drivers and the public 
and we don’t want any part in that.”
  The union leader is authorized to speak for the union. The statement cannot be 
used by someone who is suing XYZ Company to show that the trucking company 
intentionally created the risk that harmed the plaintiff. 
Admission by Agent
Admission by agent is the opposite of authorized admissions. Whereas 
authorized admission applied when the company authorizes an agent to 
speak on its behalf, admission by agent applies when someone is trying 
to hold a company liable based on what the agent or employee said. The 
authority flows the opposite way. As long as the companies and their 
agents do what they are supposed to do, there is no problem. When some-
one exceeds their authority, there is a problem.
The first question in these situations is what was the agent authorized 
to do? Once that is determined, the next question is, was the agent acting 
within the scope of what he or she was authorized to do? For example, in 
a company that sells used cars, the sales staff must have the details of a sale 
approved by “my manager.” The review of the details by someone with 
more authority is designed to prevent the sale from being too generous. 
In this situation, the final sale is based on the deal the manager signs, not 
promises made by the person who meets the prospective client and talks 
to him or her. On the other hand, everything included in the sale that was 
authorized by the manager is enforceable against the owner of the car lot.
Example of Statements That Are Admissible under Admissions 
by an Agent Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  A couple who wanted to sell their house signed an agreement with a real estate 
company. The real estate agent told potential buyers that the house did not have 

208 
Chapter 8
termites. After they purchased the house, the new owners discovered extensive 
termite damage that made the house unsafe. The statements of the real estate 
agent could be used in a law suit by the new owners against the sellers. Real estate 
agents are normally authorized to make statements about the building that is 
being sold. On the other hand, if real estate law in the state requires all terms of 
the sale be approved by the owner, the purchaser cannot sue based on the agent’s 
statements that were not in the written agreement. 
•  State law requires an insurance company to mail notices to clients 10 days before 
their policy will expire. An agent employed by the insurance company forgot to 
put a stack of expiration notices in the outgoing mail basket. Twelve days later, a 
lady whose notice had never been sent caused a serious traffic accident. The fact 
that the insurance agent did not follow required procedures can be used against the 
insurance company because it is considered likely that the lady would have renewed 
her policy if she had received the notice.
Example of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Admissions 
by an Agent Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  A sales representative works “in the field” and drives approximately 100 miles per day. 
One day, the rep runs some personal errands when he should have been working. 
During that time, he is involved in an accident. He hands the other driver his business 
card and says, “Call them; they will take care of everything.”
  This statement was not made within the scope of the sales rep’s duties; therefore, 
it is not binding on the company. The situation might be different if the company 
routinely ignored the fact that sales reps ran personal errands as long as they 
completed the assigned calls on time.
•  A delivery truck driver worked for a company that had a strict “no drinking on the 
job” policy. In the past, drivers had been fired for having one beer with lunch. A 
delivery driver had a pitcher of beer and a small pizza for lunch. An hour later, this 
driver was involved in an accident. She got out of the truck, handed the driver of 
the other car the truck’s insurance ID card, and said, “Just call the insurance agent. 
He’ll take care of everything.”
  The driver violated a strict “no drinking on the job” policy; therefore, the company 
is not responsible for the accident caused by the drunk driver. The driver’s 
statement that the insurance agent would “take care of everything” did not create 
any liability for the company. If the company tolerated drinking on the job, then the 
outcome would be different. 
Admission by Co-conspirator
Many states have a hearsay exception for statements made by co-conspirators. 
This rule closely mirrors the criminal law rule that makes each conspirator 
responsible for acts of other conspirators. Statements made by one con-
spirator during the conspiracy can be used against another conspirator. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
209
The statement must be made within the scope of the conspiracy and in 
furtherance of the purpose of conspiracy.
Example of Statements That Are Admissible under Admission 
by Co-conspirator Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Tom and Steve formed a conspiracy to rob a bank on Monday. Sunday afternoon, 
Steve was placing duct tape in a duffle bag to be used during the robbery when his 
girlfriend walked in. He winked at her and said, “Tomorrow Tom and I are applying 
for a big loan from the bank.” This statement can be used against both Tom and 
Steve when the prosecution tries to show that Tom and Steve were involved in a 
conspiracy to rob the bank. 
•  Renee and Michelle formed a conspiracy to print counterfeit money. Renee sent 
e-mails to two vendors asking questions about the resolution that the printer 
could achieve and the colors of ink that were available. These e-mails can be 
used by the prosecution to show “acts” had been performed in furtherance of the 
conspiracy. 
Example of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Admission 
by Co-conspirator Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Mary and Jo agreed to kidnap Bruce, the boy Mary babysat, and hold him for 
$100,000 ransom. A week before the planned kidnapping, Jo called Mary and told her 
that she was leaving on vacation and wasn’t going to help with the kidnapping. Mary 
went ahead with the kidnapping and signed Jo’s name to the ransom note.
  The ransom note cannot be used to prove that there was a conspiracy because it 
was produced after Jo withdrew from the conspiracy.
•  Bob talked to Mike about forming a production company to make “kiddie porn” 
DVDs. Mike acted like he was interested. Bob withdrew $50,000 from his savings 
account and bought an expensive camera and a machine to make 50 duplicate copies 
of a DVD at once. Meanwhile, Mike went to the FBI and told them about Bob’s 
suggestion. The FBI agent told Mike to meet with Bob and get more information. 
Mike arranged to meet with Bob and recorded the entire conversation.
  Bob’s statements cannot be used against him under the Admission by Co-conspirator 
Exception because there never was a conspiracy—Mike only pretended he was 
interested.
Declarations against Interest (Declarant 
Must Be Unavailable)
Unlike the Admissions Exception, which only applies to statements made 
by parties to the case, declarations against interest are admissible no 
matter who made them—but the declarant must be unavailable. If you 

210 
Chapter 8
look at the list of situations that qualify as “unavailable,” the statement 
would be admissible if the defendant does not testify at trial.
Note that if a statement against personal interest is made by the defen-
dant, the statement is admissible under either the Admissions Exception 
to the Hearsay Rule or as a declaration against interest. Most likely, the 
prosecutor will attempt to admit the statement under the Admissions 
Exception because it would not be necessary to show that the defendant 
is unavailable to testify. This makes it easier to introduce the statement at 
trial.
Definition
Declaration against Interest Exception (Also Called Statement against 
Interest Exception) to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement will be admissible under the Declaration against Interest Exception 
to the Hearsay Rule if, at the time the statement was made, it
1. Was contrary to the declarant’s pecuniary or proprietary interest, OR
2. Tended to subject the declarant to civil or criminal liability, OR
3. Rendered invalid a claim by the declarant against another.
These factors are used to show that a reasonable person in the declarant’s 
position would not have made the statement unless he or she believed the 
statement was true. 
Note: A statement tending to expose the declarant to criminal liability and 
offered to exculpate the accused is not admissible unless corroborating 
circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 804(b)(3).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under Declaration 
against Interest Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The fraud victim, who has since moved out of town and cannot be located, told a 
friend, “I can’t tell my husband about this. I took money from an account at work 
to pay for those phony stocks. I feel like a fool falling for such an obvious swindle.”
•  A person who bought several stolen rings from the defendant told a friend, “Sure, 
I knew the rings were hot, but he was selling them so cheap, I just couldn’t resist!” 
The suspect is now on trial for theft. The person who bought the rings has been 
charged with receiving stolen property and refuses to testify.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Declaration 
against Interest Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The victim of the fraud testified that he did not report the scam because it would 
be very embarrassing if his children learned that he did not read the small print on 
the contract.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
211
  Not admissible as declaration against interest because fraud victim is testifying; 
declaration against interest requires that the hearsay declarant is unavailable to 
testify.
•  The foreign tourist who was arrested for soliciting a prostitute told the police, “Yes 
I paid her, but I had no idea hiring a prostitute was a crime; it isn’t where I come 
from.” The tourist had returned home and was not present to testify against the 
woman charged with prostitution.
  Although the tourist is unavailable, the declaration does not appear to be against 
his interest.
Originally, a statement was not considered to be against the interest of 
the person making it unless the statement could result in a financial loss 
for the declarant. In more recent years, the definition of “against interest” 
has expanded. Confessions to crimes are now generally included, as are 
statements that could be used against a person in civil court. A few states, 
such as Montana, Nevada, and Wisconsin, include statements that would 
make the person the subject of hatred, ridicule, or disgrace.
Declarations against interest are considered trustworthy because it is 
unlikely a person would make a statement that could be damaging unless 
the statement were true. Even then, testimony by the person who originally 
made the statement is preferred. It is only when the in-court testimony is 
not possible that the out-of-court statement is allowed.
Spontaneous Statements (Also Called Excited 
Utterances)
Some states consider present sense impressions, spontaneous statements,
and contemporaneous declarations to be three separate exceptions to the 
Hearsay Rule. Other states include them in the res gestae (literally, “things 
done”) exception to the Hearsay Rule that covers a variety of statements 
to explain the actions that were being done at the time the statement 
was made. We consider the two separately and note that they are quite 
similar.
Both of these exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are considered to be trust-
worthy because there was no time for the declarant to think about what he 
or she is saying. Unlike a statement that is contemplated and composed in 
order to present the case in a manner favorable to the declarant, the speed 
with which the spontaneous statement or contemporaneous declaration is 
made is believed to lower the probability that the declarant lied. 
Sometimes the defendant in a criminal case makes a statement that 
would fall into the category of simultaneous statement or contemporaneous 

212 
Chapter 8
declaration. These exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are rarely used in these 
circumstances because it is easier to have the defendant’s statements admit-
ted under the Admissions Exception. 
Definition
Spontaneous Statements Exception (Also Called Excited Utterance 
Exception) to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement will be admissible under the Spontaneous Statements Exception 
to the Hearsay Rule if, at the time the statement was made,
1. The statement related to a startling event or condition, AND 
2.  The statement was made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement 
caused by the event or condition.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(2).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under 
the Spontaneous Statements (Also Called Excited Utterance) 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Immediately after a traffic accident a bystander said, “Did you see that? He just ran 
the red light. He never tried to stop before he hit that car!”
•  During a robbery the victim said, “No! No! Please don’t take my money.”
•  The victim grabbed his stomach and said, “Oh, that hurts. Why did you hit me?”
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the 
Spontaneous Statements (Also Called Excited Utterance) Exception 
to the Hearsay Rule
•  After she came home from work, a woman told her husband, “Some guy tried to 
rob the bank this morning. I’d just walked in there to cash a check. I was so scared 
when I saw he had a gun!”
  This conversation took place several hours after the event—the woman was no 
longer under the stress or excitement of the event.
•  A man told the police taking statements immediately after the bank robbery, “I was 
next in line for Teller No. 4. I saw the guy, but there wasn’t anything to be afraid of. 
He didn’t have a gun or anything.” 
  This conversation occurred soon after the robbery was finished, but the man was 
never excited or frightened by the “robber.” 
•  A man who observed a train wreck told a friend, “There was a train wreck last year. 
Right there, at the same spot. My wife was killed.”
  This man was speaking from the emotion of the moment, but he was talking about 
something that happened a year ago. This was not about the event that caused the 
excitement.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
213
To qualify as a spontaneous statement, the declarant must have per-
sonally observed the event he or she is commenting about. This includes 
utilization of any of the five senses, although eyesight and hearing are the 
most common. Given the current level of “live” broadcasts by the media, 
it no longer is necessary for the declarant to be at the location where the 
event occurred. 
The statement must be made very near (timewise) to the occur-
rence of the event in question. The person should still be responding 
to the event, or as some codes state, “in the excitement of the moment.” 
The length of this interval will vary with the type of stimulus involved. 
There is no set time limit. The stronger the stimulus, the longer the 
“excitement of the moment” is likely to last. In some cases, this rule is 
applied to the time immediately following being told of an event, such 
as the death of a loved one.
Normally, the statement must be made without any questioning. The 
idea here is that there was no interrogation taking place. Polite questions 
such as “Are you OK?” would be less likely to defeat a request to introduce 
a statement as a spontaneous statement. Self-serving statements, such as 
statements the defendant made to make him- or herself look good, are not 
admissible under this exception even if all other criteria are met.
The defendant may make spontaneous statements, but this exception 
is normally used to admit statements by other people. Everything the 
defendant said is admissible against the defendant under the Admissions 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule.
Contemporaneous Declarations (Also Called 
Present Sense Impressions)
To be admissible under the Contemporaneous Declarations Exception (also 
called the Present Sense Impressions Exception) to the Hearsay Rule, the 
statement and the acts must occur at the same time (i.e., contemporaneously) 
and relate to the same event. There is no requirement, however, that the 
statements be made spontaneously. The statements will be admissible even 
if they are in response to a police officer’s questions, such as “What are you 
doing?” and additional questions about what the person is doing, thinking, 
or feeling as the situation evolves. Communications with crisis interven-
tion team members would qualify as long as they deal with current sensa-
tions. The same is true for a kidnapper’s response to a hostage’s questions 
or a written statement that the hostage taker prepared with the intent of 
reading it to the press. All of these statements may be edited (redacted) to 

214 
Chapter 8
remove portions that do not pertain to a present state of mind before they 
are presented in open court.
The Contemporaneous Declaration Exception covers answers to a list 
of questions that a patient prepared before going to the doctor. It applies 
to a person’s recitation of current medical problems or attempts to explain 
the location of the pain and/or describe the type of pain the person is 
feeling. However, this exception to the Hearsay Rule would not cover 
statements about the past, such as the answer to the question, “When did 
the pain start?” The same would be true of psychological symptoms. The 
patient’s response to a therapist’s prompts would qualify, as would narra-
tive as long as it focused on the current situation.
Definition
Contemporaneous Declaration Exception (Also Called Present Sense 
Impression Exception) to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement is admissible under the Contemporaneous Declaration Exception to 
the Hearsay Rule if
1.  The statement describes or explains an event or condition made while the declar-
ant was perceiving the event or condition, OR
2.  The statement was made immediately after the declarant perceived the event or 
condition.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(1).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under 
Contemporaneous Declaration (Also Called Present Sense 
Impression) Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The doctor said, “I am going to have to operate to save your life.”
•  A man entered the bank and said, “This is a stick-up. Give me all the money.”
•  The victim said, “I’ll give you the money; just don’t shoot me!”
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the 
Contemporaneous Declaration (Also Called Present Sense 
Impression) Exception to the Hearsay Rule 
•  A woman told her friend, “I’m OK now, but I sure was scared this morning when 
that guy pointed the gun at me.”
  This is not a contemporaneous declaration because the woman is telling her friend 
what happened earlier in the day.
•  A man told his wife, “I look back on it, and it’s awfully frightening thinking about 
how close I came to getting hit, but at the time I was pretty calm; all I thought 
about was grabbing that kid, pulling him to safety.”

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
215
  This is not contemporaneous. The man is trying to describe how he felt at the time 
he grabbed the kid, but that was in the past.
•  A mother woke her child and gave him a hug, “Honey, you’re OK. Mommy’s here, 
you’re safe. Don’t cry. It was just a bad dream, no one’s going to hurt you.”
  This is not a contemporaneous declaration; the child was having a dream—the 
event never happened. 
A statement may qualify under the Contemporaneous Declaration 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule and still not be admissible in court. If the 
statement is written in the doctor’s notes or some other document, the 
document will need to be produced in court and be authenticated. If it is 
in a business record, someone from the records office will need to be called 
to testify about the process used to make the record. Another issue will 
arise if the declaration was made to an attorney, doctor, etc. because the 
statement may be privileged and at least one witness will need to waive the 
privilege before it can be introduced at trial (see Chapter 9). 
Dying Declaration Exception (Also Called Statement 
under Belief of Impending Death; Declarant Must 
Be Unavailable)
The dying declaration is one of the oldest exceptions to the Hearsay 
Rule. It was based on the assumption that a person would not go to meet 
his Maker with a lie upon his lips. Hence, it was considered trustworthy. 
Obviously, not everyone is reluctant to use falsehoods at the moment of 
death, but the old assumption is still used to justify admitting the dying 
declaration into court.
The traditional rule allowed the use of dying declarations in criminal 
prosecutions of the declarant’s killer but not in other criminal or civil trials. 
Over time, the admissibility of dying declarations was expanded to pros-
ecution of crimes other than homicide and presentation in civil trials. The 
reasoning behind the expansion was that the trustworthiness of the dying 
declaration was based on the fear of imminent death. Therefore, the state-
ment was equally trustworthy if, after making the statement, the person 
lived or died. Many states now allow dying declarations to be admitted into 
evidence in both criminal and civil trials. The Federal Rules (Rule 804(b)(2)) 
and a few states allow the statement to be used even if the declarant does 
not die.

216 
Chapter 8
Definition
Dying Declaration Exception (Also Called Statement under Belief of 
Impending Death) to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement is admissible in a homicide prosecution under the Dying 
Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule if
1. It was made when the declarant believed that death was imminent, AND
2.  The statement concerned the cause or circumstances of what the declarant 
believed to be impending death. 
Note: Many states add a third requirement: Declarant must die before trial.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 804(b)(2).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Dying 
Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  The victim said, “I’m gonna die. That jerk, Peter, shot me.”
•  The victim said, “Get a priest. I need the Last Rites. John shot me after we had an 
argument over the money from the bank robbery.”
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Dying 
Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  A battered wife said, “He tried to kill me. I’m going to divorce that brute.”
  This statement cannot be used as a dying declaration. The statement “I’m going 
to divorce that brute” indicates that she believes she will recover; therefore, this 
statement cannot be used as a dying declaration. 
•  The victim said, “I know I am dying. I want to confess to the bank robbery I 
committed last week and get it off my chest.”
  This statement cannot be used as a dying declaration. The statement “I want to 
confess to the bank robbery I committed last week” indicates that the statement is 
not about the cause of death.
One of the keys to admissibility of dying declarations is the declarant’s 
belief that he or she will die almost immediately. If the declarant has any 
hope of recovery, the statement will not fall under this exception. Neither 
will a statement that indicates the declarant believes death will not occur 
in the immediate future.
Dying declarations can only be about the events surrounding the 
death—usually it is a statement by the victim about who inflicted the fatal 
injury. Statements about past crimes or other things are not admissible 
unless the state expanded the rule. The declarant must speak from per-
sonal knowledge about things heard, seen, smelled, etc.
Another important aspect of the dying declaration is that the declar-
ant must be mentally competent. Unlike the normal case in which only 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
217
the competence of the person on the witness stand is at issue, in cases 
involving a dying declaration, both the hearsay declarant and the witness 
who is testifying must be mentally competent. Statements that qualify for 
this exception to the Hearsay Rule are treated the same as statements made 
in open court by a witness. If the dying person was in severe pain, under 
heavy medication, delusional, or exhibiting other signs of severe deteriora-
tion of his or her mental capacity, the question must be addressed. 
Dying declarations do not have to be spontaneous. In fact, it is frequently 
necessary to ask the homicide victim questions in order to find out if he or she 
believes death is imminent. Questions regarding the crime are also allowed.
Mental or Physical State
The Mental or Physical State Exception to the Hearsay Rule is used to 
introduce statements made about mental, emotional, or physical states. 
The statement must relate to the declarant’s mental, emotional, or physical 
state at the time the statement was made.
Definition
Mental or Physical State Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement may be admissible under the Mental or Physical State Exception to 
the Hearsay Rule within the following guidelines:
1.  A statement of the declarant’s then existing state of mind, emotion, sensation, 
or physical condition (e.g., intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain, and 
bodily health) is admissible, but 
2.  A statement of memory or belief is not admissible to prove the fact remembered 
or believed. 
   But a statement that relates to the execution, revocation, identification, or terms 
of declarant’s will is admissible.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(3).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Mental 
or Physical State Exception to the Hearsay Rule
• The robber said, “Give me your money or I will kill you.”
• The battered woman screamed, “I hate you!”
• The torture victim repeatedly screamed, as if in extreme pain.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Mental 
or Physical State Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  A wife told her husband as she aimed a gun at him, “Do you remember how it used to 
be, back when we first got married, you were so gentle, always trying to make me smile?”

218 
Chapter 8
  This does not qualify for the Mental or Physical State Exception because the wife is 
talking about mental state “back when we first got married.”
•  The paramedic asked the victim of a shooting who appeared to be gritting his teeth, 
“Do you want some pain medicine?” The man replied, “No, I’m no sissy.”
  This does not qualify for the Mental or Physical State Exception because the man is 
refusing to admit his current physical state.
•  A paranoid boyfriend reads his girlfriend’s homework for her fiction writing class, 
“I love him so much, I’d never hurt him!” and says, “You liar! You’d never hurt me! 
All you ever do is hurt me!” 
  This does not qualify for the Mental or Physical State Exception for two reasons: 
The girl supposedly wrote fiction, so the statement does not represent anyone’s 
current mental state, and even if it did, it did not represent a current emotion—the 
essay had been written at some time in the past. 
This exception to the Hearsay Rule is useful to show intent, plan, 
motive, design, emotions, pain, or health. The statement is admissible even 
if the declarant is available at the time of the trial. It must be noted that the 
statement is admitted to show that the declarant said it, but it is not admis-
sible to show that what the declarant originally said was the truth.
Most states allow the admission of statements relating to physical or 
mental state that were made for the purpose of medical diagnosis or treat-
ment. They must, of course, be relevant to the case. In some states, these 
statements are included in the Mental and Physical State Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule; in others, there is a separate exception for them. A few states 
have a separate exception to the Hearsay Rule for medical records. Where 
this does not exist, the issue of business records or public records must 
be addressed before they are admitted at trial. Another issue involved is 
whether or not the medical records can be excluded from evidence because 
they are privileged. Chapter 9 addresses this issue.
Statements showing irrational behavior are not usually admitted under 
the Mental or Physical State Exception to the Hearsay Rule. Although they 
are definitely relevant if the insanity defense is used, in most states they are 
not considered hearsay because they are not offered to show that what was 
said was true. In fact, they are offered to show just the opposite—that the 
declarant was irrational and did not know what was happening.
Business Records and Official Documents
Most businesses keep records on employees, inventory, customers, etc. A 
well-run business will have established procedures to collect this information, 
making it more trustworthy than information obtained by a less systematic 
method. Due to this apparent reliability,  the Business Records Exception to 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
219
the Hearsay Rule has been established. The same could be said for records 
maintained by many government agencies. Vital statistics (births, mar-
riages, deaths, etc.) are a form of government record. However, they are 
normally treated separately because the record was filed with the appro-
priate government agency but in most cases a government employee did 
not participate in the event.
Business Records
The term business includes every kind of business, governmental activity, 
profession, or occupation and calling, whether conducted for profit or not. 
This is a very broad definition. Almost any organized activity can fit in it. 
It includes medical facilities (doctor’s office, hospital, clinic, etc.), school 
(from preschool to university), the military and charities, as well as profit 
and nonprofit organizations.
Definition
Business Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
A document may be admissible under the Business Records Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule if
1.  It is a memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any form, of acts, 
events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, 
2.  It was made at or near the time by, or from information transmitted by, a person 
with knowledge, 
3. It is kept in the course of a regularly conducted business activity, and 
4.  It was the regular practice of that business activity to make the memorandum, 
report, record. or data compilation, 
5.  It is shown by the testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness, or by certifica-
tion that complies with Rule 902(11), Rule 902(12), or a statute permitting certification, 
6.  The source of information or the method or circumstances of preparation does 
not indicate lack of trustworthiness. 
Note: The term business as used in this paragraph includes business, institution, 
association, profession, occupation, and calling of every kind, whether or not 
conducted for profit.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(6).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Business 
Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Gun store records can be used to show that the defendant purchased the murder 
weapon several days prior to the death of the victim, thus showing premeditation.
•  Time cards can be used to show that a person was at work on a specific day if the 
company mandates that its employees keep accurate time cards.

220 
Chapter 8
•  Telephone records can be used to show that calls were made to the extortion victim 
from the defendant’s telephone.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Business 
Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Child pornography found on computer used by office manager is not admissible 
under Business Records Exception. 
  These pictures are not admissible as business records because downloading them 
was not within the normal business use of the computer.
•  A pile of sales records was found in a drawer in the accounting office. 
  These sales records cannot be used as business records because normal business 
procedure calls for them to be entered into the “books”; leaving piles of them 
around the room is not part of normal business procedures.
•  Records from the pharmacy showing that a client filled a prescription for a 
medicine that causes drowsiness.
  These records can be used to show that the client had a prescription filled 
but cannot be used to show that the person was under the influence of the 
medication at the time of the accident. Further evidence would need to be 
introduced showing that the person took the medicine on the day in question.
There are three keys to admissibility of a business record under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. First, someone with firsthand knowledge 
must have made the record, or someone with firsthand information may 
communicate the information to another person who then includes it 
in a report. It is not necessary that the person who has firsthand infor-
mation make the report. The Federal Rules of Evidence explicitly state 
that the report can be based on information transmitted by the person 
who has firsthand knowledge. Reports containing double hearsay, on the 
other hand, are not admissible. For example, the crime victim can tell 
the police officer what happened and then the police officer can include 
the information in the incident report. On the other hand, if someone 
approaches the police officer and reports what someone told him or her, it 
would be double hearsay if the officer included this in the incident report. 
Department policy will dictate what level of information should be in 
police reports. If the officer includes double hearsay in a report along with 
firsthand observations, the Business Records Exception requires excision 
of the portion of the report that is double hearsay, but the remainder of 
the report can be used in court.
The second key to admissibility is that the business record was made 
promptly after the event in question. The process for making “business 
records” includes filling out forms, writing reports, punching the keys 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
221
of the cash register, making entries in a log book, adding an entry into a 
computer database, or dictating information to someone else, as well as a 
wide variety of other acts. Failure to make the record promptly makes the 
record less trustworthy, and therefore it is not admissible in court. One 
of the problems here is that there is no definition of “promptly”; therefore, 
there is no set length of time that makes the report untrustworthy. When 
the length of time it took to record the event is in question, lawyers for both 
sides will argue the case before the trial judge, and the judge will decide the 
issue. If the admission of the item is critical to the case, and the judge ruled 
against its introduction at trial, the post-trial appeal may raise the issue 
again. Allowing the trial judge the opportunity to rule on admissibility of 
the business record is important because issues cannot be raised for the 
first time on appeal. 
Third, the records must be kept as a routine part of doing business. 
The procedures the business established must be followed. Even then, the 
court can rule information is not admissible if the opposing side is able to 
show that the business did “sloppy record keeping”—that is, it kept inad-
equate records, did not post entries promptly, allowed employees to abuse 
the record keeping function, or knew that fraudulent entries were entered 
into its records. 
Another issue that may be raised when someone tries to introduce 
business records is that the record may have been made by someone who 
works for the company, but the record was not made in the “regular prac-
tice of that business activity.” The advent of e-mail and text messaging 
has resulted in employees sending and receiving messages all day long. 
Telephone calls and voice mail messages raise the same issue. Some of 
these messages may qualify as business records, but many will not. The 
ones that are personal do not become business records because they are 
transmitted to a business or its employees, or they are saved on a business 
computer system.
One advantage of business records is that it is not necessary to have 
the person who made the record testify in court. Depending on how the 
business is organized and the type of record sought, the witness may be 
someone from personnel, accounting, or the records office. This person, 
called the “record custodian” in many codes, will testify about the methods 
used to make and record reports, as well as the security measures utilized 
to prevent tampering. Once it is established that the business has a reliable 
process for storing its records, the focus will shift to the particular record 
in question. The side offering the record into evidence will ask the record 
custodian the appropriate questions to establish that the report being 
introduced is a true copy of the original business record.

222 
Chapter 8
Business records can be used to establish many things. Some criminal 
cases, such as embezzlement, cannot be prosecuted without them. If a com-
pany keeps strict payroll records, the time card can be used to show that 
the employee was (or was not) at work at a given date and time. Hotel and 
airline records can be used to show that a person was at a given location on 
a given date. Although none of these is conclusive because someone could 
have used a false identity, the evidence can be admitted, and the other side 
will have to convince the jury that the defendant was (or was not) there.
Absence of a Business Record
If a company keeps good business records, the fact that it has no record of 
an event can be used as evidence that the event did not occur. For example, 
the fact that the defendant did not punch his time card can be used to 
show that he was not at work at that time. This is sometimes called “nega-
tive hearsay.”
Definition
Absence of a Record Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
The fact that no record of an event was recorded in regularly made business 
records may be admitted into evidence to show that an event did not occur if
1.  Evidence of a matter is not included in the memoranda, reports, records, or data 
compilations, in any form, 
2.  Records were kept in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (6)[Records of 
regularly conducted activity], 
3. Absence of a record is used to prove the nonoccurrence or nonexistence of the matter,
4.  The matter was of a kind of which a memorandum, report, record, or data com-
pilation was regularly made and preserved, 
5.  The sources of information or other circumstances do not indicate lack of 
trustworthiness.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(7).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Absence 
of Record Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Cash register tape shows every item that was processed by the register. At the 
beginning of each transaction, the register prints the date and time. In a shoplifting 
case in which the defendant claims to have paid for the item, the tapes or 
computerized records from all registers in the store can be checked. If none of these 
sources show the item was purchased, this is proof that the defendant did not pay 
for the item in question.
•  If the defendant works at a job that requires employees to “punch the clock” 
every time they report for work or leave, the fact that there is no record that the 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
223
defendant “punched the clock” can be used to show that the defendant was not at 
work on the date in question. The Court usually requires testimony about how the 
company handles time cards so the jurors will know how secure they are.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Absence 
of Record Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Some companies are very lax about having employees “punch the clock” when 
reporting for work or leaving. For example, they may allow one employee to punch 
in for another employee when returning from lunch. 
  In these circumstances, the fact that the defendant’s time card had not been 
punched cannot be used in court to show that he or she was not at work because 
there was no systematic process that recorded attendance.
•  Some teachers sporadically keep attendance. 
  In these circumstances, the fact that the teacher did not put a mark beside a 
student’s name cannot be used as evidence that the student was not in class on a 
particular day.
Public Records and Reports (Also Called Official 
Documents)
The Federal Rules of Evidence divide public records and reports into 
three categories. The first, “activities of the office or agency,” covers a wide 
range of internal records and reports. Public agencies, ranging from the 
courts to the police department, the tax collector, and the dog catcher, 
are covered. Any report that these agencies make documenting their own 
activities falls in this category, much as the Business Records Exception 
covers reports a private agency makes in the normal course of business. 
On the other hand, any statement included in reports made by public 
agencies that is hearsay requires separate analysis. To be admissible, these 
embedded hearsay statements must be covered by some other exception 
to the Hearsay Rule. For example, if an officer records a dying declara-
tion in a police report, the statements of the dying person are admissible 
under the Dying Declaration Exception, not the Public Records and 
Reports Exception.
Definition
Public Records and Reports Exception (Also Called Official Documents 
Exception) to the Hearsay Rule*
Records, reports, statements, or data compilations, in any form, of public offices 
or agencies, may be admissible under the Public Records and Reports Exception 
to the Hearsay Rule if they set forth 

224 
Chapter 8
1. The activities of the office or agency, OR
2.  Matters observed pursuant to duty imposed by law as to which matters there was 
a duty to report, excluding, however, in criminal cases matters observed by police 
officers and other law enforcement personnel, OR
3.  In civil actions and proceedings and against the government in criminal cases, 
factual findings resulting from an investigation made pursuant to authority 
granted by law, unless the sources of information or other circumstances indicate 
lack of trustworthiness.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(8)
Examples of Information Admissible under the Public Records 
and Reports Exception (Also Called Official Documents Exception) 
to the Hearsay Rule
•  Police logs showing that Mary Jones reported domestic violence incidents on 
September 1, 2007; October 2, 2007; and November 3, 2007.
•  Report by coroner’s pathologist describing the autopsy that was done and stating 
that the unidentified person died at the hands of another.
Examples of Information Not Admissible under the Public Records 
and Reports Exception (Also Called Official Documents Exception) 
to the Hearsay Rule
•  Statement in police report that says “Mary Smith told the undersigned officer that 
her sister Joy said that John Jones was having an affair with Lucy.” 
  This is double hearsay and is not made admissible by the fact that it is included in a 
public report.
•  A neighbor submitted a report to Children’s Protective Services alleging that Nancy 
Green neglected her children because Nancy’s children went to school every day in 
January without jackets or lunch boxes.
  Mandatory Child Abuse Reporting Laws do not cover reports made by neighbors. 
Therefore, this is report is not a public report.
The second section of Federal Rule 803(8) does not apply to law 
enforcement agencies. This subsection covers mandatory reports filed 
with government agencies, not reports prepared by government employ-
ees about investigations they conducted. Child abuse reports, prepared by 
“mandatory reporters” and submitted to Children’s Protective Services, 
fall into this category. The same is true of mandatory reports on elder 
abuse and also communicable disease reports that doctors, hospitals, and 
others are required to prepare. Individuals—doctors, nurses, teachers, 
day care workers, etc.—are mandated by state or federal law to prepare 
reports and forward them to specific government agencies. A “mandatory 
reporter” can be charged with a misdemeanor if he or she fails to report as 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
225
required by law; this penalty is considered sufficient to make the reports 
trustworthy. Mandatory reports, prepared by hundreds or thousands of 
individuals who do not work for the government, thus become part of the 
files of numerous government agencies. These reports are covered by the 
Public Records and Reports Exception to the Hearsay Rule. 
The third subsection of Rule 803(8) applies to the “factual findings 
resulting from an investigation made pursuant to authority granted by 
law.” The result of this exception to the Hearsay Rule is that the reports 
of investigations conducted by government agencies may be admissible at 
trial. The agency could be the police department, coroner, grand jury, or 
any other department of a public agency that conducts investigations as 
a normal part of its operation. One caveat is attached to the admissibility 
of these investigative reports—that is, “unless the sources of information 
or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness.” The authors of 
the Federal Rules of Evidence put in a reminder that hearsay cannot be 
admitted into evidence if there is reason to doubt its trustworthiness. 
Their wording makes it clear that the report could lack trustworthiness 
because of the sources of the information or the way the investigation 
was conducted. This was a restatement of the standard rules that apply 
to hearsay, not a broad indictment of the way government conducts 
investigations.
Vital Statistics
“Vital statistics” are another form of government record. The most 
common documents in this category are certificates that record births, 
marriages, and deaths. Once again, the certificate is made by a person 
who conducts an activity as part of his or her profession—the practice of 
medicine or being a member of the clergy, for example—and files reports 
with the government about specific activities (delivering a baby, perform-
ing a marriage, etc.). 
Definition
Records of Vital Statistics Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
Information from records of vital statistics is admissible under the Public 
Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it consists of
1. Records or data compilations, in any form, 
2. Of births, fetal deaths, deaths, or marriages, 
3.  If the report thereof was made to a public office pursuant to requirements of law.
*Based on the Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(9).

226 
Chapter 8
Examples of Vital Statistics That Are Admissible under the Vital 
Statistics Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Marriage certificate filed with the county by a priest stating that he officiated at the 
marriage of John and Mary Jones on June 3, 2001.
•  Death certificate filed with the county by Dr. Smith stating that he was present 
when Mary Jones died of a gunshot wound on December 4, 2007.
•  Death certificate filed by Dr. Brown, deputy coroner for the county, stating his 
conclusion, after conducting the autopsy on Mary Jones, that she died at the hands 
of another (homicide).
Examples of Records That Are Not Admissible under the Vital 
Statistics Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Certificate of marriage filed by Howard King.
  This marriage was determined to be void because Howard King was not a licensed 
member of the clergy.
•  Birth certificate for Lonny Jordon was found in Dr. White’s office after his death. 
Dr. White’s executor filed it with the County Department of Vital Statistics.
 Birth certificate was not valid because Dr. White failed to sign it. 
•  Birth certificate of Nancy Black was proven to be no longer valid.
  Nancy Black was adopted on June 1, 2007, and as part of the adoption procedure, 
her original birth certificate was removed from vital statistics and replaced with one 
showing that she was the child of her adoptive parents.
Prior to 1900, very few states collected vital statistics. In the absence of 
legislatively established procedures, a variety of informal documents (writ-
ten hearsay) were used when it was necessary to prove a person’s age, marital 
status, and/or date of death. In the absence of such documentation, oral 
statements were admissible for these purposes. The most commonly used 
nongovernment sources were family Bibles or journals in which this infor-
mation was recorded close to the time that the events occurred. Church 
records of baptisms, marriages, and funerals could be used to establish 
critical dates. Another source of vital statistics was U.S. Census records, 
which were compiled every 10 years, listing the names of the people living 
in the household and stating their ages.
Today, each state legislature has created a process that is used for main-
taining vital statistics. Most mandate the forms that will be used and the 
procedures that must be followed. For example, the official birth certificate 
is completed by the doctor who delivered the baby, it is kept at the County 
Department of Vital Statistics, and a computer-readable copy is sent to the 
State Department of Vital Statistics. Other certificates may be prepared. 
For example, many hospitals give the parents an elaborate birth certificate. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
227
The same is true for events held in churches, such as weddings and funer-
als. The family frequently assumes that the most elaborate certificate is the 
official one. This is not true. Only the one on a form mandated by the state 
qualifies for the Vital Statistics Exception to the Hearsay Rule. If the official 
form has been lost, other documents can be used to establish the event. 
Today, it is rare to resort to testimony of eye witnesses for information 
relating to births, marriages, and deaths.
Alternative procedures have been established for unusual occur-
rences. For example, in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks, many people were unaccounted for. Some investigators believed 
that the intensity of the initial explosion resulted in people being incin-
erated to unrecognizable ashes. It became obvious that an alternative 
procedure was needed so that the families that were left behind could go 
on with life, estates could be settled, and provisions could be made for 
business affairs. Bills were passed by the U.S. Congress and signed by the 
President that made provision for families to have a missing loved one 
officially declared dead. 
In addition to establishing the procedures for recording vital statistics, 
it is important to establish a process for making duplicates that are accept-
able in court. If each person who needed to establish a vital statistic were 
required to produce the original record, the integrity of the vital statistics 
files would be impinged. The possibility for lost records would be high. It 
would be easy to convince a jury that the absence of a document meant 
that the event never took place, when in reality the absence of the docu-
ment meant that someone had removed the file and failed to return it. For 
this reason, the process for making certified copies was established. The 
process has been modified as more modern procedures have been intro-
duced into the Vital Statistics Office.
Reputation
Reputation is what others say about someone. It is by its very nature hear-
say. In fact, it is frequently nothing but gossip. Nonetheless, historically, 
there has been a hearsay exception for reputation. The terminology used 
is inconsistent. A “character witness” is called to testify about a person’s 
reputation.
As a general rule, the character witness is not allowed to give his or 
her personal opinion about the person whose reputation is in question but 
should report on what the person’s associates or the community thinks. 
“Associates” are the people who work with the person in question. “The com-
munity” refers to the residential and social community. These may be two 

228 
Chapter 8
completely different groups of people. (Refer to Chapter 4 for a discussion of 
when reputation is admissible.) A number of states now allow the witness to 
give his or her own opinion about the person’s reputation or to cite specific 
incidents, but the Federal Rules of Evidence still follow the traditional rule.
Definition
Reputation Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
Statements are admissible under the Reputation Exception to the Hearsay Rule if 
they involve
1. Reputation of a person’s character 
2. Among associates or in the community.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(21).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Reputation 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Defense character witness said that defendant had a reputation in the community 
for being a peaceful, law-abiding person.
•  Prosecution character witness said that defendant had a reputation among co-
workers for being hot-tempered and violent.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the 
Reputation Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Character witness told jury her personal opinions about the defendant and cited 
incidents to support those opinions.
  Federal Rule allows testimony about reputation among associates or in the 
community, but it does not allow personal views of the character witness or 
testimony about specific incidents.
•  Character witness told jury what the defendant’s reputation was among other 
members of their fraternity while they were in college 10 years ago, but the witness 
admitted he had no current information about the defendant’s character.
  Testimony about reputation in the fraternity would ordinarily be admissible, but 
when it is 10 years old and the witness has no recent information, the witness 
should not be allowed to testify.
The general rule is that the prosecution is not allowed to introduce 
testimony about the defendant’s reputation. The purpose of this rule was 
to prevent the prosecution from asking the jury to infer that the defendant 
committed the crime because the criminal behavior charged would have 
been expected from a person with that reputation. The scene changes if 
the defendant introduces his or her own reputation into evidence. Since 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
229
the defense opened the door to examine the defendant’s reputation, the 
prosecution may call character witnesses to refute the ones the defendant 
called. 
So far, we have talked about general character (e.g., the defendant is a 
nice guy who would not commit a crime). There are times when a specific 
character trait is in question because of the crime that has been alleged. If 
the defendant is on trial for a crime of violence, she might want to intro-
duce character witnesses who testify that she has the reputation for being 
a very calm, nonviolent person. If the charge is theft, the defense may call 
a character witness who testifies that the defendant has the reputation 
for being a very honest person. The old rule applies: If the defense opens 
the door, then the prosecution can call witnesses who will testify that the 
defendant does not have the reputation the character witnesses claimed. 
Anyone who testifies as a character witness can be impeached. Ironically, 
a person who testifies that the defendant has a good reputation can be 
impeached based on his or her own bad reputation.
Occasionally, the reputation of the victim is at issue. This is most 
likely to happen when the defendant has been charged with an aggressive 
crime, such as aggravated battery, and is claiming that he was acting in 
self-defense. The defense would call character witnesses to testify that the 
victim had a reputation for being a bully and initiating fights. In cases in 
which a battered woman kills or seriously injures her batterer, the defense 
is frequently based on the prior violence that the victim has inflicted on 
the defendant. The defense may call character witnesses to help support 
the defendant’s allegations. 
Former Testimony (Witness Must Be Unavailable)
The Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule covers testimony 
taken under oath at a prior court appearance or other legislative autho-
rized proceeding such as a deposition or arbitration proceeding. This is 
one of the easiest exceptions to the Hearsay Rule to justify. The statement 
was made under oath; therefore, it is considered trustworthy. The fact that 
the witness is no longer available makes the exception necessary. The use of 
this statement is restricted because the witness cannot be cross-examined. 
The jury will be deprived of the opportunity to watch the witness testify 
and observe possible signs of deception. 
When this exception is used, the former testimony is introduced as evi-
dence in the present case. If the former testimony is used to impeach, it comes 
in under the Prior Inconsistent Statement Exception to the Hearsay Rule.

230 
Chapter 8
In criminal cases, the Former Testimony Exception is most commonly 
used at trial to introduce testimony taken at the preliminary hearing. 
Testimony of any witness the defendant called at the preliminary hearing 
can be admitted by the prosecution. If it is the testimony of a prosecu-
tion witness, the defendant must have had the opportunity and motive to 
cross-examine. If the defense decided not to cross-examine, the testimony 
will still be admissible.
Definition
Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
A statement is admissible under the Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay 
Rule if
1. Testimony was given as a witness
  a.  at another hearing of the same proceeding OR 
  b.  in a different proceeding, OR
  c.   in a deposition taken in compliance with law in the course of the same or 
another proceeding,
2.  If the party against whom the testimony is now offered, or, in a civil action or 
proceeding, a predecessor in interest, 
3.  Had an opportunity and similar motive to develop the testimony by direct, cross, 
or redirect examination.
*Based on the Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 804(b)(1).
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Former 
Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Transcript of testimony at preliminary hearing given by an elderly victim who died 
prior to trial.
•  Transcript of testimony of defense witness at a prior trial. At the prior trial, 
this witness made statements indicating the defendant was not the person 
who committed the crime. The defendant was convicted in the prior trial. The 
conviction was reversed on appeal, and the case is currently being retried. The 
witness now refuses to testify. 
•  Transcript of testimony of prosecution witness at prior trial that ended in hung 
jury. The case is currently being retried. The prosecutor can introduced this 
transcript if the prosecution used due diligence but the witness could not be found.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Former 
Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Eyewitness told the police that she saw the defendant hit the victim. The prosecutor 
wants to introduce the statement in the police report because the person who made 
the statement cannot be found.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
231
  To qualify for Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule, the statement 
must have been made under oath at a hearing designated in the code section. The 
statement in the police report was not made under oath; it was also not made at a 
hearing. Therefore, the statement in the police report is not admissible under the 
Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule.
•  Transcript of prosecution witness at the preliminary hearing. The prosecution has 
made no effort to locate the witness. 
  This statement was made under oath at the prior hearing and the opposing side 
had the opportunity to cross-examine. The requirement that has not been met is 
that the witness is unavailable.
Testimony might also have come from a previous trial of the same case 
if there was a hung jury or the case was reversed on appeal. When there is 
more than one defendant, it is possible that the testimony came from the 
preliminary hearing of another defendant. In all of these situations, there 
must have been at least one defendant present with a motive to cross-
examine that is similar to the motive of the current defendant.
Prior Inconsistent Statements
Prior inconsistent statements can be used to impeach a witness. When 
used for this purpose, opposing counsel asks questions about them during 
cross-examination (see Chapter 5). Many authorities on evidence claim that 
they are not hearsay because they are not offered to show that they are true. 
Instead, they are offered to show that the witness may not be telling the 
truth. The Federal Rules of Evidence (Rule 801(d)(1)(A)) and a number of 
states follow this approach. Some states list prior inconsistent statements as 
a separate exception to the Hearsay Rule, and for this reason they are dis-
cussed here. Under either approach, the prior statements are admissible. 
The definition used in California Evidence Code Section 1235 is used to 
demonstrate how these statements are treated when they are considered evi-
dence because there is no similar section in the Federal Rules of Evidence. 
Definition
Prior Inconsistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
Evidence of a statement made by a witness is admissible under the Prior 
Inconsistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule if
1. Statement is inconsistent with his or her testimony at the hearing AND
2. Witness is given opportunity to explain inconsistency.
*Based on California Evidence Code Section 1235.

232 
Chapter 8
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under Prior 
Inconsistent Statements Exception to Hearsay Rule
•  Defendant gave Officer Green an alibi when questioned prior to arrest. On the witness 
stand, he gave a totally different account of where he was and denied having given the 
first alibi. Officer Green can be called to testify regarding what the defendant said. 
•  Defendant testified that she had never met the co-defendant prior to her arrest 
on February 10, 2007. On cross-examination she was asked if she remembered 
telling someone at her office on January 6, 2007, that the defendant was her new 
boyfriend. She admitted making the statement at her office. No other witness will 
be called regarding the statement.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under Prior 
Inconsistent Statements Exception to Hearsay Rule
•  At trial the defendant gave an alibi that she had been at work when the robbery 
occurred. The prosecutor then asked the defendant why she refused to tell the 
officer about the alibi after being given Miranda warnings. 
  The fact that the defendant refused to answer when given the Miranda warnings 
cannot be used as a prior inconsistent statement because the defendant had the 
right to refuse to talk to the officer.
•  At trial the defendant refused to take the witness stand. The prosecutor wants to 
call witnesses to testify that the defendant told them that he had an alibi.
  The prosecutor had the right to introduce this information during the prosecution’s 
case in chief. When the defendant does not take the stand, the prosecutor has no 
right to impeach the defendant.
If the witness admits the inconsistent statement, no other witnesses are 
called to impeach. However, if he or she denies making the statement, a witness 
may be called to restate what was said. The purpose of asking about the incon-
sistent statement first is to save court time. It also gives the witness a chance to 
explain if the statement has been taken out of context or is not accurate.
Identification made at pretrial lineup or showup procedures can be intro-
duced as prior inconsistent statements if the person who made the identifica-
tion at the pretrial procedure takes the stand and identifies a different person 
as the criminal. The same would be true if the person on the stand made an 
in-court identification of the defendant as the person who committed the 
crime but failed to identify the same person during a pretrial lineup. 
Prior Consistent Statements
Prior consistent statements are used to rehabilitate a witness who has 
been impeached. The most common reason for using them is that the oppos-
ing side introduced prior inconsistent statements during cross-examination. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
233
They can also be used if there is a charge that the witness recently fabri-
cated his or her testimony, is biased, or has some other improper motive 
for testifying. 
Prior consistent statements are offered to show that the person who 
is testifying made the statement, not that the statement is true. Rule 
801(d)(1)(B) of the Federal Rules of Evidence and a number of states do 
not classify “prior consistent statements” as hearsay; other states consider 
them as hearsay but have an exception to the Hearsay Rule that allows 
these statements to be introduced at trial during redirect examination 
to rehabilitate a witness. Either way, the statements are admissible if the 
lawyer proposing that they be admitted correctly states the law when chal-
lenged by the opposition. 
Prior consistent statements are discussed here because some states 
specifically list them as exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. The definition 
used in California Evidence Code Section 1236 is used to demonstrate how 
these statements are treated when they are considered evidence.
Definition
Prior Consistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
1.  Prior consistent statements are admissible if the statement is consistent with tes-
timony by the present witness in this case AND
2. The consistent statement was made by the witness at this hearing
  a.  Prior to the statement that was introduced to show inconsistent statements OR
  b.   Prior to the express or implied charge that the testimony of this witness at this 
hearing has recently been fabricated
 
     OR
  c.   Prior to the allegation that the witness at this hearing is influenced by bias or 
other improper motive AND
3.  The statement was made before the inconsistent statement, bias, or motive for 
fabrication or other improper motive is alleged to have arisen.
*Based on California Evidence Code Section 1236.
Examples of Statements That Are Admissible under the Prior 
Consistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  During cross-examination the prosecutor asked the witness questions designed to 
show that the defense witness altered his testimony due to a bribe he received on 
July 1, 2007. 
  On redirect the defense introduced a written statement made by the witness on 
May 3, 2007. Details of the document are the same as the testimony given during 
direct examination.

234 
Chapter 8
•  During cross-examination the defense impeached the witness by showing that she 
was not able to identify the defendant at a police lineup.
  On redirect the prosecution was allowed to show that the witness had identified the 
defendant when the police took her to a showup the day before the lineup.
Examples of Statements That Are Not Admissible under the Prior 
Consistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  On cross-examination, the defense introduced testimony that showed that 
the witness was a shareholder in the victim’s company and would profit if the 
defendant was convicted because the stock would rise.
  In chambers, the prosecutor told the judge that he planned to introduce testimony 
that showed that stock in the victim’s company had substantial gains during the 
period between the date of the alleged crime and the day the witness testified. At 
the defense’s request, the judge ruled that testimony about the stock gains was not 
admissible because it did not address the issue of potential gains in the stock if the 
defendant was convicted.
•  On October 22 during cross-examination, the prosecution successfully impeached 
the defense witness by asking questions about statements she made to the police 
on May 3. These statements were inconsistent with testimony the witness gave on 
October 20.
  At a conference in the judge’s chambers, the defense informed the judge that he 
would ask questions during redirect about an entry in the witness’s journal dated 
October 19 that was consistent with the testimony given on October 20. The 
prosecution objected to the testimony on the grounds that only journal entries 
dated before May 3, the date of the alleged crime, could be used to rehabilitate 
the witness. The judge ruled that the defense could not ask the proposed question 
during redirect.
Just as a prior inconsistent identification of a suspect at a lineup or 
showup can be used to impeach a trial witness, a prior consistent identifica-
tion can be used to rehabilitate a witness. Care must be taken to use state-
ments that fit the timeline (i.e., statements made prior to the “erroneous” 
identification). The same procedure may be used if there is an allegation 
that the witness was coached to identify the “correct” person or that the way 
the lineup was conducted led the witness to pick the wrong person; earlier 
consistent statements may be used to show that the person was able to 
identify the “correct” person prior to being coached or influenced by police 
misconduct.
Rehabilitating witnesses based on prior consistent statements is difficult 
unless there is a written, dated document that can be used for this purpose. 
Showing that a statement was made before the person who made it became 
biased or developed a bad motive is equally problematic. It is important to 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
235
remember that rehabilitation occurs during redirect. Jurors are likely to 
become confused. Prior to attempting to rehabilitate a witness, it is impor-
tant to consider how important the witness is to the total case and whether 
the jurors will be able to understand what the attorney is trying to prove.
Ancient Documents
The Ancient Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule is necessary 
because after many years there is frequently no one available who can testify 
about the events that surrounded the making of the documents. This excep-
tion most commonly involves deeds and wills. The length of time to qualify 
for the Ancient Documents Exception varies and is usually set by the state’s 
legislature. For example, both the Federal Rules and the Arizona Rules of 
Evidence require 20 years; Pennsylvania and Tennessee require 30 years.
Definitions
Ancient Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
A record may be admissible under the Ancient Documents Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule if
1. Statement is in a document 
2. The document was in existence for 20 years or more 
3. Before the authenticity of the document is challenged.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(16).
Examples of Documents That Are Admissible under the Ancient 
Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Deed dated 1975 showing that Sam Smith purchased a residential lot located at 123 
Elm Street, Hometown, from John Doe. Deed does not appear to have been altered. 
Sam Smith and his family built a house and lived in it from 1975 until 2006.
•  In a will dated 1945, Jane Doe gave land at 123 Elm Street, Hometown, to her son 
John. Will was probated without challenge and a deed was given to John.
Examples of Documents That Are Not Admissible under the Ancient 
Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  In a will dated 1977, George Green disowned Gwendolyn, whom he treated as his 
favorite daughter, and gave his entire estate to Merry Widow, a woman none of 
George’s family or friends had ever met or heard him talk about. George died in 
2005. Merry Widow came to town with the will in 2007.
  This will is more than 30 years old, but it will not be treated as an ancient 
document because the fact that all of his property was given to a complete stranger 

236 
Chapter 8
is not the normal way people handle their estates. It is also suspect because it was 
not kept in a location where George Green would have been likely to keep his will 
and was not probated in a timely manner.
•  Merry Widow had a deed to George Green’s house. George’s heirs sent the deed to 
a forensics document examiner who discovered, among other things, that the name 
of the original grantee had been erased and Merry Widow’s name had been typed 
over the erasure.
  This deed did not appear genuine because of the erasure discovered by the forensic 
document examiner. 
To qualify as an “ancient document,” the document must appear 
to be genuine based on the observable characteristics of the document. 
Obviously, a document that has words crossed out will raise questions. 
Forensic tests may be performed to establish that the document could 
have been made at the time it is alleged to have been made. For example, 
suppose inkjet printers use unique ink. If one side of a law suit claims that 
the document was made in 1970, approximately 20 years before the inkjet 
printer was marketed, but the forensics lab could prove that the document 
was printed in a type of ink that is unique to inkjet printers, then the 
document will not be presumed to be valid under the Ancient Documents 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule. In this example, the differences in ink may 
not be observable to the naked eye, but tests from the forensics lab are per-
missible to establish this element of the Ancient Documents Exception.
One additional factor must be present in order for a document to qual-
ify as an ancient document. The parties to the transaction must have acted 
as though the document was authentic. For example, a person normally lists 
friends and family members in a will. When a stranger’s name appears in a 
rich man’s will, the heirs will allege that the document is a forgery. 
Past Recollection Recorded
The Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule can be 
used to introduce information even though the person who wrote it down 
can no longer remember the facts. Although it is unlikely that someone 
would forget the facts in a homicide investigation, it occurs at times with 
lesser crimes and traffic tickets. 
The reason information in old reports is considered trustworthy is 
that the original report was accurately made near to the time the event 
occurred when memory was at its best. It does not have to be in the hand-
writing of the person who observed the event; it is also admissible if the 
report was dictated and someone else typed it.

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
237
Definition
Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule*
A written statement may be admissible into evidence under the Past Recollection 
Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule if
1.  There is available a memorandum or record concerning a matter about which 
the witness once had knowledge AND
2.  The witness now has insufficient recollection to enable the witness to testify fully 
and accurately AND
3. The document has been made or adopted by the witness AND
4. It was made when the matter was fresh in the witness’s memory AND
5. It was made to reflect that knowledge correctly.
If admitted, the memorandum or record may be read into evidence but may not 
itself be received as an exhibit unless offered by an adverse party.
*Based on Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(5).
Examples of Documents That Are Admissible under the Past 
Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  Police report for petty theft observed in progress by an officer. The officer has no 
current memory of the event. She testified that she always reviews her reports and 
corrects them before signing them. This report has been signed. Therefore, she can 
testify that the report is accurate.
•  Notes that the witness made on a scrap of paper while talking to an extortionist on 
the telephone. He testified that he has blacked out the incident from his memory, but 
he remembers going over the demands twice and writing them down very carefully 
because the extortionist was threatening to kidnap his daughter.
Examples of Documents That Are Not Admissible under the Past 
Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule
•  A robber handed the teller a demand note. The teller treated it as real and handed 
the person all the money that was in her drawer. The defendant, who allegedly 
committed the robbery, refused to take the witness stand.
  This document does not qualify for the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule because the demand note was not written by the bank teller. The bank 
robber wrote the note.
•  A police officer took a statement from the victim of the crime. She included the 
victim’s statement in the incident report. At trial, the victim claimed he did not 
remember all the details. The prosecutor wants to introduce the police report under 
the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule to establish the facts 
that the victim cannot remember. 
  The reason the victim’s statement in the police report cannot be introduced 
under the Past Recollection Recorded Exception is that the victim never adopted 
the police report, when the memory was fresh in his mind, as an accurate 

238 
Chapter 8
representation of what he said. This police report might be admissible if offered 
when the police officer who made it was on the stand if the officer could not testify 
fully and accurately about the events in the police report.
As used here, a “report” is any writing. It includes both formal business 
records and scraps of paper with notes written on them. Only things that 
would otherwise be admissible can be admitted under this exception. In 
other words, any parts of the report that are inadmissible hearsay, privi-
leged, or not relevant would not be admissible. 
A statement that a victim or witness made to the police may qualify 
as past recollection recorded. The police report would need to pass two 
tests. The officer who made the report would have to testify and meet 
all the requirements for the Past Recollection Recorded Exception. The 
person who made the hearsay statements that are included in the police 
report would need to adopt them while these statements were fresh in his 
or her memory. To do this, the officer would need to show the report, or 
read it, to the person who made the statement and receive an affirmative 
response to the question, “Is this an accurate report of what you told me?” 
If the officer makes the report but does not run it by the person who made 
the hearsay declaration, the Past Recollection Recorded Exception could 
be used to admit personal observations of the officer if the officer had a 
memory failure. The embedded hearsay could not to be used as “past rec-
ollection” of other people who had not adopted the report as accurate.
To use the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule, 
the trial witness must have little or no memory of the incident and at the 
same time testify that the report is accurate. This sounds like a contradic-
tion. The way it is accomplished in court is to show that the person testi-
fying has a habit of making accurate reports. The prosecutor would ask a 
police officer a series of questions, such as the following:
Prosecutor: Do you remember the facts in this case?
Officer: 
 No, I went over my notes last night, but I have no indepen-
dent memory of the events.
Prosecutor: 
Officer, when you write a report, do you automatically sign it?
Officer: 
 No, I always re-read what I wrote to make sure it is correct. 
If I find any errors, I correct them before I sign it.
Prosecutor:  I am handing you a report dated January 2, 2007. Did you 
write this report?
Officer: 
Yes, I did. That is my signature.
Prosecutor: Is this report accurate?
Officer: 
 As I said, I have no independent memory of the events, but I 
signed the report. Therefore I know I reviewed it, and corrected 
any errors. I made sure it was accurate before I signed it. 

 
Hearsay and Its Exceptions 
239
At one time, most courts required that the witness have no memory at 
all about the incident. Now the more common view is that the witness has 
insufficient memory to be able to testify fully and accurately. The judge, of 
course, will determine when this occurs.
Once something has been ruled admissible as past recollection 
recorded, the report is read into the record. The document is not given to 
the jury unless the opposing side requests that the jury be allowed to see 
it. Allowing the jury to use it as an exhibit is believed to give the contents 
of the report more weight than it deserves.
Summary
S u m m a r y
The Hearsay Rule reflects the tremendous faith we put in our juries. By watching 
the witness testify under oath, the jury is expected to determine who is telling the 
truth. Out-of-court statements are therefore disfavored. Strict enforcement of this 
rule would be impractical, so many exceptions have been allowed.
 
One of the most important exceptions in criminal cases is the Admissions 
Exception, which allows the defendant’s statements to be introduced. This 
includes statements of co-conspirators.
 
Statements people make against their own financial interest or that could cause 
them to be criminally prosecuted are admissible as a declaration against interest. 
These can only be used if the declarant is unavailable at trial.
 
Dying declarations cover statements made by a homicide victim after the fatal 
wound was inflicted. The declarant must believe that death is imminent. The 
statement must relate to the circumstances of the homicide; it typically identifies 
the person who inflicted the mortal injury.
 
Statements a person makes that accompany what he or she is doing or has 
just observed can be admitted under one of three exceptions: Spontaneous 
Statements, Contemporaneous Declarations, and Mental and Physical State. The 
lack of time to think up self-serving statements is considered to make these state-
ments trustworthy.
 
The Business Records and Public Documents exceptions cover all types of 
records kept in the course of business and government as long as established pro-
cedures for recording events promptly have been complied with. Vital statistics, 
such as birth, marriage, and death records that the law requires doctors, the clergy, 
and others to report to the government, are also covered. The Past Recollection 
Recorded Exception also recognizes the value of good record keeping. This is 
helpful when the witness cannot remember an event. If accurate notes were made 
at the time of the event, the notes may be read to the jury.
 
The Former Testimony Exception permits the introduction of testimony previ-
ously taken under oath when the declarant is no longer available.
 
The Prior Inconsistent Statements Exception and Prior Consistent Statements 
Exception permit the introduction of statements for impeachment and rehabilitation.

240 
Chapter 8
 
The Ancient Documents Exception makes it possible to introduce old docu-
ments without trying to find witnesses from 20 or 30 years ago.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Define hearsay, and explain the rationale behind the Hearsay Rule.
 2. Who is the declarant? List three exceptions to the Hearsay Rule that require 
the declarant to be unavailable.
 3. What is an adoptive admission, and how does it differ from an authorized 
admission?
 4. What types of interests are covered by declaration against interest?
 5. What is a spontaneous declaration? Do contemporaneous statements have 
to be spontaneous?
 6. When are statements of a person’s mental state admissible?
 7. What types of businesses are covered by the Business Records Exception? 
What types of public records are admissible hearsay?
 8. What is admissible to show reputation?
 9. What facts must be established at trial before an attorney can introduce the 
transcript of a witness’s testimony at the preliminary hearing?
 10. What must be shown before a prior inconsistent statement can be 
introduced?
 11. List two situations in which prior consistent statements can be introduced 
at trial.
 12. How old must a document be to qualify for the Ancient Documents 
Exception?
 13. When is the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule used?
 14. What must the prosecutor show before a police report can be read to the 
jury under the Past Recollection Recorded Exception?
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Go to www.cnn.com/crime and
1. Find a case that is currently on trial. Write a one-page (250-word) report on 
what has occurred in that trial during the past week and list the hearsay state-
ments that were admitted at trial and identify which exception to the hearsay 
rule was used to admit them at trial.
OR
2. Find a case that has not gone to court and write a one-page (250-word) report 
analyzing the statements in the report and identify the hearsay exception that 
will let the statement into evidence at trial. Also list any hearsay statements that 
you do not think will be admitted due to the Hearsay Rule and explain why you 
drew that conclusion.

241
Privileged
Communications
CHAPTER 9
Feature Case: President Bush Claims Executive Privilege
Between 2001 and 2007, the Bush administration has been widely seen 
as one of the most secretive and resistant to outside scrutiny in modern 
times. It has invoked executive privilege to prevent disclosure of its internal 
deliberations. The Bush administration claimed executive privilege as 
the reason it refused to relinquish documents during an investigation 
of a FBI regional office, documents related to the granting of pardons, 
and documents and testimony regarding the firing of nine United States 
attorneys. Vice President Cheney refused to release information regarding 
the development of his energy plan and other activities, and declared that 
neither Congress nor the executive branch had the power to inquire into his 
activities.
—Peter Nicholas, Los Angeles Times, July 29, 2007, Section A, p. 17

242 
Chapter 9
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Explain why the law regarding privileges allows relevant information to be 
excluded from trial.
• Identify conversations between an attorney and client that are privileged.
• List the privileges that apply to confidential communications between husband 
and wife.
• Recognize the privilege not to testify against one’s spouse.
• Explain the physician–patient and clergy–penitent privilege.
• Describe the purpose and function of the police–informer privilege.
• Identify the reasons for considering police personnel files privileged.
• Describe what information obtained by the media is privileged.
Key Terms
•  Attorney–client privilege
•  Clergy–penitent privilege
•   Confidential 
communication
•  Executive privilege
•  Husband–wife privileges
•  News media privilege
•   Physician–patient privilege
•  Police informant privilege
•   Police personnel files 
privilege
Myths about Privileges
Facts about Privileges
The privileges that we use in court today 
have been in use in the English court 
system since the Middle Ages.
A few of the privileges we use today have 
been in use in the English courts since 
the Middle Ages, but most of them were 
constructed fairly recently.
The priest–penitent privilege violates the 
First Amendment ban on government-
sanctioned religion.
The priest–penitent privilege treats all 
religions in the same manner; therefore, it 
does not violate the Establishment Clause 
of the First Amendment.
The attorney–client privilege protects all 
conversations that a criminal suspect has 
with an attorney from disclosure in court.
The attorney–client privilege only applies 
to confidential communications. If the 
attorney meets a client in a public place 
and takes no precautions to keep the 
conversation from being overheard, the 
conversation will not be privileged because 
it was not confidential.
The doctor–patient privilege is superior 
to any law that mandates reporting of 
information to the government.
As long as there is a rational public health 
reason for requiring doctors to report their 
observations, conversations with patients, 
or lab test results, mandatory reporting 
laws will be upheld.

 
Privileged Communications 
243
Basis for Privileges
Our legal system operates on the basic concept that what a person says 
can be used against him or her. One well-known exception is the privilege 
against self-incrimination (see Chapter 14). Another major exception is 
that privileged communications are excluded from evidence.
Over several centuries society has determined that there are certain 
relationships where it is important to maintain and encourage confiden-
tiality. For example, in order to promote honest communications within a 
marriage, a husband–wife privilege was developed under common law. No 
matter how relevant the defendant’s statement to his or her spouse may be, 
it is not admissible without the defendant’s permission. Total confidential-
ity, however, would be contrary to public policy in some situations—for 
example, if the husband attempted to kill the wife. Therefore, exceptions 
were developed to make such statements admissible.
When a privilege is established, there is a corresponding rule that 
the holder of the privilege cannot be punished for invoking the privilege. 
The U.S. Supreme Court made this point in Griffin v. California 380 U.S. 
609 (1965) by refusing to allow prosecutors to comment on the fact that 
a defendant had invoked the right to remain silent. It would be unjust to 
lead a jury to conclude that the only reason for invoking the privilege is 
that the defendant had something to hide.
The Federal Rules of Evidence say very little on the topic of privileges. 
Rule 501 is the only applicable rule. This rule acknowledges the power of 
the U.S. Constitution, statutes enacted by Congress, and rules needed to 
implement decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court to create privileges. When 
none of these apply, Rule 501 relies on the “principles of the common law 
as they may be interpreted by the courts of the United States in the light 
of reason and experience” to determine what relationships are privileged. 
Unlike hearsay, for example, there is no itemized list of privileges.
Two things must be shown in order to utilize privileges: (1) There 
must be a confidential communication and (2) the appropriate relation-
ship must have existed between the parties.
Basic Rules for Privileged Communications
1.  Statements must be made in circumstances that indicate confidentiality is 
expected.
2.  Relationship between the individuals must be recognized as entitled to 
privilege.
3. Parties must not reveal confidential statements to others.
4.  Privileged communications are admissible only if there is an exception to the 
privilege that covers the type of communication in question.

244 
Chapter 9
Other Evidentiary Rules That Must Be Considered
1. Statement must be relevant. 
2. All privileged communications are hearsay.
3.  Statements are admitted into evidence only if covered by an exception to the 
Hearsay Rule.
4. If the privileged communication is in writing:
   • 
Must authenticate the document.
   • 
Must satisfy rules on admitting contents of documents.
Although we usually think of privileged conversations, the rules extend to 
both oral and written communications including telephone calls and e-mail. 
The term conversation will frequently be used in this chapter to mean both 
oral statements and written communications. Confidentiality can be shown 
by the fact that two people excluded everyone else from the room while they 
talked or otherwise made an effort to keep anyone from overhearing what 
was said. On the other hand, if they were shouting at each other and someone 
heard the conversation, no privilege would apply. Written communications 
are confidential if delivered in sealed envelopes and stored in a manner so 
that others cannot see them; confidential material sent by fax or e-mail usu-
ally has a cover sheet stating that the information is privileged.
A person can voluntarily give up (waive) a privilege. Most commonly, this 
is done by revealing the privileged information to a third party. For example, if 
someone tells a friend all the details of a conversation he had with his attorney, 
the attorney–client privilegeis waived. When a witness is called and voluntarily 
testifies to privileged communications, the privilege is considered waived both 
for the current and the future proceedings. There is one exception. If a trial 
witness claims a privilege and the judge incorrectly rules that the privilege 
does not apply, the witness must testify but the privilege is not waived.
Throughout the years, other privileges have developed that are not 
based on the idea that a close relationship requires confidential commu-
nication. Two of these involve law enforcement agencies: (1) The identity 
of police informants is frequently considered confidential, and (2) police 
personnel records are considered privileged. Only in special circumstances 
can these two types of information be used in court.
One of the newest privileges involves the news media. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has denied that there is a constitutional privilege for the 
press, but many states have statutory privileges that enable the media to 
protect their sources of information.
Communications covered by the various privileges are also hearsay. If an 
exception to the privilege applies, the communication is not automatically 
admissible. There must be both an exception to the privilege and an exception 

 
Privileged Communications 
245
to the hearsay rule before the information can be used in court. On the other 
hand, failure to make a contemporaneous objection when there is no appli-
cable reason for admitting the statement will result in the statement being 
admitted into evidence when it should have been excluded. See Table 9-1.
At common law there were very few privileges. Gradually, however, state 
legislatures added new ones. Congress followed suit. This chapter discusses 
the most commonly used privileges. Students are encouraged to review 
their local laws and find out what privileges apply in their jurisdiction.
Attorney–Client Privilege
The attorney–client privilege dates back to the time of Elizabeth I in 
England and is firmly established in common law. It is based on the con-
cept that an attorney cannot properly handle a case without full disclosure 
of the facts by a client.
The initial consultation is covered even if the client decides not to 
hire the attorney. Privilege does not depend on the payment of a fee for 
the lawyer’s services. The privilege applies to conversations with a court- 
appointed attorney. If payment is received, it also does not matter who paid 
the lawyer. For example, if a father hires an attorney to represent his son, the 
son has the privilege—not the father. This is true even if the son is a minor.
Because the client is the holder of the privilege, the client can prevent 
the attorney from disclosing privileged information. Most states require 
the attorney to invoke the privilege unless the client has specifically 
ordered it waived. Many require the waiver to be in writing or made while 
the client is testifying at trial.
T A B L E  9-1  Comparison of Admissibility of Hearsay and 
Privileges
 
Opposing Side Made a 
Opposing Side Did Not Make a
 
Contemporaneous 
Contemporaneous Objection
 
Objection
Privilege— 
Statement is NOT admitted 
Statement is admitted
no exception applies 
into evidence 
into evidence
Privilege— 
Statement is admitted into 
Statement is admitted into
exception applies 
evidence 
evidence
Hearsay—no 
Statement is NOT admitted 
Statement is admitted into
exception applies 
into evidence 
evidence
Hearsay— 
Statement is admitted into 
Statement is admitted into
exception applies 
evidence 
evidence 

246 
Chapter 9
Attorney–Client Privilege Described
Attorney: A person the client reasonably believes is licensed to practice law. The 
fact that the attorney is not actually licensed does not invalidate the privilege.
Client: A person who consults with an attorney for the purpose of obtaining legal 
advice.
What is covered: Confidential communications between attorney and client 
regarding the legal services sought. Consultation in furtherance of future crimes 
is not privileged.
Who holds privilege: Client.
Exceptions to the privilege frequently found in criminal cases: Attorney’s 
opinion sought to help a person commit a crime or escape punishment.
Examples of Use of Attorney–Client Privilege
• Defendant confessed to his defense attorney that he committed the crime.
•  Defendant visited an attorney, outlined his case, and then decided to hire a different 
attorney.
•  Business owner visited her attorney, outlined future business plans, and asked if the 
plans were legal.
•  Man went to attorney, told about many personal problems, and asked for advice 
about filing for a divorce.
•  Owner of a failing business went to attorney in order to file bankruptcy. During 
conversation a number of questionable business practices were revealed that did 
not amount to fraud.
The client must be seeking legal advice. Discussions with a lawyer as a 
business advisor, or as a friend, are not privileged. The more common view 
is that both what the client said and what the lawyer said are privileged. 
The lawyer can be compelled to give the names of clients and the dates 
the consultations occurred but not the reasons legal advice was sought. 
In most states, the privilege continues to exist even after the death of the 
client.
The privilege applies to communications between the attorney and 
client. What the attorney observed is not privileged. In a California case, 
the prosecutor wanted to call the defendant’s former attorney as a lay 
witness to testify that when she was at the scene shortly after the crime, 
she saw the defense forensic expert pick up a small piece of evidence. The 
item was not listed in any of the expert’s reports. No one else observed the 
incident. The appellate court ordered the attorney to testify about what 
she saw.1 The decision was based on the fact that the testimony would not 
reveal any communication with the client; the fact that she was no longer 
the attorney in the case had no bearing on the outcome of the appeal. 

 
Privileged Communications 
247
To qualify as confidential communications, normally only the attor-
ney and the client are present. The privilege will not apply if the client has 
a friend present while talking to the attorney unless some other privilege 
applies. For example, if a husband brought his wife with him when he 
visited an attorney, the husband–wife privilege would also apply.
There is another exception to the rule that prohibits extra people from 
participating in an attorney–client conference. Members of the attorney’s 
office staff may be present during the interview and may have access to 
the case files. The work of secretaries, administrative personnel, law clerks, 
and paralegals is necessary to prepare court documents, conduct legal 
research, and summarize documents needed for trial. This exception also 
applies to expert witness(es) whom the attorney has retained for the case. 
It will be necessary for the attorney and the expert to discuss test results 
and other relevant issues while preparing for trial. 
The privilege only applies to communications regarding legal ser-
vices. The client cannot stretch the privilege by asking the attorney to 
hide incriminating physical evidence. For example, if a defendant hires an 
attorney to defend him on a robbery charge, their conversation regarding 
the robbery is privileged. However, if the client gives the attorney the gun 
used in the robbery, the gun will not be privileged. If the attorney becomes 
actively involved in concealing evidence, the attorney may face criminal 
charges as an accessory to the crime.
Although our legal system respects the right of every criminal defen-
dant to have legal counsel at trial, it does not extend the attorney–client 
privilege to planning crimes or helping the client commit crimes. 
Arranging to have perjured testimony given at trial falls in this category. 
Not only is there no privilege for arranging for perjured testimony but also 
the attorney can be charged with a felony for doing so.
A controversial new exception to the attorney–client privilege has 
emerged. It applies if the attorney has reason to believe that the client 
will inflict serious bodily harm or death on a specific person in the near 
future. A few states impose a duty on attorneys to warn the person who is 
in danger and/or notify authorities. Once these warnings have been made, 
the confidentiality between attorney and client is broken and the same 
information can be introduced against the client in court. 
Husband–Wife Privilege
In very early common law, neither the parties to the case nor their spouses 
were allowed to testify. The current version of the privilege emerged in 
approximately 1850. There are now two husband–wife privileges. One 

248 
Chapter 9
protects confidential communications between husband and wife that are 
made during the marriage. The other applies when one spouse is called to 
testify in court against the other.
The privilege for confidential communications between husband and 
wife restricts courtroom use of statements made in confidence during 
the marriage. It applies only if there is a valid marriage; most states apply 
the privilege to couples who are legally married even though they are not 
living together. The same states may refuse to apply this privilege to people 
who are living together but are not legally married. Some states officially 
recognize common-law marriages; in these states, the privilege also applies 
to parties to a valid common-law marriage. To date, the courts have 
refused to extend the privilege to couples who are merely living together 
unless they have a valid common-law marriage.
Husband–Wife Privilege for Confidential Communications Described
Husband and wife: Valid marriage is required. In states recognizing common-law 
marriages, parties to valid common-law marriage are covered.
What is covered: Confidential communications made during the marriage.
Who holds privilege: Both husband and wife. Either one can invoke it.
Exceptions to the privilege frequently found in criminal cases:
   • 
Crimes one spouse committed against the other spouse. 
   • 
Crimes one spouse committed against the children of either spouse. 
   • 
Failure to support a spouse or a child. 
   • 
Bigamy.
Examples of Use of Husband–Wife Privilege for Confidential 
Communications
•  While in the living room with no one there except his wife, the husband said, “I 
don’t trust John. We just finished that job and I think he is planning on stealing the 
money from me.”
•  Wife whispered to husband, “I’m tired of you flirting with Mary. I’ll get even with 
you someday.”
Examples of When the Husband–Wife Privilege for Confidential 
Communications Would Not Apply
•  After having a confidential conversation with his wife, the husband went to work 
the next day and told everybody what his wife had said.
•  The night before their wedding, the bride told the groom about her inheritance 
while they were alone. 

 
Privileged Communications 
249
Approximately half of the states hold that confidential conversations 
that occurred during the marriage remain privileged even after the mar-
riage has ended. In these states, a widow can refuse to disclose privileged 
conversations she had with her husband prior to his death. The same is 
true for divorced couples: They do not have to disclose confidential con-
versations they had during their marriage and they can prevent the former 
spouse from doing so in court.
The privilege covers all forms of communications (letters, phone calls, 
conversations, etc.) between husband and wife. They must, however, be 
made in a confidential situation. The presence of other family members, 
except for very young children, will usually defeat the privilege. The privi-
lege is waived if the conversation is overheard because the husband and 
wife were in a public place, they are shouting at each other and could be 
heard by anyone in the area, or if personal letters, e-mails, or other docu-
ments were left where someone else could read them.
Many states hold that the privilege applies to actions as well as words. 
For example, if the wife saw her husband hide items stolen during a bur-
glary, this would be considered privileged in states holding that actions 
are privileged.
Both husband and wife hold the privilege to refuse to disclose com-
munications with a spouse and to prevent the spouse from disclosing 
those communications in court. Although the normal rule is that a privi-
leged communication that has been disclosed to a third party is no longer 
privileged, the husband–wife privilege is not waived because one spouse 
betrayed the confidence by disclosing information. Only the spouse who 
disclosed the information has waived (given up) the privilege. 
The policy reason for the privilege is that requiring one spouse to 
testify against the other would damage the marital relationship. The excep-
tions generally cover those situations in which the marriage is probably 
beyond repair.
There are several obvious situations in which the privilege cannot be 
applied. If one spouse commits a crime against the other, such as domestic 
violence, there is no public policy reason for preventing the victim from 
testifying. This is also true if either spouse victimizes any of the children in 
the family. If one spouse is charged with neglect or desertion of the family, 
the privilege is also waived. The same is true in bigamy cases. Many states 
also have exceptions to the privilege for planning crimes. This applies if 
one spouse told the other about his or her plans to commit a crime as well 
as situations in which both husband and wife were planning to commit a 
crime together. If a husband and wife are charged with conspiracy, either 
spouse may testify against the other. 

250 
Chapter 9
The second husband–wife privilege is the privilege not to testify. This 
issue is raised when one spouse is on trial and the other is being called as 
a witness. To invoke the privilege, the parties must show that they are cur-
rently married. The privilege ends when the marriage ends. 
Husband–Wife Privilege Not to Testify against Each Other Described
Husband and wife: Valid marriage is required. In states recognizing common-law 
marriages, parties to valid common-law marriage are covered.
What is covered: Testifying in court.
Who holds privilege: Legislature or case law designates which spouse holds this 
privilege; the most common rule is that the spouse who is being called to testify 
holds the privilege.
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases:
   • 
Crimes committed by one spouse against the other spouse. 
   • 
Crimes committed by one spouse against the children of either spouse. 
   • 
Failure to support a spouse or child. 
   • 
Bigamy.
Examples of Use of Husband–Wife Privilege Not to Testify against 
Each Other
•  In states where spouse holds the privilege not to take the witness stand:
   Husband is on trial for robbery and wife is subpoenaed to testify. Wife may assert 
the privilege and refuse to take the witness stand. 
•  In states where defendant holds privilege to prevent spouse from taking witness 
stand: 
  Husband is on trial for burglary. Prosecution subpoenaed wife to testify. Husband 
can assert the privilege and block wife from taking the witness stand.
Examples of When Husband–Wife Privilege Not to Testify against 
Each Other Would Not Apply
• In states where spouse holds the privilege not to take the witness stand: 
  Husband is on trial for beating his wife. She does not want to take the witness stand 
and testify about the beating. Wife may not assert the privilege and refuse to take 
the witness stand because domestic violence is a crime for which the privilege does 
not apply.
•  In states where defendant holds privilege to prevent spouse from taking witness 
stand:
  Husband is on trial for child abuse. Prosecution subpoenaed wife to testify. 
Husband cannot assert the privilege and block wife from taking the witness stand 
because child abuse is on the list of crimes for which the privilege does not apply.

 
Privileged Communications 
251
There is considerable variation between the states with regard to who 
holds the privilege not to testify. Some jurisdictions allow the spouse who 
has been subpoenaed to refuse to testify; others allow the defendant to pre-
vent his or her spouse from taking the witness stand. Several states do not 
recognize the testimonial privilege as separate from the confidential marital 
communication privilege. 
The exceptions to the testimonial privilege are basically the same as 
those applicable to the confidential marital communication privilege. The 
same policy reasons apply. Some states do not allow this privilege to be 
invoked if the defendant got married for the purpose of preventing the 
new spouse from testifying.
A key distinction between the confidential communication privilege 
and the privilege not to testify is that the latter privilege is used to keep 
someone from taking the witness stand. The side that intends to invoke 
the privilege should notify the judge of this decision before the spouse is 
called as a witness. A hearing is held without the jury present. After each 
side argues its case, the judge rules on whether or not the spouse should 
take the stand. If the judge rules that the privilege not to testify applies, the 
witness is not sworn in. The jury is not told that the issue arose.
There must be a valid marriage on the date the privilege not to testify 
against a spouse is invoked. It does not matter whether the testimony 
would have been about events that occurred during the marriage or not. 
On the other hand, the confidential communication privilege prevents 
testimony about conversations that occurred during the marriage. In most 
states, the status of the marriage at the time of the court appearance is not 
important. Both privileges frequently apply; the result is that the spouse 
does not take the witness stand. See Table 9-2.
Physician–Patient Privilege
The physician–patient privilege did not exist at common law. It first 
appeared in a New York statute in 1828. Despite this fact, some of the 
federal courts allow evidence to be excluded under this privilege. Some 
recent cases also exclude physician–patient communications under the con-
stitutional right of privacy.
In many ways, this privilege is similar to the attorney–client privilege. 
The patient is protected as long as there was a reasonable belief that the 
physician was licensed to practice medicine. The reason for the privilege 
is the belief that the doctor cannot adequately care for the patient unless 
he or she has complete information about the patient’s condition. The 
privilege makes it more likely that the patient will be completely honest 

252 
Chapter 9
T A B L E  9-2 Comparison of Privilege for Confidential 
Communications between Husband and Wife 
Versus Privilege Not to Testify against a Spouse
Statement boyfriend made 
to girlfriend in confidential 
setting—before they were 
married
Statement boyfriend 
made to girlfriend—not in 
confidential setting—before 
were married
One spouse made a 
statement to the other 
spouse in confidential setting
Statement one spouse made 
to the other spouse—not in 
confidential setting
Statement one spouse made 
to the other spouse in a 
confidential setting—they 
are now divorced
Statement one spouse made 
to the other spouse—not in 
confidential setting—they 
are now divorced
Confidential 
Communications between 
Husband and Wife*
N/A—not married
N/A—not married and not 
confidential
Applies if they were married 
when the statement was made
N/A—not confidential
Applies if they were married 
when the statement was made
N/A—not confidential
Privilege Not to Testify 
against a Spouse
Applies if they are married* 
at the time the spouse is 
called to testify
Applies if they are married* 
at the time the spouse is 
called to testify
Applies if they are married* 
at the time the spouse is 
called to testify
Applies if they are married* 
at the time the spouse is 
called to testify
N/A—they were divorced 
at the time the spouse was 
called to testify
N/A—they were divorced 
at the time the spouse was 
called to testify
* A legally valid marriage is required; in states that recognize common-law marriage, the relationship must 
qualify as a common-law marriage.
with the doctor. Although the definition varies slightly from state to state, 
it usually includes M.D.s as well as osteopaths, chiropractors, and possibly 
others. The doctor can be ordered to give names of patients and the dates 
that they consulted the doctor (but no information about their conversa-
tions) even if the communications are privileged. 
Physician–Patient Privilege Described
Physician: Person reasonably believed by the patient to be licensed to practice 
medicine.
Patient: Person who consulted physician for purpose of diagnosis or treatment.
What is covered: Information obtained by the physician for the purpose of 
diagnosis or treatment of the patient.
Who holds the privilege: Patient. 
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases: 

 
Privileged Communications 
253
   • 
Advice sought on how to conceal a crime. 
   • 
Advice sought to help plan crime. 
   • 
Information physician is required by law to report to authorities. 
Notes
1.  Some states do not allow the physician–patient privilege to be used in criminal 
cases.
2.  If state law mandates that the doctor report a particular incident, the privilege 
does not apply in those cases. Incidents that must be reported vary from state to 
state; common examples are child abuse, gunshot wounds, etc.
Examples of Use of Physician–Patient Privilege
•  Woman who had numerous lacerations and bruises went to doctor for treatment. 
When doctor asked how she sustained the injuries, she stated that she had been 
hiking and had a bad fall.
•  Woman went to doctor for a HIV test. When asked why she wanted to be tested, she 
stated that she had been raped.
•  Man told his doctor that he had not been sleeping well and that he was hearing 
voices telling him to attack people who went into an abortion clinic.
Examples of Situations Not Covered by Physician–Patient Privilege
•  Blood and urine tests requested by the police in cases involving driving under the 
influence of alcohol.
• Blood tests done to obtain marriage licenses.
• Physical examinations done in order to obtain insurance.
• Court-ordered medical exams.
•  Examinations done at the request of an attorney so that an expert witness can 
testify at trial.
Like the attorney–client privilege, the physician–patient privilege 
only exists if the physician and patient make reasonable attempts to keep 
the information confidential. Some states consider conversations privi-
leged even though the patient is accompanied by a close family member. 
However, the presence of other people during the consultation will result 
in the information not being privileged unless some other privilege is 
involved. If the patient is accompanied by a spouse, the privilege for con-
fidential communications between husband and wife would apply, but 
this privilege would not apply if an unmarried couple went to the doctor 
together. 
The presence of a medical assistant during the examination does not 
violate the physician–patient privilege, and neither would the fact that the 
patient was sent to a laboratory for tests. It is also considered necessary for 

254 
Chapter 9
a member of the clerical staff to type the medical reports and someone to 
bill the insurance company. Much of this has been taken for granted, but 
recent federal laws mandate that patients be given information about their 
privacy rights.
Many states make information obtained by the physician privileged, 
rather than restricting the privilege to communications between the 
physician and patient. “Information” refers to what the doctor observed 
during the examination, such as bruises, as well as what the patient told 
the doctor. 
The law recognizes that there are a variety of situations in which a 
person goes to a doctor. The only ones that are normally privileged are 
those in which the patient is seeking diagnosis or treatment. This includes 
referrals for a “second opinion.” Consultation for purposes of giving the 
information to someone else, such as a physical exam required by the 
patient’s employer, are not covered because the original intent was to 
disclose the information to someone else. Autopsy results are not usually 
covered by the privilege. This is based on the idea that a patient must be 
a living person; an alternative explanation is that autopsies are frequently 
mandated by state law when a person dies under suspicious circumstances. 
These reports were prepared to determine the cause of death and are made 
for the benefit of the state.
The physician–patient privilege belongs to the patient. If a doctor 
is on the witness stand and is asked about a privileged conversation, the 
doctor should assert the privilege on behalf of the patient. If the patient 
testifies in court that he or she waives the privilege, the doctor will answer 
the questions. The patient can claim the privilege even if the physician has 
died or the medical practice has been sold. The privilege also continues 
after the death of the patient. 
Some states do not allow the physician–patient privilege to be used in 
criminal proceedings. In states that do not go so far as to abolish the privilege 
in criminal trials, the states may have an exception to the physician–patient 
privilege that applies when doctors help plan or conceal a crime. When a 
patient meets with a doctor for these purposes, the doctor can be compelled 
to testify about it in court. For example, plastic surgery used to help a sus-
pect avoid arrest would not be privileged. Consultations regarding altering 
fingerprints would not be privileged. In some instances, the doctor has been 
charged as an accessory to the crime. The problem with this approach is that 
the doctor could claim the Fifth Amendment and refuse to testify. 
Many states require doctors to report gunshot wounds, fetal deaths, 
sexually transmitted diseases, child abuse, and a variety of other things. 
The privilege cannot be used as a reason for not reporting, when the law 

 
Privileged Communications 
255
mandates the event be reported. In these circumstances, the doctor can also 
be required to testify in court about the incident. Many states make it pos-
sible to charge a doctor or other mandated reporter with a misdemeanor 
if no report is filed. 
Two variations of the physician–patient privilege are common:
psychotherapist–patient privilege and psychologist–patient privilege. Some 
states include psychiatrists in the physician–patient privilege because psy-
chiatry is a specialty within the practice of medicine; others have created 
separate statutory privileges. Practitioners of homeopathic medicine may 
also be included in the physician–patient privilege in a few states. The student 
should consult local law to determine how to proceed with cases involving 
therapists.
Clergy–Penitent Privilege
There was no clergy–penitent privilege at common law, but most states 
now accept it either by legislation or by case law.
Clergy–Penitent Privilege Described
Clergy: Priest, minister, or religious practitioner.
Penitent: Person who consults clergy for spiritual advice.
What is covered: Confidential communications.
Who holds the privilege: Both clergy and penitent.
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases:
  Traditionally: None. 
  Some states now require the clergy to report incidents of child abuse.
Examples of When Clergy–Penitent Privilege Would Apply
• Man went to confession and told the priest that he had robbed a bank.
•  Woman met with her pastor in his study. She told him she had taken money from 
the Sunday School offering plate and asked if God would forgive her if she gave it 
back.
Examples of When Clergy–Penitent Privilege Would Not Apply
•  Priest who taught in a school operated by the church noticed bruises on the face of 
a student. When he asked what had happened, the student replied that his father hit 
him.
•  A woman met her rabbi at a party and told him that she had a bad habit. She loved 
to shop and frequently shoplifted.

256 
Chapter 9
The concept of a clergy–penitent privilege originated from the con-
fidentiality of the Catholic confessional and gradually expanded. It now 
includes confidential communications with members of the clergy of all 
denominations. The courts usually look to the doctrines of the individual 
denominations to determine who is authorized to hear such commu-
nications. Many states only recognize the privilege if the denomination 
imposes a duty on the clergy to keep these communications confidential.
The communication must have been made in a confidential setting for 
the purpose of obtaining spiritual guidance. It does not cover situations 
in which a member of the clergy plays a different role, such as a marriage 
and family counselor (although a member of the clergy who is a licensed 
counselor may be covered by the privilege afforded therapists). It also does 
not apply to observations made in a nonconfidential setting—for example, 
seeing bruises on a child while shaking hands after the religious service or 
at the church picnic. 
The clergy–penitent privilege is unique in that both the clergy and 
the penitent have the right to refuse to reveal what was said. The reason 
for giving a separate privilege to the clergy is that they are bound by the 
rules of their denominations not to disclose penitential communications. 
Corresponding to this respect for religious duties of the clergy is that tra-
ditionally there have not been any exceptions to this privilege. The result 
is that neither the prosecutor nor the defense can compel a member of 
the clergy to testify regarding the defendant’s penitential communication. 
Recently, a number of states have expanded their child abuse reporting 
laws to mandate that members of the clergy report suspected child abuse. 
Therefore, members of the clergy, like doctors and teachers, are now 
required to file reports if they have at least a reasonable suspicion that 
someone has abused a child.
Media Reporter Privilege
The news media play a very important role in our society. We rely on them 
to keep us informed about what is going on around us and to investigate 
the misdeeds of government. The importance of their role is reflected 
in the First Amendment’s protection of freedom of the press. The news 
media have unsuccessfully argued that the First Amendment gives them 
a privilege not to disclose their sources. This argument is based on the 
assumption that the news media would not be able to obtain sensitive 
information if the reporter could not guarantee that the identity of the infor-
mant would remain confidential.

 
Privileged Communications 
257
There was no privilege for the press at common law. In Zurcher v. 
Stanford Daily (436 U.S. 547 (1978)) the U.S. Supreme Court held that 
the First Amendment does not mandate an absolute privilege. Since 1980, 
many states and the federal government have enacted statutes creating a 
news media privilege. Typically, there was no effort by the drafters of 
these statutes to differentiate based on the quality or circulation of the 
medium. A reporter for the New York Times is on the same footing as 
one hired by the National Enquirer or someone writing for the school 
newspaper. Although these laws are not identical, it is common to give 
reporters immunity from being cited for contempt of court if they refuse 
to tell the court or a grand jury the sources of information used in a story. 
The judge may hold an in camera (in chambers) hearing to determine if 
there is a right to invoke the privilege. A subpoena duces tecum (subpoena
to produce documents in court) may also be used to attempt to obtain 
documents from a news agency.
If there were no privilege, a reporter could be subpoenaed to court and 
sworn in as a witness. If the reporter refused to answer questions about 
the source(s) for a particular story, the judge could hold the reporter in 
contempt. The reporter could be sent to county jail until he or she decides 
to answer the questions. The privilege, as enacted in most states, protects 
the reporter from going to jail for refusing to answer questions about 
informants and other sources used to prepare a news article. 
Privilege for News Reporter Described
News reporter: Person employed by the media to investigate stories and report on 
them. Media includes print media as well as radio and television.
What is covered: Reporter’s notes and identity of informants. 
Who holds privilege: Reporter.
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases:
   Some states make an exception for prosecution of serious crimes if it can be 
shown that there is no other source for the information requested.
Examples of Ways Privilege for News Reporter Would Apply
•  Notes the reporter made while investigating the case. What was published is no 
longer privileged because it was made available to the public, but notes on portions 
of the story that were not published are privileged.
• Film clips taken by a TV news crew that were not shown on the air.
•  Audiotapes a reporter made of an interview done while researching a story. The 
newspaper later decided not to run the story. 

258 
Chapter 9
Examples of Ways Privilege for News Reporter Would Not Apply
•  Tape recordings a freelance journalist made of interview of suspect in murder case.
 Most state laws only apply to people who are employed by the news media.
•  Videotape a tourist made of police beating a motorist with their batons. Tourist 
tried to sell tape to the local TV station.
 The person who made the tape does not qualify as a member of the news media.
When there is a statute in this area, it usually gives a very broad 
definition of “reporter.” Publishers, editors, and reporters for newspapers, 
magazines, and periodicals are usually covered, as are those working for 
wire services. Similar protections are given to those working for radio, tele-
vision, and cable networks. It is not clear whether the privilege extends to 
freelancers who are not employed by the media at the time they investigate 
or write stories.
The privilege generally covers all information discovered by the 
reporter that has not been published. This includes the sources directly 
related to the published story. It also covers items used only for back-
ground by the reporter and information collected, but not included, in 
the published version of the story. Notes, photographs, tapes, and outtakes 
(material edited out) are usually covered.
Some states require a reporter to give the names of sources if there is 
no other way to obtain vital information for the prosecution of a serious 
crime. The prosecution would have the burden of convincing the judge 
that there is no other way to obtain the evidence and that the reporter has 
enough relevant information to warrant violation of the confidence placed 
in him or her. This would be done at an in camera hearing.
There is an apparent conflict between this statutory privilege and the 
fact that the Supreme Court has allowed the police to obtain search war-
rants for newsrooms and reporters’ desks. See Chapter 10 for a detailed 
discussion of the warrant process.
Executive Privilege
Numerous investigations of the President of the United States have been 
conducted in the twentieth century, but none stand out as much as the 
investigation of the Nixon administration. 
A federal grand jury indicted a number of individuals involved in the 
Watergate scandal and other misdeeds, and it named President Nixon as 
an unindicted co-conspirator. Congress appointed a special prosecutor. At 
his request, the District Court issued a third-party subpoena duces tecum

 
Privileged Communications 
259
directing the President to produce tape recordings and documents relating 
to his conversations with aides and advisors for use at pending criminal 
trials. President Nixon moved to quash the subpoena on the grounds that 
the materials requested were covered by an executive privilege against 
disclosure of confidential communications.
In a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Warren Burger, the 
Supreme Court rejected Nixon’s claim of absolute privilege. The Court 
stated,
The expectation of a President to the confidentiality of his conversations and 
correspondence, like the claim of confidentiality of judicial deliberations, 
for example, has all the values to which we accord deference for the privacy 
of all citizens and, added to those values, is the necessity for protection of 
the public interest in candid, objective, and even blunt or harsh opinions in 
Presidential decision-making. A President and those who assist him must 
be free to explore alternatives in the process of shaping policies and making 
decisions and to do so in a way many would be unwilling to express except 
privately. These are the considerations justifying a presumptive privilege for 
Presidential communications. The privilege is fundamental to the operation 
of Government and inextricably rooted in the separation of powers under 
the Constitution. (United States v. Nixon 418 U.S. 683, 708–709)
Nowhere in the Constitution, as we have noted earlier, is there any explicit 
reference to a privilege of confidentiality, yet to the extent this interest relates 
to the effective discharge of a President’s powers, it is constitutionally based. 
(418 U.S. 683, 712)
We conclude that when the ground for asserting privilege as to subpoenaed 
materials sought for use in a criminal trial is based only on the generalized 
interest in confidentiality, it cannot prevail over the fundamental demands 
of due process of law in the fair administration of criminal justice. The 
generalized assertion of privilege must yield to the demonstrated, specific 
need for evidence in a pending criminal trial. (418 U.S. 683, 714)
Within hours of the Court’s denial of the claim of executive privilege, 
Nixon resigned the presidency of the United States.
This landmark case provides the framework for analyzing claims of 
executive privilege when documents are sought for use in criminal cases. 
First, it is presumed that the President has the right to refuse access to the 
confidential decision-making process. Second, statements requested in the 
subpoena that meet the test of admissibility and relevance must be isolated. 
Third, the District Court judge will hold an in camera hearing where the 
material that the executive branch claims is privileged will be examined. 

260 
Chapter 9
Only the federal judge and an attorney representing the President will 
be present at this hearing. The outcome of this hearing will be an order 
detailing what, if anything, will be admissible at the criminal trial in ques-
tion. During this process, the District Court has a very heavy responsibility 
to make sure that information reviewed in camera and determined to be 
privileged is accorded the “high degree of respect due the President of the 
United States” (418 U.S. 683, 716). The District Court has the responsibility 
for making sure that there are no leaks of the material that was reviewed but 
not ruled admissible at trial.
Privilege for Official Information
There was a common-law privilege for official government documents if 
disclosure would be against the “public interest.” It was generally recog-
nized to cover military and diplomatic secrets. It was not well developed 
in civil cases due to the fact that a person could not sue the government 
without the government’s permission.
The federal Freedom of Information Act has made it easier to obtain 
many government documents. This statute, and many of its state counter-
parts, requires disclosure of information in government files but restricts 
access to facts about ongoing investigations. In some states, the identity 
of informants and locations where surveillance is being conducted are 
privileged. Legislation frequently makes personnel records of government 
employees privileged. Table 9-3 summarizes how privilege is applied to 
certain types of information.
T A B L E  9-3  Types of Information and How Privilege 
Is Applied
Type of Information 
Application of Privilege
Freedom of Information Act (federal) 
 Allows access to information retained by federal 
government. Exceptions apply.
Identity of informant 
 Police have privilege not to disclose identity of 
informants, but judge can order disclosure if it is 
crucial to defense.
Ongoing investigation 
 Police have right to refuse to disclose information 
about an ongoing investigation. Privilege ceases 
once investigation is finished.
Personnel records 
 Personnel records of government employees are 
privileged. Judge can order disclosure of relevant 
information.

 
Privileged Communications 
261
These privileges apply to all levels and branches of law enforcement. 
It includes both traditional police forces and the investigative branches of 
other agencies, such as consumer affairs and environmental protection.
Privilege Not to Disclose Identity of Informant
The police informant privilege allows police officers to withhold the 
names of confidential informants—that is, people who supply the police 
with information with the understanding that they will not be called as 
witnesses. The information supplied is frequently used to develop other 
evidence that constitutes probable cause for an arrest.
Privilege Not to Disclose Identity of Informant Described
Police: Applies to all law enforcement agencies.
Informant: Person who supplies information to police with the understanding 
that his or her identity will not be made public.
What is covered: Name and address of the informer.
Who holds the privilege: Law enforcement agency that used the informant to 
help with a specific case.
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases: Identity of informant must be 
disclosed if it is important in the defendant’s case.
Examples of When Privilege Not to Disclose Identity of Informant 
Would Apply
•  Mr. Jones called police and reported that the man who lived next door appeared to 
be dealing drugs. Police set up surveillance on the neighbor’s house and an officer 
witnessed several drug deals. 
  The police would not have to reveal the name of the informant because all crucial 
observations were made by the police.
Examples of When Privilege Not to Disclose Identity of Informant 
Would Not Apply
•  As the result of a plea bargain agreement, Mr. Smith agreed to assist police in a 
stolen property investigation. Smith went “undercover” and made several purchases 
from burglars. Only Smith and the burglars were present when the purchases were 
made. 
  The police would have to reveal Smith’s name because his identity and the ability to 
attack his credibility at trial are crucial to the defense’s case.
The U.S. Supreme Court in McCrary v. Illinois (386 U.S. 300 (1967)) held 
that there is a constitutional right to obtain the identity of an informant only 

262 
Chapter 9
if it is crucial to the defense. Circumstances that would trigger this exception 
would be that the informant was the only eyewitness to toxic waste dumping, 
or that the informant participated in a drug case by dressing in street clothes 
and doing the “buy.” On the other hand, if the police used facts supplied by an 
informant to start an investigation, and as a result of this investigation they 
were able to establish probable cause, there is no need to disclose the identity 
of the informant.
When the defense demands the name of an informant, the judge will 
review the police files in camera (in chambers) with only the prosecutor 
and a representative for the police department present. The identity of the 
informant is given to the defense attorney only if the judge decides that 
there is a constitutional right to know this information. Even at this point, 
the police may refuse to disclose the identity of the informant, but refusal 
may result in dismissal of the case. The police and the prosecutor make the 
final decision on disclosing the identity of the informant; the informant 
cannot force them to withhold the information. If the life of the informant 
is in danger, or if concealing the identity of the informant is vital to other 
cases, it may be necessary to let the case be dismissed.
The police cannot prevent an informant from disclosing his or her 
own identity. If an informant does this, the relationship is no longer con-
fidential and the police cannot continue to conceal the information.
Many states consider police personnel files privileged except when 
there is litigation between the employee and the employer. Certain facts, 
such as the dates of employment, are not privileged. The contents of these 
files are usually irrelevant in a criminal case.
There are a few recurring situations in criminal cases in which the 
contents of police personnel files are relevant. If the defense claims 
the officer is committing perjury, the fact that other people have filed 
complaints with the police department that the officer is untruthful is 
relevant. In a case in which the charges are assault and/or battery on 
a police officer, the defendant may claim that he or she only acted in 
self-defense. Prior allegations of police brutality against the officer will 
be relevant.
Privilege to Withhold Personnel Files Described
Personnel files: Permanent personnel records on an employee. Police personnel 
files include investigations of an officer conducted by internal affairs.
What is covered: Records concerning the performance of the officer and 
investigations of his or her conduct.
Who holds the privilege: Law enforcement agency.
Exceptions frequently found in criminal cases: Must disclose information 
relevant to the defense.

 
Privileged Communications 
263
Examples of Ways Privilege for Police Personnel Files Would Apply
•  The defendant claims the officer has falsified the evidence so the defense attorney 
subpoenaed the officer’s personnel file. The judge reviewed the personnel file at the 
in camera hearing and determined that the only complaint against the officer was 
by his ex-wife, who stated he was not paying child support. 
 The defense would not be allowed to see the personnel file.
Examples of Ways Privilege for Police Personnel Files Would Not
Apply
•  The defendant was charged with assault on a police officer but the defendant 
claims she was acting in self-defense. The officer’s personnel file was subpoenaed. 
The judge reviewed the personnel file at the in camera hearing and found two 
complaints of police brutality filed against the officer in the past 3 years. 
  The defense would be entitled to a copy of the two complaints of police brutality 
but would not have access to any other documents in the personnel file.
Police personnel files only become an issue in a case if the defense files a 
discovery motion asking for the police files. Many states mandate that this be 
done before trial. The motion would name the officer(s) involved in the case. 
If the police department refuses to give the files to the defense, a hearing will 
be conducted before the judge. The judge will review the files in camera and 
determine if there is anything in the officer’s personnel file that is relevant. If 
there is, the judge will order that the relevant portions of the file be given to the 
defense. The order may include (1) dates and locations of alleged incidents, 
(2) names and addresses of victims, and (3) witnesses to these incidents. The 
opinions of internal affairs investigators are not given to the defense.
Many states have set limits on this type of disclosure. It is common to 
limit the period during which allegations of misconduct must be disclosed; 
a 5-year limit is common. If so, any material in the personnel file that relates 
to activities more than 5 years before the event in question is not shown to 
the judge. The defense may be required to give a plausible explanation for 
each file that is requested. Discovery may also be denied if there is a non-
confidential source for the same information. For example, if the case was 
featured in the local newspaper, there is no justification for delving into the 
confidential personnel files of the officer(s) involved.
Summary
S u m m a r y
Privileges have been established to protect the need for confidential communica-
tions. Each legislature has decided which relationships should receive protection. 

264 
Chapter 9
Even when a privileged relationship exists, the communication will be admis-
sible unless the parties have attempted to keep the communications confidential. 
Voluntary disclosure defeats a privilege. The information will also be admissible 
if it falls under one of the exceptions to the privilege.
 
The attorney–client privilege protects confidential communications between 
an attorney and client. It covers discussions about crimes that have already 
occurred. This privilege, however, does not apply to conversations in which the 
client seeks advice on how to commit crimes or escape punishment.
 
Confidential communications between a husband and wife while they are mar-
ried are privileged. Common exceptions cover situations in which one spouse is 
charged with committing a crime against the other spouse or their children.
 
Many states also allow one spouse to refuse to testify against the other spouse. 
Some reverse this and allow one spouse to refuse to let the other spouse testify 
against him or her. The same exceptions usually apply to this privilege and 
the privilege for confidential communications between husbands and wives. 
Unmarried cohabitants are not covered.
 
The physician–patient relationship usually has a privilege similar to the 
attorney–client relationship. Confidential communications are privileged except 
when planning or concealing a crime. Some states do not allow this privilege to 
be used in criminal cases at all.
 
There is a privilege for people who seek spiritual guidance from their clergy. 
Both the penitent and the clergy hold the privilege and can refuse to disclose their 
conversations.
 
Although there is no constitutional or common-law privilege for the news 
media, many states have enacted statutory privileges for the media. These laws 
usually take the form of giving the media immunity from citation for contempt 
when they refuse to identify the sources of information for a story. Some states 
make an exception if there is no other way to obtain information about a serious 
crime.
 
Confidential communications between the President of the United States and 
his immediate, high-level staff are presumed to be privileged. If a prosecutor can 
show that portions of those communications are relevant and otherwise admis-
sible, an in camera hearing will be held in which the federal District Court judge 
reviews the communications in question. Based on this review, the judge will 
determine which confidential communications are covered by executive privilege 
and which ones will be available to the prosecution at trial. 
 
Some government records are privileged. Two were discussed in this chapter: 
identity of police informants and police personnel files. The defendant has a 
constitutional right to know the identity of a police informant if the information 
this person provided is crucial to the defense. Police personnel files are privileged 
except where they contain information relevant to the case. The defense cannot 
obtain facts to be used in general character assassination of the police officer, but 
previous accusations that the officer committed perjury can be discovered; earlier 
allegations of police brutality are discoverable if relevant to the current case (e.g., 
the defendant is charged with assault on a police officer and claims he or she was 
acting in self-defense).

 
Privileged Communications 
265
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
1. Define the attorney–client privilege, and list its exceptions. 
2. Define the privilege for confidential communications between husband and 
wife, and list three exceptions.
3. Define the privilege of one spouse not to testify against the other, and give 
three exceptions.
4. Define the physician–patient privilege, and explain the common exceptions.
5. Define the clergy–penitent privilege, and explain the exceptions, if any.
6. When may the police keep the name of an informant secret? 
7. Explain the procedure the defense would use to obtain the name of a police 
informant. 
8. Identify two situations in which police personnel files would be relevant to a 
criminal case. Explain how a defendant can obtain the files.
9. Do the media have a First Amendment privilege to protect their sources? 
Explain.
10. Define the statutory privilege for the media to withhold the identity of their 
sources. Explain the procedure used to invoke the privilege. 
Go to www.cnn.com/crime. Find a case involving the use of privilege. Write a one-
page (250-word) report on the use of privilege in the case you found. If you 
have trouble finding a current case, go to www.crimelibrary.com and type the 
word privilege in the search box.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Notes
N o t e s
 1.  See, “To Avoid Jail, Former Lawyer for Phil Spector Testifies at Murder Trial.” Downloaded on 
July 13, 2007 From http://www.courttv.com/trials/spector/071207_ctv.html.

This page intentionally left blank 

267
Developing Law of 
Search and Seizure
CHAPTER10
Feature Case: Murder of Christa Worthington
Christa Worthington, an ambitious, creative, honors graduate from Vassar, 
established a career as a fashion writer and editor for Cosmopolitan and 
Woman’s Wear Daily before being sent to Paris as a reporter for W maga-
zine. She moved on to London, where she worked as a freelance journalist. 
When she learned her mother was dying of cancer, she went to be near 
her, and a short while later she moved into her family’s cottage in Truro, 
Massachusetts, a community of 1,600 near Cape Cod. Christa had an affair 
with a local man, but they broke up when he learned she was pregnant. 
Four days after her mother died of cancer, Christa gave birth to a girl 
whom she named after her mother. She gave up her career to be a full-time 
mom. 
Two years later, a former boyfriend went to Christa’s cottage and 
found her seminude body in a puddle of blood on the floor. Her daughter, 
who was by her side, reached up to him and said, “Mommy fell down.” It 
appeared that the little girl had tried to revive her mother by giving her 
a drink from her sippy cup. The coroner estimated that Christa had been 
dead for 24–36 hours. 
Several men who had dated Christa were the initial suspects, but all 
were cleared by DNA tests. DNA samples from other people who had 
contact with Christa were sent to the lab. The investigators were frustrated 
when DNA found under Christa’s fingernails was shown to be from three 
unidentified men. Additionally, the killer left no fingerprints. Three years 
after the murder, the police appealed to male residents of the area to vol-
untarily submit DNA samples. Before DNA from these volunteers could 
be tested, the lab reported that a sample from the initial round of suspects 

268 
Chapter 10
matched the major DNA profile developed from saliva on the victim’s 
breast and was consistent with the minor DNA profile developed from 
a vaginal swab. Christopher McCowen, a 33-year-old African American 
garbage collector who worked in Christa’s neighborhood, was arrested for 
first-degree murder, aggravated rape, and armed assault. He had previ-
ously served time in Florida for crimes including car theft and burglary. 
Five women in the Cape Code area had obtained domestic violence 
restraining orders against him.
Two detectives handled McCowen’s 7-hour interrogation. McCowen 
signed a waiver form after being given his Miranda rights, but he requested 
that the interview not be tape recorded. The detectives reminded him of 
his right to call his attorney on several occasions, and a telephone was on 
the table in the interview room for his use. He did not avail himself of 
these opportunities to exercise his privileges. Twice the detectives offered 
him something to drink, and on one occasion they offered to get food for 
him. McCowen initially denied knowing Christa. During the interroga-
tion, he gradually changed his story but always claimed that the sexual 
encounter was consensual. He blamed the murder on a friend. The inter-
view was stopped while the detectives verified his friend’s alibi. Twice the 
detectives indicated that the interview was over, but on both occasions 
McCowen told them that he wanted to talk some more in order to clear 
things up. 
A pretrial hearing on McCowen’s Motion to Suppress the Confession 
due to a violation of his rights lasted nearly 4 days. The judge’s 13-page 
ruling carefully detailed what the police did, how McCowen’s rights 
were protected, and McCowen’s behavior. After this detailed recap of 
the hearing, the judge ruled that McCowen was neither intoxicated nor 
under the influence of drugs or medications during the interrogation. 
Furthermore, the judge found that the detectives had been calm and 
in no way intimidated or coerced McCowen during the interrogation. 
The judge concluded that the Miranda warnings had been given cor-
rectly and that McCowen made a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary 
waiver of his rights. McCowen’s statements in the interview room were 
admissible at trial.
During the trial, the prosecution presented evidence from the crime 
scene, McCowen’s statements, and testimony from other witnesses. The 
pathologist testified that there were minor defensive wounds on Christa’s 
hands, cuts and bruises on her face and torso, and blunt force trauma to 
her head; he concluded that the cause of death was a knife wound that 
cut her left lung and pierced her heart. The force of the knife was so 
strong that the knife nicked the floor under the victim’s body. There was 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
269
no evidence of trauma to her genitals; hence, the pathologist could not 
rule out consensual sex.
The defense based its case on the contamination of the crime scene, 
racial prejudice that made it impossible for the detectives to believe that 
the affluent white woman would have consensual sex with the black 
garbage collector, and the “unjust” arrest of McCowen who was but one 
in a long line of men who had sex with Worthington. The defense also 
introduced evidence that it claimed showed the police coerced McCowen 
while he was under the combined influences of alcohol, marijuana, and 
Percocet. It was also alleged that he had an IQ of 78 and did not have 
the capacity to make a valid waiver of his Miranda rights. According to 
the defense attorney, McCowen’s low IQ, combined with being under the 
influence of prescription painkillers and marijuana during the interview, 
made it impossible for him to understand his rights. The jury convicted 
McCowen.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Describe the history of the Fourth Amendment.
• List what acts of law enforcement are considered to be “searches” and 
“seizures.”
• Define probable cause and how it is used in arrest and search situations.
• Define the legal meaning of the term standing.
• Identify what information is needed to obtain a search warrant and explain how a 
search warrant is executed.
• Define the Exclusionary Rule and its effect on evidence.
• Identify the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine, its exceptions, and application.
• Define the independent source rule.
• Identify those court proceedings in which the Exclusionary Rule is not used.
• Explain the constitutional limits placed on the use of physical force to obtain 
evidence.
Key Terms
•  Affidavit
•  Anonymous informant
•  Confidential informant
•  Exclusionary Rule
•  Execution of a warrant
•   Fruit of the Poison Tree 
Doctrine
•  Good Faith Exception
•   Independent Source 
Exception
•   Inevitable Discovery 
Exception
•   Knock-and-announce 
procedure
•  Probable cause
•  Protective sweep
•  Public Safety Exception
•   Return (of search 
warrant)
•  Substantial compliance
•  Valid on its face

270 
Chapter 10
History and Development of Fourth Amendment
The principle that “a man’s home is his castle” existed in England long 
before the colonies were settled in America. The English Bill of Rights was 
enacted by Parliament in 1689 and gave even the poorest peasant the right 
to exclude the King from his home. Yet, in Colonial America the British 
freely used the “general warrant,” which gave unlimited rights for soldiers 
to search homes for whatever evidence they might find.
Many of the original states expressed their disapproval of the general war-
rant by including a prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures in 
their constitutions. When the U.S. Constitution was ratified, it did not contain 
any mention of searches and seizures or any of the other protections now in 
our Bill of Rights. Many of the states that ratified the Constitution insisted 
Myths about Warrants,  
Facts about Warrants, Exclusionary
Exclusionary Rule, and the Fruit  
Rule, and the Fruit of the Poison
of the Poison Tree 
Tree 
If the police wish to conduct a search, they  
There are numerous exceptions to the search
must obtain a search warrant. 
warrant requirement.
For a judge to issue a valid search warrant,  
The U.S. Supreme Court allows judges to issue
there must be sworn testimony from at least  
search warrants based on the totality of the
one eyewitness to the crime. 
circumstances. If all of the facts in the affidavit 
 
for the warrant, taken as a whole, provide 
 
probable cause that evidence of the crime is 
 
currently at a specific location, a judge can 
 
issue a warrant to search the premises. One 
 
type of evidence is not preferred above 
 
another kind, as long as the evidence is 
 
credible.
When serving a search warrant, the police  
In addition to the items specified in the search 
may only seize things that are specifically  
warrant, the police have the right to seize
listed in the warrant.  
anything that falls under the Plain View 
 
Doctrine.
The Exclusionary Rule is no longer used in  
The Exclusionary Rule is still in use in the
the United States. 
United States, but decisions of the U.S. 
 
Supreme Court during the past 45 years have 
 
narrowed the application of the rule.
The authority of local police officers to use  
In addition to state laws, the Fourth 
force when making an arrest is solely  
Amendment and the Due Process Clause of
governed by state laws. 
the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments place 
 
restrictions on a police officer’s right to use 
 
force when making an arrest and/or recovering 
 
evidence.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
271
that additional protections against the power of the federal government be 
included. The first 10 amendments to the Constitution, known collectively as 
the Bill of Rights, were added in 1791, only 4 years after the Constitution was 
ratified. Their wording has not been changed since.
Fourth Amendment
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, 
but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing 
the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
There are three broad concepts in this amendment:
1. Protection is provided for the person, home, and belongings.
2. Unreasonable searches and seizures are prohibited.
3. Warrants must be based on probable cause and specifically describe 
the place to be searched and what is to be seized.
These concepts are explained in this chapter and in Chapters 11–13.
Definitions
Prior to considering what police conduct violates the Fourth Amendment, 
four basic definitions must be discussed: search, seizure, probable cause, 
and standing. 
Definitions
Search:
An examination of a person, his or her house, personal property, or other 
locations when conducted by a law enforcement officer for the purpose of 
finding evidence of a crime.
Seizure:
The act of taking possession of a person or property.
Probable cause:
A reasonable belief that a person has committed or is committing a crime or 
that a place contains specific items connected with a crime. Under the Fourth 
Amendment, probable cause must be shown before an arrest warrant or search 
warrant may be issued.
Standing:
Standing is a party’s right to make a legal claim or seek judicial enforcement of a 
duty or right.

272 
Chapter 10
Search
A search involves the act of looking for something that otherwise would 
not be seen. Finding something that was left out where the police could 
see it is the opposite of a search. If the officer has the right to move things, 
then anything seen while moving those items is in plain view and is not 
the product of a search.
Even if there is a search, it may not violate the Fourth Amendment. Only 
unreasonable searches are prohibited. The Supreme Court has spent a great 
deal of time deciding what is “reasonable” and what is not. If a search is ille-
gal, it is also unreasonable. The result is that items found during an illegal 
search are not admissible in court. This is discussed later in this chapter.
Examples of Searches
•  Police officer orders the suspect to empty his pockets and carefully examines 
each item that is produced.
 If the officer did this before arresting the suspect, it is unreasonable.
  If the officer arrested the suspect before ordering the pockets emptied, the officer’s 
actions would be a reasonable search. See Chapter 11.
•  A police officer sees a suspicious car parked behind a store late at night. The 
officer opens the unlocked door and looks for stolen merchandise.
  If the officer does this based on probable cause that stolen merchandise is in the car, 
it would be a reasonable search. See Chapter 12.
  If the officer does not have probable cause that there was anything in the car that he 
had the right to seize, the search would be unreasonable.
  The fact that the car was parked in violation of a local ordinance would empower 
the officer to write a citation. In these circumstances, the officer would not be 
authorized to open the door or search the interior of the car.
•  A police officer goes to a farm and finds a field of marijuana plants.
  If the officer searches close to the farmhouse, his actions are unreasonable.
  If the officer searches open fields that are not near a dwelling, the actions are 
reasonable. See Chapter 12.
Examples of Actions That Are Not Searches
•  A police officer was walking down the sidewalk and saw a wallet that appeared 
to be lost. She picked up the wallet.
 Finding the wallet and picking it up would not be a search.
 Opening the wallet and looking for ID would have been a search.
   The search would be considered reasonable because the purpose of opening the 
wallet was to help locate the owner and return the wallet. See Chapter 12.
•  A police officer was walking through the park and observed a young man 
smoking a cigarette. The air was full of the smell of marijuana smoke.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
273
  The park was a public place; therefore, what the officer observed while walking 
through the park was not a search.
  Picking up the man’s backpack and looking inside for marijuana would be a search.
  Searching the backpack would be considered unreasonable because it was an 
invasion of the man’s privacy.
   If the smell of marijuana was so strong that it provided probable cause justifying 
an arrest, the officer could legally search the backpack immediately after the 
arrest. See Chapter 11.
•  An officer was called to a house to investigate a recent burglary. The resident 
invited the officer into the house and took him to the kitchen to show him a 
broken window where he believed the burglar entered the house. While talking 
to this person, the officer noticed several sheets of uncut $20 bills on the 
kitchen table.
  The officer had been invited into the house to take a burglary report. Therefore, he 
was legally there.
  Making an observation from a location where the officer had the legal right to be 
was not a search.
  Picking up the sheets of $20 bills to look at them more closely would have been a 
search.
  Examining a sheet of $20 bills would be considered unreasonable because the 
officer had no right to pick it up.
   If the officer’s observation of the sheet of $20 bills (without picking them up) 
was sufficient to establish probable cause that they were counterfeit, and there 
was probable cause to believe that the person he was talking to was involved in 
counterfeiting, the officer could make an arrest.
   Immediately after the arrest, he could seize the sheets of $20 bills if they were 
within arm’s reach of the person who was arrested. See Chapter 11.
   Information about the sheets of $20 bills could be included in an affidavit used to 
obtain a warrant to search the house for evidence of counterfeiting.
Seizure
Police “seize” evidence when they take it into their possession. When a 
person is seized, it is called an arrest. Even when there is no search (for 
example, something was left out in plain view where the police could see 
it), officers still must have probable cause to seize it.
For example, if a police officer observes something inside a house by 
looking through a window, there is no right to enter the house to seize it 
without a search warrant. Another example would be information that is 
recorded while circling the area in an aircraft. Observing back yards and 
fields in this manner is not a search because there is no physical entry onto 
the property of another person. There must be sufficient evidence to obtain 
a search warrant in order to enter private property and seize the items that 
were observed. Abandoned property goes by a different rule because no one 

274 
Chapter 10
currently owns it (or has a possessory interest in it). Evidence left in a public 
place can be seized without a search warrant because there is no invasion 
of anyone’s property interests. It does not matter whether the items were in 
transparent or opaque trash sacks or other forms of packaging.
Examples of Seizures
•  Police stop a man carrying an object that appears to be a gun. They 
immediately seize the object. An arrest can be made as soon as it is determined 
that the man does not have a permit to carry the gun.
•  When the suspect is booked into the city jail, officers remove all personal 
belongings in the suspect’s possession.
•  Officers go to a bank and obtain a copy of the suspect’s checking account 
records. A court order is needed in order to make this a legal seizure.
Examples of Actions That Are Not Seizures
•  Police stop a man walking down the street at 11:30 p.m. in an industrial area. 
They ask for identification and the reason that the man is at the location. 
The man explains that he works the midnight to 8:00 a.m. shift at a factory 
approximately a quarter mile from the location. After copying the information 
from the man’s driver’s license, they return it to the man and allow him to 
continue his legal activity.
 The man was briefly detained, which may be considered a seizure.
  The police copied information from the driver’s license, but returned the license. 
There was no seizure of the ID.
•  A police officer observed a box in a shopping bag in a trash barrel on the curb 
for the garbage truck to pick up the next morning. The officer picked up the 
sack, examined the contents, and put it in an evidence bag.
  Everything in the trash barrels has been discarded by the owner. It no longer 
belongs to anyone; therefore, picking it up is not a seizure.
Probable Cause
In criminal cases, probable cause is required in three key situations:
1. Probable cause that a crime was committed.
2. Probable cause that the suspect is the person who committed the crime.
3. Probable cause that evidence is at a specific location.
The Fourth Amendment specifically refers to issuing warrants based 
on probable cause. It is also an important prerequisite for many police 
activities conducted without warrants.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
275
Examples of Probable Cause to Make an Arrest
•  Police arrive at scene and observe the suspect hitting another person with a 
baseball bat.
•  Woman calls 911. When the police arrive at her house, they observe that the 
woman has red marks on her face indicating she has recently been hit. The 
woman tells the officers that her husband hit her six times with his open hand.
Examples of Facts That Did Not Make Probable Cause
•  Police arrive at the scene and discover the front door is open. They cautiously 
walk though the house but see nothing amiss.
  The police officers have no idea why the front door is open. The owner may have 
left it open or someone else may have opened it.
 There is no indication that a crime has been committed.
 The officers do not have probable cause to make an arrest.
•  Police officers receive a message from the dispatcher to go to 123 Maple Street 
and investigate a possible dead body in the back yard.
  Upon arrival at 123 Maple Street, officers go into the back yard and see a white 
female in a prone position on the lawn.
  The odor of alcohol is detected when they approach the body. As one officer gently 
probes the body with a gloved hand, the woman begins to move.
  It is determined that the woman drank a large quantity of beer and “passed out” in 
her back yard.
 Having determined that no crime was committed, the officers leave.
Standing
“Standing” refers to the right to ask the court to take legal action. Only 
a person with standing can activate the Exclusionary Rule by asking the 
judge to rule that evidence cannot be used at trial because it was illegally 
seized. After many years of struggling with the concept, the U.S. Supreme 
Court adopted “reasonable expectation of privacy” as a guide and no 
longer uses the term “standing.” A person can only ask to have evidence 
excluded due to a violation of the Fourth Amendment if it can be shown 
that his or her privacy was violated by the police. The results of having 
standing and having one’s reasonable expectation of privacy violated are 
frequently the same.
Some examples illustrate this approach. If a person’s house is searched 
unconstitutionally, the resident’s reasonable expectation of privacy has been 
violated; the person who lives in the house can have the evidence suppressed 
if charges were filed against him or her. An overnight guest who was present 
when the house was searched also has an expectation of privacy that was 

276 
Chapter 10
violated when his or her personal belongings were searched. The overnight 
guest can have the illegally seized evidence suppressed. On the other hand, 
if a friend left something in the house prior to the search but was not 
present when the illegal search was conducted, the friend had no reason-
able expectation of privacy. This conclusion is based on the rationale that 
by giving up possession of property, the owner gives up control of the items 
that were left behind. The friend hoped that his or her personal items would 
be treated with respect, but the people in the house were free to do whatever 
they wanted with their friend’s property once he or she left. Therefore, the 
friend had no expectation of privacy. Without an expectation of privacy, the 
friend cannot ask the court to suppress items from evidence that were left at 
another person’s house. This is true even though the police seized the items 
during a search that was conducted illegally. The Supreme Court also ruled 
that people who stop briefly at a home or apartment for business purposes 
have no expectation of privacy in the residence they are visiting. Due to the 
fact that they do not have an expectation of privacy, business visitors cannot 
have property that the police seized illegally suppressed.
Rights under the Fifth Amendment are also personal. Only the person 
who made the confession can successfully make a motion to suppress it. If 
the confession implicated someone else in the crime, the person who was 
implicated would not have the right to have the confession suppressed 
even though Miranda had been violated.
Examples of the Right to Have Evidence Suppressed
•  Sam was illegally stopped by the police and his car was searched. Sam has 
standing to ask the court to suppress evidence that was found illegally.
•  Mary, who is a suspect in a theft investigation, is spending the weekend with 
her brother Ned. Police enter Ned’s apartment without a search warrant and 
find the items that Mary stole.
Examples of Individuals Who Do Not Have the Right to Have 
Evidence Suppressed
•  At a party, Pete gave Rosie a small bag containing illegal drugs and asked her to 
put it in her purse. The police raided the party and found the drugs.
  Rosie would have standing to ask the judge to suppress the drugs at her trial because 
they were in her possession. The judge would rule on whether or not Rosie’s Fourth 
Amendment rights had been violated by the police when they raided the party.
  Pete does not have standing to ask the judge to suppress the drugs at his trial because 
they were not in his possession. When he gave Rosie possession of the drugs, he gave up 
the right to challenge any search of Rosie that produced the drugs.
•  Tom, a salesman, was visiting the home of Victor, his client. Tom had just 
placed a thick notebook containing a sales prospectus and samples of his 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
277
products on the kitchen table when the police entered Victor’s home and 
searched the living room and kitchen. The police carefully examined the contents 
of the notebook and arrested Tom for receiving stolen merchandise, a felony.
  Victor could successfully have the evidence suppressed if it was found during an 
illegal search that was conducted in violation of the Fourth Amendment.
  Tom could not have the evidence in the notebook suppressed, even if the search 
violated the Fourth Amendment, because the Supreme Court has ruled that a 
casual business visitor does not have an expectation of privacy in a building that is 
searched.
  For the same reason, Tom could not have the evidence in the notebook suppressed 
because the officer’s examination of the notebook violated the Plain View Rule.
Warrant Requirements
The Fourth Amendment specifically states that (1) no warrant shall be 
issued unless there is probable cause, (2) probable cause must be estab-
lished under oath or affirmation, and (3) the warrant must particularly 
describe the place to be searched and the person or things to be seized. It 
does not say that all searches must be authorized by warrants.
The Supreme Court has decided many cases addressing the issue of 
whether or not warrants are required. It has stated a preference for war-
rants, but it has also recognized that there are situations in which officers 
do not have to obtain them. Search warrants may be issued to search 
nearly any location, including residences, newsrooms, and doctors’ and 
lawyers’ offices.
In noncriminal situations, such as inspections to determine if build-
ings conform to electrical codes, search warrants are also required if no 
one will consent to the inspection. For these “administrative warrants,” 
probable cause is satisfied if there is a reasonable legislative purpose for 
the inspection.
The basic principle is that warrants are mandatory except when the facts 
fit within one of the exceptions to the warrant requirement. This chapter 
deals with the procedures used to obtain warrants. The numerous exceptions 
authorized by the Supreme Court are dealt with in Chapters 11 and 12.
Information Needed to Obtain a Warrant
The warrant process was created to allow a neutral magistrate to review 
the facts and decide if the police should be authorized to conduct a search 
or make an arrest. To do this, the magistrate must have the facts of the 
case. The Fourth Amendment requires that these facts be taken under oath 

278 
Chapter 10
or affirmation. The written document used for this purpose is called an 
affidavit.
Prior to the 1960s, some judges relied on the officer’s decision that 
there was probable cause. For example, the affidavit might read, “This offi-
cer has received information from a reliable informant which causes me to 
conclude that there is probable cause to search the house located at 123 N. 
Main St., Hometown, for stolen property.” In 1964, the Supreme Court 
ruled that this was not acceptable.1 It held that a warrant is only valid if the 
judge determined that probable cause existed. To do this, the judge must 
personally review the facts.
Search Warrants
Facts given in an affidavit are usually very detailed and must convince 
the judge that there is evidence that the officers have a legal right to seize. 
The warrant may authorize a search for illegal drugs or other contraband, 
fruits of the crime, items used to commit the crime, or other items that can 
be used in the case. The facts need to provide detailed information about 
the crime involved, as well as an explanation of why the officers want to 
seize the items in question.
In addition to showing what is to be seized, the affidavit must give 
facts that show where the items to be seized are located. The descrip-
tion of the location to be searched must be as exact as possible. Since the 
reason for requiring search warrants is to protect people’s privacy, the 
warrant should be worded so that the police are restricted to as small an 
area as possible. Figure 10-1 shows what can and cannot be searched with 
a search warrant that authorizes the search of a garage for an assault rifle 
and a 55-gallon drum of methamphetamine pills. The officers may open 
the refrigerator, for example, because it would be possible to conceal the 
assault rifle in there if the shelves had been removed; they may not open 
the washer and dryer because their interiors are too small to hide the rifle, 
but officers could look behind them to see if the assault rifle was stashed 
there. Since the search warrant authorized officers to look for a 55-gallon 
drum, and not small quantities of pills, cupboards and boxes too small to 
conceal this large drum or the assault rifle cannot be searched.
Street addresses are usually given, but the location should be described 
even more precisely, if possible. For example, “the living room of the house 
at 456 S. Grand Ave.” or “the garage of the house at 789 W. First St.” Case law 
generally upholds warrants that include a correct description of the loca-
tion even when the street address is wrong. Examples would include “the 
blue house on the corner of Market and Third, with the address of 301 
N. Market” even though it turned out that 301 N. Market was the wrong 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
279
address, or “the apartment at the head of the stairs on the third floor of 
the building at 321 S. Broadway,” when it turned out that the apartment 
number given in the warrant was wrong.
A problem unique to search warrants is the requirement that the infor-
mation be fresh. If the facts are stale, they may not be a reliable indicator of 
where the items to be seized are currently located. In a drug case in which 
the dealer is known to do a high volume of business and change locations 
frequently, information 2 or 3 days old may be stale. If the case involves the 
use of stolen building materials at a construction site, the information is 
not likely to become stale if the stolen property is being incorporated into a 
building. It is important for the police to have current information to avoid 
rejection of the affidavit due to staleness.
Example of Facts the U.S. Supreme Court Ruled Were Sufficient to 
Establish Probable Cause to Obtain a Search Warrant
Massachusetts v. Sheppard 468 U.S. 981 (1984)
The badly burned body of Sandra Boulware was discovered in a vacant lot in the 
Roxbury section of Boston at approximately 5 a.m. Saturday, May 5. An autopsy 
revealed that Boulware had died of multiple compound skull fractures caused by 
Figure 10-1
Execution of a Search Warrant
The search warrant stated that officers may search this garage for an assault rifle and 
a 55-gallon drum of methamphetamine pills.
9 feet
10 feet
May seize if officers can
identify as marijuana
without opening or
physically examining
May not search
May search
May not search
May not search
May search
May search
May not search
May search
May search

280 
Chapter 10
blows to the head. After a brief investigation, the police decided to question one 
of the victim’s boyfriends, Osborne Sheppard. Sheppard told the police that he 
had last seen the victim on Tuesday night and that he had been at a local gaming 
house (where card games were played) from 9 p.m. Friday until 5 a.m. Saturday. 
He identified several people who would be willing to substantiate the latter claim.
By interviewing the people Sheppard had said were at the gaming house on 
Friday night, the police learned that although Sheppard was at the gaming house 
that night, he had borrowed an automobile at approximately 3 a.m. Saturday 
morning in order to give two men a ride home. Even though the trip normally 
took only 15 minutes, Sheppard did not return with the car until nearly 5 a.m.
On Sunday morning, police officers visited the owner of the car Sheppard had 
borrowed. He consented to an inspection of the vehicle. Blood stains and pieces of 
hair were found on the rear bumper and within the trunk compartment. In addition, 
the officers noticed strands of wire in the trunk similar to wire strands found on and 
near the body of the victim. The owner of the car told the officers that when he last 
used the car on Friday night, shortly before Sheppard borrowed it, he had placed 
articles in the trunk and had not noticed any stains on the bumper or in the trunk.
Note: The previous facts were held sufficient to issue a search warrant for 
Sheppard’s residence for the victim’s clothing, rope and/or wire matching 
samples found on the body, a blunt instrument used to kill the victim, and 
blood-stained clothing.
Example of Facts the U.S. Supreme Court Ruled Were Not Sufficient 
to Establish Probable Cause to Obtain a Search Warrant
United States v. Leon 468 U.S. 897 (1984)
In August 1981, a confidential informant of unproven reliability informed 
an officer of the Burbank Police Department that two persons known to 
him as “Armando” and “Patsy” were selling large quantities of cocaine and 
methaqualone from their residence at 920 Price Drive in Burbank, California. 
The informant also indicated that he had witnessed a sale of methaqualone by 
“Patsy” at the residence approximately 5 months earlier and had observed at the 
time a shoebox containing a large amount of cash that belonged to “Patsy.” He 
further declared that “Armando” and “Patsy” generally kept only small quantities of 
drugs at their residence and stored the remainder at another location in Burbank.
On the basis of this information, the Burbank police initiated an extensive 
investigation focusing first on the Price Drive residence and later on two other 
residences as well. Cars parked at the Price Drive residence were determined to 
belong to Armando Sanchez, who had previously been arrested for possession of 
marijuana, and Patsy Stewart, who had no criminal record. During the course of the 
investigation, officers observed an automobile belonging to Ricardo Del Castillo, 
who had previously been arrested for possession of 50 pounds of marijuana, 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
281
arrive at the Price Drive residence. The driver of the car entered the house, 
exited shortly thereafter carrying a small paper sack, and drove away. A check of 
Del Castillo’s probation records led the officers to Alberto Leon, whose telephone 
number Del Castillo had listed as his employer’s. Leon had been arrested in 1980 on 
drug charges, and a companion had informed the police at that time that Leon was 
heavily involved in the importation of drugs into this country. Before the current 
investigation began, the Burbank officers had learned that an informant had told 
a Glendale police officer that Leon stored a large quantity of methaqualone at his 
residence in Glendale. During the course of the investigation, Burbank officers 
learned that Leon was living at 716 South Sunset Canyon in Burbank.
Subsequently, the officers observed several persons, at least one of whom had 
prior drug involvement, arrive at the Price Drive residence and leave with small 
packages; observed a variety of other material activity at the two residences as 
well as at a condominium at 7901 Via Magdelena; and witnessed a variety of 
relevant activity involving respondents’ automobiles. The officers also observed 
Sanchez and Stewart board separate flights for Miami. The pair later returned to 
Los Angeles together, consented to a search of their luggage that revealed only a 
small amount of marijuana, and left the airport.
Note: This warrant application was found insufficient because the facts used to 
corroborate the reliability of the informant were either stale or only related to 
innocent activity.
Arrest Warrants
For an arrest warrant, facts must be given to establish every element of each 
crime listed in the warrant. Additional information must be included to 
show that the person named is the one who committed the crime(s). The 
physical description of the person to be arrested, along with his or her date 
of birth (if available) or approximate age, is usually required so the officers 
making the arrest can verify that they have the correct person. It is possible 
to obtain an arrest warrant even if the name of the suspect is not known if a 
detailed description, usually including an alias or street name, is given.
In several sexual assault cases, it was possible to successfully run a DNA 
test but the authorities did not know the name of the suspect. An arrest war-
rant was obtained based on the DNA report rather than a name. In at least 
one case, the person was later identified and charged with the crime.
Process to Obtain an Arrest Warrant
•  Draft affidavit(s) that contains facts to establish
 Probable cause that crime occurred.
   Must have probable cause that each element in the definition of the crime occurred.

282 
Chapter 10
 Probable cause that the person named in the arrest warrant committed the crime.
 Reasons why the judge should believe the information is true.
 Affidavit must be signed under penalty of perjury.
 Arrest warrant is prepared so it will be ready for the judge to sign.
•  Present affidavits and draft arrest warrant to the judge.
 The judge may have officer sworn in and ask for additional facts.
  If the judge is satisfied that requirements for warrant have been met, the judge signs 
the warrant.
   The judge can change the crimes listed on the warrant that the officers prepared 
for the judge’s signature.
•  Officers may execute the arrest warrant.
Example of Way to Establish Probable Cause for an Arrest Warrant
While on routine patrol on the evening of December 10, 2007, the undersigned 
officer observed a person in the alley behind 123 North Park Ave., Hometown. 
Said individual had an object in his hand that appeared to be a tire iron. The 
individual was using the object to pry open a garage door. The undersigned 
officer aimed the patrol car’s flood light on the individual and ordered the 
individual to halt. The individual paused, looked at the undersigned officer 
for approximately ten (10) seconds, and then ran. The undersigned officer was 
unable to apprehend him. A tire iron was recovered at the scene.
Latent fingerprints were recovered from the tire iron by Officer Fred Smith. 
Based on a comparison made by Officer Fred Smith, fingerprints recovered from 
the tire iron match fingerprints in the files of this department taken when John 
Q. Doe was booked on May 2, 2001.
Officer Smith prepared a photo array of six (6) pictures of men who resembled 
John Q. Doe’s booking picture. When undersigned officer viewed the photo 
array, he selected the picture of John Q. Doe immediately and unequivocally.
For the reasons stated above, an arrest warrant is requested for John Q. Doe for 
the offense of attempted burglary, Penal Code Section 459, at 123 North Park 
Ave, Hometown, on December 10, 2007.
Example of Facts That Did Not Establish Probable Cause for an Arrest 
Warrant
On October 10, 2007, the undersigned officer responded to a “robbery now” call 
at a 7-11 convenience store located at 654 North Juniper Ave, Hometown. Alice 
Woods, the clerk working at the store at the time I arrived, told me that a male 
juvenile robbed her. According to Woods, a male juvenile wearing a white T-shirt 
and blue jeans entered the store about 6:15 p.m., picked up a bottle of beer, and 
loitered near the refrigerator case until another customer went to the check-stand. 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
283
When Woods was busy with that customer, the juvenile tried to sneak out the 
front door. Woods said that she yelled, “Hey, come back here!” but never 
left the cash register. Three juveniles were standing outside the store when I took 
the report, but Woods did not recognize any of them as the juvenile who took 
the beer. Woods could not give a more detailed description of the juvenile who 
walked out of the store with the bottle of beer.
For the reasons stated above, an arrest warrant is requested for John Q. Doe 
for the offense of robbery, Penal Code Section 211, at 654 North Juniper Ave., 
Hometown, on October 11, 2007.
Reliability of Facts in Affidavit
Due to the fact that the affidavit is usually reviewed by a judge without 
a chance to question the person providing the information, the affida-
vit must also convince the judge that the facts are reliable. If the officer 
making the affidavit observed the facts firsthand, the fact that the affidavit 
is made under oath is sufficient to establish reliability. Information pro-
vided by crime victims and eyewitnesses is usually assumed to be reliable 
unless there is a motive to falsify. One problem that frequently occurs with 
victims is that they do not provide enough details to identify the suspect.
Informants who are themselves criminals create the biggest problem. Due 
to their past convictions, or a bad motive for incriminating someone else, 
they lack credibility. In Spinelli v. United States the Supreme Court established 
a rule that required applications for warrants to establish probable cause for 
the action sought (search or arrest) and separate probable cause that the 
informant is credible.2 Some states still follow this rule, whereas others have 
adopted the more lenient standard established in Illinois v. Gates.
When a warrant is sought in a state that follows the Spinelli standard, facts 
stated in the affidavit must establish the reliability of the informant. The most 
common method used to do this is to give specific examples of useful informa-
tion that the informant has given the officers in the past. If, in previous cases, 
officers checked out the facts supplied by the informant and found they were 
correct, the informant’s reliability in the current case is enhanced. Another 
method is to verify the information provided in the present case. When reliabil-
ity is established by verifying facts, the Supreme Court insisted in Spinelli that 
the facts that were checked showed criminal activity. Merely verifying innocent 
facts, such as addresses and telephone numbers, is not enough.
In 1983, in Illinois v. Gates, the Supreme Court ruled that anonymous 
tips could be used to obtain search warrants.3 The Court relaxed the older 
rule that required that facts supporting the informant’s reliability be given 
in the affidavit. In states that follow this rule, it is possible to support 

284 
Chapter 10
the reliability of the information by showing that the facts given are so 
detailed that they must be true. When an anonymous informant is used, it 
is especially important that as many facts as possible be given in the affida-
vit. Even so, the police must verify as much of the information as possible 
prior to seeking a warrant.
A distinction must be made between confidential informants and 
anonymous ones. Confidential informants give police information on 
the condition that their names will not be revealed. This information can 
be used in a warrant without giving the name of the person who provided 
it. At a later time, the defendant may request the name of the informant, 
but the judge will only require the police to disclose it if the identity of the 
informant is crucial to the case (McCray v. Illinois).4
People whose identities are unknown, referred to as anonymous infor-
mants, frequently provide information to the police. They may call a hot-
line, such as “We Tip,” and leave a message on an answering machine, or they 
may talk directly to an officer on the phone without identifying themselves. 
It would be impossible for the police to give the names of these people to the 
defense. It is also impossible, of course, to establish their prior reliability.
Procedure to Obtain a Warrant
The Fourth Amendment merely requires that a warrant be issued by a 
neutral magistrate. In most policing agencies, however, the case is reviewed 
by the officer’s supervisor prior to seeking a warrant. Additionally, the 
prosecutor frequently reviews the file to determine if a warrant should be 
sought. Sometimes the prosecutor prepares the proper forms and helps 
police draft the required affidavits.
The completed warrant application is presented to a judge or magis-
trate who must be neutral and not part of any law enforcement agency. 
Many years ago, some states authorized high-ranking police officials and 
members of their attorney’s general staff to issue warrants. This proce-
dure was specifically disapproved in Coolidge v. New Hampshire because 
all personnel in law enforcement agencies are considered to have a vested 
interest in apprehending criminals.5 The Supreme Court considered this 
to create a potential conflict of interests that could interfere with an objec-
tive review of the facts in the affidavit.
Most states restrict a judge’s authority to issue warrants. The rules 
for arrest warrants and search warrants differ and may result in two or 
more judges being involved in the same case. Judges are usually restricted 
to granting search warrants for locations within the court’s geographical 
jurisdiction. Arrest warrants may only be issued for crimes that occurred 
within the court district.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
285
If there is more than one judge in the jurisdiction, each judge has equal 
power to issue a warrant. Although there is no constitutional requirement 
that a warrant be issued by a judge who is assigned to criminal trials, 
judges who are not assigned to the criminal calendar usually defer to those 
who are.
Once a request for a warrant has been rejected by a judge, it may not 
be taken to another judge in hopes of obtaining a more favorable deci-
sion. However, new affidavits containing more facts can be drafted and the 
process started again. This may require more work for the police in order 
to develop additional information, or it might merely mean that a careful 
review of the file shows that the original affidavit left out some key facts.
Many states require that search warrants be executed in the daytime 
(typically defined as 6 a.m. to 10 p.m.) unless the judge specifically indi-
cates they may be served at night. Arrest warrants for misdemeanors com-
monly cannot be served at night unless the suspect is in a public place. 
There are usually no similar restrictions on felony warrants.
Search warrants must be served within a few days after they are issued. 
State laws vary, but search warrants usually expire within 10 days. The 
reason for this short time period is the same as the policy that rejects affi-
davits containing stale information. The only reason to invade a person’s 
privacy is to obtain evidence that can lawfully be seized by the police. If 
there is too much delay, there is no longer any reason to believe that the 
evidence is at the location.
Arrest warrants must be obtained before the statute of limitations 
expires on the crime in question. State laws establish how long an arrest 
warrant is valid. Misdemeanor warrants frequently do not expire for at least 
1 year; most felony warrants are valid for 3 years or more depending on the 
charge. Warrants for murder and a few other crimes may be valid indefi-
nitely. The reason for enforcing old arrest warrants, but not search warrants, 
is that stale information may not be used to obtain a search warrant, but the 
passage of time usually does not change the probable cause that the suspect 
committed the crime. If new facts indicate that the person named in the 
warrant did not commit the crime, the warrant should be withdrawn.
Process to Obtain a Search Warrant
•  Draft affidavit(s) that contains facts to establish
 Probable cause that crime occurred;
   Must have probable cause that each element in the definition of the crime 
occurred.
  Probable cause that evidence that is relevant to this crime is currently at the 
location to be searched. Evidence includes

286 
Chapter 10
  Items used to commit the crime
  Clothing and other items witnesses observed during the crime
  Items taken from the scene of the crime, including property that was stolen.
 Reasons why the judge should believe the information is true;
 Reasons why the judge should believe the information is not “stale.”
 Affidavit must be signed under penalty of perjury.
 Search warrant is prepared so it will be ready for the judge to sign.
•  Present affidavits and draft search warrant to judge.
 The judge may have officer sworn in and ask for additional facts.
  If the judge is satisfied that requirements for warrant have been met, the judge signs 
the warrant.
   The judge can change the items to be seized or the location to be searched on the 
draft warrant before the judge signs the search warrant.
•  Officers may execute the arrest warrant.
 Must execute warrant before it expires.
 Knock-and-announce applies to houses.
 Protective sweep applies in any type of building.
 Plain View Doctrine applies as long as officers execute search warrant properly.
•  Return must be filed after warrant was executed.
 States when search warrant was executed.
 Who executed it.
 Inventory of items seized when search warrant was executed.
Example of Proper Procedures to Obtain a Search Warrant
On February 1, 2008, patrol officers observed Apartment #4 at 987 South 
Seventh Street for 90 minutes. While they watched, they saw 5 people enter the 
apartment. From their viewpoint a block away, it appeared that people came 
out of the apartment carrying small bags. They wrote a memo notifying the 
Narcotics Bureau detailing their observations.
Narcotics officers set up a stakeout that lasted 15 hours spread over 3 days. 
Between February 4 and 7, 2008, officers on the stakeout observed 29 people 
enter Apartment #4 at 987 South Seventh Street; 27 of these people exited after 
staying less than 10 minutes; each of these 27 people carried a small paper bag.
An undercover narcotics officer went to Apartment #4, 987 South Seventh Street, 
on February 8, 2008. After entering through the front door, he was directed 
to the kitchen where he purchased a substance the seller said was “meth.” The 
purchase was made with marked money. While in the kitchen, the narcotics 
officer observed an apparatus of the type commonly used to make tablets, a large 
plastic bag containing a white powdery substance was to the left of the apparatus, 
a clear plastic canister approximately 12 inches high and 16 inches in diameter 
containing tablets similar to the ones purchased, approximately 100 zip lock bags 
approximately 2 × 3 inches in size, and a package of brown paper bags of the 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
287
type frequently used for lunches. No weapons were observed. When the person 
who was believed to have sold the controlled substance to the officer exited the 
apartment at 11:51 p.m., she was arrested. The search incident to arrest produced 
$579 in cash, including the two marked $10 bills used by the undercover officer 
to purchase the drugs. No weapons were found on the person who was arrested. 
Laboratory tests conducted on February 9 indicated that the tablets purchased 
contained a total of 19.2 grams of methamphetamine plus various fillers.
The undercover officer signed an affidavit and prepared a search warrant for the 
search of the kitchen of Apartment #4 at 987 South Seventh Street. The warrant 
authorized the search for methamphetamine powder and pills, equipment and 
paraphernalia used to make pills, cash, weapons, and other items that were 
contraband.
The judge reviewed the affidavit and concluded that there was probable cause 
that methamphetamine tablets were being made and sold in Apartment #4 at 987 
South Seventh Street. The judge found no reason to believe that weapons were 
being used, so the portion of the warrant that authorized the search for weapons 
was crossed out before the judge signed the search warrant. 
Example of Procedures Used to Obtain a Search Warrant That Were 
Not Appropriate
On February 1, 2008, patrol officers observed Apartment #4 at 987 South Seventh 
Street for 90 minutes. While they kept the location under surveillance, they saw 
five people enter the apartment. From their viewpoint a block away, it appeared 
that people came out of the apartment carrying small bags.
They quickly drafted an affidavit stating the above facts and requesting a warrant 
so they could search the apartment for narcotics and narcotics paraphernalia. 
When they presented the affidavit to a local judge, she looked at it and told them 
that the affidavit did not contain probable cause to issue a search warrant.
Execution of Search Warrants
A warrant directs a peace officer to take specific action (i.e., search or make an 
arrest). The act of doing this is called the execution of a warrant. If necessary, 
a police officer may take civilians along when executing the search warrant; for 
example, if the warrant authorizes a search for jewelry stolen during a residen-
tial burglary, the owner of the jewelry may go along to help identify the items 
in question. On the other hand, taking the news media along when officers 
enter a private home violates the privacy of the residents.
The officer executing the warrant is responsible for verifying that the 
warrant is valid on its face. This means that the warrant looks like it was 

288 
Chapter 10
legally issued, and it has not expired. The officer is not liable in a subse-
quent civil case if a judge issued a warrant without probable cause unless
the officer knew there was a problem with the warrant. For example, in 
Groh v. Ramirez (2004), an officer prepared an affidavit that supplied 
probable cause for a search warrant but the warrant did not indicate the 
location to be searched or the items to be seized; the court found that this 
warrant was not valid on its face and the officer was not entitled to immu-
nity when sued for violating the suspect’s Fourth Amendment rights.6
Even with a warrant, officers are expected to respect people’s privacy. 
This results in five requirements:
1. Absent an emergency or consent of the occupants, a warrent is 
required to enter a home;
2. Prior to entering a home, officers must comply with knock-and-
announce procedures; 
3. A protective sweep may be conducted for the safety of the officers 
immediately after entering a building;
4. Searches must be restricted to the area described in the warrant;
5. A return must be completed after the search and sent to the courthouse.
Preference for Warrant When Entering a Dwelling
The Fourth Amendment specifically requires that search warrants “par-
ticularly describe” the location to be searched and the items to be seized. 
When executing the warrant, officers must restrict their movement to 
locations where they are reasonably likely to find the things specified in the 
search warrant. If a large item, such as a 25-inch color television, is to be 
seized, officers may not look in drawers or other places that are obviously 
too small to conceal such an item.
If the warrant mentions the location of the evidence, such as the kitchen, 
officers may not search other rooms. Although the courts have been quite 
strict in interpreting these requirements, they have given officers the right 
to seize evidence they find while legally conducting a search. For example, if 
drugs are found in plain view while officers are looking for the stolen televi-
sion, the drugs can be seized and appropriate charges filed. This is called the 
Plain View Doctrine. It is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12.
Right to Enter
The ancient “home is one’s castle” doctrine has been interpreted in Payton 
v. New York to mean that a person can prevent police from entering his or 
her home unless the officer(s) has a warrant or there is an emergency.7 An 
arrest warrant is needed to enter the suspect’s home in order to arrest him 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
289
or her; if the suspect is hiding in someone else’s home, a search warrant is 
needed to enter that dwelling. Emergencies that would permit entry with-
out a warrant include hot pursuit of someone who just entered the house 
or someone inside the house calling for help.
Mincey v. Arizona held that there is no automatic right to enter a dwell-
ing even if it is the scene of a murder or other serious crime.8 The officers 
are justified in entering if there is a possibility that there are injured people 
inside who need assistance. Once it is determined that no further emer-
gency aid is needed, the officers must either obtain consent from someone 
who lives in the dwelling or secure a search warrant.
Knock-and-Announce
Prior to entering a house, officers must comply with the knock-and-announce 
procedure unless special situations exist.9 This rule applies to the service of 
warrants as well as actions done while investigating crimes and making war-
rantless arrests. The procedure is only required for residential buildings.
The proper knock-and-announce procedure requires four basic 
actions: (1) Police must knock or otherwise announce that they are there; 
(2) they must identify their official capacity (e.g., “Police.”); (3) announce 
why they are there (e.g., “We have a warrant for your arrest.”); and 
(4) wait long enough for a cooperative person to open the door. The length 
of the wait will vary, of course, with the circumstances. If no one responds, 
officers may resort to forced entry if necessary.
Two types of situations permit officers to enter without complying with 
the full knock-and-announce procedures. First, if there are explicit facts that 
indicate that the officer’s life, or the life of someone else in the house, may 
be in danger, immediate entry may be allowed. Following an armed suspect 
to the house would be an example of this type of emergency. Similar excep-
tions are allowed if taking the time to comply is very likely to result in the 
destruction of evidence or escape of a suspect. To qualify for total avoid-
ance of knock-and-announce, the facts must clearly indicate that there is an 
immediate danger. Mere suspicion or the fact that criminals usually destroy 
the evidence is not enough. In Richards v. Wisconsin (1997), the Supreme 
Court refused to allow judges to automatically waive knock-and-announce 
procedures when issuing search warrants in drug cases.10
Second, substantial compliance is permitted if the facts that develop 
while officers are giving the appropriate announcements indicate that there 
is danger. This follows the same basic situations mentioned in the previous 
paragraph: (1) danger to the police, (2) destruction of evidence, (3) escape 
of a suspect, or (4) danger to people in the house. Substantial compliance 
is only authorized if the officers, in good faith, have attempted to comply 

290 
Chapter 10
with the law, and while they are doing this the suspect does something to 
indicate that further delay would jeopardize the case. Common examples 
are hearing someone running away from the door while the officers are 
announcing their presence, the sound of toilets flushing when the offi-
cers are attempting to serve a search warrant in a drugs case, or hearing 
someone in the house screaming for help. In these situations, the Supreme 
Court indicated that the crucial question is how long it would take the 
suspect to destroy the evidence, not how long it would take a cooperative 
person to come to the door.11
Protective Sweep
Officers may conduct a protective sweep in order to prevent attacks on them 
when they execute a search warrant (Maryland v. Buie).12 When executing a 
search warrant in a house, they may quickly look in adjoining areas to make 
sure no one is hiding there. To go to more distant parts of the building, the 
officers must have reasonable suspicion that someone might ambush them. A 
protective sweep does not allow officers to look in drawers or other areas too 
small to conceal a person. The Plain View Doctrine does, however, apply to 
things found when checking appropriate places.
Return
Lastly, officers must file a “return” on the search warrant. The return is a 
document, sometimes printed on the back of the search warrant, that tells 
the court what actions were taken. The time and date the warrant was served 
are listed. If anything was seized, an inventory of all items taken is included 
in the return. Copies of the warrant and the return are given to the person 
whose premises were searched. If no one was there at the time of the search, 
the copies are left at the scene in a conspicuous place.
If no one executed the search warrant, this fact is indicated on the 
return. After the officers complete the return, it is filed with the court and 
becomes part of the official record of the case.
Exclusionary Rule
Although the U.S. Supreme Court has had the power to interpret the 
Constitution and the Bill of Rights since its inception, few cases were 
decided prior to 1914 that dealt with the Fourth Amendment. Weeks v. 
United States,13 decided that year, declared that evidence obtained by federal 
agents in violation of the Fourth Amendment could not be used in federal 
court. The rule, however, did not apply to state and local police. In fact, the 
rule was so narrow that the so-called “Silver Platter Doctrine” emerged. This 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
291
doctrine, which lasted until 1960, allowed evidence obtained unconstitu-
tionally by local law enforcement officers to be used in federal court.
In 1949, the U.S. Supreme Court declared that the Fourth Amendment 
was binding on state and local law enforcement officers. At the same 
time, however, it refused to rule that evidence illegally obtained under the 
Fourth Amendment had to be excluded from trials in state courts.
Exclusionary Rule and the Fruit of Poison Tree Doctrine
Mapp v. Ohio,14 decided in 1961, finally made the Exclusionary Rule bind-
ing on state courts. Although Mapp made unconstitutionally obtained 
evidence inadmissible, it did not provide guidelines to help the police 
determine when the Fourth Amendment had been violated. The Court 
issued many decisions in the years following Mapp in an effort to clarify 
the application of the Fourth Amendment.
Throughout the years, the Supreme Court has followed two key rationales 
in applying the Exclusionary Rule: (1) deterrence of unconstitutional police 
conduct and (2) judicial integrity. The deterrence rationale excludes evidence 
based on the belief that police officers will be more careful if they know their 
errors may mean they cannot convict the criminal. The reverse of this has also 
been seen: If the Court believes that application of the rule would have little 
deterrent value in a specific situation, the Court allows the evidence to be used 
even though it was obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment.
The judicial integrity approach excludes evidence because the courts 
should not be tainted by unconstitutional acts of the police. If this were the 
only basis for excluding evidence, the effect of the court action on future 
police conduct would not be considered. Very few cases have made judi-
cial integrity the sole basis for their decision. In the 1970s, some Supreme 
Court cases did not even mention it. Recent cases usually mention judicial 
integrity, but the dominant rationale is deterrence.
The Supreme Court’s language in Mapp indicated that illegally seized 
evidence is totally inadmissible in court. Two years later in Wong Sun v. 
United States,15 the Court went even further and declared that evidence 
derived from illegally obtained evidence was also inadmissible. This is 
called the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine.
Example 1
Aaron’s briefcase was seized during an unconstitutional search. The brief-
case and its contents would be inadmissible under the Exclusionary Rule. 
While searching the contents of the briefcase, the police found a key for 
a storage locker. They located the storage locker and discovered that it 
contained stolen televisions. The stolen televisions would be inadmissible 

292 
Chapter 10
under the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine. Table 10-1 illustrates how the 
Exclusionary Rule and Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine apply to these facts.
Example 2
All items found during the search of Bob immediately following an illegal 
arrest would be inadmissible under the Exclusionary Rule. If Bob was given 
Miranda warnings immediately after his arrest and he confessed, the confes-
sion is usually inadmissible as “fruit of the poison tree” (Table 10-2).
At some point, the taint of the original unconstitutional act evapo-
rates. Various factors have caused this result: passage of time; exercise of 
free will by a person giving the police information; the fact that a person 
has been released from police custody; a lengthy chain of events; etc. No 
one event automatically stops the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine. The 
courts analyze all of the facts.
Example 3
The Wong Sun Case.16 Narcotics agents had a tip from Hom Way that 
Blackie Toy was selling heroin. They illegally entered Blackie Toy’s living 
T A B L E  10-1  Seizure of Briefcase during Unconstitutional 
Search
Exclusionary Rule 
Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine
Illegally seized Aaron’s briefcase and  
The key to the storage locker was found in
its contents. 
the illegally seized briefcase. Stolen TV sets
 
were found when they unlocked the door to
 
the storage locker.
Briefcase and its contents will not be  
The key was part of an illegal seizure. 
admissible at trial due to the Exclusionary 
Therefore, items discovered when the key was 
Rule. 
used are inadmissible under the Fruit of the 
 
Poison Tree Doctrine.
T A B L E  10-2  Giving Miranda Warnings Immediately after 
an Illegal Arrest
Exclusionary Rule 
Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine
Search incident to Bob’s illegal arrest. 
Statements Bob made during interrogation 
 
conducted immediately after the illegal arrest 
 
are inadmissible even if Miranda warnings 
 
were given correctly.
 
Statements are the fruit of the illegal arrest.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
293
quarters and interrogated him. Mr. Toy indicated that Johnny Yee sold 
drugs and kept heroin in his bedroom. Mr. Yee was arrested and surren-
dered nearly an ounce of heroin to the agents. He told officers that his 
supplier was Wong Sun. When Wong Sun was arrested, the officers who 
searched his apartment did not find any narcotics. Toy, Yee, and Wong 
Sun were arraigned on narcotics charges and released. A few days later 
when he voluntarily returned to the agent’s office, Wong Sun was advised 
of his rights, including the right to have an attorney present. He made 
damaging admissions that were used at his trial. Table 10-3 shows how 
the Exclusionary Rule and Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine apply to the 
Wong Sun case.
Despite the broad language in Mapp and Wong Sun, there are many situ-
ations in which unconstitutionally seized evidence is admitted in court.
Good Faith Exception
In 1984, the Supreme Court recognized a Good Faith Exception to the 
Exclusionary Rule (United States v. Leon; Massachusetts v. Sheppard).17 Officers 
must be acting under an objective belief that what they are doing is constitutional. 
They must stay up to date on the law of searches, seizures, and confessions. The 
facts must be such that a reasonable officer could have made an honest mistake. 
If the officer has an ulterior motive, this exception does not apply.
T A B L E  10-3  Application of Exclusionary Rule and Fruit of 
the Poison Tree Doctrine to the Facts in Wong 
Sun v. United States
Exclusionary Rule 
Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine
Illegal entry into Toy’s living quarters. 
Inadmissible
Entry was held to be illegal because  
•  Statements made by Toy
Hom Way was not a reliable informant. 
•  Arrest of Yee
 
•  Heroin that Yee gave to agents at time 
 
    of his arrest
 
•  Arrest of Wong Sun
Admissible because taint of original illegal 
 
actions had dissipated
 
•  Statements made by Toy, Yee, and Wong 
 
    Sun after arraignment while they were 
 
    released from custody on their own 
 
    recognizance. Agents asked them to come
 
    to headquarters for questioning. They were 
 
    interrogated and made incriminating 
 
    statements.

294 
Chapter 10
However, acting in good faith is not enough. The rule only applies in 
a few distinct situations. It has been applied to actions done under search 
warrants that appeared to be valid on their face. An arrest made under a statute 
that appeared valid but was later ruled unconstitutional by the courts was also 
upheld. An arrest based on a check of computerized files that indicated there 
was an outstanding warrant for the suspect was held to fall under the Good 
Faith Exception even though it was later determined that the warrant had 
been recalled before the arrest was made. Table 10-4 gives several examples of 
the application of the Good Faith Exception to the Exclusionary Rule.
Inevitable Discovery
The Inevitable Discovery Exception to the Exclusionary Rule is based on 
the idea that the police would have found the evidence even if they had not 
used unconstitutional procedures. In Nix v. Williams,18 the case that the 
Supreme Court used to establish the rule, the fact that hundreds of volun-
teers were searching for a missing child was used to show that the discovery 
of the body was inevitable. The fact that improper interrogation procedures 
were used to induce the suspect to tell police where the body was located did 
not make the body inadmissible because the police would have discovered it 
anyway. Each case will, of course, turn on its unique facts. The prosecution 
T A B L E  10-4 Good Faith Exceptions to the Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Good Faith Exception to the
 
Exclusionary Rule
Warrant was obtained to search Charlie’s 
Evidence seized in plain view while executing
house based on an affidavit that did not 
the warrant at Charlie’s house will be
contain enough facts to establish 
admissible if the warrant appeared to be valid
probable cause. 
on its face and the officers executing the 
 
warrant did not know there was a problem 
 
with the warrant.
Dan was arrested based on a statute that 
Evidence found during the search incident to
the arresting officer believed to be valid. 
Dan’s arrest will be admissible if the 
 
officer in good faith relied on the statute 
 
even though the statute was declared 
 
unconstitutional after the arrest was made.
Eve was arrested based on information 
Evidence found in Eve’s purse during the search
the officers received from the dispatcher 
incident to her arrest will be admissible in
indicating that there was an outstanding 
court if the officers in good faith made the
warrant for her arrest. This information 
arrest based on information in a normally
was erroneous; the warrant had previously 
reliable database.
been recalled but someone forgot to
remove it from the database.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
295
bears the burden of convincing the judge that the evidence would inevita-
bly have been found by legal methods. Table 10-5 shows the relationship 
between the Exclusionary Rule and Inevitable Discovery Exception.
Independent Source
To admit evidence under the Independent Source Exception, the pros-
ecution must convince the judge that the police discovered the evidence 
without relying on unconstitutional procedures. In Segura v. United 
States,19 evidence had been illegally seized when the police entered the 
suspect’s apartment immediately after arresting him. Later, the police 
obtained a search warrant based on legally obtained information, autho-
rizing the search of the same apartment. Evidence not observed during 
the first search was seized. The Supreme Court found that the search war-
rant provided an independent source for the evidence seized during the 
second search. This would not have been so if the illegally seized evidence 
had been used to obtain the warrant. Table 10-6 shows the relationship 
between the Exclusionary Rule and the Independent Source Exception.
T A B L E  10-5  Inevitable Discovery Exception to the 
Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Inevitable Discovery Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Illegally obtained statements made by  
The body of the victim, and any evidence
Williams told the officers where to find  
discovered on it, was admissible because there
the body of the victim.  
were hundreds of people searching for the 
 
victim and it was inevitable that the body 
 
would have been found legally.
T A B L E  10-6  Independent Source Exception to the 
Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Independent Source Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Evidence observed in Frank’s apartment  
Officers legally obtained a search warrant
immediately after his illegal arrest is not  
based on facts that were obtained independent
admissible.  
of the search of Frank’s apartment immediately 
 
after his illegal arrest. When executing this 
 
search warrant in Frank’s apartment, they 
 
found the same evidence the other officers 
 
had observed but not seized.

296 
Chapter 10
The Independent Source Exception was also applied in Murray v. 
United States.20 Federal agents illegally entered Murray’s warehouse and 
observed numerous bales of marijuana. They did not seize anything at that 
time. Instead, they obtained a search warrant based on legally obtained 
information. When executing the search warrant, the marijuana they 
had previously seen was seized. The Court affirmed the admission of the 
marijuana at trial.
As the Court pointed out in Murray, the ultimate question is whether 
the facts in the affidavit and the execution of the search warrant are genu-
inely independent of the prior unconstitutional activity. The credibility of 
the police officer(s) involved is the crucial factor in this analysis.
Public Safety
The Public Safety Exception is based on the idea that the police are 
justified in acting to protect the public from immediate danger, even if 
it is necessary to violate someone’s constitutional rights to do so (New 
York v. Quarles).21 In this situation, there must be an immediate danger, 
such as a gun left where children can play with it. The fact that the area 
is closed to the public at the time the questioning is conducted does 
not change the rule because the danger will continue until the weapon 
is found.
In Quarles, the police arrested a man suspected of rape who was 
believed to be armed. They found an empty holster but no gun. An officer 
immediately asked the suspect where the gun was; the suspect indicated 
the location. Introducing the gun in court was upheld based on the Public 
Safety Exception to the Exclusionary Rule even though the Miranda warn-
ings had not been given prior to questioning. Another example of the 
Public Safety Exception would be asking the suspect, immediately after 
an arrest for kidnapping, where the victim was being held. Only brief, 
urgently needed questions are permitted under this exception; attempts to 
get a full confession would not qualify. Table 10-7 illustrates the interac-
tion of the Exclusionary Rule and the Public Safety Exception.
Knock-and-Announce Exception
The Knock-and-Announce Exception, which applies when a search 
warrant is being served, is based on the Court’s conclusion that the 
Exclusionary Rule is designed to deter seizure of evidence using methods 
that violate the Fourth Amendment. When the police obtain a valid search 
warrant, the main purpose of the Exclusionary Rule has been fulfilled. The 
Supreme Court went on to say, “What the knock-and-announce rule has 

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
297
never protected, however, is one’s interest in preventing the government 
from seeing or taking evidence described in a warrant.”22 The Court bal-
anced the interest of knock-and-announce against the burden of exclud-
ing otherwise legally seized evidence, and it concluded that violations of 
knock-and-announce when serving a warrant would not make otherwise 
legally obtained evidence inadmissible at trial.
Procedural Exceptions
A variety of situations have been found to be outside the scope of the 
Exclusionary Rule.
Harmless Error
Cases are not automatically reversed because the judge admitted uncon-
stitutionally obtained evidence that should have been excluded. The 
Harmless Error Rule applies to most constitutional violations (Chapman 
v. California).23 The case will be reversed only if the appellate judges are 
convinced, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the erroneously admitted evi-
dence influenced the jury’s decision in the case.
Harmless error is usually the last issue considered on appeal. Before 
an appellate court considers the issue of harmless error, it must determine 
whether constitutional errors occurred. If they did, the next step is to 
determine how much weight the jury gave this evidence. The justices look 
at the weight of the evidence, not at the personalities of the individual 
jurors. They consider all of the evidence that was introduced against the 
defendant. The question that must be answered is whether the jury would 
have convicted the defendant if the evidence that was erroneously admitted 
had not been introduced. The burden of proof is high: In order to reverse a 
case, a majority of the appellate judges must conclude beyond a reasonable
T A B L E  10-7  Public Safety Exception to the Exclusionary 
Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Public Safety Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police arrested George for attempted  
George’s statement about the location of the
murder shortly after the crime. They  
gun was admissible because there was an
noticed he was wearing a holster that  
important public safety interest in recovering
was empty. They asked him where the  
the gun before anyone could be harmed.
gun was without giving him the
Miranda warnings.

298 
Chapter 10
doubt that the erroneously admitted evidence influenced the jury’s ver-
dict. If the evidence against the defendant is overwhelming, the justices 
easily conclude that the erroneously introduced evidence was harmless. If 
the evidence barely established guilt, the case is likely to be reversed. The 
weight of each piece of evidence that was erroneously admitted is evalu-
ated before the justices can decide the outcome of the appeal when neither 
of these extremes apply. Table 10-8 illustrates the relationship between an 
error at trial and an appellate court’s decision to reverse.
Grand Jury
The right of the grand jury to investigate criminal cases is deeply embedded 
in our legal history. In United States v. Calandra,24 the Supreme Court held 
that this tradition is stronger than the Exclusionary Rule. Unconstitutionally 
obtained evidence may be introduced for the grand jury to consider when 
returning an indictment, even though the same evidence will be inadmis-
sible at trial. This ruling allows cases to proceed into the phase of the case in 
which most plea bargaining is done. Table 10-9 gives an example of the use 
of illegally seized evidence at a grand jury hearing.
Impeachment
Although the Exclusionary Rule prevents the prosecution from using ille-
gally obtained evidence to establish its case, the rule is not a license for the 
defendant to commit perjury. In Harris v. New York,25 the Court held that 
if a defendant testifies during trial, statements he or she made to the police 
can be used for impeachment. The statements must relate to the topics raised 
during direct examination. Confessions obtained by coercion may not be used 
for impeachment, however, because they are inherently untrustworthy and 
violate due process. The right to use unconstitutionally obtained statements 
T A B L E  10-8  Harmless Error Exception to the Exclusionary 
Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Harmless Error Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Illegally seized gun was admitted at  
If the trial judge erroneously allowed the
Hal’s trial. 
illegally seized gun to be introduced into 
 
evidence at Hal’s trial, the appellate court will 
 
reverse Hal’s conviction only if a majority of 
 
the justices are convinced beyond a reasonable 
 
doubt that the admission of the gun influenced 
 
the jury’s decision to convict Hal.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
299
for impeachment only applies to the defendant; the credibility of other 
witnesses may not be challenged in this manner (James v. Illinois).26
Table 10-10 gives an example of how statements obtained in violation of 
the Miranda warnings can be used to impeach the suspect at trial.
In a few cases, this rule also applies to the results of illegal searches (United 
States v. Havens).27 Evidence previously excluded must be relevant to a specific 
issue in the current case. For example, a suspect had been arrested on drug 
possession charges, but the case was dismissed because illegal methods were 
used to find the drugs. In a later case, the same suspect took the stand and 
categorically denied ever being involved with drugs. The arresting officer, who 
made an earlier seizure of a large quantity of drugs that the suspect was carry-
ing, was allowed to testify in order to impeach this testimony.
Civil Cases
The Exclusionary Rule does not apply in civil cases. This is true even if the 
evidence was seized by the police. In United States v. Janis,28 police illegally 
seized evidence while investigating gambling. After the prosecutor refused 
to file charges, the evidence was turned over to the Internal Revenue Service 
T A B L E  10-9 Grand Jury Exception to the Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Grand Jury Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police illegally arrested Ingrid. During the  
The illegally seized cocaine could be introduced
search incident to Ingrid’s arrest, cocaine  
when the grand jury decides whether to indict
was found in her pocket. The illegally  
Ingrid.
seized cocaine would not be admissible
at trial.
T A B L E  10-10  Impeachment Exception to the Exclusionary 
Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Impeachment Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police interrogated Jeff after his arrest  
During the defense’s case-in-chief, Jeff took
and did not give him the Miranda  
the witness stand and denied any involvement
warnings. Jeff admitted his role in  
in the crime. During cross-examination, the
committing the burglary. This statement  
prosecution could use Jeff’s statement to the
would not be admissible during the  
police in order to impeach him.
prosecution’s case-in-chief to establish  
Note: Jeff’s statement would not have been
that Jeff committed the crime. 
admissible if Jeff had not taken the witness 
 
stand.

300 
Chapter 10
(IRS). The IRS filed civil charges of tax evasion, relying on the illegally 
obtained evidence. The Supreme Court held that this did not violate the 
Fourth Amendment. It justified its decision on the deterrence rationale: 
Police do not seize evidence for the purpose of civil suits; therefore, exclu-
sion of the evidence would have no deterrent value. Table 10-11 gives an 
example of the use of illegally seized evidence at a civil trial for tax evasion.
Deportation
The Supreme Court also ruled that unconstitutionally obtained evi-
dence could be used in hearings held by U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) to deport aliens. The ruling in Immigration and 
Naturalization Service v. Lopez-Mendoza29 applies to both civil and 
criminal ICE proceedings.Table 10-12 gives an example of a situation in 
which illegally seized evidence could be used at a deportation hearing.
Sentencing
Although the Supreme Court has not specifically ruled on the question, 
many lower courts permit illegally obtained evidence to be used at sen-
tencing hearings.30 The reason given for these rulings is that only marginal 
T A B L E  10-11  Civil Case Exception to the Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Civil Case Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police illegally entered Karl’s residence and  
After the prosecutor refused to file criminal
seized evidence of illegal gambling. The  
charges against Karl, the IRS sued him in civil
prosecutor refused to file criminal  
court for tax evasion based on the same
charges against Karl because the  
evidence the criminal court ruled was
evidence would be inadmissible in
inadmissible. The evidence would be admissible
criminal court. 
because the IRS case is in civil court.
T A B L E  10-12  Deportation Case Exception to the 
Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Deportation Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police illegally detained Larry and  
If it was discovered that Larry was a resident
searched him. A large quantity of illegal  
alien in the United States, the illegal drugs
drugs was found in Larry’s backpack.  
could be used in court in an attempt to deport
A criminal court judge ruled that the drugs  
Larry due to his involvement in the illegal drug
are not admissible because they were  
trade.
seized illegally.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
301
deterrence would result from excluding the evidence. The courts believe 
that police conduct their investigations for the purpose of obtaining 
convictions. Excluding evidence from sentencing hearings would have a 
deterrent effect only if the police obtained it solely for use at the sentenc-
ing hearing. The Court did not believe this was the case. Therefore, it ruled 
that evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment could be 
used at a sentencing hearing. Table 10-13 illustrates how illegally seized 
evidence can be used at a sentencing hearing.
Parole Revocation Hearings
The Exclusionary Rule does not apply at parole revocation hearings.31 The 
Supreme Court weighed the need to deter unlawful conduct by parolees 
against the likelihood that law enforcement officers would be motivated to 
conduct illegal searches so that parole would be revoked, and it decided in 
favor of maintaining controls on parolees. Similar standards would logi-
cally apply to probation revocation hearings. Table 10-14 gives an example 
of the use of evidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment at a 
parole violation hearing.
Search by Private Person
The Bill of Rights was designed to protect people from an overbearing 
central government. Since Mapp, the Fourth Amendment has also been 
used to protect people in the United States against actions by state and local 
governments. Even with this expansion, the Fourth Amendment does not 
protect against actions by people who are not working for a government 
agency. Evidence seized by a “private person” does not become inadmissible 
T A B L E  10-13  Sentencing Exception to the Exclusionary 
Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Sentencing Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Police legally arrested Mike. When  
The $10,000 worth of jewelry found in Mike’s
conducting the search incident to  
home could be used at the sentencing hearing
the arrest, the officers found a stolen  
in an attempt to convince the judge to give
watch worth $50 in Mike’s pocket. They  
Mike a longer sentence than he would have
extended their search into the next room  
received for the theft of the $50 watch.
and found $10,000 worth of stolen jewelry.  
The $10,000 worth of jewelry would not be
admissible at Mike’s trial because the search  
incident to the arrest went beyond what is  
legally authorized.

302 
Chapter 10
under the Exclusionary Rule.32 To qualify for this exception, the private 
person must be acting on his or her own. If the police encourage a person 
to do what the police cannot do due to Mapp, the evidence is treated 
the same way it would have been treated if the police had conducted the 
search themselves. Table 10-15 gives two examples of the use of evidence 
obtained by private persons.
Impermissible Methods of Obtaining Evidence
There are certain boundaries imposed by our society that cannot be crossed 
by the police in their search for criminals. The Supreme Court ruled that 
the police may not use methods that “shock the conscience” or “offend the 
sense of justice.” These concepts come from the due process clause rather 
than any one amendment. Rochin v. California33 is the landmark case in this 
area. Rochin attempted to swallow the evidence. The police responded by 
having his stomach pumped. The Court found that this procedure was very 
painful and could not be tolerated in a civilized society. The use of the “third 
degree” to obtain confessions is on similar footing. Due process is violated 
when coercion is used during interrogation (Hayes v. Washington).34
More recently, the Court considered the question of performing surgery 
on the suspect to obtain evidence (Winston v. Lee).35 The case involved the 
recovery of a bullet that lodged in the suspect’s arm when he was shot by the 
crime victim. A search warrant or other court order was a necessary prereq-
uisite to performing the operation without the subject’s permission.
Although the Court has not totally ruled out the use of surgery, it 
established a balancing test that heavily favors the privacy of the individual. 
Surgical procedures that pose any threat to the suspect’s health cannot be 
done. The prosecution must show a compelling need for the evidence. If 
there are other witnesses who can supply the needed information, surgery 
T A B L E  10-14  Parole Revocation Exception 
to the Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Parole Revocation Exception to the 
 
Exclusionary Rule
Nancy, who was on parole, was illegally  
Nancy’s parole officer filed a petition to revoke
detained while walking down the street.  
her parole because Nancy violated a condition
She was searched and marijuana was  
of parole that required that she violate no laws.
found in her pocket. The marijuana  
The marijuana could be used at the parole
would not be admissible at trial if Nancy  
revocation hearing.
was charged with possession of marijuana.

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
303
T A B L E  10-15  Search by Private Person Exception 
to the Exclusionary Rule
Exclusionary Rule 
Search by Private Person Exception to 
 
the Exclusionary Rule
Ollie was suspected of buying stolen  
Paul, Ollie’s next-door neighbor, heard rumors
merchandise. When he left his garage door  
that Ollie was buying stolen property. When
open, the police entered the garage, looked  
Paul saw that Ollie left his garage door open,
through several boxes, and discovered  
he went into the garage and looked through
100 stolen watches. The recovered  
several boxes. Paul found a bag containing
watches are not admissible in court  
100 watches with the price tags still on them.
because the police illegally searched  
Paul took the bag and its contents to the police
the garage.  
station. The watches were identified as stolen 
 
from a Federal Express shipment. These 
 
watches could be used at trial if it is established
 
that the police did not direct Paul to search 
 
Ollie’s garage.
Quint was dealing drugs out of the back 
The local police encouraged Roxanne to obtain
door of his restaurant. The police were 
drugs from Quint’s restaurant. When Roxanne
unable to obtain a search warrant because 
responded by trespassing on Quint’s property
they did not have probable cause to search 
to obtain evidence, the court treats Roxanne as
Quint’s restaurant. 
if she was acting at the direct command of the
Roxanne, the owner of the shop next to  
police. 
Quint’s restaurant, called the police to  
Evidence that Roxanne obtained for the police
tell them her suspicion that Quint was dealing  
is suppressed using the same standards that
drugs. The police told Roxanne, “We are 
would apply if a police officer quietly entered
sorry, but we cannot do anything about it. 
Quint’s restaurant and obtained the evidence.
But if you brought us a sample of the drugs 
In these circumstances, evidence that Roxanne
that Quint is selling, we could have it tested 
obtained is not admissible at trial. 
and obtain a warrant to arrest Quint.”
The next night, Roxanne surreptitiously 
entered the kitchen area of Quint’s restaurant,
put a sample of the drugs into a zip lock bag, 
and gave it to the local police.
is not a reasonable alternative. Surgery also would not be allowed if the 
facts indicate that there is a high probability that it will not be possible to 
conduct conclusive tests on the evidence once it is recovered.
Table 10-16 analyzes two situations in which the police sought to 
obtain physical evidence from the body of the suspect. Note that both the 
officers’ actions and the reasons for their actions are important.
High-speed police pursuits are dangerous and occasionally result 
in fatal accidents. The Supreme Court ruled that reckless driving by the 
police does not raise constitutional issues. Due process is implicated only
if the officer intentionally tried to cause harm unrelated to the legitimate 
objective of arresting the suspect (County of Sacramento v. Lewis).36

304 
Chapter 10
T A B L E  10-16  Impermissible Methods of Obtaining 
Evidence
Action
Analysis
Sam was shot by a police officer when  
The court would authorize surgery to remove
he tried to escape from the scene of a  
the bullet in these circumstances. Even though
robbery he had committed. The bullet  
abdominal surgery posed risks to Sam’s health, 
lodged in his stomach. The area where  
it was done for medical reasons that aimed at
the bullet was embedded became  
speeding Sam’s recovery. 
infected and made Sam very ill. He was 
taken to a hospital and the bullet was 
removed and the infected area cleansed.
Tom was arrested for driving under the  
The purpose of drawing blood was to obtain
influence of alcohol. He was taken to  
evidence to be used against Tom. The only
the emergency room so that a blood  
possible benefit to Tom would be a showing
sample could be drawn for a blood  
that his blood alcohol was below the legal 
alcohol test. Tom became very combative.  
limit. If the officers used excessive force to pin
Three officers subdued Tom and pinned  
him down so that the blood sample could be
him to the floor long enough for a  
drawn, the court would rule that the methods
medical technician to draw the blood  
used were excessive, shocked the conscience,
sample.
and offended the sense of justice. Testimony about 
 
the results of the blood alcohol test would not
 
be admissible at Tom’s trial.
The Fourth Amendment was enacted to protect citizens from an oppressive cen-
tral government. It mandates that warrants be issued by neutral magistrates based 
on facts given under oath or affirmation. To satisfy the Fourth Amendment, the 
judge must review the affidavits and determine whether the facts establish prob-
able cause to issue the warrant. The judge also needs to know why the information 
in the affidavit is reliable. Search warrants cannot be based on stale facts. The area 
to be searched must be described in as much detail as possible so that officers will 
not unnecessarily invade someone’s privacy.
 
When serving a warrant at a residence, officers must comply with “knock-and-
announce” unless there is an immediate threat of harm to the officers, destruction 
of the evidence, or escape of the suspect. If no one responds to the knock, the 
officers may use force to enter.
 
While executing a search warrant, the officers must confine their search to 
places where the evidence listed in the warrant could be located. This includes 
staying out of areas where the warrant does not authorize entry, as well as restrict-
ing the search to places where items of the size indicated could be hidden.
 
The Exclusionary Rule prevents unconstitutionally seized evidence from being 
admitted at trial. The Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine excludes evidence derived 
from illegally obtained evidence. Even though the police violated constitutional 
Summary
S u m m a r y

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
305
rights, evidence may be admitted at trial if the violation was done in “good faith” 
reliance on an apparently valid warrant, a statute that was believed to be consti-
tutional, or computerized information indicating that there was an outstanding 
arrest warrant for the suspect.
 
Evidence will be admitted under the Inevitable Discovery Exception if the court 
is convinced that it would have been found even if there was no unconstitutional 
activity. The Independent Source Exception also allows evidence to be admitted 
despite unconstitutional actions. To qualify under this rule, there must have been 
a genuinely independent and constitutional search that led to the evidence.
 
If immediate action is required to save someone’s life, police may act under the 
Public Safety Exception. This exception authorizes only brief questioning aimed 
at preventing serious injury.
 
Cases are not dismissed for violations of the Exclusionary Rule if the Harmless 
Error Rule applies. This rule allows cases to be affirmed if the appellate judges are 
convinced that the introduction of inadmissible evidence at trial did not affect the 
verdict.
 
The Exclusionary Rule is not applied in a variety of situations. Grand juries 
may use unconstitutionally obtained evidence. The prosecutor can use it to 
impeach a witness or at the defendant’s sentencing hearing. Unconstitutionally 
obtained evidence can be used in civil suits and in U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) cases (formerly Immigration and Naturalization Service). 
None of the protections of the Fourth Amendment apply to actions of private 
persons acting on their own.
 
Evidence may not be obtained by means that offend our sense of justice. 
Surgery and other medical procedures that are particularly painful or dangerous 
are carefully scrutinized by the courts. Confessions may not be coerced. These 
situations violate due process.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Define:
(a) Search
(b) Seizure
(c) Probable cause
(d) Standing
 2. Explain what must be in an affidavit for a search warrant. How does a judge 
determine if an affidavit is reliable?
 3. Explain what procedures must be followed prior to entering a house to serve 
a search warrant. 
 4. What areas may be searched when executing a search warrant?
 5. Describe two situations in which police may enter a residence without a 
warrant.
 6. Explain when officers are allowed to conduct a protective sweep when 
executing a search warrant.

306 
Chapter 10
 7. Explain the Exclusionary Rule and the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine.
 8. Explain the Inevitable Discovery Exception to the Exclusionary Rule. How 
does it differ from the Independent Source Exception to the Exclusionary 
Rule?
 9. Explain three exceptions to the Exclusionary Rule that are not listed in 
Question 8.
 10. Explain two types of police tactics prohibited by due process.
Go to www.cnn.com/crime and find a case in which the defense made a motion 
to suppress evidence. If you have trouble finding a current case, go to www
.crimelibrary.com and type the words Fourth Amendment in the search box. 
Prepare a one-page (250-word) report explaining the legal rationale the defense 
used when it asked to have the evidence suppressed and the judge’s ruling on 
this issue.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Aguilar v. Texas 378 U.S. 108, 12 L.Ed. 2d 723, 84 S.Ct. 1509 (1964).
 2.  Spinelli v. United States 393 U.S. 110, 21 L.Ed. 2d 637, 89 S.Ct. 584 (1969).
 3.  Illinois v. Gates 462 U.S. 213, 76 L.Ed. 2d 527, 103 S.Ct. 2317 (1983).
 4.  McCray v. Illinois 386 U.S. 300, 18 L.Ed. 2d 62, 87 S.Ct. 1056 (1967).
 5.  Coolidge v. New Hampshire 403 U.S. 443, 29 L.Ed. 2d 564, 91 S.Ct. 2022 (1971).
 6. Groh v. Ramirez 540 U.S. 551, 157 L.Ed. 2d 1068, 124 S.Ct. 1284 (2004).
 7.  Payton v. New York 445 U.S. 573, 63 L.Ed. 2d 639, 100 S.Ct. 1371 (1980).
 8.  Mincey v. Arizona 437 U.S. 385, 57 L.Ed. 2d 290, 98 S.Ct. 2408 (1978).
 9.  Wilson v. Arkansas 514 U.S. 927, 131 L.Ed. 2d 976, 115 S.Ct. 1914 (1995).
10. Richards v. Wisconsin 520 U.S. 385, 137 L.Ed. 2d 615, 117 S.Ct. 1416 (1997).
11. United States v. Banks 540 U.S. 31, 157 L.Ed. 2d 343, 124 S.Ct. 521 (2003).
12. Maryland v. Buie 494 U.S. 325, 108 L.Ed. 2d 276, 110 S.Ct. 1093 (1990).
13.  Weeks v. United States 232 U.S. 383, 58 L.Ed. 652, 34 S.Ct. 341 (1914).
14. Mapp v. Ohio 367 U.S. 643, 6 L.Ed. 2d 1081, 81 S.Ct. 1684 (1961).
15. Wong Sun v. United States 371 U.S. 471, 9 L.Ed. 2d 441, 83 S.Ct. 407 (1963).
16. Wong Sun v. United States 371 U.S. 471, 9 L.Ed. 2d 441, 83 S.Ct. 407 (1963). 
17. United States v. Leon 468 U.S. 897, 82 L.Ed. 2d 677, 104 S.Ct. 3405 (1984); Massachusetts v. 
Sheppard 468 U.S. 981, 82 L.Ed. 2d 737, 104 S.Ct. 3424 (1984). See also Illinois v. Krull 480 U.S. 
340, 94 L.Ed. 2d 364, 107 S.Ct. 1160 (1987); Arizona v. Evans 514 U.S. 1, 131 L.Ed. 2d 34, 115 S.Ct. 
1185 (1995). 
18. Nix v. Williams 467 U.S. 431, 81 L.Ed. 2d 377, 104 S.Ct. 2501 (1984).
19. Segura v. United States 468 U.S. 796, 82 L.Ed. 2d 599, 104 S.Ct. 3380 (1984).
20. Murray v. United States 487 U.S. 533, 101 L.Ed. 2d 472, 108 S.Ct. 2529 (1988).
21. New York v. Quarles 467 U.S. 649, 81 L.Ed. 2d 550, 104 S.Ct. 2626 (1984).
22. Hudson v. Michigan, 126 S.Ct. 2159; 165 L. Ed. 2d 56 (2006).

 
Developing Law of Search and Seizure 
307
23. Chapman v. California 386 U.S. 18, 17 L.Ed. 2d 705, 87 S.Ct. 824 (1967).
24. United States v. Calandra 414 U.S. 338, 38 L.Ed. 2d 561, 94 S.Ct. 613 (1974).
25. Harris v. New York 401 U.S. 222, 28 L.Ed. 2d 1, 91 S.Ct. 643 (1971).
26. James v. Illinois 493 U.S. 307, 107 L.Ed. 2d 676, 110 S.Ct. 648 (1990).
27. United States v. Havens 446 U.S. 620, 64 L.Ed. 2d 559, 100 S.Ct. 1912 (1980). 
28. United States v. Janis 428 U.S. 433, 49 L.Ed. 2d 1046, 96 S.Ct. 3021 (1976).
29. Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Lopez-Mendoza 468 U.S. 1032, 82 L.Ed. 2d 778, 104 
S.Ct. 3479 (1984).
30. United States v. Butler 680 F. 2d 1055 (5th Cir. 1982); United States v. Larios 640 F. 2d 938 (9th Cir. 
1981).
31. Pennsylvania Board of Probation & Parole v. Scott 524 U.S. 357, 141 L.Ed. 2d 344, 118 S.Ct. 2014 
(1998).
32. Burdeau v. McDowell 256 U.S. 465, 65 L.Ed. 1048, 41 S.Ct. 574 (1921); United States v. Jacobsen 
466 U.S. 109, 80 L.Ed. 2d 85, 104 S.Ct. 1652 (1984).
33. Rochin v. California 342 U.S. 165, 96 L.Ed. 183, 72 S.Ct. 205 (1952).
34. Hayes v. Washington 373 U.S. 503, 10 L.Ed. 2d 513, 83 S.Ct. 1336 (1963).
35. Winston v. Lee 470 U.S. 753, 84 L.Ed. 2d 662, 105 S.Ct. 1611 (1985).
36. County of Sacramento v. Lewis 523 U.S. 833, 140 L.Ed. 2d 1043, 118 S. Ct. 1708 (1998).

This page intentionally left blank 

309
Field Interviews, 
Arrests, and 
Jail Searches
CHAPTER
Feature Case: The Trial of Ivory John Webb Jr.
On January 29, 2006, Senior Airman Elio Carrion, who was home on leave 
after a 6-month tour of duty in Iraq, attended a family barbeque. It was the 
night before he was due to return to his base. Carrion and a high school 
friend, both 21 years old, were intoxicated when they left the barbeque. 
Although he had a suspended license, the friend borrowed a blue Corvette 
and sped through neighboring towns, passing a deputy at more than 100 
mph. The deputy gave chase but was unable to catch them. Deputy Webb 
heard the chase on his police radio and took over the pursuit until the 
Corvette hit a dip, jumped a curb, swiped a fence, and rolled into a wall. 
The driver remained in the car, but Carrion jumped out the passenger 
door and lay beside the car.
Webb stood over Carrion with his gun drawn and the beam of his flash-
light shining on Carrion’s face. Webb repeatedly shouted, “Shut up!” but the 
men repeatedly talked back. Carrion gestured with one hand and told Webb 
“We mean you no harm” and “We are on your side.” Carrion said that he was 
in the military and had more training than Webb. What happened next is 
recorded on 1 minute and 15 seconds of grainy videotape that was shown to 
the jury repeatedly in slow motion and freeze frame. The outcome is not in dis-
pute: Webb shot Carrion in the leg, chest, and shoulder. In a statement prepared 
by Webb and read to the jury, he described how he felt during the encounter:
My heart is going crazy—where were my guys [my backup]? I say to 
myself, “He’s getting up.” I’m getting lightheaded.… I can’t get the 
11

310 
Chapter 11
words out, I’m saying “Get up,” I’m thinking “Don’t get . . . ” In my mind 
I’m shouting out, shouting it out, shouting it out, but . . . I’ve spent so 
much energy I can’t—I can’t get it out. . . . He turns toward me and I’m 
thinking to myself, “What is he doing?” And I see the hand, I’m dead, 
I’m, I’m dead.
According to the prosecution, Carrion had both hands on the ground just 
before Webb told him, twice, clearly to get up. As he got to his knees, Webb 
fired three shots. A prosecution expert inferred that the half-second pause 
between the shots was evidence of deliberate intent.
The defense emphasized that throughout the encounter, one of 
Carrion’s hands was often in motion, either gesturing or, at two points, 
reaching toward Webb within inches of his weapon. At another point, 
Carrion reached into his oversized Raiders jacket and Webb thought 
he was pulling a gun. The defense attorney emphasized that Webb 
was in fear of his life, and regardless of what he said, he believed he 
was telling Carrion to get his hands back on the ground where Webb 
could see them. The defense asserted, “In that position—in that level 
of fear—no human being is held to a standard of having to articulate 
perfectly.”
Both sides called experts on police training and tactics to analyze the 
tape and report on the appropriateness of Webb’s actions.
At the end of the 4-week trial, Webb was acquitted of charges of 
attempted voluntary manslaughter and assault with a firearm that 
could have resulted in more than 18 years in prison if he had been 
convicted. 
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Recognize the standard that allows police to detain a person without making an 
arrest.
• Describe the extent of the search permitted when police stop a person who is not 
under arrest.
• Define the standard for making legal arrests.
• Describe the extent of the search police may conduct when an arrest is 
made.
• Explain when a warrant is needed to make an arrest.
• Identify the type of search permitted when someone is booked into jail.
• List the types of searches permitted in a jail without a search warrant.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
311
Key Terms
•   Booking search
•  Canine searches
•  Citizen’s arrest
•  Field interview
•  Frisk
•  Jail search
•  Plain feel
•  Probable cause
•  Protective sweep
•  Reasonable force
•  Reasonable suspicion
•  School searches
•   Search incident 
to arrest
•  Temporary detention
Myths about Arrests and Detentions
Fact about Arrests and Detentions
If a fleeing felon fails to stop when told to 
do so, the police may shoot.
Police are only allowed to shoot if someone 
is in danger of imminent death or serious 
bodily injuries that are likely to cause death.
The police may not detain a person unless 
there is probable cause to make an arrest.
The police may temporarily detain someone 
for questioning if there is reasonable 
suspicion that the person is involved in 
criminal activity. “Reasonable suspicion” is 
a lower standard than probable cause.
The police have the right to automatically 
frisk anyone whom they detain.
The police only have the right to frisk (pat 
down outer clothing for weapons) if the 
officer has reasonable suspicion that the 
person is armed.
The police need an arrest warrant to 
make an arrest for a crime that was not 
committed in their presence.
Police can make felony arrests based on 
probable cause even if the crime did not 
occur in their presence. In most states, 
they need an arrest warrant to arrest for a 
misdemeanor that was not committed in 
the officer’s presence.
When there is no emergency, police are 
required to obtain arrest warrants.
The only time the Supreme Court has 
required police to obtain an arrest warrant 
is when they will enter a dwelling to make 
the arrest.
This chapter focuses on the authority the police have to detain people 
against their will. Inherent in the right to detain is the right to use rea-
sonable force to do so. The Supreme Court has ruled that the Fourth 
Amendment sets limits on the amount of force that officers may use.
The Fourth Amendment places boundaries on the rights of police 
officers to stop individuals. This chapter focuses on stops based on “rea-
sonable suspicion” and “probable cause.” Every time the police are allowed 
to detain someone, officers are also given the right to conduct at least a 
limited search if the circumstances indicate it is needed for their protec-
tion. The rights of the police vary according to the reasons for detaining 
the person. Three types of situations cover most police encounters: field 

312 
Chapter 11
interviews, arrests, and booking. Searches of jail and prison inmates are 
also discussed.
Right to Use Force to Detain or Arrest Suspects
Anytime an officer has the right to detain someone, the officer has the right 
to use reasonable force to prevent that person from leaving. This applies to 
both temporary detentions for questioning and arrests. The force used must 
always be reasonable under the circumstances. Deadly force is only justified 
if a life (including the officer’s life) is in danger. The Supreme Court set this 
standard in Tennessee v. Garner,1 a case that dealt with the right to use deadly 
force to make an arrest. The justification for the use of force is even less when 
officers are only investigating to determine if a crime has occurred. Only a 
situation perceived as life threatening will ever justify using deadly force. 
The Fourth Amendment also controls the right to use less than lethal 
force. As the Court pointed out in Graham v. Connor,2 when force is used, 
it must be reasonable under the circumstances. Although the rules on the 
use of force can be reduced to a short list, the rapidly changing situations 
that law enforcement officers face dictate that officers be well trained on 
the issues involved before they have to make split-second judgment calls 
on whether to shoot. 
What Should Be Considered before Using Physical Force
Factors that must be considered when using physical force:
1. Reasonable person
2. Reasonable appearances
3. Reasonable force
Factors that should never be considered:
1. Get even
2. Revenge
3. Retaliation
4. “Teach ’em a lesson”
Reasonable Person
When the topic is the right to use force, the reasonable person is the reference 
point. A hypothetical reasonable person has all of the physical attributes of the 
person who must decide whether or not to use force. In addition, the reason-
able person is in the same situation as the person in question, has the same 
weapons available, and the same people are present. The reasonable person 
will have reasonable emotional reactions to the situation. The reasonable 
person is neither overly timid nor overly brave. 

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
313
If a strong, young policeman with a 9 mm gun in his holster is being 
attacked by a person who is high on PCP and the backup officer has an esti-
mated time of arrival of 15 minutes, then the reasonable person is a strong, 
young policeman with a 9 mm gun confronted by a person who is high on 
PCP with no one to assist him for 15 minutes. If the officer is facing a hostile 
group of people, so is the reasonable person. If the question is whether a frail, 
86-year-old woman who is cornered in her home has the right to shoot a group 
of muscular, young gang members, then the reasonable person has the same 
physical attributes as that frail, 86-year-old woman; is cornered in her home; 
and is confronted by the same number of muscular, young gang members. 
Reasonable Appearances
When analyzing the right to use force, the facts are not as important as what 
the facts reasonably appear to be. In other words, if it reasonably appears 
that the menacing, tattooed juvenile has a gun in his pocket, the reasonable 
person will formulate a response based on the belief that the assailant has a 
gun. The analysis does not change if the postmortem reveals that the tattoos 
were temporary rub-ons and the juvenile had a water pistol. 
Reasonable Force 
Supreme Court decisions, resting on the Fourth Amendment, set two limits 
on a police officer’s right to use force. First, officers may never use deadly 
force unless the officer’s life, or the life of someone nearby, is in imminent 
danger. By inference, deadly force is never authorized to apprehend indi-
viduals for misdemeanors and nonviolent felonies. The offender’s actions 
are more important than the offenses committed. Second, whatever force 
that an officer uses must be reasonable force. 
Reasonable force is the level of force that a reasonable person would 
use to safely extricate him- or herself from a situation. If it appears the 
officer can talk his or her way out of the problem, then a resort to even 
minimal force would be unreasonable. Reasonable force is usually a higher 
level of force than the assailant is using because if both parties used exactly 
the same amount of force, there would be a standoff.
These situations are usually fluid and require new analysis every time the 
facts change. Consider the situation in which an officer is trying to talk an 
armed person into surrendering. When the gun is aimed at the officer and it 
appears that an emotionally distraught person is about to pull the trigger, it may 
be reasonable for the officer to shoot in order to save his life. A few moments 
later, when the person is apparently calm and has put the gun down, the officer 
would not be justified in shooting. If the person retrieves the gun and starts 

314 
Chapter 11
talking about suicide, the facts must be reviewed anew. During the course of the 
afternoon, there may be a dozen different situations that arise from the same 
location. Table 11-1 provides an analysis of appropriate use of force.
The issue of what level of force is reasonable 
must be considered based on what appeared 
to be happening when the force was applied.
The first officer had the right to use reasonable 
force in self-defense when Zev was hitting him. 
If the other officer had been present during this 
assault, that officer would have been allowed to 
use reasonable force to stop Zev’s attack.
When the second officer arrived and Zev ran, 
the analysis changes because Zev is no longer 
attacking anyone. The officers should not 
continue to use the same level-of-force analysis 
that applied when Zev was attacking the first 
officer.
In a life-threatening situation, the police are 
allowed to use reasonable deadly force. This 
vignette illustrates the fluid nature of these 
situations. At the time the police arrived, Yvette 
was aiming a gun at the store employee. This 
could have been interpreted as a threat to the 
employee’s life that justified deadly force, but 
before the police acted, Yvette changed her 
position.
The analysis must also change. The next 
scenario involves Yvette aiming the gun at the 
police car and shooting. If the police had acted 
at that moment, they would have been entitled 
to shoot Yvette because she posed a very real 
threat to the lives of the officers. 
The final situation has Yvette with the gun at 
her side, crying. The officers must decide if it 
reasonably appears that she is an imminent 
threat to the lives of the officers, the store 
employee, or bystanders.
The issue of what level of force is reasonable 
must consider what reasonably appeared to 
be happening. If the officer shot Will when he 
believed that Will was not armed and did not 
pose a threat to the lives of the officers if he 
escaped, the shooting would be in violation of 
the Fourth Amendment.
T A B L E  11-1 Analysis of Appropriate Use of Force
A police officer told Zev he was under arrest 
and started to handcuff him. Zev became 
combative and swung his arm, hitting the 
officer in the head twice with the loose 
handcuff. When a second officer arrived,
 Zev tried to run away.
Yvette pulled a gun when a store employee 
stopped her for shoplifting. A standoff 
occurred until the police arrived. When an 
officer turned on the car’s exterior speaker 
and said, “Put down the gun!” Yvette 
turned toward the police car and fired 
a shot. From the look on her face, it 
appeared that she was surprised that 
the gun went off. Her hand dropped 
to her side, and she stood there 
motionless, with the lights of the police 
car in her eyes, crying.
Will tried to kill a member of a rival gang. 
When the police arrived, Will sprinted down 
the street and over three fences. Based on 
the way he used both hands to vault over 
fences, the officers concluded that Will no 
longer had a weapon.
None of the officers at the scene were able 
to keep up with Will. Fearing that Will 
would escape, an officer fired three shots 
at Will, killing him.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
315
Criminal Charges for Using Excessive Force
If someone uses more force than is reasonably necessary, the force that is 
beyond what would be considered reasonable is called excessive force. This 
is an important distinction because an officer can be charged with crimi-
nal conduct if he or she uses excessive force. If the excessive force results in 
death, the officer can be charged with manslaughter or even murder.
The prosecutor determines what charges to file, but the case will be 
decided by the jury (unless there is a plea bargain). Expert witnesses fre-
quently have conflicting analyses of the facts. Review the Ivory Webb case. 
Even though the prosecution thought it had a strong case, the jury decided 
the officer should not be jailed as punishment for a mistake. In some situ-
ations, the U.S. Attorney will file federal charges for violating a suspect’s 
constitutional rights if there was a flagrant violation and the local authori-
ties did not treat the matter seriously. The officer cannot claim double 
jeopardy as a defense when this is done. Both state and federal charges 
were filed in the Rodney King case.
Field Interviews
Police frequently observe something that indicates that further investiga-
tion is called for. Many times the initial observation does not give the 
police officer enough information to arrest someone but indicates there is 
definitely something going on that needs to be checked out. Based on what 
they find during the field interview, the police may either make an arrest 
or release the person involved.
Right to Detain
The U.S. Supreme Court agreed with the police that officers should have 
the power to act even though the facts do not indicate that an arrest should 
be made. The leading case is Terry v. Ohio.
Standard for Temporary Detention
The police may temporarily detain someone for questioning if there are specific 
articulable facts that would lead a reasonable police officer to believe that 
criminal activity is occurring.3
The standard for this type of stop is frequently called reasonable sus-
picion. It differs from the standard for making an arrest in several ways. 
Reasonable suspicion does not require as many facts as are needed to 

316 
Chapter 11
make an arrest. The officer must be able to cite specific facts that caused 
him or her to believe criminal activity was present, but it is not necessary 
to identify a specific crime believed to be in progress. To make an arrest, 
the officer must believe that it is more probable than not that the suspect 
committed a crime. Reasonable suspicion only requires that a reasonable 
officer would believe that some criminal activity is occurring. An arrest is 
based on what a “reasonable person” would conclude; temporary deten-
tion can be based on what a “reasonable officer” would believe.
Even though the Court allowed the police to detain someone against 
his or her will without making an arrest, the police still cannot stop people 
any time they feel like it. An officer may stop someone based on reasonable 
suspicion but not randomly, on “mere suspicion,” or based on a hunch. 
The officer must have specific facts that can be stated to justify detention—
sometimes called “articulable suspicion.”
The Court has never set a specific time limit on temporary detentions.
The length of time must allow the officer to conduct a brief investigation. 
How long that investigation may take varies with the circumstances. One 
case involving a 90-minute detention was ruled unreasonably long. Cases 
involving 20-minute stops have been upheld. The detention should last 
no longer than necessary to determine if the person stopped was actually 
involved in a crime. The important thing is that the police diligently pur-
sued reasonable investigative techniques in order to decide if the suspect 
should be arrested.
The courts have interpreted the temporary detention standard quite 
freely, permitting many police actions. For example, the Supreme Court 
held that the fact that a person ran from the scene when a police officer 
approached is sufficient grounds to detain the individual for questioning 
(Illinois v. Wardlow).4 Merely associating with other known criminals or 
loitering in a high-crime area, however, is not sufficient to justify a stop. 
Although most temporary detentions are based on the police officer’s 
firsthand observations, often someone else provides the information. The 
Supreme Court, in Adams v. Williams, indicated that the police may use 
facts supplied by others if there is sufficient reason to believe the person 
supplying the facts is reliable.5 The totality-of-the-circumstances test is 
used to make this determination, even if the information came from an 
anonymous informant. An anonymous tip, unconfirmed by the police, is 
not enough to detain someone even though the informant stated that the 
suspect was armed (Florida v. J. L.).6
The right to detain temporarily is not restricted to crimes in progress. 
Police may also stop someone on the basis of a wanted flyer (United States 
v. Hensley).7 In these situations, the wanted flyer usually creates reasonable 

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
317
suspicion; additional details supplied by the law enforcement agency circu-
lating the flyer establish probable cause for the arrest. If the flyer turns out to 
be based on insufficient evidence, the arrest is illegal (Whiteley v. Warden).8
Examples of Temporary Detentions
Legal Detentions
•  Police observed two suspects, who appeared to be armed, outside a liquor store 
intently watching the clerk count money.
•  Police saw a car with lights out driving rapidly away from the scene of a “burglary 
now” call.
•  Police saw a person matching the description of a robbery suspect running away 
from the scene shortly after the robbery occurred.
Illegal Detentions
•  Police stopped a person who was standing on a corner near the location where drug 
dealers frequently made sales.
•  Police saw a car driving slowly in a residential area, stopping frequently to look at 
numbers painted on the curb in front of houses.
•  Police stopped a person who was jogging at night in an industrial area.
Searches during Temporary Detention
The Supreme Court, recognizing that it is frequently necessary to search 
suspects in order to protect the officer, established standards governing 
these searches.
This limited search, frequently called a frisk or a “pat down,” is designed 
solely for the protection of the officer. There is no automatic right to search 
every person stopped. Officers must have a reasonable suspicion that the 
search is needed for their protection. If a person is stopped, for example, 
because there is reasonable suspicion that a violent crime has been com-
mitted or is in progress, the right to search logically follows. If the situation 
involves a property crime, there may be little or no right to search.
Standard for Search during Temporary Detention
During a temporary detention, a search for weapons may be done if, and only if, the 
officer has a reasonable suspicion that the suspect is armed or dangerous. The officer 
may conduct a pat down of outer clothing for weapons. If the officer feels an object 
believed to be a weapon, he or she may reach into the clothing and remove it.
The scope of the search is limited to what is necessary to protect 
the officers. As previously indicated, in most cases, this involves “patting 
down” the suspect for weapons. If officers feel something they believe is a 

318 
Chapter 11
weapon, then they may retrieve it. Sometimes this search may be slightly 
broader. For example, in Terry v. Ohio the suspects were wearing heavy 
coats because it was a cold winter day. The Court approved a search that 
included checking inner pockets for items that could not be detected during 
a pat down because of the bulky nature of the coats. Figure 11-1 depicts the 
extent of a legal search when a person driving a car was detained based on 
Terry v. Ohio and there was reasonable suspicion that he was armed or that 
there were weapons in the car. 
When police, acting on reasonable suspicion, retrieve what they believe 
is a weapon, it is a legal search. This falls under the Plain View Doctrine. If, 
in fact, the object they seize is not a weapon, whatever they seize will still be 
admissible. The right to retrieve items in “plain view” was expanded slightly 
in Minnesota v. Dickerson.9 The officers were allowed to remove items that 
did not feel like weapons if, by their distinctive feel, it could be determined 
that the items were contraband. This has been called plain feel.
Examples of Searches during Temporary Detentions
Legal Searches
•  Officers observe bulge in suspect’s pocket. During pat down, officer feels hard 
object the shape of a knife. When the object is retrieved, it turns out to be a package 
of rock cocaine.
•  Robbery victim describes the robber and states that he had a gun. Officers stop 
a man who fits the description given by a robbery victim approximately 10 
minutes after the robbery and approximately half a mile from where it occurred. 
An officer immediately frisked the suspect and retrieved a gun from the pocket 
in his pants.
Figure 11-1
Search during Temporary Detention
There was recently a shooting in the area, and the police officer is reasonably 
suspicious that this person may be armed.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
319
Illegal Searches
• Officer who has no reason to believe suspect is armed conducts a pat down.
•  During a legal pat down, an officer feels a lump of something that he or she cannot 
identify in the suspect’s pocket. He orders the suspect to empty the pocket and discovers 
that the lump was a package containing methamphetamine.
Special Situations
A variety of situations have been before the Supreme Court. You should be 
familiar with the rights of the police to act in each of them.
Car Stops
There is no special right to stop a car or other vehicle. Nor do police have the 
right to randomly stop a car merely to check vehicle registration or to see if the 
driver has a valid license (Delaware v. Prouse).10 In Pennsylvania v. Mimms,11
the Court recognized the right of the police officer to order the driver to 
get out of a vehicle during a traffic stop. Other occupants may be ordered 
out of the car without particularized suspicion that they are involved in 
criminal activity (Maryland v. Wilson).12 Someone may be searched if 
there is reasonable suspicion that that person is armed; for example, a 
bulge in the driver’s pocket resembles a gun. Complete searches of the 
suspect and the passenger compartment of the vehicle are authorized if 
an arrest is made.
Cars are frequently stopped because of vehicle code violations. 
Depending on the state code, an officer may be authorized to stop a car 
and issue a citation based on something as minor as the license plate light 
being out. The officer needs at least reasonable suspicion of a code viola-
tion in order to make one of these stops; once the car has stopped, the offi-
cer will verify that the equipment is not functioning properly. If the driver 
will be released, the only rationale for a search is reasonable suspicion that 
the person is armed or has weapons in the vehicle. The passenger compart-
ment can be searched for weapons in the same manner that it could if the 
stop had been based on Terry v. Ohio.
At other times, the facts may indicate that there is reasonable 
suspicion that the occupants of a car are involved in criminal activ-
ity. These cars can be stopped under the authority of Terry to detain 
suspects temporarily. When this occurs, officers have the authority 
to conduct a search of the passenger compartment for weapons only 
if there is an articulable and objectively reasonable belief that the 
suspect is potentially dangerous (Michigan v. Long).13 This right to 
look for weapons exists even if the officers have decided to release 

320 
Chapter 11
the suspects. The rationale for this is that a suspect who has been 
released may return to the car, retrieve a weapon, and use it to harm 
the officers.
Examples of Car Stops
Legal
•  Officer observed a car go through an intersection without stopping for a red traffic 
light.
• Officer observed a car driving at night without the headlights on.
•  Officer observed a car go slowly down a residential street, stopping at every garage 
that had the door open.
Notes
In all three of these situations, the officer could conduct a pat down of the driver 
  for weapons only if the officer had a reasonable suspicion that the driver has a 
  weapon.
In all three of these situations, the officer could conduct a search of the passenger
  compartment for weapons only if the officer had reasonable suspicion that there
  is a weapon in the vehicle.
Illegal
•  Officer observed a car being driven 5 miles below the speed limit on a street in 
an industrial area on a weekend. The car was stopped and immediately the entire 
vehicle was searched.
The facts stated do not indicate that there was a valid reason for the car stop.
If there had been a legal stop and reasonable suspicion that there were 
weapons in the vehicle, the search should have been limited to the passenger 
compartment.
•  Officer stopped a truck because the driver made an illegal U-turn at an intersection. 
The driver was pulled from the cab and searched thoroughly.
The officer had the right to make the stop of an illegal U-turn. 
In order to search the driver, the officer needed reasonable suspicion that the driver 
was armed.
Even if there was reasonable suspicion that the driver was armed, the search should 
have been limited to a pat down for weapons.
•  Officer saw the passenger of a car throw a paper sack from a fast-food restaurant 
out the window. The passenger was cited for littering and the passenger 
compartment and trunk were searched.
The officer had the right to make a stop for littering.
In order to legally search the car, the officer needed reasonable suspicion that 
weapons were in the car.
Search of vehicle should have been confined to a search of the passenger 
compartment for weapons.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
321
Fingerprinting
The Supreme Court, in Davis v. Mississippi and Hayes v. Florida, heard 
cases involving taking suspects to the police station for fingerprinting.14
Both times the Court ruled that this may not be done without probable 
cause to arrest. The most recent case indicated that it would, however, be 
legal to fingerprint a person at the scene.
Examples of Fingerprinting
Legal
• Suspect who is under arrest is taken to the police station and fingerprinted.
•  Suspect who is stopped because he matched the description of a person who was 
seen leaving a nearby house that was burglarized 10 minutes earlier is fingerprinted 
at the location where he was detained.
Illegal
•  Suspect detained on reasonable suspicion is taken to the police station and 
fingerprinted.
•  All the people who work at a store where expensive electronic equipment is missing 
are taken to the police station without their consent and fingerprinted.
Interrogation
Miranda warnings are not required when an officer questions a suspect 
during a temporary detention based on reasonable suspicion. The warn-
ings will be required for questioning after an arrest is made. Dunaway v. 
New York15 held that transportation to the station for questioning can only 
be done if the suspect consents or has been arrested.
Examples of Interrogation during Detention
Legal
•  A man is stopped based on reasonable suspicion that he is selling drugs and questioned 
for 10 minutes. The police officer did not give the man the Miranda warnings.
Illegal
•  A woman is stopped based on reasonable suspicion that she used a stolen credit 
card, taken to the police station, and questioned for 10 minutes.
School Searches
Searches by school officials are governed by standards similar to those that 
apply to temporary detentions. There must be reasonable suspicion that the 
student has broken the law or violated a school regulation. These searches 
are not restricted to weapons. In New Jersey v. T.L.O.,16 the Supreme Court 
affirmed the search of a 14-year-old girl’s purse for cigarettes.

322 
Chapter 11
Examples of Searches at School
Legal
•  A girl is detained in the vice principal’s office and questioned about smoking in the 
restroom. She denies it. The vice principal dumps the contents of her purse onto 
the desk and searches the items from the purse for cigarettes.
•  A boy is detained in the vice principal’s office because a teacher reported seeing the 
boy sell marijuana. He is told to empty his pockets and backpack onto the counter. 
The teacher searches the things he put on the counter for marijuana.
Illegal
•  When a fifth-grade student reported that her lunch money is missing, all the students 
in the classroom were searched because the teacher had no idea who took the money.
•  Teachers randomly selected students in their high school and searched their 
belongings.
Canine Searches
The Supreme Court has allowed customs agents to briefly detain luggage in 
order to have narcotics detection dogs check it for drugs.17 United States v. Place 
held that there must be reasonable suspicion that the suitcases contain drugs. 
The luggage may not be opened prior to the canine inspection. Additionally, 
the detention must not be unreasonably long. The fact that a reliable, properly 
trained dog indicates drugs are present will establish probable cause.
Examples of Canine Searches
Legal
•  Dogs trained to sniff for drugs are stationed near the luggage carousel at the airport 
and allowed to sniff luggage as it is delivered from incoming airplanes.
The luggage is being processed in the normal manner; therefore, the dog may sniff 
it without any particularized suspicion. Reasonable suspicion is needed to detain 
the luggage for the dog to sniff it.
Illegal
•  A car suspected of being used to smuggle narcotics into the United States is stopped 
in the desert for an hour while the officers wait for a dog trained to sniff out 
narcotics to arrive.
The car could be briefly detained based on reasonable suspicion.
An hour detention was too long.
Arrests
In Fourth Amendment terms, an arrest is the seizure of a person. More 
commonly, it is thought of as taking a person into custody for committing 

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
323
a crime. All arrests must be based on probable cause. Officers do not need 
to personally evaluate probable cause for the arrest if they are executing an 
arrest warrant or acting at the direction of another officer. Table 11-2 com-
pares the field interview discussed in the previous section with an arrest.
Probable Cause to Arrest
Probable cause consists of a group of facts that makes a reasonable person 
more certain than not that an event occurred. In an arrest situation, that 
reasonable person must be more certain than not that the person arrested 
committed a specific crime. This requires a higher level of certainty than the 
reasonable suspicion needed for a field interview. It is a considerably lower 
T A B L E  11-2  Comparison of Field Interview and Arrest
Field Interview Based 
on Reasonable Suspicion 
Custodial Arrest Based 
on Probable Cause
Grounds to initiate 
contact
Reasonable suspicion—
sufficient facts that would 
make a reasonable officer 
believe criminal activity is afoot.
Probable cause—sufficient facts 
to convince a reasonable person 
that a crime has been committed 
and this is the person who did it.
Warrant requirement
None.
Arrest warrant is mandated 
when officers will enter a home 
to make an arrest. Many states 
require a warrant to arrest for a 
misdemeanor not committed in 
the officer’s presence. 
Miranda warnings
Miranda warnings are not 
required.
Miranda warnings are mandated 
for all questioning after the 
person is taken into custody.
Right to use force
Officer may use reasonable 
non-deadly force to detain the 
person. Officers are restricted 
to the lowest level of force 
that will contain the situation. 
Deadly force may be used only
if there is imminent danger 
to the life of the officer or a 
bystander.
Officer may use reasonable non-
deadly force to arrest a person. 
Deadly force is never authorized 
to make a misdemeanor arrest. 
For felony arrests, deadly force is 
justified only if there is imminent 
danger to the life of the officer 
or a bystander.
Length of stop
Brief detention in order to ask 
the suspect questions. At the 
end of questioning the officers 
must decide whether to arrest 
the suspect or release him or 
her.
Once the arrest is made, the 
officers may take the time 
that is necessary to secure the 
scene and complete necessary 
paperwork. The suspect is then 
transported to the station and 
booked.

324 
Chapter 11
level of proof, however, than the “beyond a reasonable doubt” required for 
a conviction.
To decide if there is probable cause, the officer must determine that 
there is probable cause for each element of the crime. In many cases, an 
arrest is made for one crime, but different charges are filed by the prosecu-
tor. This may be due to new evidence, such as drugs found when the sus-
pect was searched incident to the arrest. It can also be due to information 
discovered by the police between the time of arrest and when the charges 
are filed. The arrest is still valid if, at the time of the arrest, the officer had 
probable cause to believe that the suspect committed the crime for which he 
or she was arrested. This same rule applies even if the prosecutor refuses to 
file charges. The fact that the defendant was acquitted does not prove that 
the arrest was illegal; proof beyond a reasonable doubt that is required to 
convict is a much higher standard than probable cause for a legal arrest.
Powers of Arrest
At common law and in many states today, an officer may arrest without 
an arrest warrant if there is probable cause to believe a felony has been 
committed. For misdemeanors, officers are also required to have probable 
cause but can only arrest without a warrant if the crime is committed in 
their presence. When the crime has occurred before the officer arrived at 
the scene, the arrest must be made by someone who witnessed it or the 
facts must be presented to a judge who can issue an arrest warrant.
Having someone who witnessed the crime make the arrest (often the 
victim) is commonly called a citizen’s arrest. For felonies, a citizen’s arrest 
can be made by a person who knows of the existence of the crime even 
though he or she did not observe it occurring. Many states give the person 
making a citizen’s arrest immunity from being sued for making the arrest 
only if the person making the arrest was correct in assessing the facts. In 
other words, a police officer can make an arrest based on probable cause, but 
a person who is not a police officer must be 100% certain. Most states require 
the police to take custody of a person who has been arrested in this manner, 
although citations are now issued for many nonviolent misdemeanors.
Another approach to the problem of misdemeanors not committed in the 
officer’s presence is to have the victim and/or witnesses state the facts in an 
affidavit. The victim or the police can then go to the prosecutor. This is com-
monly referred to as “swearing out a complaint.” A judge will review the affi-
davit and, if probable cause has been established, issue an arrest warrant. This 
procedure can be used if it is not possible to make a citizen’s arrest because the 
suspect left the scene. It is also used if the victim does not want to press charges 
at the time the crime occurs but later decides to pursue the case.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
325
Although the Supreme Court repeatedly has stated that obtaining 
a warrant is the preferred procedure, it has never required the police to 
obtain arrest warrants in cases in which they have probable cause, even 
if there is no emergency requiring swift action. Neither is there a require-
ment that they arrest as soon as they believe they have enough evidence to 
establish probable cause.
Officers are required to obtain a warrant if the arrest is to be made in 
a home. This rule, which the Supreme Court stated in Payton v. New York,18
applies whether officers are looking for the suspect in his or her own home 
or in someone else’s house (Stegald v. United States).19 Either an arrest or a 
search warrant can be used to enter the suspect’s home to arrest him or her; 
a search warrant is needed if the officers must enter any other home to make 
the arrest. The foundation for this rule is the right of people to privacy 
in their homes. There is an emergency exception to the rule that applies 
if someone inside the house is calling for help, screaming, or apparently 
being attacked. If officers are in hot pursuit and the suspect runs into a 
house, the emergency exception also applies.
Examples of Situations in Which Police Have Authority to Make 
Arrest without an Arrest Warrant (Based on Traditional Rules)
•   Man flags down police officer and states that a man just pulled a knife on him and 
stole his wallet. Officer reviews the facts and concludes that robbery, a felony, has 
been committed.
•  Officer responds to a domestic disturbance call. As the officer walks past the front 
window, she observes a man hit a woman in the face. The officer concludes that a 
domestic battery has occurred in her presence.
Examples of Situations in Which Police Do Not Have Authority to 
Make Arrest without an Arrest Warrant (Based on Traditional Rules)
•  Woman flags down a police car and tells the officer that her boyfriend just beat her 
up. The officer reviews facts and concludes that a misdemeanor battery occurred, 
but the crime did not occur in the officer’s presence.
•  Drunken man flags down a police car and tells the officer that someone stole his wallet. 
When the officer questions the man, he notes that the man is giving inconsistent 
statements and concludes that it is more likely that the wallet was lost.
Search Incident to Arrest
Between 1914 and 1969, the Supreme Court repeatedly changed the rules 
on how far the police may search when they make an arrest. The current 
rule, which was established in Chimel v. California (1969),20 was originally 
based on three main criteria: (1) protection of the officer, (2) preventing 

326 
Chapter 11
destruction of evidence of the crime, and (3) seizure of contraband. It 
allows officers to thoroughly search the person and area under the imme-
diate control of the person being arrested (Figure 11-2).
Standard for Search Incident to a Custodial Arrest
Immediately following an arrest, officers may conduct a thorough search of the 
person arrested and the area under the arrestee’s immediate control.
The crime the suspect was arrested for has no bearing on the extent 
of the search incident to arrest (United States v. Robinson; Gustafson v. 
Florida).21 The Supreme Court no longer follows the original rationale 
that one of the justifications for the search incident to an arrest is to seize 
evidence of the crime. Even for offenses that have no physical evidence, 
such as driving without a license, if the person is arrested and taken into 
custody, the search may include the person and area under his or her 
immediate control. This rule applies to all crimes for which an officer has 
the authority to take someone into custody, even minor ones such as driv-
ing without a seat belt (Atwater v. City of Lago Vista).22
The justification for the search is the arrest. Therefore, items found 
during the search cannot be used as a basis for the arrest. The search must 
be done contemporaneously with the arrest. Only searches done at the 
scene immediately after the arrest qualify. Those done later must be justi-
fied on some other grounds.
Figure 11-2
Search Incident to Arrest
This person was arrested in a living room, and the police officer will conduct a search 
of the area.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
327
Unlike the protective search done during field interviews, there are no 
restrictions on the thoroughness of the search conducted when the suspect is 
arrested and taken into custody. Only the area searched is restricted. Anywhere 
the person arrested could reach to obtain weapons or destroy evidence can be 
searched. This “arm’s reach” rule (also called the “wing-span” rule) is applied 
without considering the fact that the suspect was handcuffed prior to the search. 
Anywhere he or she could reach if not restrained is included. Some courts have 
permitted searches up to 10 feet from the suspect. Officers are not restricted to 
places where evidence is believed to be. They may open drawers, look under sofa 
cushions, check in the clothes dryer, or check anything else provided it is within 
arm’s reach. Table 11-3 compares the officer’s right to search during a field inter-
view with the search that is allowed when making a custodial arrest.
T A B L E  11-3  Comparison of Right to Search during Field 
Interview and Incident to Arrest
Right to Search 
during Field Interview 
Based on Reasonable 
Suspicion
Search Incident to 
Custodial Arrest Based
on Probable Cause 
Right to search
Officer must have reasonable 
suspicion that the suspect is 
armed.
Search is allowed anytime a 
person is arrested and taken into 
custody. No suspicion that person 
is concealing evidence is required.
Reason for search
Sole justification of search 
is to retrieve weapons that 
could be used to harm the 
officer.
Originally the Supreme Court 
stated the purpose of the search 
was to retrieve evidence of the 
crime, weapons, and contraband. 
Later cases have allowed the 
search whenever there is a valid 
custodial arrest even if there were 
no grounds to believe the person 
was concealing anything.
Timing
Search must be done during 
the brief detention allowed 
by Terry.
Search must be contemporaneous 
with the arrest.
Search of the person
Pat down of person for 
weapons.
Thorough search of the person.
Search of surrounding 
area
None.
Officers may search all items 
within the suspect’s immediate 
control.
Search of vehicle
If person was in vehicle when 
detained, officers may search 
passenger compartment 
for weapons if there is 
reasonable suspicion that 
weapons are in the vehicle.
If person was in vehicle at time 
of arrest, officers may conduct 
thorough search of passenger 
compartment.

328 
Chapter 11
•  Suspect was arrested in a bank for forgery. Everything was removed from the purse 
she was carrying and closely inspected. Three forged checks were found in a bank 
deposit envelope in the lining of the purse.
•  Suspect was arrested for selling drugs. In addition to a search of the suspect, officers 
thoroughly searched the passenger compartment of the car the suspect was driving 
at the time of the arrest. Five stolen credit cards were found wedged between the 
back seat and the arm rest. 
Illegal
•  Suspect was arrested for robbery. An officer drove the suspect to the station and 
booked her. The officer then returned to the location where the arrest was made 
and searched the area within 3 feet around where the suspect stood at the time of 
the arrest.
To qualify for a search incident to arrest, the search must be done at the time and 
place of the arrest.
•  A car was stopped for speeding. After the driver signed the citation, one officer 
detained the driver at the curb while her partner thoroughly searched the passenger 
compartment of the car. 
A search incident to arrest can only be done if there is a custodial arrest. In this 
case, the driver was going to be released on a citation; therefore, the only search 
that would apply is the one discussed under Terry v. Ohio. If the officers had rea-
sonable suspicion that the driver was armed, the driver could be patted down for 
weapons. If there was reasonable suspicion that weapons were in the car, the pas-
senger compartment could be searched for weapons.
Search Incident to Arrest
Legal
Whatever is found on the person or under his or her immediate con-
trol during the search incident to an arrest is admissible evidence. It does 
not have to be evidence of the crime for which he or she was arrested. In 
many cases, the search incident to the arrest produces drugs or other con-
traband. Illegal weapons and evidence of totally unrelated crimes may be 
discovered. Additional charges may be sought based on what is found; it 
does not matter that the new charges are more serious than the ones that 
caused the arrest.
The search incident to arrest may overlap a protective sweep, but the 
timing of the search and what the officer is looking for are different. A 
protective sweep is normally done as soon as the officers arrive at the loca-
tion. Its purpose is to locate people who are present who may ambush the 
officers. On the other hand, the search incident to an arrest must be done 
after the arrest and contemporaneous with it. The officer does a thorough 
search of the person and the area under that person’s immediate control 

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
329
and may seize anything of evidentiary value. The right to search a person 
at the time of his or her arrest does not rely on any type of threat to the 
arresting officer.
Whether or not a physical arrest is made is important. When the state 
law authorizes a custodial arrest, it shows the offense is considered suf-
ficiently serious to justify a major invasion of the individual’s privacy. If 
the state deems the action less offensive, officers may be authorized to cite 
and release the suspect on the spot. Obviously, a citation is a much smaller 
invasion of the suspect’s privacy. Accordingly, intrusive searches are not 
permitted. Traffic stops present a typical example. If the suspect is released 
at the scene, the officers may not invade the suspect’s privacy by doing a 
thorough search. The officers can, however, order the occupants to get out 
of the car. The right to search in these situations is similar to what can be 
done during a field interview (i.e., protective pat down for weapons), but 
even this is allowed only if there is reasonable suspicion that the person is 
armed. Due to the fact that the officers are only with the offender briefly, 
their need to protect themselves is not the same as when the offender is 
taken into custody.
Arrests frequently involve either the driver or the passenger of a car. 
In the 1981 case of New York v. Belton,23 the Supreme Court held that 
the entire passenger compartment, including the glove box and console, 
may be searched incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the 
car. Thornton v. United States24 expanded the rule to include situations 
in which the person being arrested is a “recent occupant” of the vehicle. 
The search must be done at the time of the arrest, but the suspect may be 
removed from the car before the search begins. The Court also authorized 
an extensive search of anything in the passenger compartment, including 
luggage and other parcels. The Closed Container Rule (see Chapter 12) 
does not apply. Other parts of the car, such as the trunk, require some 
other justification.
When an arrest is made in a home or other building, officers may 
make a protective sweep. A protective sweep is a quick, visual check 
for people who may be hiding nearby. At the time of an arrest and 
without additional facts indicating danger, officers may look in the 
area immediately adjoining the place where the arrest was made, such 
as a closet where someone could hide. To go beyond that, the Supreme 
Court requires that the officer conducting the search has a reason-
able belief based on specific articulable facts that, taken together with
the rational inferences from those facts, lead a reasonable officer to  believe 
someone is present who might attack the officer (Maryland v. Buie) (see 
Table 11-4).25

330 
Chapter 11
Examples of Searches Incident to Arrest
Legal Searches
•  Immediately after the arrest, officers searched the suspect and found a small 
envelope containing heroin hidden in a cigarette pack in the suspect’s shirt pocket.
•  Suspect was driving a car when arrested on an outstanding warrant. Officers placed 
the suspect in the police car and searched the entire passenger compartment of the 
suspect’s car. Counterfeit money was found in the console.
•  Suspect was standing near a desk when arrested. Officers searched the desk drawers 
and found records of a bookmaking operation.
Illegal Searches
•  Suspect was stopped for speeding (noncustodial arrest). Officers searched the 
suspect and found a stolen ring hidden in a handkerchief.
•  Suspect was arrested on the front lawn. Officers entered the house and found a 
bank money bag taken in a robbery in the kitchen.
•  Suspect was arrested at her home. After booking, officers returned to the house and 
conducted a detailed search of the area where the suspect had been standing when 
arrested.
Booking
Booking occurs when the person who has been arrested enters the jail or 
a holding facility. It also happens if a person reports directly to the jail 
to serve all or part of a sentence. Inmates who serve weekends or leave 
the facility daily on work furlough are included. Whether the person has 
been searched recently or not, the right to search at the time of booking 
is the same.
T A B L E  11-4  Comparison of Protective Sweep with Search 
Incident to Arrest
Protective Sweep
Search Incident to Arrest
When search is conducted
When the officers arrive at 
the location
After an arrest
Rationale for search
Protect officers from being 
ambushed when searching 
or making an arrest
Protect officer; prevent 
destruction of evidence 
of the crime; and seize 
contraband
Area that may be searched
Area adjacent to where 
officers will be performing 
their duties
Person and area under that 
person’s immediate control
What officers are 
looking for
People who are hiding and 
may harm the officers
Anything of evidentiary value

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
331
The reason for allowing booking searches is to prevent weapons and 
contraband from entering the jail. Searches done at the time of booking 
are usually divided into two types: (1) search of the person, and (2) search 
of property.
Scope of Search at Booking
A booking search may include a thorough search of the person and any items in his 
or her possession at that time.
Search of the Person
The booking search is usually the most extensive search of the person that 
occurs. Although both searches incident to arrest and booking searches 
allow thorough searches of the person, the booking situation provides the 
privacy necessary to do strip searches.
Due to the fact that weapons and drugs can easily be hidden, strip 
searches and searches of body cavities are permitted. Reasonable attempts 
to preserve privacy, such as shielding the strip search area from public view 
and having searches conducted by officers of the same gender as the sus-
pect, are still required. Combative inmates who defy control by booking 
personnel or those who attempt to flee the booking area waive protections 
of their privacy.
Several states have enacted legislation limiting the right to conduct 
strip searches and body cavity searches when inmates are booked into 
the jail. Many of these laws were triggered by public outcry over how an 
“average citizen,” arrested for a very minor offense, was humiliated during 
a strip search. Most of the states that have enacted restrictions allow full 
searches for felonies but limit them for misdemeanors. In misdemeanor 
cases, the police usually must have cause to believe that weapons or con-
traband will be discovered in order to do a strip search. Sometimes the 
statutes allow complete searches anytime the suspect is booked for drug 
or weapons charges but require a factual showing to justify a strip search 
in all other cases. These restrictive statutes frequently require a court order 
prior to conducting a body cavity search. Several federal appellate courts 
have applied similar restrictions to booking searches of felony suspects, 
but the U.S. Supreme Court has not considered this precise issue.
Examples of Searches of a Person at Booking
Legal Search
•  During search of a woman booked for theft, rock cocaine was found sewn into the 
hem of her shirt.

332 
Chapter 11
•  During the search of a man booked for driving under the influence of alcohol, a 
small packet of methamphetamine tablets was found hidden behind his ear.
•  During a search of a woman arrested for prostitution, cash was found in her bra.
•  During a strip search of a man arrested for dealing drugs, a balloon of heroin was 
found taped to his thigh.
Illegal Searches
Note: The U.S. Supreme Court has given police the authority to conduct invasive 
searches at the time a person is booked. Some state legislatures, however, have 
restricted this authority. These laws limiting booking searches most frequently 
apply to people who are booked for misdemeanors. Check your local law to 
determine if special rules apply in your state.
Property Searches
At booking, it is common to inventory and store all of the suspect’s prop-
erty, including clothing. Jail uniforms are frequently issued. These mea-
sures help keep weapons and contraband out of the jail facility and also 
reduce problems in the jail caused by thefts.
The Supreme Court has considered two cases dealing with inmate prop-
erty at the time of booking. One dealt with sending clothing the inmate was 
wearing when booked to a forensics laboratory for examination. In United 
States v. Edwards,26 the Court held that anything in the inmate’s possession 
that could have been searched at the time of arrest could be searched in the 
jail without a warrant. No distinction was made between searches done at 
the time of booking and those done at a later time.
The second case, Illinois v. Lafayette,27 involved searching a shoulder 
bag that the inmate carried at the time of booking. The Court held that any 
container or other article the inmate has in his or her possession at the time 
of booking can be searched. The Closed Container Rule does not apply 
at booking. Everything taken from the inmate may be listed in an item-
ized inventory. Inventorying property at the time of booking is viewed as 
necessary to prevent theft by jail employees; it also reduces the number of 
inmates making unfounded reports of theft. Information found during the 
inventory is also useful in positively identifying the person being booked.
Examples of Searches of Property at Time of Booking
Legal Searches
•  Inmate’s clothing and everything she was carrying were thoroughly searched at the 
time of booking. 
•  Inmate booked for felony drug charges was strip searched by an officer of the same 
gender in a room in the booking area where no one else could observe.
• Purse inmate was carrying at time of arrest was searched during booking.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
333
•  Items removed from inmate’s pockets at time of booking were searched at a later 
time.
Illegal Searches
Note: No examples of illegal booking searches are listed here because the authori-
ties who operate the jail have the right to search any property that will be intro-
duced into the jail.
Jail and Prison Searches
Once a person has been booked, his or her expectation of privacy is greatly 
reduced. In fact, it nearly disappears. The Supreme Court generally allows 
jail searches if a valid administrative reason can be given.
Inmates may be searched at any time. The randomness of these 
searches is seen as an important factor in maintaining security and reduc-
ing the flow of contraband in jails and prisons. Bell v. Wolfish held that 
even slight grounds to believe that an inmate may be concealing contra-
band can justify body cavity searches.28
Cell searches may also be done without cause. Inmates have no reason 
to expect privacy in their cells (Hudson v. Palmer).29 The need to main-
tain order and security within the facility justifies the intrusion into the 
inmate’s cell. Some courts have allowed limited privacy interests in legal 
papers and diaries inmates keep in their cells.
This same need to maintain security in correctional facilities has justi-
fied limitations on what an inmate can possess. Many items that are legal 
outside the prison can be seized as contraband; for example, large paper 
clips may be prohibited because of the possibility they can be sharpened 
and bent to form weapons. Prison officials can also restrict what inmates 
receive from visitors and through the mail. Due process, however, requires 
that inmates be given reasonable notice of the rules.
Examples of Searches in Jail or Prison
Legal Searches
•  Correctional officer stopped an inmate who was walking down a hall in jail and did 
a pat down. A makeshift knife was found in his pocket.
•  Two correctional officers ordered all of the inmates to leave their cell block. They 
then searched every cell. Illegal drugs were found hidden in two cells.
•  Correctional officers in the visiting room routinely do thorough strip searches of 
inmates before and after contact visits.
•  Individuals who enter the prison for contact visits with inmates may be strip 
searched before and after the visit.
• Attorneys who visit inmates may be searched.

334 
Chapter 11
Illegal Searches
Note: No examples of illegal jail or prison searches are listed because the officers 
who run jails and prisons have the authority to conduct any search that promotes 
the safe operation of the facility. This includes unannounced strip searches and 
body cavity searches.
Summary
S u m m a r y
Police may briefly stop a person for questioning if there are specific, articulable 
facts that would lead a reasonable officer to believe that criminal activity is afoot. 
When this type of detention is made, a pat down of the outer clothing may be 
conducted for weapons if there is a reasonable suspicion that the detainee is 
armed. If a car is stopped, the officers have the right to search the passenger 
compartment for weapons if there is a reasonable suspicion that the car contains 
weapons. The right to detain a person for a field interview does not include the 
right to transport the suspect to the station for fingerprinting or interrogation.
 
All arrests must be based on probable cause. The officer must have facts that 
would cause a reasonable person to conclude that a specific crime has been com-
mitted and that this is the person who committed it. A totality-of-the-circumstances 
test will be used to determine if the officer had enough facts to justify the arrest.
 
Police usually have the right to arrest if there is probable cause to believe a felony 
has been committed, but in most states arrests for misdemeanors are restricted to 
situations in which the officers observed the crime in progress. If the officers were 
not present when the crime occurred, the victim or someone else who observed the 
misdemeanor needs to make the arrest or swear out a complaint.
 
A warrant is normally needed to make an arrest inside a house. An emergency 
(sometimes called “exigent circumstances”), such as officers following a suspect into the 
house in hot pursuit or someone screaming for help, permits entry without a warrant.
 
When a custodial arrest is made, a search of the person and area under his or 
her immediate control is allowed. The search must be done at the time and place 
of arrest. Anything found is admissible. If the person was arrested while riding in 
a car, the entire passenger compartment may be searched.
 
A thorough search of the person (and anything in his or her possession) may be done 
at the time of booking. The Closed Container Rule does not apply. Strip searches and 
searches of body cavities must be done in a manner that protects the inmate’s privacy.
 
Once the inmate enters the prison population, there are very few restrictions 
on searches. Probable cause is not required. The need to maintain security and 
control contraband justifies random searches of inmates and cells.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. What is the standard for stopping a suspect for brief questioning when there 
are no grounds for an arrest? Explain.

 
Field Interviews, Arrests, and Jail Searches 
335
2.  How much force may be used to detain someone for a field interview? For 
an arrest? Explain.
3.  Explain when a search is permitted during a temporary detention. How 
extensive may the search be? Explain.
4.  When may a person be transported to the police station for fingerprinting 
or interrogation? Explain.
5.  What is the standard for an arrest and when is a warrant required? Explain.
6.  What area may be searched at the time of arrest? Explain.
7.  What search is permitted if a person is arrested in a car? Explain.
8.  Explain the extent of the search permitted at booking.
9.  Can property seized at booking be searched at a later time without a search 
warrant? Explain.
10. Explain the right to search inmates in prisons and jails.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Go to www.cnn.com/crime and find a case of a celebrity who was recently arrested. 
What was found during the search incident to the arrest? Write a one-page 
(250-word) report on the case that you found.
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Tennessee v. Garner 471 U.S. 1, 85 L.Ed. 2d 1, 105 S.Ct. 1694 (1985).
 2. Graham v. Connor 490 U.S. 386, 104 L.Ed. 2d 443, 109 S.Ct. 1865 (1989).
 3.  Terry v. Ohio 392 U.S. 1, 20 L.Ed. 2d 889, 88 S.Ct. 1868 (1968).
 4. Illinois v. Wardlow 528 U.S. 119, 145 L.Ed. 2d 570, 120 S.Ct. 673 (2000).
 5.  Adams v. Williams 407 U.S. 143, 32 L.Ed. 2d 612, 92 S.Ct. 1921 (1972); Alabama v. White 496 U.S. 
325, 110 L.Ed. 2d 301, 110 S.Ct. 2412 (1990).
 6. Florida v. J. L. 529 U.S. 266, 146 L.Ed. 2d 254, 120 S.Ct. 1375 (2000).
 7.  United States v. Hensley 469 U.S. 221, 83 L.Ed. 2d 604, 105 S.Ct. 675 (1985).
 8. Whiteley v. Warden 401 U.S. 560, 28 L.Ed. 2d 306, 91 S.Ct. 1031 (1971).
 9. Minnesota v. Dickerson 508 U.S. 366, 124 L.Ed. 2d 334, 113 S.Ct. 2130 (1993).
 10. Delaware v. Prouse 440 U.S. 648, 59 L.Ed. 2d 660, 99 S.Ct. 1391 (1979). 
 11. Pennsylvania v. Mimms 434 U.S. 106, 54 L.Ed. 2d 331, 98 S.Ct. 330 (1977).
 12. Maryland v. Wilson 519 U.S. 408, 137 L.Ed. 2d 41, 117 S.Ct. 882 (1997).
 13. Michigan v. Long 463 U.S. 1032, 77 L.Ed. 2d 1201, 103 S.Ct. 3469 (1983).
 14. Davis v. Mississippi 394 U.S. 721, 22 L.Ed. 2d 676, 89 S.Ct. 1394 (1969); Hayes v. Florida 470 U.S. 
811, 84 L.Ed. 2d 705, 105 S.Ct. 1643 (1985).
 15. Dunaway v. New York 442 U.S. 200, 60 L.Ed. 2d 824, 99 S.Ct. 2248 (1979).
 16. New Jersey v. T.L.O. 469 U.S. 325, 83 L.Ed. 2d 720, 105 S.Ct. 733 (1985).
 17. United States v. Place 462 U.S. 696, 77 L.Ed. 2d 110, 103 S.Ct. 2637 (1983).
 18. Payton v. New York 445 U.S. 573, 63 L.Ed. 2d 639, 100 S.Ct. 1371 (1980). 
 19. Stegald v. United States 451 U.S. 204, 68 L.Ed. 2d 38, 101 S.Ct. 1642 (1981).
 20. Chimel v. California 395 U.S. 752, 23 L.Ed. 2d 685, 89 S.Ct. 2034 (1969).
 21. United States v. Robinson 414 U.S. 218, 38 L.Ed. 2d 427, 94 S.Ct. 467 (1973); Gustafson v. Florida
414 U.S. 260, 38 L.Ed. 2d 456, 94 S.Ct. 488 (1973).
 22. Atwater v. City of Lago Vista 532 U.S. 318, 149 L.Ed. 2d 549, 121 S.Ct. 1536 (2001).

336 
Chapter 11
 23. New York v. Belton 453 U.S. 454, 69 L.Ed. 2d 768, 101 S.Ct. 2869 (1981).
 24. Thornton v. United States 541 U.S. 615, 158 L.Ed. 2d 905, 124 S.Ct. 2127 (2004).
 25. Maryland v. Buie 494 U.S. 325, 108 L.Ed. 2d 276, 110 S.Ct. 1093 (1990).
 26. United States v. Edwards 415 U.S. 800, 39 L.Ed. 2d 711, 94 S.Ct. 1234 (1974).
 27. Illinois v. Lafayette 462 U.S. 640, 77 L.Ed. 2d 65, 103 S.Ct. 2605 (1983).
 28. Bell v. Wolfish 441 U.S. 520, 60 L.Ed. 2d 447, 99 S.Ct. 1861 (1979).
 29. Hudson v. Palmer 468 U.S. 517, 82 L.Ed. 2d 393, 104 S.Ct. 3194 (1984).

337
Plain View, 
Consent, Vehicle, and 
Administrative Searches
CHAPTER12
Feature Case: Snoop Dogg Arrested at Airport
On September 27, 2006, rapper Snoop Dogg was arrested as he was about to 
board a plane for New York because a collapsible baton was found in his com-
puter bag during security screening. He told authorities that the baton, which 
could fold down to 8 inches in length, was a prop for a video he planned to film. 
The 35-year-old rapper pled guilty to felony possession of a danger-
ous weapon. His sentence included 160 hours of community service, 3 
years’ probation, $1,000 in fines and court costs, and a $10,000 donation 
to a county charity for troubled children. His community services would 
be done at a local park where he would pick up trash, rake leaves, paint 
benches, etc. under the supervision of a park ranger.
The felony conviction would be reduced to a misdemeanor if he did 
not break the law for 1 year.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Explain the Plain View Doctrine.
• Define the Open Fields Doctrine.
• Describe the right to search abandoned property and consent searches.
• List situations in which police have a right to search cars.
• Identify the exceptions to the administrative warrant requirement.

338 
Chapter 12
Key Terms
•  Abandoned property
•  Administrative warrant
•  Aerial search
•  Apparent authority
•  Consent search
•  Open Fields Doctrine
•  Plain View Doctrine
•  Right to inventory
•  Roadblock
Plain View and Open Fields Doctrines
The Plain View Doctrine, established in Washington v. Chrisman, Coolidge v. 
New Hampshire, and other cases, is one of the most well-known and useful 
exceptions to the warrant requirement.
Myths about the Procedures 
Discussed in This Chapter
Facts about the Procedures Discussed 
in This Chapter
Under the Plain View Doctrine, an 
officer can seize anything that is in plain 
view when a search is conducted.
In order to seize an item under the Plain View 
Doctrine, the officer must be legally at the 
location and have probable cause that the item 
is either contraband or evidence of a crime.
Evidence officers find while trespassing 
is not admissible in court.
Under the Open Fields Doctrine, evidence is 
admissible even if the officers were trespassing. 
Searches done near a residential structure do 
not qualify for the Open Fields Doctrine.
Police must warn individuals of their 
Fourth Amendment rights before 
asking for consent to search personal 
possessions.
Police are not required to advise anyone of 
Fourth Amendment rights.
Only the owner of a building can give 
valid consent for the police to conduct a 
search without a warrant.
Anyone with apparent authority over an area 
can give valid consent for police to conduct a 
search without a warrant.
Police must obtain a warrant to search 
a car unless there is an emergency 
situation.
If police have probable cause to search a car, 
they can legally conduct the search without 
obtaining a search warrant.
Police are only allowed to search a car 
if they believe the car is being used for 
illegal purposes.
There are several exceptions to the warrant 
requirement that allow police to search cars 
that are not suspected of being involved in 
criminal activity.
Warrants that are obtained for 
administrative purposes must satisfy 
the same probable cause standards as 
search warrants.
Administrative warrants can legally be issued 
if there is a reasonable legislative purpose 
for the search as long as the officers are not
investigating criminal activity.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
339
Plain View Doctrine Defined
It is not an unreasonable search for officers who are legally on the premises to 
observe items left where they can be seen. Probable cause is needed to seize the 
objects observed in plain view.1
The Plain View Doctrine has three key elements: 
1. Objects must be where officers can observe them.
2. The officers must be legally at the location where the observation 
was made.
3. There must be probable cause to seize what was observed.
The Observation
Finding objects in plain view is not considered a search because they are 
not hidden. However, under the Plain View Doctrine, officers are not 
allowed to move things or otherwise examine them for identifying marks 
(such as serial numbers). The item must be at a location where the officer 
can see it without disturbing anything. This does not prevent the officer 
from moving to a better vantage point to observe an item—for example, 
walking around the room, stretching or bending—as long as the officer 
stays in an area where he or she is legally entitled to be. Most courts also 
allow the use of flashlights and binoculars.
In Horton v. California the Supreme Court made it clear that items 
do not have to be discovered inadvertently to qualify for the Plain View 
Doctrine.2 In that case, officers had requested a search warrant to search 
for stolen property and weapons, but the judge had issued a warrant only 
authorizing a search for stolen property. While executing the search war-
rant, officers did not find any stolen property, but they did find weapons. 
The court held that these weapons were in plain view and legally seized, 
even though the officers suspected that they were there before going to the 
location.
Examples of Observations Covered by Plain View Doctrine
•  During a stop authorized by Terry v. Ohio, an officer believed the suspect was 
armed and did a “pat down.” A hard object in his jacket pocket was believed 
to be a gun, but when the officer retrieved it, it turned out to be a roll of 
counterfeit $20 bills.
•  While executing a search warrant for a large quantity of fake ATM cards, an officer 
opened a drawer and found 50 packets of heroin.
•  A car was stopped for speeding. The officer looked through the window as he 
approached the driver and saw an illegal assault rifle on the back seat.

340 
Chapter 12
Examples of Observations Not Covered by Plain View Doctrine
•  A police officer stopped a car illegally. Marijuana clippings were observed on the 
floor behind the driver’s seat.
 Plain View does not apply because the officer was not legally at the location.
•  A police officer was executing a search warrant. He went into a portion of the house 
not covered by the search warrant and noticed a stack of credit cards. 
  Plain View does not apply because the officer was not legally there—he went into a 
portion of the house that was not covered by the search warrant.
•  An officer made an illegal arrest. During a search incident to an arrest, the officer 
found narcotics in the suspect’s pocket. 
  Plain View does not apply because the arrest was not legal; therefore, the officer 
could not legally conduct the search. 
Legally on Premises
For the Plain View Doctrine to operate, the officers must be legally at the 
location where the observation was made. Probably the most common 
situations involve making arrests, field interviews, car stops, and execut-
ing search warrants. If the officer illegally entered the house, for example, 
nothing observed inside qualifies for the Plain View Doctrine.
Aerial searches are an extension of this concept. In California v. 
Ciraolo, the Supreme Court held that observations made from a police air-
craft qualify for the Plain View Doctrine.3 The fact that the defendant built 
a fence around his backyard indicated a subjective expectation of privacy, 
but the Court found that this did not matter when the police observed 
some marijuana plants with the naked eye from public airspace. Since this 
case arose from observations made from a chartered aircraft, it is clear that 
the observation does not have to be made during routine patrol or from a 
frequently used flight path.
Examples of Being Legally on the Premises for Plain View Doctrine
•  Officers arrived at a house to serve an arrest warrant. They complied with “knock-
and-announce” before entering. Three feet inside the front door they observed a 
stack of uncut sheets of counterfeit $20 bills.
•  Officers arrested the driver of a car for driving under the influence of alcohol. 
While they were inventorying the car prior to having it towed away, they opened 
the trunk and discovered 10 bricks of marijuana.
•  Officers discovered the suspect’s car in a public parking lot. They walked around it and 
checked for damage consistent with it being involved in a recent hit-and-run accident.
•  Officers chartered a helicopter and flew over the suspect’s house. Parked in 
the backyard partially covered by a tarp, they observed a vehicle matching the 
description of the getaway car from a recent robbery. 

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
341
Examples of Not Being Legally on the Premises for Plain View Doctrine
•  Officers suspected that the house at 301 S. First Street was being used to grow marijuana. 
They climbed a fence so they could look in the windows at the rear of the house.
  Plain View does not apply because the officers were trespassing when they looked 
into the rear windows. 
•  An eyewitness to a hit-and-run accident gave the police the license number of the car 
that left the scene. An officer used this information to obtain the address where the 
car was registered. When the officer arrived at the location, he walked into the open 
garage and checked the car for paint transfers and damage to the front bumper.
  Plain View does not apply because the officer was trespassing when he went into
the garage. 
Probable Cause to Seize
The fact that the item was in plain view and the officers were legally pres-
ent indicates that there has been no unreasonable search. The final issue 
deals with the right to seize the item. To do this, there must be probable 
cause (Arizona v. Hicks).4 Reasonable suspicion is not enough.
This probable cause requirement means the facts must indicate it is 
more likely than not that the item is evidence of a crime or is contraband. 
This decision must be made without searching the item for clues such as 
serial numbers. If probable cause exists, the item can be seized on the spot 
without a warrant.
Even when the facts do not establish probable cause, the observation 
may still be useful. It may provide leads in the investigation. The observa-
tion can also be included, along with other facts, in an affidavit used to 
obtain a warrant to conduct a full search of the location.
Examples of Probable Cause to Seize Item under the Plain View 
Doctrine
•  When conducting a booking search of the suspect, an officer emptied the backpack 
that the suspect had been carrying. The officer carefully inspected everything and 
discovered a watch that exactly matched the description of a unique watch taken in 
a recent robbery.
•  While executing a search warrant for equipment used to make counterfeit money, 
an officer discovered seven TV sets. By walking around the TVs, the officer was able 
to copy down serial numbers. The officer had the dispatcher run the serial numbers 
and confirmed that they matched those on TVs taken during a recent burglary of 
an appliance store.
•  An officer inventoried a car found abandoned in the street prior to having the car 
towed to an impound lot. The officer found three hand-rolled marijuana cigarettes 
in the ash tray.

342 
Chapter 12
Examples of Not Having Probable Cause to Seize Item
under the Plain View Doctrine
•  While executing a search warrant, an officer found a zip lock bag with an odd colored 
powder in it. Having no idea what it was, she put the zip lock in an evidence envelope.
  The fact that the officer had no idea what was in the bag indicates that there was no 
probable cause to seize the zip lock bag.
•  While frisking a suspect during a Terry stop, an officer placed a paper bag that the 
suspect was carrying into an evidence envelope without opening it.
  Probable cause is needed to seize anything under Plain View. This officer did not 
have probable cause because he did not know what was in the paper bag.
Open Fields Doctrine
The Open Fields Doctrine, established in Oliver v. United States and United 
States v. Dunn,5 relies heavily on history and the wording of the Fourth 
Amendment. Since farmland and other open spaces are not included in the 
“persons, houses, papers, and effects” specified in the Fourth Amendment, 
they are not protected. Historical protection of the “curtilage,” or enclosed 
area immediately around the house, expands the amendment to those areas 
but not beyond to open fields. Figure 12-1 illustrates where police officers 
can seize evidence under the Open Fields Doctrine.
Open Fields Doctrine Defined
Evidence found by officers in open areas that are not close to homes can be 
seized. This evidence is admissible even though the officers were trespassing at 
the time they seized it.
Figure 12-1
Open Fields Doctrine

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
343
The Open Fields Doctrine has little use in the urban setting, but it can 
be used in rural areas. It is very useful in the search for clandestine mari-
juana cultivation. The Open Fields Doctrine applies even though fences 
have been built and “No Trespassing” signs posted. Areas where there are 
no established roads can also be searched under this doctrine.
Examples of Application of Open Fields Doctrine
•  Officers suspected that a farmer was growing marijuana in the portion of his 
field farthest from the road. They walked down the rural road, climbed a fence 
that had a “No Trespassing” sign, and went to the back of the field. They found 
approximately 100 healthy marijuana plants growing there.
•  Police chartered a helicopter and flew over the suspect’s farm. Approximately 500 
yards from the house they observed 10 cars in various stages of being dismantled.
Examples of Situations That Would Not Qualify
for the Open Fields Doctrine 
•  Officers were on private property when they found a large growth of marijuana 
plants. As they continued to investigate, they discovered a small cabin. Through the 
open curtains they saw equipment used to manicure marijuana and package it.
 Looking into the cabin’s windows is not allowed under the Open Fields Doctrine.
•  While responding to a call to take a burglary report, officers noticed that small 
marijuana plants were growing in the planter beside the front door.
 The planter beside the front door is not in an open field.
Abandoned Property
One of the key points in the Supreme Court’s analysis of search and sei-
zure issues is the expectation of privacy. Both an objective and a subjec-
tive expectation of privacy must exist. The subjective part of the analysis 
focuses on the efforts a person took to protect his or her privacy. The 
objective aspect of privacy means that a privacy interest exists that society 
is willing to protect.
Seizing abandoned property is not an unreasonable search because 
there is neither an objective nor a subjective expectation of privacy. In 
most cases, the fact that the property has been abandoned clearly indicates 
that the previous owner no longer has any interest in it. This is clear when 
the property has been left in a public place.
A more difficult question arises when trash has been sealed in opaque 
plastic bags and left at the curb for pickup by a garbage truck. Although 
the opaque plastic may indicate a subjective expectation of privacy, the 
Supreme Court, in California v. Greenwood, ruled that there is no objective 
basis for this expectation.6 This rests on the fact that strangers, animals, and 

344 
Chapter 12
snoops are free to look through trash. The person throwing out the trash also 
has no authority to prevent the garbage collectors from rummaging through 
it or giving it to the police. Leaving items for recycling results in the same con-
clusion because it should be anticipated that someone will sort through it.
The final part of this analysis is determining when something has 
been abandoned. Dumping it in a trash can in a public place or littering 
the highway are obvious examples of abandonment. A person who merely 
puts an item in a waste basket inside a private home still has the right 
to reclaim it. Hiding something in an open area that is accessible to the 
public, such as under a rock in the forest, could be considered either way. 
Items that a person discards while being pursued by police, but prior to 
arrest, are considered abandoned.7
Examples of Situations in Which Abandoned Property Rule Applies
•  As a police officer chased the suspect, the suspect threw something away. After 
detaining the suspect, the officer went back to the location and found a small 
plastic bag containing illegal drugs.
•  Police suspected that a man was involved in bookmaking. They put his house under 
surveillance and watched him put his trash bags at the curb and go back inside. They 
seized the trash bags and searched them for anything indicating bookmaking. 
Examples of Situations in Which Abandoned Property
Would Not Apply
•  Officers searching for evidence from a bank robbery found a cloth bag full of 
marked money carefully hidden under a dumpster.
 The fact that the bag was carefully hidden indicates that it was not abandoned.
•  Officers looking for evidence of drug trafficking went into the suspect’s backyard 
and searched his garbage cans.
  The garbage cans were still in a private party’s backyard, so the contents cannot be 
considered abandoned.
Consent Searches
Officers do not need a warrant if they have obtained consent to search. On 
the other hand, probable cause to search cannot be based solely on the fact 
that a person refused to give consent.
Consent Search Defined
A search conducted based on the voluntary consent of a person with apparent 
authority over the area to be searched does not require a search warrant or other 
justification.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
345
Three key points must be considered to determine if a search can be 
based on consent: 
1. The standard for obtaining consent.
2. Who can give consent.
3. What can be searched based on the consent given.
Standard for Consent
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte established that consent must be given volun-
tarily.8 The Supreme Court has, however, specifically refused to require 
officers to warn suspects that there is a constitutional right to refuse to 
give consent for a search. Each case must be analyzed on the totality of the 
circumstances that were present when the officers asked for permission to 
search. Officers do not need reasonable suspicion to approach a person 
and ask for consent to search.
Consent may be implied from a person’s conduct. It is well-known 
that everyone goes through a security check before boarding a commer-
cial airplane or being admitted to a rock concert. The Snoop Dogg case is 
an example. An illegal weapon was found when his carry-on luggage was 
searched at the airport. He could have avoided the search by selecting a 
different mode of transportation; he also could have reduced his chance 
of being arrested by placing contraband in luggage that was not subject to 
routine search.
Some factors clearly indicate that the consent is coerced. Consent is 
not voluntary if the police inform someone that they have a search war-
rant. Allowing the police to enter in these circumstances is considered to 
be merely acquiescing to authority (Bumper v. North Carolina).9 By stating 
that they have a warrant, the police, in effect, inform people that they do 
not have the right to refuse entry.
More commonly, the courts will consider all of the facts present when 
the request for consent was made. The fact that officers had their guns drawn 
weighs very heavily against the consent being voluntary. Other applicable 
factors include the education and intelligence of the suspect, attempts by 
the police to intimidate the suspect, and the fact that the suspect already 
knew his or her rights. For example, in Florida v. Bostick, uniformed officers 
approached a person on a bus and asked for permission to search his lug-
gage.10 The officers testified that they informed Bostick that he had the right 
to refuse to consent, and they never drew their guns or threatened Bostick in 
any manner with a gun. Bostick testified that he did not feel free to leave the 
bus. The Court held that consent was valid and saw no distinction between a 
stop in the close confines of a bus and one on the street.

346 
Chapter 12
Examples of Consent Search
•  During a routine traffic stop, the officer politely asked the driver, “Do you mind if I 
look in the trunk?” The driver replied, “OK.”
•  An officer handling a domestic violence call arrived after the batterer left. The 
officer asked the battered woman, “Do you mind if I look to see if there are any 
guns in the house? I can take the guns into custody so he won’t be able to shoot 
you.” The woman said, “Yes, please do!”
Examples of Situations That Would Not Be Considered
Valid Consent Searches
•  When officers arrived at the suspect’s apartment, both the suspect and her 
roommate were there. The roommate told the officers that they were welcome to 
search the living room. The suspect refused to give consent for the search.
  When the suspect is at the location, the suspect’s refusal to give consent cannot be 
countermanded by another person who lives there.
•  An officer went to a suspect’s home when he knew the suspect was at work. Holding 
up a folded piece of paper, the officer told the elderly gentleman who answered the 
door, “Search warrant. May I come in?”
  There is no valid consent when someone allows a search because an officer feigns 
having a search warrant.
Who Can Consent
Consent must be given by someone with apparent authority over the area 
to be searched (United States v. Matlock and Illinois v. Rodriguez).11 Officers 
may rely on reasonable appearances that a person lives in a house or owns 
a business.
Ownership, however, is not essential. In fact, the owner may not be able 
to consent. The key again is reasonable expectation of privacy. Landlords 
cannot consent to searches of a tenant’s apartment, nor can hotel personnel 
grant permission to search a guest’s room. Police cannot rely on consent 
from people whose personal privacy is not at stake.
If two people have equal rights to a location, either may consent to a 
search. This commonly applies to husband–wife and roommate situations. For 
example, either roommate can consent to a search of the kitchen, but if they 
have separate bedrooms one cannot consent to a search of the other’s room.
The parent–child relationship is more complicated. If a young child is 
living at home, the parent can consent to a search of the child’s room and 
possessions. Older children, however, may have their own privacy interests. 
Paying rent or the fact that the parents recognize the child’s right to exclude 
them from the room may indicate that a parent cannot give consent. Even if 
the parent can consent to police entering the room, teenagers may still have 
an expectation of privacy regarding locked containers kept in their rooms.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
347
Very young children do not have the authority to consent to police 
entering the house. Children generally do not have the right to consent to 
searches of their parents’ room or other private areas of the house.
Probationers and parolees pose a different question. Some states permit 
searches of probationers and parolees on less than probable cause. Others 
make consent to searches a condition of probation or parole. In Griffin v. 
Wisconsin, the Supreme Court approved of this practice because it is neces-
sary to facilitate rehabilitation and deter criminal activity.12 In the case before 
the Court, searches based on “reasonable grounds,” but less than probable 
cause, were authorized under the supervision of the probation officer.
Examples of Who Can Consent to a Search
•  A father called the police because he was afraid his 15-year-old son was using drugs. 
The police talked to the father while the son was not home. The father told the 
officer that his son stayed in the garage a lot. The officer asked if he could search the 
garage. The father gave the officer permission.
•  Two roommates got into a fight, but one left before the police arrived. The 
neighbors called the police. Roommate A told the police that Roommate B was 
selling drugs. The officer asked where the drugs were kept. When told that they 
were in the freezer in the kitchen, an officer asked Roommate A for permission to 
look in the freezer. Roommate A said yes.
•  A car carrying three adult males was stopped because a man who lived nearby 
complained that the car was cruising the area all evening. The officer had all of them get 
out of the car. He then asked the driver if he could search the car. The driver said yes.
Examples of Who Cannot Consent to a Search
•  A woman was washing windows when the police arrived. An officer asked her, “Can 
we go in?” She nodded her head.
  There is no indication that the woman lived at the location or that she understood 
what the officers said. If either one of these factors is missing, the consent is not valid.
•  The police stopped at the manager’s office and asked for a key before going to the 
suspect’s apartment. The manager gladly gave it to them.
  The manager is not the person whose privacy will be invaded; therefore, consent 
given by an apartment manager is not valid consent.
Scope of the Search
The area to be searched and how long officers can search may be very broad or 
very limited. These factors are governed by the conditions that accompanied the 
consent. Once consent has been given, officers can search anything in that area 
(including closed containers) unless the person giving the consent has placed 
restrictions on what may be searched.13 Consent can be withdrawn at any time 
and no justification needs to be given for terminating the consent to search.

348 
Chapter 12
What is found during the search may create probable cause for an 
additional search. If so, this probable cause can be considered by the offi-
cers when seeking a search warrant. It may also indicate that some other 
exception to the warrant requirement applies. Plain view accompanies a 
consent search. Anything seen during the search can be seized if there is 
probable cause to tie it to a crime.
Examples of the Scope of the Search When There Is a Consent Search
•  During a routine traffic stop the officer asked to look in the trunk. The driver 
consented. When the officer was searching the trunk, the driver suddenly yelled, 
“Stop. Get out of my trunk. Now!” Consent was taken away and the officer had to 
stop the search.
•  Officers entered a pawn shop and asked the sales clerk, “Do you mind if we look 
around?” The clerk nodded agreement. The officers slowly inspected everything 
behind the counter, writing down serial numbers so they could check them later.
Examples of Searches That Are Not Valid Because Officers Went 
Beyond the Scope of the Consent
•  After obtaining consent to search the dorm room from a college student who lived 
there, the officer pretended not to hear what was said when the student told the 
officer to leave.
 The officer cannot extend the consent beyond a reasonable attempt to revoke it.
•  When the driver of the car that was stopped for speeding could not find the vehicle 
registration, the officer asked if she could look for it in the glove compartment. 
The driver agreed. While pretending to look in the glove compartment, the officer 
searched for narcotics under the passenger seat and in the door pocket. 
  When the officer asked for consent to search a specific area, the consent was limited 
to that area.
Vehicle Searches
Cars and other vehicles have become very important parts of our daily 
lives and are highly visible and heavily regulated. Their extensive exposure 
to public view, coupled with detailed licensing requirements and safety 
inspections, has resulted in a lesser expectation of privacy in vehicles than in 
homes. The mobility of vehicles is viewed as creating an urgency not present 
when evidence is found in buildings. For all of these reasons, the rules for 
searching vehicles are somewhat different than those for other locations. 
Motor homes are usually treated like vehicles. California v. Carney14
concluded that even though motor homes possess many of the character-
istics of houses, they still have the ability to leave the scene. This creates 

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
349
an urgency not present with more traditional dwellings. If, on the other 
hand, the motor home is hooked up to utilities or otherwise immobilized, 
it is treated like a dwelling.
Vehicle Search Incident to Arrest
The search incident to a custodial arrest normally covers the person and 
area under his or her immediate control. If the occupant of a car is arrested, 
New York v. Belton 15 permits the search to cover the person and the passenger 
compartment of the car. Thornton v. United States 16 expanded this rule to 
situations in which the person arrested is a “recent occupant” of the vehicle. 
The entire passenger compartment is viewed as the area where the person 
may reach to obtain a weapon and/or destroy evidence or contraband. 
Unlike the nonvehicle arrest, the person arrested can be removed from the 
vehicle prior to the search. This does not change the requirement that the 
search be contemporaneous with the arrest.
Right to Search a Vehicle as Incident to Arrest Defined 
When an occupant of a car is arrested, officers may conduct a thorough search of 
the person arrested and the entire passenger compartment.
The passenger compartment is easily identified in a traditional sedan. 
It includes the area around the front and back seats, the glove compart-
ment, and the console. It does not extend to the trunk, the area under the 
hood, or to other parts of the vehicle. Vans, sports utility vehicles, and 
other models that do not have a physical barrier separating the driver and 
occupants from storage space require a factual determination of what is 
the equivalent of the passenger compartment.
Everything within the passenger compartment may be thoroughly 
searched. This includes items, such as briefcases, that would normally fall 
under the Closed Container Rule. The glove compartment and console 
may be opened. Since both weapons and other evidence may be seized, 
areas too small to hide a gun or knife may also be searched.
Examples of Vehicle Searches Done Incident to Arrest
•  An officer arrested the passenger in a car based on an outstanding warrant. Prior 
to taking the person to jail, the officer conducted a very careful search of the entire 
passenger compartment.
•  An officer arrested the driver of a car for driving under the influence of alcohol, 
handcuffed him, and placed him in the back seat of the police car. An officer legally 
parked the car at the curb. While one officer watched the driver, the other very 
thoroughly searched the passenger compartment of the vehicle.

350 
Chapter 12
Examples of Vehicle Searches That Would Not Qualify as Search 
Incident to Arrest
•  A patrol officer in New Jersey stopped a car for driving erratically. When the 
driver’s license was run through the National Crime Information Center database, 
it indicated the driver had an outstanding arrest warrant for felony assault in New 
York. The driver was arrested and the entire car searched.
  Incident to a custodial arrest, the passenger compartment may be searched. In this 
case, the officers extended their search to the entire car.
•  A traffic officer stopped a car for speeding. After writing a citation, the officer 
searched the passenger compartment of the car.
  The right to search the passenger compartment incident to an arrest only applies 
if there is a custodial arrest. The only search that applies when the driver is given a 
citation is the search for weapons authorized in Terry v. Ohio.
Vehicle Searches Based on Probable Cause
Primarily due to the mobility of cars and other vehicles, the Supreme Court 
in Chambers v. Maroney authorized searches without a warrant if the police 
have probable cause to believe that evidence is in the vehicle.17 Subsequent 
cases make it clear that these searches do not require any type of emergency 
to justify the failure to obtain a search warrant (Michigan v. Thomas and
Maryland v. Dyson).18 In fact, a probable cause search may be conducted 
after a car has been impounded for a reason totally unrelated to the case.
Right to Search Vehicle Based on Probable Cause Defined
Officers may conduct a search of a vehicle without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe that the vehicle contains something of evidentiary value that can 
legally be seized. The search is restricted to areas where there is probable cause 
to believe the items are located. It may be done at the scene or later at a more 
convenient location.19
The scope of a probable cause search of a vehicle is directly tied to the facts. 
For example, if an officer saw someone run from the scene of a robbery, throw 
something in the trunk of a car, and then flee the scene on foot, there would 
be probable cause to believe evidence of the robbery may be in the trunk of 
the car. The trunk may be searched immediately based on this probable cause. 
These facts, however, do not provide any justification to search other parts of 
the car. It is important to note that once a search is justified, the officer can 
search anything in the car that is large enough to conceal the item(s) sought. 
This would justify searching a purse that belongs to a passenger in the car who 
is not yet suspected of criminal activity (Wyoming v. Houghton).20

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
351
Sometimes probable cause searches and searches incident to arrests 
overlap. For example, if police pursue a getaway car leaving the scene of 
a burglary with occupants matching the description of the suspects, they 
will have probable cause to arrest the occupants and probable cause to 
search the car. On the other hand, if a person in a car is arrested on an old 
warrant, there will be no probable cause to search the car.
There is no time limit on when a probable cause vehicle search must be 
done. It can be done at the scene or later. Officers can tow the car to a storage 
yard, the police station, or some other convenient location before searching 
it. One evidentiary issue must be considered, however. If the search is not 
done immediately, the prosecution will have the burden of showing that no 
one tampered with the vehicle or “planted” the evidence between the time 
the car was impounded and the search was conducted.
United States v. Ross held that the search of a vehicle based on probable 
cause can be as extensive as the one a judge could authorize if presented 
with an affidavit stating the facts known to the officers.21 Closed contain-
ers can be searched on the spot. Officers are not required to seize them and 
obtain a warrant before opening them.
Examples of Vehicle Searches Done on Probable Cause
•  Police saw a man run from a store with a clerk chasing him shouting “Thief! Thief!” 
The man threw something through the open window of a car and ran away. An 
officer reached through the open window and retrieved a brand new watch with the 
sales tags still on it.
•  Police stopped a car for speeding. As the officer walked up to the driver, he smelled 
a strong odor of marijuana coming from the trunk. The officer demanded the keys 
to the trunk, opened it, and found 500 pounds of marijuana.
•  Police observed what they thought was a drug deal. When they stopped the 
suspect’s car, they observed approximately 25 baggies of marijuana on the 
passenger seat. The car was impounded. Two days later, they searched the entire 
passenger compartment and found a number of other drugs packaged for sale.
Examples of Vehicle Searches That Would Not Qualify
as Probable Cause Searches
•  The driver of a car was arrested based on an outstanding arrest warrant for robbery. 
Based on the fact that they had probable cause to arrest the driver, the police 
searched the passenger compartment and the trunk.
  Probable cause to make an arrest does not give officers the right to conduct a 
probable cause search of the car. The search of the passenger compartment was 
appropriate because it was done incident to a custodial arrest. Searching the trunk 
went beyond what is allowed because there was no probable cause to believe that 
there was anything in the trunk that the officers could seize.

352 
Chapter 12
•  After a foot pursuit, a police officer arrested a burglary suspect as she was unlocking the 
door to her car. The officers impounded the car and searched the trunk thoroughly.
  To do a probable cause search of the trunk of the car, there must be probable 
cause that something of evidentiary value is in the trunk. Here, the suspect had 
just arrived at the car, and the officers had no evidence indicating that she placed 
anything in the trunk of the car.
•  A car was found abandoned in the middle of the street. Police impounded it and 
conducted a thorough search of the entire vehicle.
  When a car is impounded, the officers are allowed to conduct an inventory of what 
is in the car. This is different from the search that is done based on probable cause 
that something of evidentiary value is in the car.
Vehicle Search—Inventory of Impounded Vehicles
Whenever a car is legally impounded it may be inventoried. The reason 
for impounding the vehicle has no bearing on the right to inventory. The 
Supreme Court, in South Dakota v. Opperman,22 based the right to con-
duct the inventory on the protection of both the owner of the vehicle and 
the police. The police protect the owner by accounting for everything that 
is present and removing valuable items. The police are protected against 
unfounded claims of theft because a detailed report is available stating 
exactly what was in the vehicle at the time it was taken into custody.
Right to Inventory Vehicles Defined
Anytime a vehicle is impounded, officers may inventory its contents. The 
inventory consists of making an itemized list of what is in the car.
Any evidence found during the inventory is admissible. The primary 
question is whether the police were searching for evidence or conduct-
ing a legitimate inventory. Department policies that require all cars to be 
inventoried are usually admissible on this point. In general, the courts are 
satisfied that an inventory was being conducted if the police systematically 
go over the entire car. The inventory is more likely to be considered a pre-
text to search if the officers stopped as soon as evidence was found. Closed 
containers may be opened during an inventory if the department’s policy 
indicates that this action is authorized.23
Another distinction between a search and an inventory is the extent of 
the search. An inventory usually involves merely itemizing observable items 
that could be removed from the car. This commonly includes opening the 
glove compartment and trunk. It does not involve inspecting the inside of 
the spare tire, removing rocker panels, or cutting the upholstery open to 
see if they contain drugs. Such acts would be considered searches.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
353
Examples of Vehicle Searches during the Inventory
of an Impounded Vehicle
•  Police had a car towed away because it was blocking a fire lane. When it arrived at 
the impound lot, they inventoried it. They found a jack, a tire iron, a spare tire, and 
a sack containing 100 counterfeit CDs in the trunk.
•  Police had a car towed away because it was inoperable after an accident. They 
inventoried it prior to the arrival of the tow truck and found 10 forged checks and 
false IDs in the glove compartment.
•  Police arrested a suspected bank robber after a high-speed chase. The car was 
impounded as evidence. Prior to towing it, the car was inventoried. In the trunk 
they found a bank bag from the bank that was robbed and money wrappers from 
the same bank.
Examples of Vehicle Searches That Would Not Qualify
as the Inventory of an Impounded Vehicle
•  The driver of a car was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol and the 
car was impounded. An officer started by searching the trunk. As soon as he found 
narcotics in the trunk, the officer stopped the inventory.
  A search only qualifies as an inventory if the officer systematically inventories 
everything in the vehicle. When the officer stopped the process after finding the 
narcotics, the inventory was nullified.
•  At the scene of a traffic accident the officer indicated that the vehicles would 
be impounded. After the inventory was complete, the car that was in operable 
condition was released to its owner.
  The right to inventory a vehicle only applies if the vehicle is impounded.
Vehicle Search during Stop Based on Reasonable Suspicion
Michigan v. Long 24 stated two prerequisites for the search of a car for weap-
ons during a field interview: 
1. There must have been specific articulable facts that caused the offi-
cers to believe that at least one of the occupants of the vehicle was 
involved in criminal activity AND
2. There must have been at least a reasonable suspicion that the vehicle 
contained weapons the suspect might use against the officers.
Right to Search Vehicles during Stops Based on Reasonable
Suspicion Defined
During a field interview, the passenger compartment of a vehicle may be 
searched for weapons if there is reasonable suspicion that the vehicle contains 
weapons.

354 
Chapter 12
Although this type of vehicle search permits police to search the entire 
passenger compartment, it is more limited than the search incident to a 
custodial arrest. Weapons are the only things officers are justified in look-
ing for. This means that only areas large enough to conceal a weapon can 
be searched. Anything found while the officers are properly conducting 
this type of search is admissible under the Plain View Doctrine.
The search for weapons can be done while the suspects are out of the 
car if they will be permitted to return to it. This is allowed because as soon 
as the suspect is released, he or she may retrieve weapons from the car and 
attack the officer.
Noncustodial arrests, such as traffic tickets, also fall under this rule. 
It is important to note that the second prerequisite, reasonable suspicion 
that the vehicle contains weapons, is not an automatic conclusion when 
a noncustodial arrest is made. Officers must be able to state specific facts 
that caused them to suspect that weapons were present.
Examples of Vehicle Search during Stop Based
on Reasonable Suspicion
•  A car is stopped based on reasonable suspicion that the occupants are about to 
paint graffiti on a nearby wall. Based on the behavior of the suspects, the officers 
believe they have weapons in the car. The passenger compartment is searched; two 
knives and 6 ounces of cocaine are recovered.
•  A car is stopped because officers believe the occupants are about to commit a drive-
by shooting. The passenger compartment of the car is immediately searched for 
weapons. The officers find a sawed-off shotgun under the driver’s seat.
Examples of Vehicle Search That Would Not Qualify as Search Based 
on Reasonable Suspicion
•  A traffic officer pulled a car over because it was driving at night without any tail 
lights. The officer ordered the driver and passenger out of the car and immediately 
did a thorough search of the passenger compartment.
  In order to search a car based on reasonable suspicion, the officer must have 
reasonable suspicion that there are weapons in the car. Driving without any tail 
lights, without more facts, does not create suspicion that the driver and/or a 
passenger is armed.
•  A patrol officer stopped a car in an industrial area where it was parked behind 
a factory. When the driver was asked to exit the car, he became belligerent. The 
officer immediately pulled the man out of the car and did a thorough search of the 
passenger compartment and the trunk. 
  The search that is allowed based on reasonable suspicion that there are weapons in 
the vehicle is limited to a search of the passenger compartment for weapons. The 
search of the trunk exceeds this allocation. 

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
355
Vehicle Search—Outside of Vehicle
The outside of a car parked in a public place falls under the Plain View 
Doctrine (Cardwell v. Lewis; New York v. Class 25). What is seen may be 
used to establish probable cause for further action. For example, paint on 
the car may indicate that it has been in a collision. Samples may be taken, 
either at the original location or later at the impound lot, and sent to a 
forensics laboratory for testing. This rule also allows officers to look for 
vehicle identification numbers. It is important to note that this rule does 
not apply to cars parked on a private property.
Right to Search the Outside of a Vehicle Defined 
Officers may inspect the outside of a vehicle that is parked in a public place.
Examples of Vehicle Search—Outside of the Vehicle
•  While a police officer questioned the suspect, another officer went outside and looked 
at the suspect’s car, which was parked on the street. A dent and paint the color of the 
vehicle that had been pushed over a cliff were found on the front bumper.
•  The police had the suspect under surveillance and noted that she always parked at the 
curb in front of her apartment. After the suspect went inside, an officer looked at the 
tags on the license plate and determined that they were not the ones issued for the car.
Examples of Vehicle Search That Would Not Qualify as Legal Search 
of Outside of the Vehicle
•  The police suspected that John’s car had been used to transport a kidnap victim. An 
officer went into the underground parking garage of the building where John lived 
and looked through the car windows for any items the victim indicated were in the 
car when she escaped.
  The right to look at the outside of a vehicle only applies when the vehicle is in a 
public place. The officer did not have the right to go into a private parking garage 
to look at the car.
•  An officer saw a car parked on a red curb outside a bank and became suspicious 
that it was a “getaway” car for a robbery. She forced open the trunk and found six 
bricks of marijuana.
  The only search that is allowed under this exception is observation of the exterior 
of the car. Opening the trunk is not allowed.
Vehicle Search during Non-Criminal Investigation 
The Supreme Court authorized searches not related to the investigation 
of a crime as part of the “community caretaking function” of the police 
(Cady v. Dombrowski 26). The case involved searching an impounded car in 

356 
Chapter 12
an unguarded lot for a gun that the driver had the legal right to possess. 
The search was considered justified because it was done to prevent vandals 
from stealing the gun. During the search, much to the surprise of the offi-
cers, evidence of an unreported murder was discovered. 
Right to Search Vehicle during Non-Criminal Investigation Defined
In some circumstances, cars may be searched if there is a legitimate reason for 
the search not related to the investigation of a crime.
This is an exception to the search warrant requirement that has not 
been fully developed by the Supreme Court. Officers should be very cau-
tious in relying on it.
Examples of Vehicle Searches during Non-Criminal Investigations
•  Police officers find a car parked beside a rarely used road. It appears the vehicle has 
been there a long time. They open the door in order to find the registration. Once 
inside, they detect the smell of marijuana.
•  A Department of Motor Vehicles officer is checking paperwork at a local car dealer 
against the cars on the lot to verify that the dealer is paying appropriate fees. One 
car does not have any license plates. The agent opens the trunk to locate the plates 
and finds several stolen car stereos.
Examples of Vehicle Searches That Would Not Qualify as Legal 
Search during Non-Criminal Investigations
•  An officer finds a dirty car without license plates parked on a city street. Suspecting 
that the car is stolen, he opens the door to look for the vehicle registration and finds 
an illegal gun.
  The fact that the officer suspects that the car is stolen indicates that the search is 
part of a criminal investigation.
•  An officer is notified that a car has been parked in the same location for at least 
a week. Noting that the car matches one belonging to a person who has been 
reported missing, the officer conducts a thorough search of the car to determine if 
there is any evidence that indicates that the person met with “foul play.”
  The fact that the officer was trying to determine if the person met with foul play 
indicates that this search was part of a criminal investigation.
Vehicle Stops at Roadblocks
The seemingly contradictory rule that allows the police to stop all cars without 
cause but not to randomly stop a few cars was dicta in Delaware v. Prouse,27 a 
case that expressly prohibited random car stops for the purpose of checking 
drivers’ licenses and vehicle registrations. It suggested that stopping all cars 
traveling on the street to check licenses and registrations would be legal.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
357
Right to Stop Vehicles at Roadblocks Defined
Vehicles may not be stopped randomly when there is no suspicion of illegal 
activity, but in some situations roadblocks may be established and all cars 
stopped briefly. Officers may also set up roadblocks in order to distribute 
information about a recent crime that occurred in the area.28
Roadblocks have been used to conduct inspections of safety equipment, 
such as brakes and tail lights. Roadblocks are not authorized, however, merely 
to check for outstanding arrest warrants. The Supreme Court approved the 
use of roadblocks for sobriety checkpoints after balancing the need to pre-
vent drunk driving against the minimal intrusion such roadblocks make 
on the rights of individual motorists.29 In another case, however, the Court 
refused to allow stopping cars at roadblocks that were set up to detect illegal 
drugs.30 On the other hand, officers may set up a roadblock for the purpose 
of soliciting information from the public about a recent crime.31
Examples of Legal Vehicle Stops at Roadblocks
•  Officers set up a roadblock and stopped every fourth car in order to give the driver 
a breath alcohol test. Arrests were made for drivers whose blood alcohol was over 
the legal limit. Officers also arrested people when the officers observed drugs 
through the windows of the car.
•  Officers set up a roadblock so they could check safety equipment on the cars—
brake lights, head lights, and turn signals. If the car did not have operative safety 
equipment, the driver was given a “fixer” ticket. People were also cited if they were 
not wearing seat belts when they drove into the roadblock.
Examples of Vehicle Stops That Would Not Qualify as Legal Roadblocks
•  Officers set up a roadblock in an area where there had been numerous drug arrests 
within the past 2 weeks. They stopped each car and searched it for narcotics.
  Checking cars for narcotics is considered part of ordinary police work. The 
Supreme Court ruled that roadblocks could not be used for this purpose.
•  Officers set up a roadblock for “drunk drivers.” Every car was stopped. All drivers 
were given sobriety tests and the cars were searched for open containers of alcohol.
  Roadblocks can be used for “drunk drivers,” but searching the cars for open 
containers of alcohol goes beyond what can legally be done.
Administrative Searches
There are many reasons to search a building that are not related to normal 
police activity. For example, inspectors may need to check for compli-
ance with the fire and building codes. The Supreme Court, in Camara v. 
Municipal Court and See v. City of Seattle,32 designed a modified warrant 
procedure for these situations.

358 
Chapter 12
The probable cause needed for an administrative warrant is very 
different from that mandated for search warrants. The purpose of the 
warrant is to protect people’s privacy from invasion by public offi-
cials. It is also designed to prevent harassment by frequent, needless 
inspections.
Requirements for Administrative Warrant 
Probable cause for an administrative warrant requires a reasonable legislative 
purpose for the search. This legislative purpose does not have to show that there 
is reason to suspect that there are violations in any specific building.
The statement of legislative purpose merely restates the reason the 
law was created that authorized the search. For example, if the sanitation 
district is authorized to inspect each building once every 4 years, the fact 
that the quadrant of the city where the house in question is located is 
scheduled for inspection this year is sufficient probable cause. There is no 
need to state that there are facts indicating that the sanitation code is being 
violated at the address named in the warrant application.
Although the administrative warrant procedure applies to both 
residential and commercial buildings, use of these warrants is rare. Most 
people are willing to permit inspectors to enter the building and perform 
their duty. When admission is denied, a warrant can be used to complete 
the inspection. The process can be used for building and wiring codes, 
inspection of restaurants for health code violations, sanitation inspections 
for rodents and other pests, and inspections to determine if the fire regula-
tions are being complied with.
Supreme Court cases establish exemptions from the administrative 
warrant requirement for firearms dealers (United States v. Biswell),33
establishments selling alcoholic beverages (Colonnade Catering Corp. v. 
United States),34 junkyards that dismantle cars (New York v. Burger),35 and 
safety inspections under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 
(Donovan v. Dewey).36
These are all businesses that are typically heavily regulated. The 
common theme for permitting warrantless inspections is the following:
1. The regulatory scheme is supported by a substantial government 
interest. 
2. The warrantless inspections are necessary to further the regulatory 
scheme.
3. The statute must limit official discretion and advise the owners of 
businesses of the limits on their privacy.

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
359
Immigration and Naturalization Service agents were also exempted 
from the use of warrants when they enter businesses to check for undocu-
mented workers employed there (Immigration and Naturalization Service v. 
Delgado).37 The Court found that, unlike the other exemptions, entering 
the business, including blocking the exits, did not constitute a seizure. 
If specific individuals were detained for questioning, normal Fourth 
Amendment standards would apply.
Several Supreme Court cases have refused to grant exemptions from 
the administrative warrant requirement. One is for Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration inspections. Inspectors may not enter a busi-
ness to check for violations of health and safety rules without consent or 
an administrative warrant (Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc.).38
Fire inspectors pose several interesting problems. Firefighters trying 
to put out a blaze, and those involved in the mop-up operation, obvi-
ously do not need any type of warrant. Inspections that are primarily 
regulatory in nature require administrative warrants. An administra-
tive warrant is also required if there is suspicion of arson. Once arson 
investigators have probable cause to believe arson in fact occurred, they 
need a regular search warrant to enter the structure (Michigan v. Tyler;
Michigan v. Clifford).39 Burned-out structures may still have a protected 
privacy interest if the owners have tried to board them up or otherwise 
keep people out.
Examples of Legal Administrative Searches
•  The fire department is checking all businesses for compliance with fire regulations. 
When Business X refused to allow the inspection, the fire department obtained an 
administrative warrant and did the inspection anyway.
•  The health department checks restaurants for compliance with sanitary 
requirements. When Big Burgers refused to allow the inspectors into the kitchen, 
the health department obtained an administrative warrant in order to inspect the 
kitchen.
•  The Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) went to Gun 
Shop to check its records against the stock on hand. The owner of Gun Shop 
refused to allow the search. ATF agents forced their way into Gun Shop and 
searched it because firearms dealers are exempt from the administrative warrant 
requirement.
Examples of Searches That Would Not Qualify as Legal 
Administrative Searches
•  The fire marshal suspects that the fire at the local dry cleaners was set by an 
arsonist. An administrative warrant is obtained authorizing the fire marshal to 
search the burned-out dry cleaners.

360 
Chapter 12
The fire marshal can use administrative warrants to enter businesses or residences 
in order to check for violations of the fire code. Once there is probable cause that 
arson was involved, a regular search warrant must be used.
•  The police suspect that Hank is hiding undocumented workers in several garages 
at his apartment building. They obtain an administrative warrant to check the 
garages for failure to obtain a building permit before the garages were converted to 
apartments.
An administrative warrant would be appropriate if they intend to check for 
building code violations such as installing plumbing in garages without a 
building permit. If the intent is to search for undocumented workers, a regular 
search warrant should be obtained.
It is not a search to observe something that is in plain view. The Plain View 
Doctrine applies to whatever officers see without searching while they are legally 
on the premises. There must be probable cause in order to seize an item. A related 
rule, called the Open Fields Doctrine, admits evidence observed by officers even 
while trespassing. To qualify, the area must not be near a dwelling.
 
No matter where abandoned property is found, it is admissible. The Fourth 
Amendment does not apply to abandoned property due to the fact that no one’s 
expectation of privacy is involved.
 
A search is legal if it is done with the consent of a person with apparent author-
ity over the area. Officers must reasonably believe this person has a privacy inter-
est in the area to be searched. The consent must be voluntary, but officers do not 
need to inform anyone of his or her constitutional right to refuse to consent. The 
person giving the consent may limit the area to be searched and/or restrict the 
length of time the police may spend searching.
 
The Supreme Court does not recognize as great a privacy interest in vehicles as 
in houses. If an occupant of a car is arrested, the entire passenger compartment 
may be searched. Specific parts of a car may be searched, immediately or after 
impounding the vehicle, if there is probable cause to believe evidence is con-
cealed there. Any impounded vehicle may be inventoried. Evidence found during 
the inventory is admissible. If a car is stopped on reasonable suspicion that it is 
involved in criminal activity and there is also reasonable suspicion that weapons 
are in the vehicle, the passenger compartment may be searched for weapons. The 
exterior of a car parked in a public place may be inspected under the Plain View 
Doctrine.
 
A special search warrant must be obtained to enter a building to do an admin-
istrative inspection if no one will give consent. Probable cause for this warrant 
is established if there is a reasonable legislative purpose for the inspection. Gun 
dealers, junkyards, and establishments selling alcohol may be entered for inspec-
tion without the warrant.
Summary
S u m m a r y

 
Plain View, Consent, Vehicle, and Administrative Searches 
361
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. What are the requirements for the Plain View and Open Field Doctrines?
 2. When may police search abandoned property? Explain.
 3. What is the standard for determining if consent to search is valid? Who may 
consent? How detailed a search is permitted? Explain.
 4. What areas may police search if they arrest the driver of a car? Explain.
 5. When may officers search a car without a warrant? When may officers 
inventory a car? Explain.
 6. What areas may be searched if a car is stopped because there is reasonable 
suspicion that a passenger is involved in criminal activity? Explain.
 7. May officers randomly stop cars to check registration? Explain.
 8. Can roadblocks be set up to check for drunk driving? Explain.
 9. When is an administrative warrant required? How do officers obtain one? 
Explain.
 10. Name three types of businesses that are generally exempt from the 
administrative warrant requirement. What is the common rationale for 
such exemptions?
Go to www.cnn.com/crime and find a case that has either a vehicle search or a con-
sent search. Write a one-page (250-word) report on the case that you found.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Washington v. Chrisman 455 U.S. 1, 70 L.Ed. 2d 778, 102 S.Ct. 812 (1982). See also Coolidge v. 
New Hampshire 403 U.S. 443, 29 L.Ed. 2d 564, 91 S.Ct. 2022 (1971).
 2. Horton v. California 496 U.S. 128, 110 L.Ed. 2d 112, 110 S.Ct. 2301 (1990).
 3. California v. Ciraolo 476 U.S. 207, 90 L.Ed. 2d 210, 106 S.Ct. 1809 (1987).
 4. Arizona v. Hicks 480 U.S. 321, 94 L.Ed. 2d 347, 107 S.Ct. 1149 (1987).
 5. Oliver v. United States 466 U.S. 170, 80 L.Ed. 2d 214, 104 S.Ct. 173 (1984); United States v. Dunn
480 U.S. 480 294, 94 L.Ed. 2d 326, 107 S.Ct. 1134 (1987).
 6. California v. Greenwood 486 U.S. 35, 100 L.Ed. 2d 30, 108 S.Ct. 1625 (1988).
 7. California v. Hodari D. 499 U.S. 621, 113 L.Ed. 2d 690, 111 S.Ct. 1547 (1991).
 8. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte 412 U.S. 218, 36 L.Ed. 2d 854, 93 S.Ct. 2041 (1973).
 9. Bumper v. North Carolina 391 U.S. 543, 20 L.Ed. 2d 797, 88 S.Ct. 1788 (1968).
 10. Florida v. Bostick 501 U.S. 429, 115 L.Ed. 2d 389, 111 S.Ct. 2382 (1991).
 11. United States v. Matlock 415 U.S. 164, 39 L.Ed. 2d 242, 94 S.Ct. 988 (1974); Illinois v. Rodriguez
497 U.S. 177, 111 L.Ed. 2d 148, 110 S.Ct. 2793 (1990). 
 12. Griffin v. Wisconsin 483 U.S. 868, 97 L.Ed. 2d 709, 107 S.Ct. 3164 (1987).
 13. Florida v. Jimeno 500 U.S. 248, 114 L.Ed. 2d 297, 111 S.Ct. 1801 (1991).
 14. California v. Carney 471 U.S. 386, 85 L.Ed. 2d 406, 105 S.Ct. 2066 (1985).
 15. New York v. Belton 453 U.S. 454, 69 L.Ed. 2d 768, 101 S.Ct. 2869 (1981).

362 
Chapter 12
 16. Thornton v. United States 541 U.S. 615, 158 L.Ed. 2d 905, 124 S. Ct. 2127 (2004).
 17. Chambers v. Maroney 399 U.S. 42, 26 L.Ed. 2d 419, 90 S.Ct. 1975 (1970).
 18. Michigan v. Thomas 458 U.S. 259, 73 L.Ed. 2d 750, 102 S.Ct. 3079 (1982); Maryland v. Dyson 527 
U.S. 465, 144 L.Ed. 2d 442, 119 S. Ct. 2013 (1999).
 19. Chambers v. Maroney 399 U.S. 42, 26 L.Ed. 2d 419, 90 S.Ct. 1975 (1970).
 20. Wyoming v. Houghton 526 U.S. 295, 143 L.Ed. 2d 408, 119 S. Ct. 1297 (1999).
 21. United States v. Ross 456 U.S. 798, 72 L.Ed. 2d 572, 102 S.Ct. 2157 (1982).
 22. South Dakota v. Opperman 428 U.S. 364, 49 L.Ed. 2d 1000, 96 S.Ct. 3092 (1976).
 23. Michigan v. Long 463 U.S. 1032, 77 L.Ed. 2d 1201, 103 S.Ct. 3469 (1983).
 24. Michigan v. Long 463 U.S. 1032, 77 L.Ed. 2d 1201, 103 S.Ct. 3469 (1983).
 25. Cardwell v. Lewis 417 U.S. 583, 41 L.Ed. 2d 325, 94 S.Ct. 2464 (1974); New York v. Class 475 U.S. 
106, 89 L.Ed. 2d 81, 106 S.Ct. 960 (1986).
 26. Cady v. Dombrowski 413 U.S. 433, 37 L.Ed. 2d 706, 93 S.Ct. 2523 (1973).
 27. Delaware v. Prouse 440 U.S. 648, 59 L.Ed. 2d 660, 99 S.Ct. 1391 (1979).
 28. Illinois v. Lidster 540 U.S. 419, 157 L.Ed. 2d 843, 124 S. Ct. 885 (2004).
 29. Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz 496 U.S. 444, 110 L.Ed. 2d 412, 110 S.Ct. 2481 (1990).
 30. City of Indianapolis v. Edmond 531 U.S. 32, 148 L.Ed. 2d 333, 121 S.Ct. 447 (2000).
 31. Illinois v. Lidster 540 U.S. 419, 157 L.Ed. 2d 843, 124 S. Ct. 885 (2004). 
 32. Camara v. Municipal Court 387 U.S. 523, 18 L.Ed. 2d 930, 87 S.Ct. 1727 (1967); See v. City of 
Seattle 387 U.S. 541, 18 L.Ed. 2d 943, 87 S.Ct.1737 (1967).
 33. United States v. Biswell 406 U.S. 311, 32 L.Ed. 2d 87, 92 S.Ct. 1593 (1972).
 34. Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States 397 U.S. 72, 25 L.Ed. 2d 60, 90 S.Ct. 774 (1970).
 35. New York v. Burger 482 U.S. 691, 96 L.Ed. 2d 601, 107 S.Ct. 2636 (1987).
 36. Donovan v. Dewey 452 U.S. 594, 69 L.Ed. 2d 262, 101 S.Ct. 2534 (1981).
 37. Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Delgado 466 U.S. 210, 80 L.Ed. 2d 247, 104 S.Ct. 1758 
(1984).
 38. Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc. 436 U.S. 307, 56 L.Ed. 2d 305, 98 S.Ct. 1816 (1978).
 39. Michigan v. Tyler 436 U.S. 499, 56 L.Ed. 2d 486, 98 S.Ct. 1942 (1978); Michigan v. Clifford 464 U.S. 
287, 78 L.Ed. 2d 477, 104 S.Ct. 641 (1984).

363
USA PATRIOT Act, 
Foreign Intelligence, 
and Other Types of 
Electronic Surveillance 
Covered by Federal Law
CHAPTER 13
Feature Case: Jose Padilla*
In a 3-month trial, Jose Padilla, Adham Amin Hassoun, and Kifah Wael 
Jayyousi were accused of being part of a North American support cell that 
provided supplies, money, and recruits to groups of Islamic extremists. 
The defense contended that the three men were trying to help persecuted 
Muslims in war zones by sending them humanitarian aid.
When Padilla was first detained in 2002, the Bush administration 
portrayed him as a U.S. citizen and Muslim convert who was a commit-
ted terrorist. Claiming that he was part of an al-Qaida plot to detonate a 
radioactive “dirty bomb” in the United States, the administration claimed 
that his detention was an important victory in the war against terrorism.
The charges brought in civilian court in Miami, however, were much 
less serious than those initial claims, in part because Padilla was interrogated 
*Based on story downloaded November 3, 2007, from http://www.courttv.com/news/2007/ 
0816/jose_padilla.html.

364 
Chapter 13
with no attorney present while he was held in military custody as an 
enemy combatant for 3½ years. An additional problem was that he was 
not read his Miranda rights.
Padilla’s attorneys fought for years to get his case into federal court. 
In late 2005, shortly before the U.S. Supreme Court considered President 
Bush’s authority to continue detaining him, Padilla was added as a defen-
dant in the case against a Miami terrorism support group. He had lived 
in south Florida in the 1990s and was supposedly recruited by Hassoun to 
become a mujahedeen fighter while he was there.
The key piece of physical evidence was a five-page form Padilla suppos-
edly filled out in July 2000 when he was petitioning to attend an al-Qaida 
training camp in Afghanistan. This camp linked Padilla to the other two 
defendants as well as Osama bin Laden’s terrorist organization. The form, 
recovered in Afghanistan by the CIA in 2001, contained seven of Padilla’s 
fingerprints and several other personal identifiers, such as his birthdate 
and his claim that he was able to speak Spanish, English, and Arabic.
Padilla’s lawyers insisted that the form was far from conclusive, and 
they denied that he was a ‘star recruit’ of the North American support cell 
that allegedly intended that he become a terrorist. They said Padilla trav-
eled to Egypt in September 1998 to learn Islam more deeply and become 
fluent in Arabic. “His intent was to study, not to murder,” said Padilla’s 
attorney Michael Caruso.
Central to the investigation were approximately 300,000 FBI wiretap 
intercepts collected from 1993 to 2001, mainly involving Padilla’s co-
defendants Hassoun and Jayyousi and others. Most of the conversations 
were in Arabic and purportedly used code such as “tourism” and “football” 
for violent jihad or “zucchini” and “eggplant” instead of military weapons or 
ammunition. The bulk of these conversations and other evidence concerned 
efforts in the 1990s by Hassoun and Jayyousi, both 45 years old, to assist 
Muslims in conflict zones such as Chechnya, Bosnia, Somalia, Afghanistan, 
and Lebanon. Jayyousi also ran an organization called American Worldwide 
Relief and published a newsletter called the Islam Report that provided 
details of battles and political issues in the Muslim world.
Padilla was convicted.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you should be able to
• Define the Misplaced Reliance Doctrine.
• List the requirements for obtaining an electronic surveillance warrant.

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
365
• Explain how the USA PATRIOT Act applies to wiretapping and foreign intelligence 
operations.
• State the requirements for obtaining an electronic surveillance warrant based on 
the current version of the Wiretap Act.
• Explain the differences between the Wiretap Act of 1968 (as currently amended) 
and the current version of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
Key Terms
Myths
Facts
The USA PATRIOT Act created a new 
vehicle for investigating terrorism.
Many of the items in the USA PATRIOT Act 
amended existing federal laws. A few new 
statutes were added.
The USA PATRIOT Act replaced all existing 
federal laws regulating the issuance of 
electronic surveillance warrants.
The USA PATRIOT Act amended some 
portions of the Wiretap Act of 1968, but 
most of the provisions of the original Act are 
still in place.
Search warrants must be obtained when 
using undercover officers.
Based on the Misplaced Reliance Doctrine, 
search warrants are not required if someone 
voluntarily allows an undercover officer to 
observe or participate in criminal activity.
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
(FISA) was enacted to exempt the CIA and 
other U.S. agencies involved in foreign 
intelligence gathering from the Fourth 
Amendment.
FISA was enacted to create a vehicle that 
would enable federal judges to issue 
electronic surveillance warrants for use by 
U.S. agencies that investigate activities of 
foreign governments and their agents.
The President of the United States can 
authorize wiretaps for foreign intelligence 
purposes without asking a judge for 
approval.
The President can order the installation of 
wiretaps for foreign intelligence purposes, 
but it is still necessary to obtain approval 
from the Foreign Intelligence Court.
An electronic surveillance warrant is 
required to obtain e-mail records and 
stored e-mail messages.
Obtaining e-mail records and stored e-mail 
is covered by the Electronic Communication 
Privacy Act, which was modified by the USA 
PATRIOT Act. When seeking e-mail that the 
provider has placed in long-term storage, 
law enforcement can use a subpoena. This is 
easier than obtaining a search warrant.
•  Bumper Beeper
•  Covert entry
•   Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act
•  Electronic surveillance
•   Misplaced Reliance 
Doctrine
•  Pen Register
•  Title III
•  Trap and Trace Device
•  USA PATRIOT Act
•  Wiretap Act

366 
Chapter 13
Law enforcement’s interest in conducting wiretaps and other forms of 
electronic surveillance has increased with the rapid growth of new forms 
of electronic communications. Since September 11, 2001, fear of terror-
ist attacks has made ongoing seizures of international communications 
necessary.
This chapter first discusses the Misplaced Reliance Doctrine, which 
applies to eavesdropping; this investigative technique can be used without 
a warrant. Next, it briefly recounts the history of electronic surveillance 
warrants and their recent expansion. A number of major federal laws 
are reviewed, including the Wiretap Act of 1968 (also referred to as Title 
III), the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, the USA PATRIOT 
Act (2001), and legislation enacted in 2006 that extended the life of the 
PATRIOT Act. Many of these pieces of legislation are long (the original 
PATRIOT Act was 323 pages) and provide amendments for many older 
laws, so delving into all of the intricate subparts is difficult. Discussion 
will focus on what the laws currently authorize. Portions of these laws that 
are of most significance to law enforcement agencies fighting terrorism are 
covered, as is the Wiretap Act, which is the primary vehicle for obtaining 
electronic surveillance warrants. No attempt is made to cover electronic 
surveillance legislation at the state level.
Eavesdropping and Electronic Surveillance
Eavesdropping has probably been done since people began keeping secrets 
from each other. Electronic surveillance, however, only emerged after the 
technology developed. Both involve the seizure of private conversations. 
The key distinction noted in Supreme Court cases is that the person 
making the comments knows whether a listener is present but is unlikely 
to know whether electronic equipment is being used. Violation of trust 
by one party to a conversation is all that it takes to make what was said 
admissible in court.
Misplaced Reliance Doctrine
In situations in which the suspect knew someone was listening, the 
Supreme Court has placed the burden on the suspect to make sure that 
he or she can trust everyone who can hear what is said. This is called the 
Misplaced Reliance Doctrine. It applies whether or not tape recorders or 
radio transmitters are used. The person who overhears the conversation 
may carry tape recorders, radio transmitters, or other high-tech equip-
ment without prior authorization from a judge.

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
367
Misplaced Reliance Doctrine Defined
No warrant is required to obtain conversations that can be overheard by the 
police or their agents based on the misplaced reliance of the suspect. Each person 
bears the burden of restricting his or her conversations to people who will not 
reveal them to the authorities. 
The facts from two cases help explain this doctrine. Hoffa v. United 
States is one of the leading cases.1 When Jimmy Hoffa was on trial in what 
is called the “Test Fleet” case, the U.S. Justice Department had another 
union official named Partin released from prison. Partin was instructed 
to join Hoffa’s entourage and report on Hoffa’s out-of-court activities. 
No electronic monitoring equipment was used. Partin frequented Hoffa’s 
hotel suite and overheard conversations about plans to tamper with the 
jury. The “Test Fleet” case ended with a hung jury. Evidence supplied by 
Partin was used in a subsequent case in which Hoffa was charged with 
attempting to bribe jurors. The Supreme Court found this was a case of 
misplaced reliance. Hoffa knew Partin was present and took the risk that 
Partin might report the jury tampering to the authorities. The fact that the 
Justice Department had planted Partin had no legal significance.
Federal narcotics agents used concealed radio transmitters in United 
States v. White, another leading case.2 They recorded conversations between 
agents and the defendant in public places, restaurants, the defendant’s home, 
and the informant’s car. The informant also allowed an agent to hide in a 
kitchen closet and transmit conversations between the informant and the 
defendant. All of these recorded conversations were found admissible under 
the Misplaced Reliance Doctrine. Defendant White should have been more 
careful in deciding whom he could trust. This even applied to the agent in 
the closet. White should not have relied on his friend who allowed the agents 
to hide there.
Examples of Situations Covered by Misplaced Reliance Doctrine
•  Mary told her friend Liz that she had stolen an expensive ring. Liz reported what 
Mary said to the police.
•  Nancy got in an argument while talking to Phil on her cell phone. She became so 
upset that she started shouting. A passerby who heard Nancy threaten to kill Phil 
reported it to the police.
•  Rick was arrested for selling drugs. He tried to plea bargain. Officers told him that 
they would drop the charges if he wore a “body mike” while buying drugs from 
his supplier. Rick wore the body mike and the police obtained enough evidence to 
convict the supplier.

368 
Chapter 13
Examples of Situations Not Covered by Misplaced Reliance Doctrine
•  Police had been watching Sam as he collected “protection money.” At the end of the 
day he always stopped at the pay phone on 3rd and Main and made a call. Without 
obtaining a warrant, the police put a wiretap on that phone and recorded his calls.
  This was a public phone and no one gave permission. Therefore, the police must 
obtain a wiretap warrant in order to legally record the calls.
•  Tom, the basketball coach at a nationally ranked university, was a suspect in a 
sports betting operation. A police officer contacted a cooperative janitor, who 
unlocked the door so that a listening device could be installed in Tom’s office. The 
recorded calls indicated that Tom was involved in rigging the point spread at crucial 
games.
  The janitor did not have the authority to authorize the installation of the listening 
device. Therefore, the information obtained from the listening device would not be 
admissible against Tom in court.
Electronic Surveillance and Wiretap Act of 1968
Electronic surveillance has particularly troubled the Supreme Court 
because it has a great potential for abuse. In both wiretap and bugging 
cases, the victim may be totally unaware that the government is listen-
ing. The key decisions on this topic were made in the late 1960s and early 
1970s. Since that time, new laws have been needed because technology has 
rapidly advanced, creating opportunities for electronic eavesdropping that 
are much greater than those that existed previously.
Reasonable expectation of privacy, the current standard for Fourth 
Amendment protections, originally came from a wiretap case. Prior to that 
time, electronic surveillance cases had focused on trespassing. Anything 
the police could accomplish without physically trespassing on the suspect’s 
property was permitted. Sometimes this went to the extreme of measuring 
how far a “spike mike” had gone into the common wall between two apart-
ments in order to determine if there had been a trespass.
In Katz v. United States,3 agents had probable cause to believe that 
the suspect was using a telephone booth as part of an interstate gambling 
operation. A listening device was placed on the outside of a public tele-
phone booth. There was no trespass. Even so, the Supreme Court held that 
the government violated the Fourth Amendment. Katz had a reasonable 
expectation of privacy because he entered the telephone booth, closed the 
door, and kept his voice down.
The issuing of warrants permitting electronic surveillance was 
reviewed by the Supreme Court in Berger v. New York.4 Statutes authorizing 
this specialized search warrant must provide very precise requirements, 
including a description of the offense and the types of conversations the 

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
369
officers expect to seize. The warrant must be limited to a short period of 
time. Although the Court did not specifically state what the maximum 
length of time was, it found that 2 months was too long. Extensions of the 
original warrant must be based on a showing that probable cause exists 
for the continuance of the surveillance. The warrant must have a return 
that reports on the interceptions made while the listening equipment was 
in place.
Warrant Requirement for Electronic Surveillance Defined
An electronic surveillance warrant is required to install wiretaps and electronic 
listening devices that invade a person’s reasonable expectation of privacy. 
The warrant must contain a detailed statement of probable cause, including a 
showing of why other investigative techniques will not work. The warrant must 
not permit electronic monitoring for extended periods of time. 
Examples of Electronic Surveillance That Is Conducted Legally
•  Based on a wiretap warrant, the police department had the telephone company 
connect a device that would record all conversations on the lines listed in the 
warrant.
•  Based on an electronic surveillance warrant, the federal agents had a device secretly 
installed in the suspect’s living room. The device contained a radio transmitter 
so that the agents were able to monitor the conversations from a surveillance van 
parked a block away.
•  Based on an electronic surveillance warrant, the police had a device installed that 
recorded all messages left on the suspect’s home phone.
Examples of Electronic Surveillance That Is Not Conducted Legally
•  Based on a search warrant, police entered a house and installed a recording device 
in the telephone receiver.
  Installation of a recording device requires an electronic surveillance warrant. A 
search warrant is not sufficient.
•  The police asked the local phone company to install a wiretap on a suspect’s phone.
  Consent by the phone company is not sufficient because it is not the phone 
company’s privacy that is being invaded. An electronic surveillance warrant is 
required.
Not all electronic devices that transmit information are covered by the 
same legal rationale. Pen registers record the numbers dialed for outgoing 
calls; “trap and trace” devices record the phone numbers on incoming 
calls. Neither is covered by the Fourth Amendment or the Wiretap Act 
(Smith v. Maryland; United States v. New York Telephone Co.)5 because

370 
Chapter 13
these devices do not seize (record) conversations. The Supreme Court 
found no expectation of privacy in the telephone numbers because the 
telephone company has access to them. Congress, however, passed laws 
regulating their use during criminal investigations. This legislation man-
dates that a warrant be obtained before installing pen registers and “trap 
and trace” devices. In order to obtain this specialized warrant, an applica-
tion must be submitted that contains
1. the identity of the attorney for the government or the name of the 
state law enforcement or investigative officer making the application, 
and the identity of the law enforcement agency conducting the inves-
tigation; and
2. a certification by the applicant that the information likely to be 
obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being con-
ducted by that agency.6
The process is similar to the one federal investigators follow when 
seeking search warrants. Note that it is not necessary to establish prob-
able cause; investigators need only show that the information obtained 
will be relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation. The extra require-
ments imposed on applicants for electronic surveillance warrants do 
not apply. 
The Fourth Amendment also does not apply to transponders (also 
called “bumper beepers”) as long as they do not enter residences (United 
States v. Karo; United States v. Knotts).7 A transponder emits a signal that 
makes it possible to track a vehicle or package without keeping it under 
visual surveillance. The Supreme Court held that the electronic device 
merely facilitates the surveillance process. It drew the line, however, when 
the container with the transmitter in it entered the suspect’s home.
Examples of Use of Federal Legislation on Electronic Surveillance
•  FBI agents are investigating organized crime’s involvement in gambling. They have 
been able to trace banking records to a specific person, but attempts to place this 
person under surveillance have failed. They obtain a Title III warrant for a wiretap 
on the person’s home phone for 30 days.
•  City police officers are investigating a kidnap for ransom case. They were assisted 
by the FBI because interstate transportation of the victim was suspected. The 
kidnapper is calling the parents and trying to arrange the delivery of the ransom 
money. FBI agents obtain a warrant to install a “trap and trace” device on the phone 
in order to determine where the kidnapper is calling from.
•  Federal agents believe that a person who is involved with a terrorist cell sponsored 
by a foreign government is plotting to blow up a federal building in the near future. 
The U.S. Attorney General authorizes a wiretap for 90 days.

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
371
Federal Legislation on Electronic Surveillance8
Immediately after Katz and Berger indicated the need for carefully drafted 
legislation authorizing electronic surveillance, Congress enacted the 
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. Title III of this 
act, officially called the Wiretap Act of 1968,9 was devoted to electronic 
surveillance. The Wiretap Act has been amended several times, including 
changes authorized by the USA PATRIOT Act (2001) and its reauthoriza-
tion statute in 2006.
Wiretap Act of 1968
The code sections.  The Wiretap Act of 1968,10 sometimes referred to as 
Title III, made it a federal felony to willfully intercept any wire or oral 
communication by electronic or mechanical devices unless an electronic 
surveillance warrant has been obtained.11 Oral communications are cur-
rently defined as any utterance by a person exhibiting an expectation that 
such communication is not subject to interception in circumstances justi-
fying such expectation; electronic communications are not covered by this 
definition.12 The PATRIOT Act extended the Wiretap Act to cover voice 
mail messages, and records of telephone or Internet/e-mail service provid-
ers that record customers’ names, addresses, and other information about 
their accounts including the length of service and source of payments 
(credit card and bank account numbers). Wire communications include 
any communication made in whole or in part by wire, cable, or other con-
nection operated by a common carrier.13 Employees of the telephone com-
pany or other common carriers, such as telephone operators who legally 
intercept conversations, are prohibited from disclosing them.14
The Wiretap Act set detailed requirements that must be followed in 
order to obtain an electronic surveillance warrant. Although this statute 
only applies to federal agents, it has much broader implications because 
many states have either authorized their officers to proceed under identical 
laws or have used it as a basis for state statutes. Federal rules may also apply 
if local police officers are part of a task force that includes federal agents. 
In such situations, it is likely that if electronic surveillance warrants are 
needed, they will be obtained using the Wiretap Act.
Electronic surveillance warrants may only be issued by federal judges 
for the investigation of crimes specified in the Wiretap Act. The following 
list contains approximately half of the crimes that are enumerated:
Any offense punishable by death or by imprisonment for more than 1 year 
relating to the enforcement of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954; sabotage 
of nuclear facilities; espionage; kidnapping; protection of trade secrets; 

372 
Chapter 13
sabotage; treason; riots; destruction of vessels; piracy; murder, robbery, or 
extortion; bribery of public officials, witnesses, bank officials, and sporting 
contests; unlawful use of explosives; transmission of wagering information; 
influencing or injuring an officer, juror, or witness; assassination of the 
President, Presidential staff, members of Congress, or Supreme Court justices; 
transactions involving nuclear materials or biological weapons; interference 
with commerce by threats or violence; use of interstate commerce facilities 
in the commission of murder for hire; laundering of monetary instruments; 
embezzlement from pension and welfare funds; sex trafficking of children 
by force, fraud, or coercion; sexual exploitation of children; selling or buying 
of children; child pornography; interstate transportation of stolen property; 
hostage taking; computer fraud and abuse; production of false identification 
documentation; procurement of citizenship or nationalization unlawfully; 
reproduction of naturalization or citizenship papers; any offense involving 
counterfeiting; manufacture, importation, receiving, concealment, buying, 
selling, or otherwise dealing in narcotic drugs, marijuana, or other dangerous 
drugs; destruction of a natural gas pipeline; aircraft piracy; smuggling of 
aliens; chemical weapons; or terrorism.15
The USA PATRIOT Act added several categories of crimes to this list, but 
the majority of them were in the bill when it was passed in 1968.
Realizing that several states passed laws that in effect made the 
Wiretap Act their state’s law on electronic surveillance, Congress added a 
list of the state-level felonies for which electronic surveillance warrants can 
be issued. Those crimes are murder, kidnapping, gambling, robbery, brib-
ery, extortion, or dealing in narcotic drugs, marijuana, or other dangerous 
drugs, or other crimes dangerous to life, limb, or property.16 States that 
enact their own electronic surveillance laws may alter this list.
More facts must be included in an application for a Wiretap Act war-
rant than for a normal search warrant. The code is very specific about 
what should be included: 
1. The identity of the law enforcement officer making the application.
2. The name of the senior officer who reviewed the application and 
authorized its presentation to the court. 
3. A full and complete statement of the facts and circumstances relied 
on by the applicant to justify his or her belief that an order should be 
issued, including 
 
a.  details as to the particular offense that has been, is being, or is 
about to be committed, 
 
b. particular description of the nature and location of the facili-
ties from which or the place where the communication is to be 
intercepted, 

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
373
 
c. particular description of the type of communications sought to 
be intercepted,
 
d. the identity of the person, if known, committing the offense and 
whose communications are to be intercepted.
4. A full and complete statement as to whether or not other investiga-
tive procedures have been tried and failed or why they reasonably 
appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried, or it would be too danger-
ous to try them.
5. A statement of the period of time for which the interception is 
required to be maintained.
6. A full and complete statement of the facts concerning all previous 
applications known to the individuals authorizing and making the 
application, involving any of the same persons, facilities, or places 
specified in the application, and the action taken by the judge on 
each such application.17
An applicant can request a warrant without listing the location where the 
wiretap will operate. To obtain a warrant in these circumstances requires a 
strong showing justifying deviation from normal procedure.18
If an extension is needed for an existing warrant, the application must 
comply with the previous list and give a detailed description of what has 
been obtained during previous wiretaps. If the surveillance produced few 
results, the application for the extension must give a reasonable explana-
tion why efforts to date were not more productive.19
Another step that must be completed when seeking a wiretap war-
rant is that the application must be reviewed before it is submitted to the 
judge.20 Federal law enforcement agents must have their warrant applica-
tions screened by a senior member of the Attorney General’s staff. The 
U.S. Attorney General now has the flexibility to designate someone with 
the rank of Deputy Assistant Attorney General, or higher, in the criminal 
division to review these applications.21 If a state empowers its officers 
to act under the federal Wiretap Act, the state Attorney General reviews 
applications by officers with statewide agencies, and the principal pros-
ecuting attorney of the county does corresponding reviews for local police 
departments.22 The entire warrant application must be reviewed by the 
screener before it can be submitted to a judge. 
The Court may direct a common carrier, such as the telephone com-
pany, to cooperate with the agents executing the warrant.23 The maximum 
length of interception under the warrant is 30 days.24 Shorter periods are 
preferred.
If there is reason to suspect that there is immediate danger of death or 
serious physical injury to any person, conspiratorial activities threaten the 

374 
Chapter 13
nation’s security interest, or there are conspiratorial activities characteris-
tic of organized crime, an emergency procedure is available.25 There must 
be sufficient grounds to obtain a warrant before an emergency intercep-
tion begins. An application must be made for a warrant within 48 hours of 
the start of an interception. If a wiretap warrant is obtained, it will retro-
actively apply and any communications seized will be admissible in court. 
If the application is denied, or if no application is made, the interception 
must stop immediately; anything obtained during the interception will be 
inadmissible in court.
The communications obtained under the electronic surveillance 
warrant must be tape recorded or otherwise retained.26 The recordings 
must be done in a manner that prevents later editing or alteration. These 
recordings must be made available to the judge when the surveillance has 
been completed. They must be kept for 10 years and may not be destroyed 
without an order from a judge.
The person(s) whose conversations were intercepted must be served 
with a limited inventory within 90 days of the end of surveillance. The 
person must be told
1. That an order was entered or the application was made.
2.  The date of the entry, and the period of authorized, approved or dis-
approved interception, or the denial of the application.
3.  The fact that during the period, wire, oral, or electronic communica-
tions were, or were not, intercepted.27
The judge has the discretion to permit the persons whose communi-
cations were seized to see the application for the warrant and to hear the 
taped interceptions.28 If evidence obtained during the surveillance is to be 
used in court, all parties must have access to the application and warrant 
at least 10 days before the testimony is introduced.29
Title III contains its own exclusionary rule. It is stricter than the one 
created by the Supreme Court. Illegally obtained conversations may not 
be used in any hearing, trial, or other proceeding before any court, grand 
jury, government agency, regulatory body, or legislative committee of the 
United States or any of the states, counties, or cities. Anyone whose tele-
phone or premises was monitored, as well as anyone whose conversations 
were seized, has standing.30
The case law on the Wiretap Act.  The Supreme Court has decided several 
cases regarding the Wiretap Act. Probably the most important to local 
law enforcement is Dalia v. United States.31 The issue was whether agents 
using an electronic surveillance warrant could covertly enter a home to 

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
375
install listening devices. Congress had not addressed the issue. The Court 
found that the right to enter was a fundamental part of the right to use 
electronic devices. Re-entry to service the equipment and/or retrieve it at 
the end of the surveillance was also included. No separate search warrant 
was required. Neither was it necessary to ask for authorization for covert 
entries when the original surveillance warrant was obtained.
Minimization is done to protect privacy by limiting the monitoring of 
conversations. One aspect of this is the requirement that the suspects be 
named in the application for a surveillance warrant. Listing prime targets 
is not enough. United States v. Donovan applied this to all persons the 
government has probable cause to believe are involved in the crime and 
whose conversations are likely to be seized.32 This does not make conversa-
tions inadmissible if police knew a person, such as the wife of the suspect 
in United States v. Kahn, was likely to be using the telephone but had no 
reason to suspect that she was involved in criminal activity.33 Each case is 
to be decided based on an objective review of the facts. The officer’s sub-
jective intent is not binding (Scott v. United States).34
Although the Wiretap Act has an emergency provision that can be 
used in cases involving national security, the Supreme Court has narrowly 
interpreted it. Neither the President, Attorney General, nor anyone else 
can authorize wiretaps on U.S. citizens, even “domestic dissidents,” with-
out judicial review (United States v. United States District Court (Keith)).35
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (FISA)36
In response to Keith, Congress passed the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Act (FISA) in 1978. It started as a platform for issuing electronic surveil-
lance warrants, but it has been amended several times. It is now a key piece 
of legislation in the post-9/11 war against terrorism.
FISA was enacted in order to provide a “secure framework by which 
the Executive Branch may conduct legitimate electronic surveillance for 
foreign intelligence purposes within the context of this nation’s com-
mitment to privacy and individual rights.”37 FISA created the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC), which currently consists of 11 
judges appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. The Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review (FISCR), which has jurisdic-
tion to review FISA applications that the FISC denied, was also part of 
the original design. The Supreme Court theoretically has the final word, 
although to date no petitions for certiorari have been made. FISCR pub-
lished its first opinion in 2006; the number of unpublished opinions is 
unknown.

376 
Chapter 13
The applicant for a FISA warrant must complete an extensive 
application: 
(1) The identity of the Federal officer making the application; 
(2)  The approval of the Attorney General to make the application to the court; 
(3)  The identity, if known, or a description of the target of the electronic 
surveillance; 
(4)  A statement of the facts and circumstances relied on by the applicant to 
justify his belief that—
(A) the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power or an agent 
of a foreign power; and 
(B) each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance is 
directed is being used, or is about to be used, by a foreign power or 
an agent of a foreign power; 
(5)  A statement of the proposed minimization procedures; 
(6)  A detailed description of the nature of the information sought and the 
type of communications or activities to be subjected to the surveillance; 
(7)  Certification(s) by the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs 
or an executive branch official or officials designated by the President: 
(A) that the certifying official deems the information sought to be foreign 
intelligence information; 
(B) that a significant purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign 
intelligence information; 
(C) that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal 
investigative techniques; 
(D) that designates the type of foreign intelligence information being 
sought according to the categories described in section 1801 (e) of 
this title; and 
(E) including a statement of the basis for the certification. 
(8)  A statement of the means by which the surveillance will be effected and a 
statement whether physical entry is required to effect the surveillance; 
(9)  a statement of the facts concerning all previous applications that have 
been made to any judge under this subchapter involving any of the 
persons, facilities, or places specified in the application, and the action 
taken on each previous application; 
(10)  a statement of the period of time for which the electronic surveillance is 
required to be maintained, and if the nature of the intelligence gathering 
is such that the approval of the use of electronic surveillance under this 
subchapter should not automatically terminate when the described type 
of information has first been obtained, a description of facts supporting 
the belief that additional information of the same type will be obtained 
thereafter; and 

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
377
(11)  whenever more than one electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance 
device is to be used with respect to a particular proposed electronic 
surveillance, the coverage of the devices involved, and what minimization 
procedures apply to information acquired by each device.38
Prior to presenting it to the court, it must be approved by the Attorney 
General. The application is then submitted to the FISC by a federal officer.
The definition of probable cause that applies when FISA warrants 
are sought is different than the one used for other Fourth Amendment 
purposes. The applicant must establish that the target of the electronic 
surveillance is a foreign power and no “United States person” is being 
considered a foreign power or foreign agent because of activities protected 
by the First Amendment. When the judge evaluates probable cause, the 
target’s past activities, as well as facts and circumstances relating to current 
and future activities, may be considered.39
Another difference between FISA wiretaps and those authorized by 
the Wiretap Act is that a judge can issue the warrant without restricting it 
to a specific telephone number(s) and locations listed in the application. 
These roving warrants increase the investigator’s ability to obtain valid 
intelligence data. Low-cost cell phones, dubbed disposable phones, have 
made the change necessary. 
A confusing feature of FISA is that surveillance can be authorized for 
different periods of time. Unless an exception applies, warrants are valid 
for a maximum of 90 days.40 Warrants targeting foreign powers may be 
valid for a maximum of 1 year;41 for foreign agents, the corresponding 
period is 120 days.42 In all cases, the warrant terminates if the stated objec-
tive is reached before the expiration date.
Similar to Wiretap Act warrants, FISA provides for emergency warrants. 
If the Attorney General determines that “an emergency situation exists with 
respect to the employment of electronic surveillance to obtain foreign intel-
ligence information before an order authorizing such surveillance can with 
due diligence be obtained,” the surveillance can be started immediately.43 If 
a FISA warrant is obtained within 72 hours, it will apply retroactively.
In matters of national security, FISA permits the President to autho-
rize the Attorney General to conduct electronic surveillance for up to 
1 year without a warrant. This includes the right to conduct “wiretaps” 
and intercept e-mail as well as utilizes pen registers and “trap and trace” 
devices. Monitoring must be limited to channels used exclusively between 
foreign powers. The Attorney General must certify in writing under oath 
that there is “no substantial likelihood that the surveillance will acquire 
the contents of any communication to which a United States person is a 
party.”44 Nonverbal technical intelligence can also be seized. 

378 
Chapter 13
For electronic surveillance of foreign agents not utilizing the exclu-
sive channels mentioned previously, the President must provide a written 
authorization for the Attorney General to petition a special federal court 
for permission to use such techniques. The surveillance order is normally 
good for no more than 120 days; extensions can be for up to 1 year.45
In the only case published by the United States Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Court of Review since it was created in 1978, the court ruled 
that when FISA is used to issue wiretap orders, the information gathered 
can be shared with other government agencies for use in prosecuting 
crimes. Unlike some lower courts, the appellate court found no basis in the 
statute, or debates when it was enacted by Congress, to warrant creating a 
wall between the intelligence community and law enforcement.46
Physical Searches
FISA was amended in 1994 to make it possible to obtain warrants for 
physical searches done in connection with foreign intelligence investiga-
tions. The process is similar to the one outlined previously for FISA elec-
tronic surveillance warrants. The application to the FISC must include a 
statement of the nature of the foreign intelligence sought and the manner 
in which the physical search is to be conducted. Review by the Attorney 
General is mandated. The assistant to the President for National Security 
Affairs, or designee, must certify
(A)  that the certifying official deems the information sought to be foreign 
intelligence information;
(B)  that a significant purpose of the search is to obtain foreign intelligence 
information;
(C)  that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal 
investigative techniques;
(D)  that designates the type of foreign intelligence information being 
sought according to the categories described in section1801 (e) of this 
title; and 
(E)  includes a statement explaining the basis for the certifications required 
by subparagraphs (C) and (D).47
The application is reviewed by a FISC judge and issued if there is probable 
cause. As used here, probable cause means
(A)  the target of the physical search is a foreign power or an agent of a 
foreign power, except that no United States person may be considered 
an agent of a foreign power solely upon the basis of activities protected 
by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States; and 

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
379
(B)  the premises or property to be searched is owned, used, possessed by, or 
is in transit to or from an agent of a foreign power or a foreign power.48
When evaluating probable cause, the judge is allowed to consider past 
activities of the target, as well as facts and circumstances relating to cur-
rent or future activities of the target.49
FISA also has a provision originally designed to obtain business 
records. It now has a broader definition:
Application for an order requiring the production of any tangible things 
(including books, records, papers, documents, and other items) for an 
investigation to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning 
a United States person or to protect against international terrorism or 
clandestine intelligence activities, provided that such investigation of a 
United States person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities 
protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution.50
The application can be filed with the FISC or any U.S. Magistrate. The 
orders are routinely granted if they meet the procedural specifications of 
the code section. Unlike search warrants, probable cause is not required—
only the certification that there is an ongoing investigation that complies 
with existing Executive Orders. Once issued, the order is served on the 
record holder, much like a subpoena to produce documents for a grand 
jury. The person who receives the order is bound by federal law to main-
tain secrecy about the order.
National Security Letters51
During a span of 30 years, Congress passed legislation that allowed the 
Executive Branch to obtain records from banks and many other institu-
tions; all of them were revised as part of the USA PATRIOT Act. Referred 
to as National Security Letter (NSL) statutes, what they have in common 
is that they enable a federal investigative agency, usually the FBI, to 
obtain records stored with a third party. No prior judicial authorization 
is required. The entity that is served with an NSL is required to maintain 
secrecy about the request and/or compliance with it.
Although the materials requested must be relevant to an ongoing 
investigation, all that the investigator need put in most NSL requests is 
the following quote: “such information is sought for the conduct of an 
authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clan-
destine intelligence activities.”52 Table 13-1 summarizes five NSL statutes 
that are part of the USA PATRIOT Act.

380
T A B L E  13-1  National Security Letters
Authorizing
Legislationa
Who Can Use
This Law
Standard for Issuing NSL
Type of Agency
Type of Information
Right to Financial Privacy 
Act of 1978 (RFPA)
FBI
Relevance
Banks, credit unions, 
pawnbrokers, travel 
agencies, automobile 
dealers, U.S. Postal Service, 
and casinos
Financial records
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA)
FBI
Relevance
Consumer reporting 
agencies
Names and addresses of 
all financial institutions at 
which consumer maintains 
or has maintained an 
account
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA)
Any government 
agency authorized to 
conduct investigations 
of international 
terrorism
Information is necessary for the 
agency’s conduct of investigation 
Restricted to international 
terrorism and clandestine 
intelligence activities
Consumer reporting 
agencies
Consumer report on a 
consumer and all other 
information in the 
consumer’s file
Electronic 
Communications Privacy 
Act (ECPA)
FBI
Relevance
Telecommunications 
providers
Information regarding 
wire and electronic 
communications, such as 
routing and addressing 
information
Does not cover content 
of communications
Intelligence Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 1995
FBI
Must have reasonable grounds 
to believe, based on credible 
information, that the person 
might be sending classified 
information to foreign powers 
or agents
Financial agencies, financial 
institutions, consumer 
reporting agencies
Information about finances 
including records of travel 
Limited to government 
employees who hold 
security clearances
aActs have been amended by the USA PATRIOT Act (2002).
Based on N. A. Sales, “Secrecy and National Security Investigations,” Alabama Law Review 58 (2007).

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
381
Summary
S u m m a r y
Eavesdropping is covered by the Misplaced Reliance Doctrine. Anything over-
heard is admissible. The person speaking bears the burden of restricting his or 
her conversations to trustworthy people. This rationale applies even if someone is 
surreptitiously carrying electronic recording equipment.
 
Wiretapping and other electronic monitoring of conversations require a spe-
cial warrant. Only specific serious crimes justify this type of invasion of privacy. 
Police must show that other types of investigative techniques are inadequate. 
The warrant is good for a maximum period of 30 days. Once the electronic 
surveillance warrant has been obtained, officers may covertly enter to install, 
maintain, and retrieve the equipment. The Wiretap Act of 1968 was designed 
to enable federal courts to issue electronic surveillance warrants. The Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 covers wiretaps and other devices used on 
agents working for foreign governments and terrorists. Both of these statutes 
were amended by the USA PATRIOT Act so that they can be used in the fight 
against terrorism.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1. Is a warrant required if an informer is going to carry a tape recorder when 
talking to a suspect who has not been arrested? Explain.
2.  When is an electronic surveillance warrant required? Explain.
3.  Explain the requirements for obtaining a warrant under the Wiretap Act 
of 1968 (Title III).
4.  Explain the requirements for conducting electronic surveillance under the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
5.  Explain how the FBI, while investigating terrorism by foreign agents, can 
gain access to bank account information and other personal records of the 
suspected terrorist.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Go to the websites that we have used previously and find a case in which a wiretap 
was used. Write a one-page report on it. Include why the wiretap was used and 
whether useful information was obtained from the wiretap.

382 
Chapter 13
 1. Hoffa v. United States 385 U.S. 293, 17 L.Ed. 2d 374, 87 S.Ct. 408 (1966).
 2. United States v. White 401 U.S. 745, 28 L.Ed. 2d 453, 91 S.Ct. 1122 (1971).
 3. Katz v. United States 389 U.S. 347, 19 L.Ed. 2d 576, 88 S.Ct. 507 (1967).
 4. Berger v. New York 388 U.S. 41, 18 L.Ed. 2d 1040, 87 S.Ct. 1873 (1967).
 5. Smith v. Maryland 442 U.S. 735, 61 L.Ed. 2d 220, 99 S.Ct. 2577 (1979). See also United States v. 
New York Telephone Co. 434 U.S. 159, 54 L.Ed. 2d 376, 98 S.Ct. 364 (1977).
 6. 18 U.S.C. 3121(b).
7. United States v. Karo 468 U.S. 705, 82 L.Ed. 2d 530, 104 S.Ct. 3296 (1984); United States v. Knotts
460 U.S. 276, 75 L.Ed. 2d 55, 103 S.Ct. 1081 (1983).
 8. N. Abrams, “The US Crosses the Rubicon: The Military Commissions Act 2006,” Journal of 
International Criminal Justice 5: 1(2007, March); S. Blasberg, “Legal Update: Law and Technology 
of Security Measures in the Wake of Terrorism,” Boston University Journal of Science and 
Technology Law 8: 721 (2002, Summer); E. Broxmeyer, “Note and Comment: The Problems 
of Security and Freedom: Procedural Due Process and the Designation of Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations under the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act,” Berkeley Journal 
of International Law 22: 439 (2004); G. Christensen, “Government Information Collection: 
Federal Data Collection, Secure Flight, the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act, 
and the Reauthorization of the USA PATRIOT Act,” I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the 
Information Society 2: 485 (2006, Fall); J. X. Dempsey, “Communications Privacy in the Digital 
Age: Revitalizing the Federal Wiretap Laws to Enhance Privacy,” Albany Law Journal of Science & 
Technology 8: 65 (1997); S. N. Herman,  “The USA PATRIOT Act and the Submajoritarian Fourth 
Amendment,” Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review 41: 67 (2006, Winter); J. Jaffer, 
“Symposium: Secret Evidence and the Courts in the Age of National Security: Panel Report: 
Secret Evidence in the Investigative Stage: FISA, Administrative Subpoenas, and Privacy,” Cardozo 
Public Law, Policy & Ethics Journal 5: 7 (2006, Fall); C. Metzler, “Providing Material Support to 
Violate the Constitution: The USA PATRIOT Act and Its Assault on the 4th Amendment,” North 
Carolina Central Law Journal 2006, 29 N.C. Cent. L.J. 35; S. A. Osher, “Privacy, Computers and 
the Patriot Act: The Fourth Amendment Isn’t Dead, But No One Will Insure It,” Florida Law 
Review 54: 521 (2002, July); K. Oyama, “Cyberlaw: Note: E-Mail Privacy after United States v. 
Councilman: Legislative Options for Amending ECPA,” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 21: 
499 (2006); S. H. Rackow, “Comment: How the USA PATRIOT Act Will Permit Governmental 
Infringement upon the Privacy of Americans in the Name of ‘Intelligence’ Investigations,” 
University of Pennsylvania Law Review 150: 1651 (2002, May); R. Shulman, “Note: USA Patriot 
Act: Granting the U.S. Government the Unprecedented Power to Circumvent American Civil 
Liberties in the Name of National Security,” University of Detroit Mercy Law Review 80: 427 (2003, 
Spring); C. Truehart, “Case Comment: United States v. Bin Laden and the Foreign Intelligence 
Exception to the Warrant Requirement for Searches of ‘United States Persons’ Abroad,” Boston 
University Law Review 82: 555 (2002, April); J. W. Whitehead and S. H. Aden, “Forfeiting 
‘Enduring Freedom’ for ‘Homeland Security’: A Constitutional Analysis of the USA PATRIOT 
Act and the Justice Department’s Anti-Terrorism Initiatives,” American University Law Review 51: 
1081 (2002, August).
 9. 18 U.S.C. 2510 et. seq.
 10. Id.
 11. 18 U.S.C. 2511(1).
 12. 18 U.S.C. 2510(2).
 13. 18 U.S.C. 2510(1).
 14. 18 USC 2511(2).
 15. 18 U.S.C. 2516(1).
 16. 18 U.S.C. 2516(2).
Notes
N o t e s

 
USA PATRIOT Act, Foreign Intelligence, and Other Types of Electronic Surveillance 
383
 17. 18 U.S.C. 2516
 18. 18 U.S.C. 2518(11).
 19. 18 U.S.C. 2518(6).
 20. 18 U.S.C. 2516(1).
 21. Id.
 22. 18 U.S.C. 2516(2).
 23. 18 U.S.C. 2518(12).
 24. 18 U.S.C. 2518(5).
 25. 18 U.S.C. 2518(7).
 26. 18 U.S.C. 2518(8).
 27. 18 U.S.C. 2518(8)(d).
 28. 18 U.S.C. 2518(8)(d)(3).
 29. 18 U.S.C. 2518(9).
 30. 18 U.S.C. 2515.
 31. Dalia v. United States 441 U.S. 238, 60 L.Ed. 2d 177, 99 S.Ct. 1682 (1979).
 32. United States v. Donovan 429 U.S. 413, 50 L.Ed. 2d 652, 97 S.Ct. 658 (1977).
 33. United States v. Kahn 415 U.S. 143, 39 L.Ed. 2d 225, 94 S.Ct. 977 (1974).
 34. Scott v. United States 436 U.S. 128, 56 L.Ed. 2d 168, 98 S.Ct. 1717 (1978).
 35. United States v. United States District Court, Eastern Michigan (Keith) 407 U.S. 297, 32 L.Ed. 2d 
752, 92 S.Ct. 2125 (1972).
 36. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 can be found at 50 U.S.C. 1801 et. seq.
 37. B. Hund, “Note: Disappearing Safeguards: FISA Nonresident Alien ‘Loophole’ Is 
Unconstitutional,” Cardozo Journal of International and Comparative Law 15: 169, 182 (2007, 
Winter).
 38. 50 U.S.C. 1804.
 39. 50 U.S.C. 1805(a)(3).
 40. 50 U.S.C. 1805(e)(1).
 41. 50 U.S.C. 1805(e)(1)(A).
 42. 50 U.S.C. 1805(e)(1)(B).
 43. 50 U.S.C. 1805. 
 44. 50 U.S.C. 1802.
 45. 50 U.S.C. 1805(e)(2)(B).
 46. In re: Sealed Case No. 02-001. United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review 
(November 18, 2002).
 47. 50 U.S.C. 1823(a)(7).
 48. 50 U.S.C. 1824(a)(3).
 49. 50 U.S.C. 1824(b).
 50. 50 U.S.C. 1861(a)(1).
 51. N. Sales, “Secrecy and National Security Investigations,” Alabama Law Review 58: 811 (2007).
 52. 12 U.S.C. 3414(a)(5)(A).

This page intentionally left blank 

385
Self-Incrimination
CHAPTER14
Feature Case: Central Park Jogger Attack
In 1989, five African American and Hispanic teenagers from Harlem who 
had been implicated in a series of muggings were arrested, interrogated by 
police, and later convicted of raping and beating nearly to death a Caucasian 
female jogger in New York’s Central Park. Despite the youths’ assertion of 
innocence during and after trial, the case received extraordinary attention 
primarily because of the brutal nature of the crime, the fact that four of the 
teens’ confessions were videotaped, and colorful media descriptions of the 
teens acting like “animals” “wilding” as in a “wolf pack” looking for “prey” 
during a period when violent crime was perceived to be an out-of-control 
epidemic plaguing New York City.
However, on December 19, 2002, the convictions of the five youths were 
vacated when convicted rapist and murderer Matias Reyes admitted respon-
sibility for the Central Park attack and exonerated the teens, providing a 
confession that was corroborated by physical evidence indicating he had 
acted alone. Consequently, the case directly questioned police interrogation 
techniques that employ extensive questioning, isolation, deceptive tactics, 
and use of false promises made to young, immature, uneducated, or other 
so-called “vulnerable” suspects.
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define the scope of the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination.
• Explain how the Fifth Amendment applies to nontestimonial evidence.
• State the Miranda warnings and explain when they should be given.

386 
Chapter 14
• Describe the standard for a waiver of Miranda rights.
• Explain how Miranda rights apply to sequential interrogations. 
• List the procedures that are required prior to interrogating a person who has been 
indicted or arraigned. 
Key Terms
•  Custodial interrogation
•  Double jeopardy
•  Immunity
•  Indigent suspect
• Miranda booking 
exceptions
• Miranda public safety 
exception
• Miranda waiver
• Miranda warnings
•  Right to counsel
•   Right to have attorney 
present
•  Right to remain silent
•  Self-incrimination
•  Testimonial evidence
•   Tolling statute of limitations
Myths about Miranda Rights
Facts about Miranda Rights
Police are always required to provide 
Miranda warnings when arresting a 
suspect.
Miranda warnings are only required at 
the time of arrest if the suspect will be 
interrogated immediately after arrest.
Miranda warnings must be read verbatim 
because any mistake in advising a suspect 
will result in the waiver being invalid.
Although officers are encouraged to use 
standardized warnings, a suspect’s waiver 
will be valid as long as he or she understood 
the nature of the Miranda warnings and 
made a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary 
waiver of those rights.
Once a suspect invokes his or her right 
to remain silent, police cannot initiate 
questioning again.
Police may re-advise a suspect of his or her 
rights and reinitiate questioning as long as 
the suspect agrees to talk and does not ask 
for legal counsel.
The police must give Miranda warnings at 
traffic stops, detentions, and similar field 
interviews.
Miranda warnings are only required for 
custodial interrogations or their “functional 
equivalent” and are not needed during 
limited detentions, such as traffic stops, 
where there is no coercive atmosphere.
Scope of the Privilege against Self-Incrimination
The Fifth Amendment protects a suspected criminal from being com-
pelled to give testimony that might incriminate him- or herself. It does 
not apply in civil cases.
Privilege against Self-Incrimination Defined
No person can be required to make statements that can be used against him or 
her in a criminal proceeding.

 
Self-Incrimination 
387
Situations Not Covered by the Fifth Amendment
Self-incrimination applies only if criminal charges could be based on the 
confession or admission. It does not apply in three situations that arise in 
criminal cases in which it is impossible to file charges:
1. The statute of limitations has run.
2. The witness has been granted immunity.
3. The witness cannot be prosecuted due to double jeopardy. 
It must be noted that even in these cases due process prevents police 
from using coercion to obtain confessions.
Statute of Limitations
If the statute of limitations has run, no charges can be filed. Due to the fact 
that the statute can be tolled (stopped) if a suspect flees the jurisdiction 
to avoid prosecution, it is possible for the statute to have run against one 
suspect but not another. A similar situation occurs when one suspect com-
mitted a felony and another person involved in the same crime spree only 
committed a misdemeanor that has a shorter statute of limitations. When 
either of these situations occurs, the police may be interested in obtaining 
a statement from the suspect for whom the statute has expired in order to 
use the information against someone who can still be prosecuted. In these 
circumstances, a suspect cannot refuse to talk on the grounds that it might 
incriminate him or her.
Immunity
A witness with immunity cannot be prosecuted for what he or she said, pro-
vided the confession is within the scope of the immunity. In most states, the 
prosecutor can grant immunity, but defense counsel does not have similar 
powers. Grand juries can also grant immunity. The formal documents filed 
with the court when immunity is granted specify the scope of the immunity. 
The most common types of immunity are use immunity (what is stated by 
the witness cannot be used against him or her) and transaction immunity 
(the witness cannot be prosecuted for the crimes specified; neither his or 
her statements nor evidence the police obtain independently can be used). A 
grant of immunity from federal prosecution carries with it immunity from 
state prosecution for the same offense, and vice versa.
If the witness is careless enough to tell about crimes not covered by 
immunity, charges can be filed. On the other hand, the immune witness 
cannot refuse to testify merely to protect a friend or save face. Refusal to 
testify is grounds for holding the witness in contempt of court. This type 

388 
Chapter 14
of contempt usually results in sending the witness to jail until he or she is 
willing to testify. Since the witness can be released as soon as the testimony 
is given, the witness is said to “hold the key” to the jail.
Double Jeopardy
Double jeopardy protects a person who has been either convicted or 
acquitted of a crime. The same crime, or lesser included charges, cannot be 
re-filed. The fact that the jury convicted the defendant of a lesser included 
offense when the more serious charge was filed implies an acquittal on the 
more serious offense.
When there are multiple parties to the crime who are tried separately, 
the testimony of an accomplice who has already been tried and either 
convicted or acquitted can be very useful. Once again, there is no right 
to refuse to testify based on self-incrimination. As a practical matter, the 
prosecutor may delay using this approach until after the conviction has 
been affirmed on appeal. It is important to note that only convictions or 
acquittals activate this rule. Failing to file charges, winning suppression 
motions, or dismissing the case without prejudice do not qualify; neither 
does a trial ending in a “hung jury.”
Examples of Situations Not Covered by Fifth Amendment
•  Mary was charged with murder because she hired Harry, a “hit man,” who killed her 
wealthy husband. She convinced the trial jury of her innocence and was acquitted. If 
called to testify at Harry’s trial, Mary cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment because 
double jeopardy will protect her from being prosecuted for the murder twice.
  Mary could claim Fifth Amendment protection against double jeopardy if charges 
were filed against her again for the murder of her husband.
  Mary cannot claim Fifth Amendment self-incrimination and avoid testifying at 
Harry’s trial because no charges can be filed against her after her acquittal. 
•  Carrie stole sweaters from a department store. Shelby, a sales clerk, was charged 
with fraud for doctoring the sales records. The detective handling the cases lost 
both files. When he found them 18 months later, charges could not be filed 
against Carrie, but Carrie was called to testify about the theft at Shelby’s trial for 
felony fraud. 
  Carrie has protection against charges being filed against her based on the 1-year 
statute of limitations for the misdemeanor theft.
  Assume that all felonies, except murder, have a statute of limitations of 3 years. 
   
 Shelby can be prosecuted for fraud (a felony) because the statute of limitations 
has not run on the fraud.
  Assume that Carrie cannot be prosecuted for anything related to the fraud that 
Shelby committed except the theft. 
   
 Carrie cannot claim the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination privilege to avoid 
testifying at Shelby’s trial. 

 
Self-Incrimination 
389
•  Ian was given “transaction immunity” when he agreed to testify against fellow 
gang members about a rape they both participated in. The week before the trial, 
he received a letter threatening to kill him if he testified. At trial he was sworn in as 
a witness. When the prosecutor asked him a question about the rape, Ian claimed 
the Fifth Amendment. The judge instructed Ian that he could not claim the Fifth 
Amendment and told Ian that he would be held in jail if he refused to testify.
  Ian cannot claim the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination privilege and avoid 
testifying because he has immunity.
   
 Ian cannot refuse to testify about incidents covered by the immunity. When a 
person with immunity refuses to testify, that person can be placed in jail until 
he or she decides to testify.
How the Privilege against Self-Incrimination Is Invoked
The appropriate way to invoke the privilege against self-incrimination
varies with the stage of the criminal justice system where it is used. Prior 
to arrest and during field interviews, a person may refuse to answer ques-
tions, but the police have no duty to inform the suspect that he or she may 
do so. The suspect’s use of the privilege at this stage depends on his or her 
prior knowledge of these rights. If the suspect wants to seek advice from 
an attorney at this phase of the investigation, it must be done at his or her 
own expense.
During custodial interrogations, the police must inform the suspect 
of his or her constitutional rights. In order to continue the questioning, a 
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver must be obtained from the sus-
pect. Coercion may not be used to persuade a suspect to talk. An indigent 
suspect has the right to have counsel appointed at government expense 
during custodial interrogation if he or she so desires.
At trial, the proper procedure depends on who is invoking the Fifth 
Amendment privilege. If it is the defendant, the defense attorney indicates 
this indirectly by not calling him or her to the witness stand. Although it is 
obvious to the jury that the defendant did not testify, the Supreme Court in 
Griffin v. California made it clear that no inference of guilt may be drawn 
from the invocation of this constitutional right.1 The prosecutor may not ask 
the jury to infer that the only reason the defendant did not testify is that he or 
she is guilty. If the defendant makes a timely request, the judge must instruct 
the jurors that they may not draw this conclusion (Carter v. Kentucky).2
There is one exception to this procedure. If the defense counsel claims 
during the closing statement that the defendant never had an opportunity 
to explain his or her side of the case, the prosecution may inform the jury 
that the defendant had the right to testify but chose not to (United States 
v. Robinson).3

390 
Chapter 14
Other witnesses must take the stand, even if they have already said 
they refuse to testify. The privilege against self-incrimination is asserted in 
response to each question. In most cases, the reason for invoking the privi-
lege is obvious and no explanation is given in open court. If it appears there 
is no basis for invoking this privilege, the judge may ask the witness, outside 
the hearing of the jury and attorneys, to explain why the privilege applies.
Witnesses have the right to have their own attorneys present to give 
advice on how to answer questions. When a witness who does not have 
an attorney present starts to make an incriminating statement, the judge 
usually will stop the proceedings briefly to determine if the witness under-
stands the gravity of what is happening. The judge, or the prosecutor at 
the judge’s direction, frequently advises the witness of his or her right to 
remain silent by giving the Miranda warnings.
If the defendant takes the witness stand and lies under oath, he or 
she can be punished. The obvious approach is to file charges for perjury. 
Another approach is to use the fact that the defendant committed perjury 
as an enhancement when calculating the sentence for the crime for which 
he or she was on trial. The Supreme Court approved this practice but 
noted that an enhancement could not be imposed if it appeared that the 
testimony was inaccurate due to confusion, mistake, or faulty memory. If 
the defendant objects to the enhancement, there must be an independent 
finding by the judge that the testimony was a willful obstruction of justice, 
or an attempt to do so, that falls within the definition of perjury (United 
States v. Dunnigan).4 This would occur at the sentencing hearing and does 
not necessitate a new trial.
Examples of How the Fifth Amendment Is Invoked
•  Kevin was stopped approximately 100 yards from a building where the burglar 
alarm had just gone off. The police legally stopped him based on reasonable 
suspicion but did not have probable cause to arrest him. They questioned him 
without giving the Miranda warnings. Kevin said, “Sorry, I refuse to answer any 
more questions. Fifth Amendment.” The police stopped the questioning.
  When a person is stopped on reasonable suspicion, the police are not required to 
give the person the Miranda warnings.
  A person stopped on reasonable suspicion has the right to refuse to answer 
questions and the right to have an attorney present during questioning, but the 
police are not required to provide this information. 
 At this stage of the proceedings, the person must pay for the attorney. 
•  Libby was on trial for embezzlement. Her attorney told her that the Fifth 
Amendment gave her the right to refuse to testify. She decided that was a good idea. 
During the defense case-in-chief, the defense attorney did not call Libby to testify.
 Everyone has the right not to testify during his or her own criminal trial.

 
Self-Incrimination 
391
  The decision not to testify is made during a conference with the attorney. No 
specific mention is made in open court about the defendant’s decision not to 
testify. It becomes clear that he or she will not testify when the defense attorney 
announces, “The Defense rests,” without calling the defendant.
 The prosecutor does not have the right to call the defendant to the stand.
  The prosecutor cannot comment about the fact that the defendant did not testify or 
tell the jurors that a defendant would refuse to testify only if he or she was guilty.
•  Martin helped Lizzy alter the company books. He had not been arrested or 
charged with his part in the crime. The prosecutor called Martin as a witness. He 
answered the questions that he thought were safe. When the prosecutor asked 
an incriminating question, Martin asked to talk to his lawyer. After doing so, 
Martin told the judge that he refused to answer the question because of the Fifth 
Amendment. The prosecutor went on to another question.
  Martin cannot refuse to take the witness stand. Only the defendant is allowed to 
invoke the privilege in that manner.
  Martin can invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer specific questions 
if he and his attorney believe that the answers to those questions could be used 
against him.
Note: Some states have statutes that require the witness to declare his or her intent 
to invoke the Fifth Amendment before taking the witness stand. In these states, a 
hearing is held before the witness takes the stand so the judge and attorneys can 
decide whether the person should be allowed to testify.
Nontestimonial Compulsion
The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the Fifth Amendment privi-
lege against self-incrimination applies only to testimonial evidence. Most 
commonly, this means statements that a person makes that are admissions 
or confessions. These may be either oral or written. The privilege does 
not apply to other incriminating evidence that may be obtained from a 
person.
Body Fluids
The results of blood, urine, or breath tests can be used in cases involv-
ing driving under the influence of alcohol. A variety of tests are done on 
blood and semen samples in sexual assault cases. DNA samples may be 
tested. Many other tests are used less frequently. All of these tests rest on 
the same basis as far as the Fifth Amendment is concerned. Although the 
results may be very incriminating, no privilege can be asserted as grounds 
for refusing to take the tests because they are nontestimonial.5
Three other types of challenges can be used. If the arrest was illegal, 
usually due to lack of probable cause, body fluids can be excluded on 

392 
Chapter 14
the grounds of an illegal search and seizure. The Fruit of the Poison Tree 
Doctrine could then be used to exclude the laboratory tests. Due process 
could be asserted as a reason for excluding the test results if excessive force 
was used to obtain the samples. A variety of other rules of evidence can 
be invoked if the fluids were not handled in a manner that established the 
chain of custody, if the laboratory personnel were not adequately trained, 
or if the equipment used was not properly maintained.
Identifying Features
A person’s appearance is also not testimonial evidence. The most com-
monly used identification procedure involves fingerprints. Due to the high 
scientific reliability of fingerprint identification, a match is very incrimi-
nating. Once again, the Fifth Amendment provides no protection because 
no testimony is required. The Fourth Amendment protects the suspect 
to the extent that the police may not take a suspect to the station for the 
purpose of obtaining fingerprints for comparison purposes unless there 
is consent or probable cause to make an arrest (Hayes v. Florida).6 This 
does not prevent the police from rolling a set of prints at the scene where 
a legal field interview is conducted. The fingerprint cards made any time 
a person was legally arrested are very useful for the purpose of identifying 
fingerprints found at a crime scene. Print cards in government files for 
other purposes, such as applications for state licenses, can also be used.
Visual identification by victims and witnesses to the crime are treated 
in a similar manner. They are not testimonial (United States v. Wade).7 The 
suspect cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment as a grounds for refusing to 
participate in a lineup or showup. The police do not violate the suspect’s 
rights by showing mug shots or other photographs. Due process protects 
the suspect from unduly suggestive techniques used by the police. This is 
discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Handwriting and Voice Exemplars
Handwriting exemplars and voice exemplars, also referred to as samples, 
are frequently used for identification purposes. Neither is testimonial 
(United States v. Mara).8 The suspect is told what to write or say. For this 
reason, the content of the exemplar is not an indication of guilt and cannot 
be incriminating. The visual or audio characteristics of the exemplar are 
incriminating, but these factors are not testimonial.
Sobriety Tests
Sobriety tests, whether conducted at the scene where a car is stopped on 
suspicion of drunk driving or later during booking, are not covered by 

 
Self-Incrimination 
393
the Fifth Amendment privilege. Actions in the sobriety test that indicate 
lack of muscle coordination, such as poor balance and slurred speech, 
are not testimonial. Questions that call for incriminating answers, 
such as “How many drinks did you have?” require Miranda warnings. 
Videotapes of the sobriety test are admissible in court, but segments that 
would be considered interrogation must be excluded (Pennsylvania v. 
Muniz).9
Examples of Nontestimonial Compulsion
•  Erin was arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol. The 
officer took her to the nearest emergency room and had a nurse draw a blood 
sample. 
  Erin cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination privilege as 
grounds for refusing to give the blood sample because blood is not testimonial 
evidence.
  Drawing blood for a sobriety test is considered an emergency because the alcohol 
will dissipate over time as part of a normal body function that cannot be stopped in 
a living person. 
 No search warrant is required because of this emergency.
  The police need probable cause in order to arrest a person and take the person to 
an appropriate facility to have blood drawn.
  Absent consent, blood cannot be drawn during a detention based on reasonable 
suspicion.
•  Frank is a suspect in a rape case. The arresting officer used a swab to obtain a tissue 
sample from the inside of Frank’s cheek. If the DNA test is positive, this tissue 
sample will be very incriminating.
  Frank cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination privilege because 
tissue samples are not testimonial evidence.
  Unreasonable force cannot be used to obtain the tissue sample.
  Probable cause is needed to detain Frank in order to take the tissue sample. 
  Many states require that medical personnel take the tissue sample, not the arresting 
officer. 
   
 Investigating officers must comply with both the U.S. Supreme Court decision 
and state law.
•  Phyllis was arrested for forgery. She was asked to copy a paragraph the officer 
handed her, using her own handwriting. If a forensic documents examiner 
determines that the handwriting exemplar indicates that Phyllis wrote the forged 
documents, it will be very incriminating. 
  Phyllis cannot invoke the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination privilege as 
grounds for refusing to make the exemplar because exemplars are not testimonial 
evidence.
  Officers must have probable cause to take Phyllis to the station to obtain the 
exemplar.

394 
Chapter 14
Miranda Warnings
Miranda v. Arizona10 is one of the best known Supreme Court cases, yet 
there are many details surrounding the Miranda decision that still cause 
confusion. To help clear up some of these problems, four key areas are 
addressed: 
1. What are the Miranda warnings? 
2. When must they be given?
3. How does a suspect waive his or her Miranda rights?
4. What rules apply to sequential interrogations?
Content of Miranda Warnings
Each officer must fully understand the Miranda warnings so that he 
or she can explain them correctly to each suspect. The Supreme Court 
has permitted paraphrasing but has been quite intolerant of misleading 
warnings. This includes answers to a suspect’s questions about these 
rights. Although the police would obviously feel it is best to make a full 
confession, it is the job of the defense attorney to decide the best tactic 
for the suspect to take. Police officers should not attempt to give legal 
advice.
Miranda Warnings Defined
Prior to custodial interrogation the suspect must be warned that
1. You have the right to remain silent.
2. Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law.
3. You have the right to have an attorney present during questioning.
4.  If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be appointed at no charge to assist you 
during questioning.
The right to remain silent includes the right to refrain from making 
both oral and written statements. Nodding the head “yes” or “no” would 
also be covered. The suspect retains the right to refuse to answer questions 
at any time. Even though he or she agreed to talk at the beginning of the 
interview, the right to remain silent enables the suspect to stop the inter-
rogation at any time.
Second, anything that the suspect says can be used against him or her 
in court. For emphasis, many departments warn the suspect that state-
ments “can and will” be used against you in court. Statements that are 
not confessions can be used if they have any evidentiary value. Attempts 
to incriminate another person frequently are used to show guilty knowl-
edge. Anything that is inconsistent with other statements made by this 

 
Self-Incrimination 
395
suspect can be used to impeach him or her at trial. Attempts to talk to the 
police “off the record” indicate that the suspect does not understand the 
warnings.
Third, the suspect has the right to have an attorney present during 
questioning. Law enforcement officers may not continue questioning a 
suspect after he or she has requested an attorney. The fact that an attorney 
will be appointed at arraignment is not enough. It should be noted, how-
ever, that this right is not a guarantee that an attorney will meet with the 
suspect immediately. The police have two alternatives—stop questioning 
or give the suspect an attorney. Since most attorneys routinely tell their 
clients not to make any statements to the police, it is not uncommon for 
the interrogation to be stopped when an attorney is requested. The suspect 
is returned to his or her cell but no attorney is called. This does not violate 
the suspect’s rights.
Lastly, if the suspect cannot afford an attorney, one will be provided 
at no cost to the suspect. The purpose of this warning is to inform the
indigent suspect that his or her lack of money will not prevent him or 
her from having an attorney present during questioning. It is not the duty 
of the police, however, to review the financial status of the suspect and 
give advice on whether he or she is eligible for a free attorney. The court 
usually makes this determination of eligibility at the arraignment. Neither 
is it appropriate for the police to tell the suspect that the court has the 
authority to order a person to repay the cost of the attorney. If the sus-
pect requests an attorney, the police should proceed in the same manner 
regardless of the suspect’s apparent wealth (or lack thereof): Questioning 
must stop.
Many law enforcement agencies have the Miranda warnings printed 
on pocket size cards so officers can read them to each suspect. The purpose 
of the card is to ensure that the warnings are given uniformly. However, 
merely reciting the Court’s language is not enough. The warnings must 
be given so that the suspect can understand them. The prosecution bears 
the burden of convincing the judge that the warnings were correctly 
explained to the suspect. This must be established by a preponderance of 
the evidence.
For juveniles, this means explaining the warnings in very simple 
terms. Similar problems may occur with illiterate and mentally impaired 
suspects. Intoxicated and mentally ill suspects also pose a challenge. If the 
suspect does not speak English fluently, an interpreter may be necessary. 
Care must be taken to make sure the interpreter and the suspect speak the 
same dialect. Subtle differences, if not clearly understood by the suspect, 
may make the warnings void.

396 
Chapter 14
Sample Dialogue Used to Give Miranda Warnings
Det. Dawson:      I have some questions for you, but before we begin I need to 
give you the Miranda warnings.
Johnny Johnson:   Oh, neat. I saw that on TV.
Det. Dawson:      I want you to pay close attention. This is not TV. You were 
arrested for a serious crime.
Johnny Johnson:   OK.
Det. Dawson:      Here is a Miranda card I want you to read while I read it out 
loud. Item No. 1 says, “You have the right to remain silent.” 
Do you know what that means?
Johnny Johnson:   Sure. It means I do not have to answer your questions.
Det. Dawson:      Good. Look at No. 2. It says “Anything you say can and will be 
used against you in a court of law.” Do you know what that 
means?
Johnny Johnson:   I think it means that if I confess, you will tell about it when I 
go to trial.
Det. Dawson:      Well, that is part of it. But you need to understand that 
anything you say, not just a confession, can be used against 
you in court. Got that?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I understand that.
Det. Dawson:      Now let’s look at No. 3. It says, “You have the right to have an 
attorney present during questioning.” Do you understand?
Johnny Johnson:   Well, yes and no. It says I have the right to have an attorney 
here while you question me. But I don’t have an attorney so it 
doesn’t apply to me. 
Det. Dawson:      Yes, I know you don’t have an attorney. But that is covered 
in No. 4. Look at it very closely. It says, “If you cannot afford 
an attorney, one will be appointed at no charge to assist you 
during questioning.”
Johnny Johnson:   Oh, I see. I sure can’t afford an attorney but if I want one I get 
one free. Right?
Det. Dawson:      Yes, that’s right. All you have to do is ask.
When Miranda Warnings Are Required
The key to giving Miranda warnings at the correct time is to watch for 
custodial interrogation. The suspect must be in custody at the time, and 
the police must be interrogating him or her.
Custody, for the purposes of Miranda, is the equivalent of a custodial 
arrest (Berkemer v. McCarty).11 It does not include traffic stops in which 
citations are issued and the violator is released at the scene (Pennsylvania v. 
Bruder).12 Brief field interviews based on reasonable suspicion are not 
covered. Neither does it apply to situations in which the suspect is 

 
Self-Incrimination 
397
being questioned at the police station but is not under arrest (Oregon v. 
Mathiason).13 Whether there is a custodial arrest is judged by an objective 
test; the subjective intent of the officer is not important.14
On the other hand, Orozco v. Texas held that it does not matter why the 
suspect is in custody.15 Warnings are required if a suspect was arrested for 
a minor crime and questioned regarding a very serious one. Questioning 
by a different law enforcement agency also requires the warnings. Miranda
warnings are even required if the suspect is questioned while in jail serving 
time on a totally unrelated offense.
In Rhode Island v. Innis and Brewer v. Williams, the Supreme Court 
defined interrogation as the process of questioning, or its functional equiva-
lent.16 Miranda warnings are required prior to any interrogation that is done 
while the suspect is in custody. Asking questions about a crime is clearly 
interrogation. So is requesting a narrative statement. The Court has also 
included indirect attempts to obtain information. For example, if two offi-
cers engage in a conversation with the intent of being overheard and eliciting 
a response, this is the functional equivalent of interrogation. So is telling 
a suspect, “I want you to think about this . . . ” but never asking a specific 
question. Trial judges are left with the task of deciding which conversations 
were indirect questioning and which ones accidentally resulted in a response 
from the suspect.
As with the Fourth Amendment, the Fifth Amendment protections 
only apply to acts by government employees and their agents. If an accom-
plice, who has decided to cooperate with the police, questions the suspect, 
the same rules apply as if the police had done it themselves. Questioning 
done by a private person that the police did not authorize or condone does 
not require Miranda warnings. Informants from the jail population can 
provide very useful information. They may report on anything they hear.
A 1990 Supreme Court case held that Miranda warnings are not 
required when an inmate is questioned by an undercover police officer. 
Voluntary statements made in this type of situation are admissible because 
none of the coercive elements of police interrogation are present when the 
inmate does not know he or she is being questioned by law enforcement 
personnel (Illinois v. Perkins).17
Miranda warnings may even be required prior to questioning by non-
police personnel. The need for the warnings prior to a polygraph examina-
tion conducted by the police is fairly obvious. Warnings are not required 
if the defense requests the examination or the defendant consents to it, 
but it is still a good idea to give them. Estelle v. Smith held that psychiatric 
examinations conducted on behalf of the prosecution, or ordered by the 
court, also must be preceded by Miranda warnings.18

398 
Chapter 14
Volunteered statements are admissible even though Miranda warnings 
were not given. They are also admissible if a suspect who refused to talk, 
or requested an attorney, later comes forward and volunteers information. 
As used in this context, volunteered means the suspect came forward on 
his or her own initiative and made a statement. The Supreme Court used 
the example of a person who came to the police station and immediately 
blurted out a confession to the desk officer. A suspect in a holding cell who 
bangs on the bars and wants to talk to an officer is another example. It is 
important to be aware, however, that any detailed questioning that follows 
the volunteered information is considered interrogation.
The courts recognize a minor exception to Miranda for the booking
process. Questions related to name, address, person to notify in case of an 
emergency, date of birth, and a few other biographical facts are permitted 
without giving any warnings. Warnings would be required if questioning 
at booking is extended in order to obtain information needed for a crimi-
nal investigation.
Another exception recognized by the Supreme Court in New York v. 
Quarles is for public safety.19 Brief questioning is permitted without 
giving Miranda warnings if it is done in order to obtain information that 
is needed immediately in order to protect others from harm. Asking where 
the suspect hid a gun would fit under this exception if the question was 
asked in order to prevent innocent people from being hurt by the gun.
Examples of When Miranda Warnings Are and Are Not Required
Miranda Warnings Required
•  Don was arrested for an assault that occurred the previous day. After arriving at the 
station, the police decided to question him. Prior to starting questioning they gave 
him the Miranda warnings. 
Miranda warnings are required prior to custodial interrogation. The arrest in this 
case did not occur on the day of the crime. That does not change the rule. Don is in 
custody and the officers plan to interrogate him: Miranda warnings must be given 
before the questioning starts. 
•  Mike was arrested by an officer from City E Police Department. The day after the 
arrest, officers from City M Police Department came to the jail and wanted to 
question Mike. The first thing they did after seating Mike in the interrogation room 
was give him the Miranda warnings. Mike asked, “Why did you do that?” An officer 
replied, “We have to give warnings any time we question someone who is in custody.” 
Mike replied, “But you didn’t arrest me.” The officer replied, “It doesn’t matter. If you 
are in custody and we question you, we have to give you the warnings.”
Miranda warnings must be given prior to custodial interrogation. In this case, 
an officer from City E arrested Mike. The next day, officers from City M came to 
question Mike. Clearly Mike was in custody. Unless they are positive that correctly 

 
Self-Incrimination 
399
worded Miranda warnings were given the day before and Mike still remembers 
them, the officers from City M need to give Mike the Miranda warnings before 
questioning him.
Miranda Warnings Not Required
•  Police were questioning Adam at his home about a recent arson. Adam answered 
a few questions, but when he realized he was the suspect in the case he said, “No 
more questions. I know my Fifth Amendment rights. If you want to talk to me 
again, call my attorney. Now leave my house.”
  The police did not need to advise Adam of his rights because he was not under 
arrest.
  The police did not need to provide Adam an attorney because he was not under 
arrest.
  Adam had the right to call his own attorney and/or to demand that his own 
attorney be present during the interview. The government does not have to pay for 
Adam’s attorney at this stage of the proceedings.
•  Bruce was stopped for speeding. The traffic officer asked, “Do you know how fast 
you were driving?” Bruce laughed and said, “Wait. Wait. You can’t ask me questions 
unless you give me my Miranda warnings!” The officer replied, “Sorry, Mister. 
The D.A. says that we only have to give Mirandas after we arrest someone.” Bruce 
groaned; the officer was right.
  Bruce did not have the right to have the officers read the Miranda warnings because 
he was not in custody.
  The Supreme Court explicitly stated that Miranda warnings are not required at a 
traffic stop.
•  Carl was caught trying to break into a house. He was arrested for attempted 
burglary. An officer handcuffed Carl and placed him in the back seat of the patrol 
car. During the drive to the station Carl said, “Hey, I’m going to win this case. You 
didn’t give me the Miranda warnings.” The officer replied, “Wrong! You only have 
the right to Mirandas if we question you after your arrest.”
Miranda warnings have to be given prior to custodial interrogation. Once a person 
is under arrest, he or she is in custody. Miranda warnings would have to be given 
prior to interrogation. Since Carl was not under interrogation, the officer was not 
required to give the Miranda warnings.
Waiver of Miranda Rights
Once Miranda warnings have been correctly given to a suspect who is in 
custody, the police may try to obtain a waiver of the suspect’s rights. This 
must be a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver.
To have a knowing waiver, the suspect must have been correctly 
advised of his or her rights. The courts have uniformly required that the 
police show that they have done this. It is not presumed that anyone knows 
the Miranda warnings. Even though it may seem ridiculous for a police 

400 
Chapter 14
officer who arrests a prominent defense attorney or judge to advise him or 
her of the Miranda rights, it is still the best way to ensure that any state-
ments obtained can be used in court. 
“Intelligent,” as used in this context, means that the person had the 
basic intelligence necessary to understand his or her rights. This may be 
an issue if a young juvenile is involved. It is also an issue if the suspect is 
mentally impaired. Similar problems occur when the suspect is extremely 
intoxicated (either from alcoholic beverages or drugs). Only the most 
extreme cases qualify for suppression on the basis of lack of an intelligent 
waiver. This is especially so in intoxication cases—the courts generally 
admit confessions except when the suspects totally lack the ability to 
understand what is going on.
“Voluntary” is somewhat difficult to define in this context. No coercion 
may be used to obtain a confession. The courts have taken a fairly rigid stance 
against coercion used to obtain a waiver of Miranda rights. During the inter-
rogation that follows the waiver, police have been permitted more leeway in 
using deceptive tactics as long as the will of the suspect is not overborne.
Colorado v. Connelly limited the prohibition against coercion to acts of 
the police or their agents.20 Factors outside the control of the police that 
are coercive will not cause a confession to be suppressed. For example, the 
fact that the suspect confessed after hearing “voices from heaven” order-
ing him or her to do so does not make the confession involuntary. On the 
other hand, a confession was held to be coerced when an informant, whom 
the police had asked to help them obtain a confession, told the suspect that 
he could protect the suspect from gang violence only if a full confession of 
past crimes was made.21
“Third-degree” tactics offend due process. Physical force cannot be 
used to obtain a confession. Deprivation of food and/or sleep for long 
periods is not allowed. Neither are false promises of leniency, such as offers 
to drop charges or assurances that the suspect will get a light sentence if 
he or she confesses.
Absent one of these obviously coercive acts, the courts consider the 
totality of the circumstances. The key concept is that the police are not 
allowed to overbear the will of the suspect. This balances the acts of the 
police against the vulnerability of the defendant. What may be coercive 
when done to a naive teenager may be considered acceptable when applied 
to a streetwise ex-convict.
Lies and half-truths may be permitted. The police do not have to tell 
the suspect all of the crimes being investigated (Colorado v. Spring).22
Neither do they have to inform him or her that someone has arranged for 
an attorney to come to the jail to provide counsel (Moran v. Burbine).23

 
Self-Incrimination 
401
The last issue involving the waiver of Miranda rights is the procedure 
used to obtain the waiver. The Supreme Court has not set a protocol. In 
fact, in North Carolina v. Butler the Court found a valid waiver based on 
the suspect’s conduct.24 The suspect had responded in the affirmative 
when asked if he understood his rights but did not reply when asked if he 
wished to waive them. The indication that he understood the warnings, 
coupled with the fact that he answered the questions asked by the police, 
was enough to convince the Court that a valid waiver had been obtained. 
In another case, the Court decided that the confession was admissible 
when the suspect gave an oral confession, even though his reply to the 
request for a waiver was that he refused to make a written confession 
(Connecticut v. Barrett).25
Despite these cases that condone less than explicit waivers, each officer 
should attempt to obtain as much evidence of a valid waiver as possible. 
Many agencies have the suspect sign a card that has the warnings printed 
on it. Although the signature on the form is not conclusive (the suspect 
can still allege that he or she was forced to sign the card), it does provide an 
impressive exhibit that can be used at trial. Having the suspect initial each 
of the warnings on the Miranda card provides even stronger evidence of a 
waiver. Copious notes taken during the interrogation help. Tape recording 
the interrogation, including the process of giving Miranda warnings and 
requesting a waiver, is also useful.
Sample Dialogue Used to Obtain a Waiver of Miranda Rights
Det. Dawson:      OK, we’ve gone over all the warnings and you understand 
them. Is that correct?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I understand them.
Det. Dawson:      Are you currently intoxicated or under the influence of any 
type of drugs?
Johnny Johnson:   No. I’m cold sober. I gave up doing drugs after I spent that 
time in detox.
Det. Dawson:      Do you read English well?
Johnny Johnson:   I do OK. I never finished high school but I was always good at 
reading.
Det. Dawson:      So you read the Miranda card and understand it.
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I read it. I didn’t understand it all but I do now, after 
you explained it.
Det. Dawson:      I want to ask you some questions about why you were 
arrested. But I need to know if you think that I am forcing 
you to talk to me. Am I?
Johnny Johnson:   No. You aren’t forcing me to talk. I’d shut up real fast if I 
thought you were trying to force me to talk.

402 
Chapter 14
Det. Dawson:      One last detail before I can ask you those questions. Look 
at the Miranda card, at the very bottom. There is a short 
paragraph there that says that you understand your rights 
and you are willing to talk to me. And that you are doing this 
voluntarily. All you need to do is sign it and then we can get 
on with the questions.
Johnny Johnson:   OK. I see it. Give me a pen and I’ll sign it.
Sequential Interrogations
It is not uncommon for the police to interrogate a suspect more than once. 
The procedures that the police should follow at second (or later) interro-
gation sessions depend largely on what occurred previously.
Prior Interrogation without Valid Miranda Waiver
At one time, many courts held that none of the confessions following a 
statement obtained in violation of Miranda could be used to establish 
the prosecution’s case. This was based on the “cat out of the bag” theory. 
Once the suspect had confessed, the courts believed the suspect was likely 
to confess again because he or she knew the police already knew he or she 
was guilty.
In 1985, the Supreme Court decided Oregon v. Elstad, which held 
such a theory did not apply.26 If the first confession was involuntary, all 
subsequent confessions are inadmissible. On the other hand, if the first 
confession was voluntary but in violation of Miranda, a subsequent con-
fession may be admissible if a new set of properly administered Miranda
warnings were given and the suspect waived his or her rights. Each case 
is considered on its merits. Miranda warnings given only seconds after 
obtaining the inadmissible confession will not be viewed as effective. 
Using the first confession as the primary focus of the second interroga-
tion session would likely trigger the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine. A 
voluntary confession obtained several days after the suspect was released 
from custody will more than likely be admissible. The more scrupulous 
the police are in obtaining the second confession, the better chance they 
have of using it in court. No matter what the police do, the original con-
fession obtained in violation of Miranda will remain inadmissible except 
for impeachment purposes.

 
Self-Incrimination 
403
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogations When Prior 
Interrogation Was Conducted without Valid Miranda Waiver
Det. Dawson:       Johnny, have you been questioned since you were arrested 
yesterday?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. Det. Smith asked me a bunch of questions right after they 
brought me here.
Det. Dawson:      OK. That was what I had heard. I want you to forget about 
talking to Det. Smith. Whatever you told him will not be used 
to convict you. I want you to just focus on the questions that I 
am going to ask. Can you do that?
Johnny Johnson:   I’ll try.
Det. Dawson:      Now we just went over your Miranda rights. You understand 
them, right?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I already told you that I do. I don’t forget stuff that fast!
Det. Dawson:      And you are willing to answer my questions?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. Just get on with it.
Prior Interrogation with Valid Miranda Waiver
If the first interrogation was conducted legally and the suspect agreed to 
talk, a subsequent interrogation can be conducted rather routinely. The 
Supreme Court has not required a new set of Miranda warnings every time 
questioning is resumed. The warnings are needed if the suspect is not likely 
to remember his or her rights. If there has been a lengthy delay between 
two interrogations, warnings should be administered again so the suspect 
cannot claim in court that he or she forgot his or her rights. It is also a 
good idea to give the warnings again if someone else gave them the first 
time. This serves as a guarantee that the warnings were given correctly.
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogation When There Was a 
Prior Interrogation with a Valid Miranda Waiver
Det. Dawson:      Hi, Johnny. Did you have a good lunch?
Johnny Johnson:   It was OK, I guess. The food in here isn’t great.
Det. Dawson:     Do you remember what we were talking about before lunch?
Johnny Johnson:   You talked a lot about my Miranda rights. Then you started 
asking questions about what I did yesterday.
Det. Dawson:      Why did we stop talking?
Johnny Johnson:   Because it was lunch time.
Det. Dawson:      I want to ask you some more questions. Is that OK?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, it’s OK. This is taking too long.

404 
Chapter 14
Suspect Invoked Right to Remain Silent
Police must stop interrogation immediately if the suspect invokes the right 
to remain silent. This rule applies whether the suspect invoked the right 
to remain silent at the time the Miranda warnings were initially given or 
asserted the right after custodial interrogation was in progress. This does 
not mean, however, that the police may never try to resume questioning.
In Michigan v. Mosley, the Supreme Court insisted that the suspect’s 
rights be scrupulously honored.27 Police may not badger the suspect with 
frequent attempts to get the suspect to talk, but after a reasonable time 
they may ask the suspect if he or she would like to continue the interroga-
tion. A new waiver of the Miranda rights is mandatory at this point.
No specific guidelines have been established for renewing questioning 
after the suspect refused to talk. In the leading case, there was a 2-hour 
gap between the interrogations; the second interview was conducted by 
different officers on a different floor of the police building and focused on 
a different crime. Each case will turn on its own facts. A reasonable time 
period must follow the request to remain silent. Tactics that appear to 
harass the suspect are not tolerated.
Sample Dialogue to Start Interrogation after the Suspect Invoked 
Right to Remain Silent
Det. Dawson:      Welcome back, Johnny. Have you thought about what you 
told me yesterday?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I thought about it a lot last night.
Det. Dawson:      Yesterday you said you didn’t want to talk to me anymore. Is 
that right?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, that’s what I said.
Det. Dawson:      Would you like to talk to me now?
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I thought about it a lot and I have some things to say to 
you now.
Det Dawson:       I’m glad to hear that, but before we start I need to read the 
Miranda warnings to you again. When I finish you can sign 
the waiver form and we can talk. OK?
Johnny Johnson:  OK.
Suspect Invoked Right to Attorney
Edwards v. Arizona establishes a rule that applies when a suspect who is 
in custody and being questioned requests an attorney: Questioning must 
stop and can resume only if an attorney is present.28 This is a distinctly 
different rule than the one that applies if the suspect refuses to speak 

 
Self-Incrimination 
405
to officers: If the attorney was requested, the request cannot be revoked 
unless there is an attorney present; a lapse of time cannot be used to justify 
renewing questioning without an attorney present.
One of the major problems with the rule about requesting an attorney 
is determining when it applies. An unambiguous request for counsel auto-
matically invokes it (Smith v. Illinois).29 Unfortunately, suspects frequently 
make equivocal statements. In Oregon v. Bradshaw, the Supreme Court 
found that the suspect’s question, “Well, what is going to happen now?” 
permitted the officers to continue the interrogation.30 Each case will have 
to be decided on its own facts. It is important, however, that officers avoid 
the temptation to ignore a request for counsel and attempt to convince the 
suspect that he or she does not need or want an attorney.
Sample Dialogue Used to Determine If Suspect Has Invoked Right 
to an Attorney
Det. Dawson:      What did you just say?
Johnny Johnson:   I said, “Maybe I need an attorney.”
Det. Dawson:      So, do you want an attorney?
Johnny Johnson:   Oh, gee, I’m not sure. You said I could have one. When you 
ask me all those questions I get scared. But I don’t trust 
attorneys. It’s so confusing. Maybe I should have one. What 
do you think?
Det. Dawson:      I just want to know if you want an attorney right now, at this 
minute. Give me a straight answer—yes or no.
If the officer determines that the suspect wants an attorney, the suspect 
must have an opportunity to speak with an attorney before questioning 
can continue; the attorney will also have to be present when a new waiver 
is sought. This rule applies in two situations: (1) the suspect asked for an 
attorney, and (2) the suspect refused to talk to the officer and requested 
an attorney. The time that elapses between interviews is no substitute for 
contact with an attorney. Questioning may resume only if the defendant 
has an attorney present (Minnick v. Mississippi).31
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogation after Suspect Invoked 
Right to Attorney
Det. Dawson:      OK, Johnny. It’s 4:00 p.m. When I was talking to you earlier 
you asked for an attorney. What happened after that?
Johnny Johnson:   You stopped talking to me and had some guy take me back to 
the holding cell.
Det. Dawson:      Have you had a chance to talk to an attorney?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. I called the Public Defender’s Office and talked to Mr. Brown.
Det. Dawson:      Is Mr. Brown an attorney?

406 
Chapter 14
Johnny Johnson:  Yes.
Det. Dawson:      Is Mr. Brown in this room right now?
Johnny Johnson:  Yes. He is sitting beside me. Sorry, I forgot to introduce you.
Det. Dawson:      Are you ready to talk to me now?
Johnny Johnson:   Mr. Brown doesn’t want me to talk, but I need to tell you 
some stuff.
Det. Dawson:      OK. I’m giving you another Miranda card. Read it and sign it 
if you want to talk to me. Mr. Brown can stay here with you if 
you want.
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah, I know. You give me lots of those cards to sign.
In 1988, the Supreme Court made it clear in Arizona v. Roberson that 
the fact that the subsequent interrogation was about a different crime did 
not alter this rule.32 The suspect had been arrested at the scene of a bur-
glary. Immediately after the arresting officer gave the Miranda warnings, 
the suspect demanded to see his lawyer. Three days later, a different officer, 
who did not know the suspect had invoked his Miranda rights, questioned 
him about a different burglary. The confession was ruled inadmissible even 
though the second officer obtained a Miranda waiver before the suspect 
made an incriminating statement. The Supreme Court clearly stated that it 
intended to follow the bright line rule in Edwards without exceptions. This 
makes it imperative that officers communicate the request for an attorney to 
all potential interrogators. Noting it on the booking slip may be helpful.
Sample Dialogue Used to Interrogate Suspect Who Has Already 
Asked for an Attorney
Conversation between Det. Jones and Officer White who is in charge of the 
holding cells
Det. Jones:       I’m here to question Johnny Johnson. Please have him sent to 
Interrogation Room No. 3.
Officer White:   Let me check his file. Wait. There is a note that says he asked for 
an attorney when Det. Dawson interrogated him this morning.
Det. Jones:       Wow. I’m glad you told me that. If I’d gone ahead and 
questioned him the judge would have thrown it all out. Forget 
about sending him to the interrogation room.
Special Situations
Several situations require special attention: whether proper Miranda
warnings are sufficient to make a confession admissible when the suspect 
was illegally arrested; procedures that should be modified when juveniles 

 
Self-Incrimination 
407
are questioned; and the use of confessions for impeachment purposes. 
Complying with normal Miranda procedures may not be enough in 
these situations.
Suspect Illegally Arrested
The Supreme Court refused to rule that all confessions made after a valid 
Miranda waiver are admissible. If the arrest was illegal, Miranda will not 
automatically make the confession admissible (Lanier v. South Carolina;
Brown v. Illinois; New York v. Harris).33 Instead of making all of these confes-
sions admissible, the Court utilized the Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine. 
Confessions obtained after an illegal arrest are only admissible if the facts 
show that the taint of the unconstitutional act has dissipated. Each case must 
be reviewed on its own merits. Confessions obtained after the suspect has 
been released from custody are quite likely to be admissible. On the other 
hand, if any form of police brutality was present during the arrest, the con-
fession will probably be suppressed. Relevant considerations include obser-
vance of Miranda, the temporal proximity of the arrest and the confession, 
the presence of intervening circumstances, and particularly, the purpose and 
flagrancy of the official misconduct.34
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogation after Suspect 
Was Illegally Arrested
Det. Dawson:   Good morning, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green: 
Good morning.
Det. Dawson:   I’ve been reading your file. It looks like Officer Swenson 
arrested you last week but the D.A. refused to file charges. Some 
technicality about the arrest.
Mr. Green: 
 I don’t know anything about technicalities. I just know they let 
me go home.
Det. Dawson:   What day did they let you go home?
Mr. Green: 
Last Thursday. Four days ago.
Det. Dawson:   And why are you at the police station today?
Mr. Green: 
 You called me and said you wanted to talk to me and hear my 
side of it. It sounded like a good idea, so I came down.
Det. Dawson:   You are free to leave when you want to. Did you know that?
Mr. Green: 
Yeah, sort of. Unless you arrest me first.
Det. Dawson:   That’s right. So now, let’s start talking.
Note: Miranda warnings are not required in this scenario because the suspect 
is not under arrest. Warnings are not required when the suspect is at the police 
station but not under arrest.

408 
Chapter 14
Interrogating Juvenile Suspects
All but very young juveniles are capable of waiving their Miranda rights. 
Whereas the question of whether the suspect is in custody is the same for 
adults and juveniles,35 the question of whether there was a valid waiver 
of Miranda rights will be considered on the totality of the circumstances. 
The clarity of the warnings given is very important. Other factors 
include the age and intelligence of the juvenile. Prior contacts with the 
police and other evidence of sophistication related to the criminal justice 
system are relevant. Police tactics that intimidate or coerce are carefully 
scrutinized.
If juveniles ask to speak to their parents, the questioning must stop. 
The courts have treated this type of request as the equivalent of an adult 
demanding an attorney. Fare v. Michael C. held that requests to speak 
to a probation officer, on the other hand, have no conclusive effect.36 It 
is important to take notice of any request the juvenile makes, however, 
because it may be considered as an indication that the suspect wants to 
terminate the questioning.
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogation of a Juvenile 
Det. Dawson:   Hello, Michelle.
Michelle:       Hi.
Det. Dawson:   I’m here to talk to you about why you were arrested. Before I do 
that, I need to explain your rights to you. OK?
Michelle:       OK. 
Det. Dawson:   How old are you, Michelle?
Michelle:       I’m 15. My birthday was last week.
Det. Dawson:   Do you go to school?
Michelle:       Yes. Wilson High.
Det. Dawson:   What grade are you in?
Michelle:       I’m a sophomore.
Det. Dawson:   What kind of grades do you get?
Michelle:       Mostly Cs and Ds. But they keep telling me I’m really smart and I 
could do better if I studied. School is so boring.
Det. Dawson:   Have you ever been in trouble with the law before?
Michelle:       Yeah. I was in Juvie last year.
Det. Dawson:   So you know about your rights.
Michelle:       Yeah. The Public Defender told me all about them when I was in 
Juvie waiting for my trial.
Det. Dawson:   OK. I’m going to go over your Miranda rights with you. I want 
you to listen real close because this is very important. OK?
Michelle:       OK. But don’t use any big words. I get lost when people use too 
many big words.

 
Self-Incrimination 
409
Impeachment
Statements a suspect makes during an interrogation can be used to 
impeach his or her trial testimony as long as the statement was voluntary 
(Harris v. New York).37 Coerced statements cannot be used in court, but 
any voluntary statement made during an interrogation that violated other 
aspects of Miranda can be used to impeach.
This rule is only activated if the person who was interrogated takes 
the witness stand and testifies in a manner that conflicts with the prior 
statements. It is important that the prosecutor be aware of any statements 
the police obtained even though they now realize that inappropriate pro-
cedures were followed.
Sample Court Dialogue Used to Introduce a Confession 
for Impeachment
Prosecutor: 
The People call Det. Dawson.
Court clerk swears in Det. Dawson and he takes the witness stand.
Prosecutor: 
 Det. Dawson, did you interrogate Sean O’Neil on February 2, 
2008?
Det. Dawson: 
Yes, I did.
Prosecutor: 
Did Sean O’Neil make any statements to you?
Defense attorney:   Objection. Judge Wilson ruled that the statements Mr. O’Neil 
made to Det. Dawson are inadmissible because the Miranda
warnings were not given correctly.
Prosecutor: 
 Your Honor, I am attempting to introduce Mr. O’Neil’s 
statements for impeachment. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled 
in Harris v. New York that voluntary statements are admissible 
for impeachment purposes even if Miranda warnings were not 
given properly.
Judge: 
Objection overruled. You may proceed, Mr. Prosecutor.
Prosecutor: 
Det. Dawson, please answer the question.
Det. Dawson: 
Yes, Sean O’Neil made several statements to me.
Prosecutor: 
 On direct examination, Sean stated that he was at his 
girlfriend’s house between 8:00 p.m. and midnight on 
February 1, the night of the drive-by shooting. Is that what 
he told you on February 2?
Det. Dawson: 
 No. He told me that he was hanging out with some friends 
at a strip club. He claimed he arrived at 9:00 p.m. and 
stayed until it closed at 2:00 a.m. He never mentioned his 
girlfriend.

410 
Chapter 14
Post-Arraignment Confessions
The right to counsel attaches at the beginning of adversary court pro-
ceedings (United States v. Gouveia).38 This is the arraignment unless 
some other proceeding, such as indictment by the grand jury, occurs first. 
From the time the right to counsel attaches, police may not interview a 
suspect without an attorney present unless there is a waiver of the right 
to counsel. It does not matter whether the interrogation takes place in a 
custodial setting.
Interrogation after Right to Counsel Attaches
Once formal court proceedings have begun, a suspect must waive the right to 
counsel prior to custodial or noncustodial interrogation. Miranda warnings may 
be used for this purpose.
The leading case is Massiah v. United States.39 Massiah had been indicted 
by a federal grand jury for smuggling narcotics. He retained a lawyer, entered 
a “not guilty” plea, and was released on bail. Colson, his co-defendant, 
decided to cooperate with federal agents and allowed them to conceal a 
radio transmitter under the front seat of his car. While seated in Colson’s 
car, Massiah and Colson discussed their upcoming trial and Massiah made 
several incriminating statements. The Supreme Court held that these state-
ments were not admissible because they were obtained in violation of 
Massiah’s right to counsel.
For interrogations that occur after arraignment or indictment, the 
key questions are, Was the accused made sufficiently aware of the right 
to have counsel present during questioning? and Was he or she aware 
of the possible consequences of the decision to forgo the assistance of 
counsel? In Illinois v. Patterson, the Supreme Court said that a knowing, 
intelligent, and voluntary waiver of Miranda satisfies these criteria.40 A 
similar problem arises if the defendant has been indicted prior to being 
arrested: Statements that officers deliberately elicit anytime after the 
indictment without the suspect’s attorney present are not admissible at 
trial.41
The Court refused to hold that the defendant must actually meet 
with an attorney prior to making this decision. If, on the other hand, the 
suspect demands to see an attorney or to have one present during ques-
tioning, interrogation must stop and cannot be resumed unless there is an 
attorney present.
For defendants who remain in custody, the rules that govern Miranda 
warnings apply whether or not an arraignment has occurred. Officers 
must be particularly alert, however, if the suspect has been arraigned but 

 
Self-Incrimination 
411
is currently not in custody. In these situations, even though there is no 
custodial interrogation, Miranda warnings or some other form of advice 
regarding the right to counsel must be given and a waiver obtained before 
discussing the case that has been filed. Table 14-1 compares the rights to 
counsel under Miranda and Massiah.
Since the right to counsel does not attach until the court proceedings 
begin, the normal Miranda rules apply to questioning conducted after the 
T A B L E  14-1  Comparison of Right to Counsel under 
Miranda and Massiah
Miranda
Massiah
When must suspect be 
advised of his or her rights?
Prior to custodial 
interrogation.
Prior to interrogation that 
occurs after the first court 
appearance. Rule applies 
to suspects who are in 
custody and those who have 
been released but still have 
charges pending in court.
When does the suspect have 
the right to have an attorney 
present?
During any questioning 
by authorities that occurs 
after the suspect asks for an 
attorney.
At all interrogation sessions 
after the first court 
appearance.
What charges are covered?
Once the attorney is 
requested, there must be 
an attorney present during 
custodial interrogation 
about any crime.
Right to counsel applies 
to charges that have been 
filed in court. Right to have 
an attorney present during 
questioning on other crimes 
is governed by normal 
Miranda procedures.
Procedure for waiving right to 
counsel
Before suspect requests 
attorney: Suspect can waive 
right without attorney 
present.
After suspect requests 
attorney: Attorney must be 
present when suspect waives 
right to have counsel present.
Defendant can waive right 
to have attorney present on 
his or her own without an 
attorney present.
Warnings that must be given
Police must give Miranda
warnings.
Police must advise defendant 
of the right to have an 
attorney present and obtain 
a waiver. Miranda warnings 
may be used for this purpose 
but the Court has not 
specified that they are the only 
warnings that can be used.

412 
Chapter 14
arraignment about charges that have not been filed. It may be difficult to 
determine which charges have been filed, particularly if the suspect has 
cases pending in several jurisdictions. Therefore, the safest practice is to 
give Miranda admonitions whenever talking to a suspect who has been 
arraigned.
Sample Dialogue Used to Start Interrogation to Obtain 
a Post-Arraignment Confession
Det. Dawson: 
Good morning, Johnny. I haven’t seen you for a long time.
Johnny Johnson:   Yeah. That’s because I’ve been in county jail for several 
months. But they finally let me out.
Det. Dawson: 
 Did you go to court while you were in jail?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. I had an arraignment in June and a preliminary hearing 
in July.
Det. Dawson: 
 Was this all about those burglaries I arrested you for last 
April?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. They filed two counts of burglary. No other charges were 
filed, though. I guess I got lucky.
Det. Dawson: 
Did they give you an attorney at the arraignment?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. His name is Mr. Nelson. I have his card here in my wallet 
somewhere.
Det. Dawson: 
 OK. You are out of jail and you have an attorney. When you 
called I got the impression that you wanted to talk to me 
about your case. Is that true?
Johnny Johnson:   Yes. You always treated me fair.
Det. Dawson: 
 Before I can discuss anything, I need you to waive your right 
to have Mr. Nelson, your attorney, present. Or we can call him 
and ask him to come down here, if you prefer.
Johnny Johnson:   No, that’s OK. The reason I called you was that I wanted to 
talk to you without him telling me what to do.
Det. Dawson: 
 The easiest way to handle this is to go over the Miranda
warnings and then you can waive them, if you want to talk to 
me, that is.
Johnny Johnson:   Sure. I know my Mirandas by heart, you have given them to 
me so many times.
Det. Dawson: 
 Just the same, here is the Miranda card. Let’s go over it to 
make sure we get everything right.

 
Self-Incrimination 
413
The Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination only applies to state-
ments that can be used against a person in a criminal trial. It does not apply if the 
statute of limitations has expired, the witness has immunity, or double jeopardy 
prevents refiling the charges.
 
Testimonial acts are covered: oral and written statements as well as assertive 
gestures. The following are not covered because they are not considered testimo-
nial: body fluids (blood, urine, breath, etc.), identifying features (physical appear-
ance and fingerprints), exemplars (handwriting and voice), DNA samples, and 
sobriety tests.
Miranda v. Arizona established that a suspect must be advised of his or her con-
stitutional rights. These rights include the right to remain silent, the clear warning 
that anything said can be used against the suspect in court, the right to have an 
attorney present during questioning, and the right to have an attorney at public 
expense if the suspect is indigent.
Miranda rights need only be given prior to custodial interrogation, but it 
does not matter why the suspect is in custody. Interrogation includes both direct 
and indirect questions. To be valid, a waiver of Miranda rights must be know-
ing, intelligent, and voluntary. There is no required procedure that must be 
used to obtain the waiver. It may be oral, written, or inferred from the suspect’s 
conduct.
 
Volunteered statements do not fall under Miranda. There is also an exception 
that permits biographical questions to be asked during booking. Another excep-
tion permits officers to ask urgent questions immediately following arrest in order 
to protect members of the public from danger.
 
If a suspect waives his or her Miranda rights, interrogation may be resumed at 
any time. An indication that the suspect wishes to remain silent must be scrupu-
lously honored, but the police may ask for a new Miranda waiver at a later time. 
When the suspect requests a lawyer, the police may not attempt to question the 
suspect again unless there is a lawyer present. 
Miranda warnings will not automatically make a confession admissible if the 
suspect was illegally arrested. Each case is considered on its facts.
 
Care should be taken when advising juveniles of their Miranda rights. A valid 
waiver can be obtained only if the juvenile fully understood the warnings. A 
juvenile’s request to speak with a parent(s) is considered the same as an adult’s 
request for an attorney.
 
Statements made after incorrect Miranda warnings, or even when the warnings 
were not given, can be used to impeach. To be admissible for this purpose, the 
statements must have been made without coercion.
 
The right to counsel attaches at the first formal court appearance. This usually 
means arraignment or indictment. From that time on, the police may not ques-
tion the suspect unless he or she waives the right to have an attorney present. This 
rule applies to both custodial interrogation and questioning that occurs in non-
custodial settings. Miranda warnings can be used to obtain a waiver of the right 
to counsel for this purpose.
Summary
S u m m a r y

414 
Chapter 14
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1.  Define the privilege against self-incrimination, and list three situations in 
which a suspect cannot invoke it.
2.   List three types of evidence obtained from a suspect that are not considered 
testimonial.
3.  State the Miranda warnings, and explain when they are required.
4.   What is the standard for a valid Miranda waiver? Explain the acceptable 
procedures for obtaining a valid Miranda waiver.
5.  Is it necessary to give a new set of Miranda warnings if the suspect has 
already waived his or her rights? Explain.
6.  If the suspect invoked the right to remain silent, may officers attempt to 
interrogate him or her at a later time? Explain.
7.   If the suspect asked for an attorney, may officers attempt to question him or 
her at a later time? Explain.
8.  Can confessions be used in court if the suspect was illegally arrested prior to 
the interrogation? Explain.
9.   Can a statement that was obtained in violation of Miranda be used in court? 
Explain.
10.   What special procedures are required prior to interrogating a suspect who 
has already been arraigned in court? Explain.
With the prevalence of reality police shows on television, it seems that everyone 
knows the protections outlined in the Miranda decision. Use the Internet 
(www.findlaw.com) to find the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Dickerson v. 
United States 530 U.S. 528 (2000). Then conduct an informal survey by inter-
viewing at least 10 people you know to determine if the public understands 
their actual self-incrimination rights. Ask each person (1) to recite the protec-
tions established in Miranda, (2) whether the police must always provide the 
warnings when arresting a suspect, and (3) whether the police must provide a 
person with an attorney if one is requested. Write a one-page (250-word) essay 
about your research.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t

 
Self-Incrimination 
415
Notes
N o t e s
 1. Griffin v. California 380 U.S. 609, 14 L.Ed. 2d 106, 85 S.Ct. 1229 (1965).
 2. Carter v. Kentucky 450 U.S. 288, 67 L.Ed. 2d 241, 101 S.Ct. 1112 (1981).
 3. United States v. Robinson 485 U.S. 25, 99 L.Ed. 2d 23, 108 S.Ct. 864 (1988).
 4.  United States v. Dunnigan 507 U.S. 87, 122 L.Ed. 2d 445, 113 S.Ct. 111 (1993).
 5. Schmerber v. California 384 U.S. 757, 16 L.Ed. 2d 908, 86 S.Ct. 1826 (1966).
 6. Hayes v. Florida 470 U.S. 811, 84 L.Ed. 2d 705, 105 S.Ct. 1643 (1985).
 7. United States v. Wade 388 U.S. 218, 18 L.Ed. 2d 1149, 87 S.Ct. 1926 (1967).
 8. United States v. Mara 410 U.S. 19, 35 L.Ed. 2d 99, 93 S.Ct. 774 (1973).
 9. Pennsylvania v. Muniz 496 U.S. 582, 110 L.Ed. 2d 528, 110 S.Ct. 2638 (1990).
 10. Miranda v. Arizona 384 U.S. 436, 16 L.Ed. 2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602 (1966).
 11. Berkemer v. McCarty 468 U.S. 420, 82 L.Ed. 2d 317, 104 S.Ct. 3138 (1984).
 12. Pennsylvania v. Bruder 488 U.S. 102, 102 L.Ed. 2d 172, 109 S.Ct. 205 (1988).
 13.  Oregon v. Mathiason 429 U.S. 492, 50 L.Ed. 2d 714, 97 S.Ct. 711 (1977). See also California v. 
Beheler 463 U.S. 1121, 77 L.Ed. 2d 1275, 103 S.Ct. 3517 (1983).
 14. Stansbury v. California 511 U.S. 318, 128 L.Ed. 2d 293, 114 S.Ct. 1526 (1994).
 15. Orozco v. Texas 394 U.S. 324, 22 L.Ed. 2d 311, 89 S.Ct. 1095 (1969).
 16. Rhode Island v. Innis 446 U.S. 291, 64 L.Ed. 2d 297, 100 S.Ct. 1682 (1980). See also Brewer v. 
Williams 430 U.S. 387, 51 L.Ed. 2d 424, 97 S.Ct. 1232 (1977).
 17. Illinois v. Perkins 496 U.S. 292, 110 L.Ed. 2d 243, 110 S.Ct. 2394 (1990).
 18. Estelle v. Smith 451 U.S. 454, 68 L.Ed. 2d 359, 101 S.Ct. 1866 (1981).
 19. New York v. Quarles 467 U.S. 649, 81 L.Ed. 2d 550, 104 S.Ct. 2626 (1984).
 20. Colorado v. Connelly 479 U.S. 157, 93 L.Ed. 2d 473, 107 S.Ct. 515 (1986).
 21. Arizona v. Fulminante 499 U.S. 279, 113 L.Ed. 2d 302, 111 S.Ct. 1246 (1991).
 22. Colorado v. Spring 479 U.S. 364, 93 L.Ed. 2d 954, 107 S.Ct. 851 (1987).
 23. Moran v. Burbine 475 U.S. 412, 89 L.Ed. 2d 410, 106 S.Ct. 1135 (1986).
 24. North Carolina v. Butler 441 U.S. 369, 60 L.Ed. 2d 286, 99 S.Ct. 1755 (1979).
 25. Connecticut v. Barrett 479 U.S. 523, 93 L.Ed. 2d 920, 107 S.Ct. 828 (1987).
 26. Oregon v. Elstad 470 U.S. 298, 84 L.Ed. 2d 222, 105 S.Ct. 1285 (1985).
 27. Michigan v. Mosley 423 U.S. 96, 46 L.Ed. 2d 313, 96 S.Ct. 321 (1975).
 28. Edwards v. Arizona 451 U.S. 477, 68 L.Ed. 2d 378, 101 S.Ct. 1880 (1981).
 29. Smith v. Illinois 469 U.S. 91, 83 L.Ed. 2d 488, 105 S.Ct. 1285 (1984).
 30. Oregon v. Bradshaw 462 U.S. 1039, 77 L.Ed. 2d 405, 103 S.Ct. 2830 (1983).
 31. Minnick v. Mississippi 498 U.S. 146, 112 L.Ed. 2d 489, 111 S.Ct. 486 (1990).
 32. Arizona v. Roberson 486 U.S. 675, 100 L.Ed. 2d 704, 108 S.Ct. 2093 (1988).
 33.  Lanier v. South Carolina 474 U.S. 25, 88 L.Ed. 2d 23, 106 S.Ct. 297 (1985); Brown v. Illinois 422
U.S. 590, 45 L.Ed. 2d 416, 95 S.Ct. 2254 (1975); New York v. Harris 495 U.S. 14, 109 L.Ed. 2d 13, 
110 S.Ct. 1640 (1990).
 34. Kaupp v. Texas 538 U.S. 626, 155 L.Ed. 2d 814, 123 S.Ct. 1843 (2003).
 35. Yarborough v. Alvarado 541 U.S. 652, 158 L.Ed. 2d 938, 124 S.Ct. 2140 (2004).
 36. Fare v. Michael C. 422 U.S. 707, 61 L.Ed. 2d 197, 99 S.Ct. 2560 (1979).
 37. Harris v. New York 401 U.S. 222, 28 L.Ed. 2d 1, 91 S.Ct. 643 (1971).
 38. United States v. Gouveia 467 U.S. 180, 81 L.Ed. 2d 146, 104 S.Ct. 2292 (1984).
 39. Massiah v. United States 377 U.S. 201, 12 L.Ed. 2d 246, 84 S.Ct. 1199 (1964).
 40. Illinois v. Patterson 487 U.S. 285, 101 L.Ed. 2d 261, 108 S.Ct. 2389 (1988).
41. Fellers v. United States 540 U.S. 519, 157 L.Ed. 2d 1016, 124 S.Ct. 1019 (2004).

This page intentionally left blank 

417
Identiﬁ cation 
Procedures
CHAPTER 15
Feature Case: Centennial Olympics Suspect Richard Jewell
In the summer of 1996, with the Olympic Games underway in Atlanta, 
Georgia, a pipe bomb exploded in the city’s Centennial Park, killing one 
person and injuring more than 110 bystanders. In the following days, law 
enforcement officials began to focus their suspicions on a security guard 
named Richard Jewell, who had initially been praised for helping evacuate 
the area shortly after the explosion. Within 72 hours of the incident, news-
papers and television networks began reporting that Jewell had become 
the focus of the investigation. In the face of extensive media coverage, 
Jewell maintained his innocence, passed a polygraph test administered 
by a retired FBI expert, and insisted he was wrongly identified as the 
perpetrator.
As media attention on him intensified, Jewell broke down in tears at 
one television news conference as he explained that the false accusation and 
extensive media coverage had ruined his life and made him a prisoner in 
his own home. Even Jewell’s mother publicly urged President Bill Clinton 
to intervene and exonerate her son, but Jewell remained a “suspect.”
In October 1996, the U.S. Attorney’s Office officially informed Jewell 
he was no longer a “target” of the investigation.
Several years later, the FBI identified Eric Robert Rudolph, an anti-
government extremist, as the person responsible for the Centennial Park 
Olympic bombing. Rudolph was also a suspect in the bombings of a gay 
nightclub, an abortion clinic in the Atlanta area (both done in 1996), and 
a clinic in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1997. The press release referred to 

418 
Chapter 15
Rudolph as the “most notorious American fugitive on the FBI’s ‘Most 
Wanted’ List.”
In May 2003, after a massive manhunt in the hills of North Carolina 
and offers of a $1 million reward for his apprehension, Rudolph was 
arrested, and in 2005 he pled guilty to the bombings and provided infor-
mation about the location of more than 250 pounds of buried dynamite 
and other explosives in exchange for a sentence of life in prison without 
parole.
Richard Jewell subsequently became a Deputy Sheriff for Meriwether 
County, which is just outside Atlanta. He received an undisclosed amount 
from civil lawsuits filed against NBC, CNN, and the New York Post about 
their coverage of the Olympic bombing investigation.
On the 10th anniversary of the bombings, the governor of Georgia, 
Sonny Perdue, said, “The bottom line is this: His actions saved lives that 
day. Mr. Jewell, on behalf of Georgia, we want to thank you for keeping 
Georgians safe and doing your job during the course of those Games.”
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Define and differentiate between lineup, showup, and photographic lineup.
• Explain Fourth Amendment rights applicable to identification procedures.
• Explain Fifth Amendment rights applicable to identification procedures.
• Explain Sixth Amendment rights applicable to identification procedures.
• Explain the due process guarantees that apply to identification procedures.
Key Terms
•   Due process
•  Lineup
•  Photographic lineup
•  Showup
•  Unduly suggestive
Myths about Identification 
Procedures
Facts about Identification 
Procedures
Eyewitness identification of crime suspects is 
one of the most reliable methods in correctly 
determining the perpetrator of a crime.
Studies suggest mistaken identification of 
the wrong person by victims and witnesses 
is one of the most common errors leading to 
the arrest and conviction of innocent people.
Most perpetrators are quickly identified by 
analysis of forensic evidence left behind and 
collected by police at crime scenes.
Even where forensic evidence is found at a 
crime scene, identifying the perpetrator often 
takes a great deal of time and investigative 
resources if the suspect is not already known.

 
Identification Procedures 
419
Definitions Used for Identification Procedures
Law enforcement officers use a variety of techniques to identify the perpe-
trators of crimes. In addition to conducting identification procedures in a 
manner that ensures accurate identification of the suspect, Fourth, Fifth, 
Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights must be protected.
There are three basic procedures used to allow victims or witnesses to 
identify the person who committed the crime:
• Lineups
• Showups
• Photographic lineups
These terms are defined for the purpose of this chapter to avoid confu-
sion with other usages of the terms. Appropriate procedures for conduct-
ing these activities are discussed later in this chapter.
Lineups
A lineup is a procedure in which the victim or eyewitness is asked to view 
a group of people and select the one who committed the crime. Figure 15-1 
shows an example of a lineup. Many police departments and jails have 
viewing rooms set aside for this purpose. These rooms may include marks 
on the wall to indicate height, special-effects lighting that can simulate 
whatever illumination existed at the crime scene, and one-way mirrors so 
the suspects cannot see the people making the identification. On the other 
hand, a lineup may also be done by merely having the group of people 
stand in front of the person who saw the crime being committed. Due to 
the need to assemble several people, lineups are rarely done in the field.
Myths about Identification 
Procedures
Facts about Identification 
Procedures
Lineups and photographic lineups (also 
called “six packs”) involve a victim 
or witness identifying a suspect from 
a random array of other persons or 
photographs.
To encourage accurate identifications, the 
array of persons or photos presented must 
be similar in appearance without being 
unduly suggestive of the person the police 
believe committed the crime.
During a “showup,” police simply present 
a suspect to the victim or witness and ask 
if this is the person who committed the 
crime.
Victims or witnesses are usually transported 
to the location where the suspect is and 
admonished that it is just as important 
to exonerate someone who is innocent 
as it is to identify the person they believe 
committed the crime.

420 
Chapter 15
Showups
A showup is a much simpler procedure. One suspect is shown to the 
person who is to make the identification. This can be done in the field or 
at a police facility. Figure 15-2 shows an example of a showup.
Photographic Lineups
Photographic lineups involve showing pictures. Figure 15-3 presents an 
example of a photographic lineup. The suspect does not need to be in 
custody when this is done. It may be done by handing the witness a few 
carefully selected photographs or by allowing him or her to look through 
mug books. High school yearbooks are also used if the suspect is a juve-
nile or young adult. Although the photographs may be from any source, 
booking pictures are used most frequently because the police have easy 
access to them. If a tentative identification is made, the police may decide 
to hold a lineup.
Figure 15-1
An Example of a Lineup
	



Figure 15-2
An Example of a Showup

 
Identification Procedures 
421
Fourth Amendment Rights during
Identification Procedures
The police do not have the authority to detain a suspect in order to con-
duct a lineup or showup unless the detention complies with the Fourth 
Amendment. Random and “hunch” stops are not allowed. Neither may 
people be detained just because they fit a general description so that there 
will be enough people to make a valid lineup.
Fourth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures Defined
Absent consent, there must be reasonable suspicion to stop a suspect in the field 
for a showup. If there is probable cause to arrest, the suspect may be transported 
to the police station for either a lineup or a showup. 
Figure 15-3
An Example of a Photographic Lineup
A suspect may be detained briefly based on reasonable suspicion. 
Identification procedures may be conducted at the scene of this detention, 
but the suspect may not be transported to the station during this type of 
detention.1 Victims and witnesses can be transported to the location in 
order to conduct a showup.
Probable cause to arrest is necessary in order to transport the sus-
pect to the police station. Once there, either a lineup or a showup may 
be conducted. The identification procedures do not have to be related to 
the crime for which the suspect was arrested. For example, a suspect who 
was arrested for burglary can be put in a lineup by officers investigating a 
murder. It is also permissible to use inmates that are already in custody to 
provide an adequate number of people for a valid lineup.

422 
Chapter 15
The Fourth Amendment applies to detentions and arrests by the 
police. Photographic lineups are normally conducted using pictures that 
the police already have in their files. No one is detained in order to conduct 
this type of procedure. For this reason, Fourth Amendment rights do not 
apply to photographic lineups.
Examples of Protecting Fourth Amendment Rights
during Identification Procedures
•  A police officer arrived at a “robbery now” call. The suspect fled the scene 
as the police car approached. Melody, the victim, gave the officers a good 
description of the robber. Another officer patrolling approximately two 
blocks away saw a man running down the street who matched the description 
broadcast by the officer at the scene. The man was detained while the victim 
was transported to the scene. As soon as Melody saw the suspect she screamed, 
“That’s him!”
•  A traffic officer arrested James for drunk driving. After the blood test, James was 
taken to the station for booking. An officer who walked through the booking 
area commented, “That guy over there looks just like the artist’s drawing they 
are circulating in the serial rape cases.” James was placed in a lineup and the rape 
victims were asked to tell the officers if the rapist was in the lineup. Three women 
selected James; the others were not sure. 
Examples of Violating Fourth Amendment Rights 
during Identification Procedures
•  The clerk at a 7-11 store gave the police a vague description of the man who stuck a 
gun in her back and took all the money in the cash register. The police detained all 
the gang members loitering a block away and took them to the 7-11 and asked the 
cashier which one did the robbery.
The clerk’s description was too vague to give the police the right to detain a suspect.
Even if the detention were legal, the police do not have the right to transport the 
suspects to the 7-11.
In addition to the Fourth Amendment errors, there is a due process problem with 
this scenario. The wording of the officer’s request for the cashier to identify the 
robber is suggestive. 
•  A woman arrived home and found a man ransacking her house. When she walked 
into the house, the man ran out the door. When the police arrived, she gave them a 
good description of the burglar. A patrol officer stopped a man carrying a bulging 
pillow case a half mile from the burglary. The man, who was sweating and appeared 
to be out of breath, was taken to the police station and placed in a lineup with five 
other men. 
The officer had reasonable suspicion to stop the man, but probable cause is 
required to take the man to the station (unless he consents). Therefore, being in a 
lineup at the station violated the man’s Fourth Amendment rights.

 
Identification Procedures 
423
Fifth Amendment Rights during 
Identification Procedures
Being identified by an eyewitness is very incriminating. Unfortunately 
for the criminal, this is not enough to activate the Fifth Amendment. 
The privilege not to incriminate oneself only applies to testimonial 
communications.
Fifth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures Defined
A suspect has no Fifth Amendment right to refuse to participate in a lineup or 
showup. He or she may not refuse to pose, wear appropriate clothing, or give 
voice exemplars.
In United States v. Wade and Gilbert v. California, the Supreme Court 
held that a legally arrested suspect has no Fifth Amendment right to refuse 
to participate in a lineup.2 Neither may he or she refuse to put on clothing 
worn by the suspect when the crime was committed. The suspect can also 
be required to walk, take a particular stance, or make gestures observed 
during the commission of the crime.
Voice exemplars are not covered by the Fifth Amendment. Although 
they require the suspect to speak, he or she is told what to say. Therefore, 
the content of the speech is not incriminating. For this reason, the par-
ticipants in a lineup or showup can be required to repeat what the victim 
claims the criminal said during the commission of the crime. For example, 
“Put the money in the bag” or “Scream and I’ll kill you.”
Distinctive features of the suspect may be re-created. Obviously, 
this cannot be done if it harms the people participating in the lineup or 
showup. If the crime was committed by a person with tape on his or her 
face, tape may be put on each participant’s face. A make-up artist can 
create realistic scars, tattoos, etc. Realistic-looking wigs, toupees, and fake 
beards may be used.
Although none of these procedures violates the Fifth Amendment, 
due process demands fundamental fairness. If special effects are used on one 
person in a lineup, similar techniques must be applied to other participants 
if necessary to make them all have similar features.
Examples of Protecting Fifth Amendment Rights 
during Identification Procedures
•  Jason was put in a lineup after his arrest for theft. He was very uncooperative and 
told the officers, “I know my Fifth Amendment rights. I demand to be taken back to 
my cell.” 

424 
Chapter 15
The officers were correct when they refused to comply with his demands because 
Jason does not have a Fifth Amendment right to refuse to participate in a lineup.
•  Zoe was arrested for passing counterfeit bills. She was placed in a lineup and told to 
put on a jacket that was found at the crime scene. She refused and said, “My lawyer 
told me that I do not have to do this because I have a privilege not to incriminate 
myself.” 
The officers were correct when they told her she had to put the jacket on because 
wearing clothing found at the crime scene is not covered by the Fifth Amendment. 
She could refuse to make incriminating statements but she could not refuse to 
participate in the lineup.
•  Duane was arrested for bank robbery. He was placed in a lineup and each person 
was told to say, “This is a stickup. Give me your money. If you yell I’ll shoot you.” 
Duane refused to say anything.
The officers were correct when they told each person to say what the robber told 
the teller. The Fifth Amendment protects individuals when they are asked to 
incriminate themselves. 
Repeating what the officers told them to say so the victim can identify their voice is 
not the same as making a statement that is incriminating.
Sixth Amendment Rights during
Identification Procedures
The suspect has a right to counsel during a lineup only if adversary court pro-
ceedings have begun (Kirby v. Illinois).3 This usually occurs at an arraignment 
or indictment. Although the Supreme Court has not explicitly addressed the 
right to counsel at a showup, it can be inferred that the suspect has the right 
to have an attorney present only if he or she has already been arraigned or 
indicted.
Sixth Amendment Rights during Identification Procedures Defined 
A suspect who has been arraigned or indicted has the right to have an attorney 
present at a lineup or showup. There is no right to counsel at a photographic 
lineup if the suspect is not present.
Moore v. Illinois held that the defendant also has the right to have coun-
sel present during in-court identifications procedures.4 This applies when 
a witness is asked if the person who committed the crime is present in the 
courtroom. The same rule is used at arraignments, preliminary hearings, 
and trials. It also covers asking someone who is not on the witness stand 
to identify the suspect in the courtroom. It does not matter whether the 
identification is made before, during, or after the court hearing.

 
Identification Procedures 
425
On the other hand, there is no right to counsel during an identifica-
tion procedure if the suspect is not present. United States v. Ash held that 
photographic lineups do not activate the right to counsel.5 The rule is the 
same whether the pictures are shown before or after arraignment. There 
is no right to counsel even if the prosecutor decides to show the witness 
pictures immediately before testifying at trial.
Although there is a right to have an attorney present at some lineups 
and showups, the attorney does not have the right to run the show. Neither 
can he or she advise the suspect not to cooperate. The lawyer plays the role 
of an observer. In addition to not being allowed to tell the police how to 
conduct the lineup, the attorney does not have any duty to tell them to 
stop doing things that violate the suspect’s rights. Whatever the attorney 
observes can be used in court to challenge the admissibility of identifica-
tions made at the lineup.
Examples of Protecting Sixth Amendment Rights 
during Identification Procedures
•  Wendy was stopped when she attempted to flee the scene of a hit-and-run accident. 
A police officer transported a person who witnessed the accident to where Wendy 
was. Upon seeing the officer approach, she said, “Wait a minute. I want my attorney 
here before that guy tries to put the blame on me.” The officer who was detaining 
her said, “Sorry, but you do not have the right to have an attorney during showups 
that we do before your first court appearance.”
The officer is correct. There is no right to an attorney at a showup held before the 
first court appearance or indictment.
•  Steve was arrested for several burglaries and booked at the police station. The next 
day, the police held a lineup and asked eyewitnesses from several recent burglaries 
to tell them if the person they saw commit the crime was present in the lineup. 
When being taken to the lineup room, Steve said, “I demand an attorney.” The 
officer replied, “You can have your attorney when you are arraigned tomorrow, but 
we do not have to provide one for a lineup held before the arraignment.”
The officer is correct. There is no right to an attorney at a lineup held before the 
first court appearance or indictment.
•  Approximately 1 week before trial was scheduled to start, the prosecutor decided 
that a lineup should be held to determine if the eyewitness and victim still 
remembered what the attacker looked like. When Danny’s attorney heard that the 
lineup was planned, he called the prosecutor and said, “What do you think you are 
doing? You know you can’t hold a lineup now without me being there! He’s already 
been arraigned!” The prosecutor said, “You’re right. I’d forgotten about that. The 
lineup is set for 2:00 p.m. tomorrow. Be there.”
The defense attorney was right. The suspect has the right to have an attorney 
present during a lineup held after arraignment or indictment.

426 
Chapter 15
Due Process Rights during Identification Procedures
The purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause is to ensure 
that the justice systems in the 50 states are based on fundamental fairness. 
Similar Fifth Amendment protections apply to cases in federal courts. In 
the area of identification procedures, due process means that the police 
must not use unnecessarily suggestive techniques (Foster v. California).6
Testimony about eyewitness identification will not be admissible in court 
if there is a substantial likelihood of mistaken identification.
Due Process Rights at Lineups and Photographic Lineups
Lineups and photographic lineups have many of the same problems. 
Nothing in the way these procedures are conducted may point to one indi-
vidual. This usually involves two areas: how the participants are selected 
and how the witnesses are handled.
Due Process Rights during Identification Procedures Defined
Identification procedures must not be unduly suggestive. There must not be a 
substantial likelihood of mistaken identification.
One of the first rules is that there must be an adequate selection of 
individuals with similar characteristics. From five to seven individuals is 
adequate. The participants are usually drawn from the jail population and/
or employees working near the viewing room. Each of them must match 
the general description of the perpetrator of the crime. For example, if the 
eyewitness said the crime was committed by an African American male, no 
white males should be in the lineup. Obviously, it will not be possible to 
find five identical matches; in fact, using identical twins would defeat the 
purpose of a lineup. The goal is to have participants who are sufficiently 
similar so there is no clue as to which one is the suspect. Anything that 
makes the suspect stand out is prohibited because it is unduly suggestive.
Figure 15-4 illustrates how due process is applied to lineups.
If any participant in the lineup has a particularly noticeable scar or 
tattoo, the lineup could be invalid unless something is done to either hide 
it or simulate the characteristic on all participants. Make-up artists can be 
used for this purpose. Similarity in hairstyles and facial hair is also neces-
sary. Wigs and fake beards may be used for this provided they appear real.
Additional problems arise if the same witness views more than one 
lineup, photographic lineup, or showup. The fact that the witness sees one 
suspect twice may cause him or her to draw the inference that the person 
who was in both lineups is the one the police believe committed the crime. 

 
Identification Procedures 
427
This is unduly suggestive because many people will conclude that if the 
police believe a person committed the crime, he or she must be the one 
who did it; they may distrust their memory and pick the person who was 
in multiple lineups. A better way to test the witness’s memory is to place 
the suspect in one lineup and then conduct a “blank” lineup. The blank 
lineup contains people meeting the general description, but none of them 
is a suspect in the case. The witness, it is hoped, will not identify anyone 
in the blank lineup.
Care must be taken to prevent witnesses from drawing their conclu-
sions based on the way the identification procedures were conducted 
	


		
	



	
		
		

	












	
 


				


	

	
	!


	




	

"#
$#
"#
$#
Figure 15-4
How Due Process Applies to Lineups

428 
Chapter 15
rather than on their memory of the crime scene. Making an identification 
is not a committee assignment. Each witness must make an independent 
decision. It is best to separate witnesses, usually by allowing only one to be 
present in the viewing area at a time. Witnesses should not be allowed to 
tell each other which participant in the lineup is believed to be the crimi-
nal or even that the person seen committing the crime was (or was not) 
in the lineup.
The officers conducting the lineup or photographic lineup must be 
careful not to indicate which participant is believed to be the criminal. 
Each person in a lineup must be asked to do and say the same things. 
Equal time should be devoted to each participant. Avoid statements such 
as, “Look at No. 3 again” or “Don’t you think No. 5 looks like the person 
who robbed you?” Police officers should also avoid making comments to 
each other that might be overheard by the observer.
A detailed report should be made on each identification procedure 
that was conducted. If possible, this should include a photograph taken 
while the lineup was in progress. All pictures used in a photographic 
lineup should be saved and attached to the report. The name and 
description of the person each witness identified must be included in 
the report. This is true whether or not the witness picked the “right” 
suspect.
Altering some of the pictures using a felt-tip pen is not permissible 
because it is obvious what has been done, but new computer scanners 
and software now make it possible to add realistic-looking beards, change 
hairstyles, etc. Pictures showing booking numbers are not recommended 
because the fact the person has been booked may unduly prejudice the 
viewer. Placing booking pictures in window envelopes that hide indica-
tions of their source is permissible. The lack of suitable pictures may make 
it impossible to have a photographic lineup in some cases.
Due Process Rights at Showups
Many of the protections against unduly suggestive lineups do not apply 
to showups because the witness usually views only one person. Some 
rules govern both types of identification procedures: Police should not 
coach the witnesses, and witnesses must arrive at their conclusions inde-
pendently. Figure 15-5 is an example of a showup that would satisfy due 
process.
Stovall v. Denno, the Supreme Court’s first case about showups, 
involved a murder case.7 Two people had been attacked: One was dead 
and the other in grave condition and being prepared for surgery. Doctors 
told the investigator that the patient had a very low chance of surviving the 

 
Identification Procedures 
429
surgery. At that point, the police brought the suspect to the hospital room 
and asked the patient if this was the person who attacked her and killed 
her husband. The Court’s decision in the case appeared to restrict showups 
to emergencies, but Neil v. Biggers made it clear that the police can conduct 
showups when there is no emergency forcing them to do so. Instead, the 
due process analysis focuses on the reliability of the identification.8 Factors 
the courts have considered include the following: 
1. Opportunity of the witness to view the crime (including lighting and 
the length of time the witness was with the suspect)
2. Degree of attention the witness paid to the suspect while the crime 
was in progress
3. Level of certainty of the witness
4. Accuracy of the witness’s prior description of the suspect
5. Prior inaccurate identifications made by the witness
6. Length of time between showup and crime
The same approach was used in a case in which only one photograph 
was shown for identification purposes (Manson v. Brathwaite).9 Although 
the Court criticized the police for using only one picture because it was 
suggestive, the conviction was upheld because the totality of the circum-
stances indicated that the witness was not swayed by it. The witness was 
a police officer who purchased heroin from the suspect while working 
undercover. Based on a general description, another officer left the sus-
pect’s picture on the undercover officer’s desk. The justices concluded that 
the officer was not susceptible to the subtle inference that the person in the 
picture was the one the police believed committed the crime.


%&##	
	
'


	

Figure 15-5
Showup That Satisfies Due Process

430 
Chapter 15
Example of Protecting Due Process Rights during a Showup
Veronica was the victim of a home invasion robbery. She called the police 5 
minutes after the robbers left. When questioned by the police, she told them that 
she was held captive in the brightly lit bathroom for 30 minutes by the shorter 
suspect while the taller one ransacked the house. Neither robber wore a mask. 
She gave the following descriptions: One robber was a white male between 18 
and 20 years old, between 5 feet 8 inches and 5 feet 10 inches tall, slender build, 
blond hair, and wearing a black sweatshirt and black denim pants; the other 
robber was an Hispanic male, approximately 25 years old, between 5 feet 10 
inches and 6 feet tall, black hair, muscular build, and wearing a navy blue hooded 
sweatshirt and navy blue sweat pants. The robbers left carrying several items of 
expensive jewelry in a black sock.
Several hours later, the police stopped a car for speeding and became suspicious 
that the two males in the car were the men who robbed Veronica. Another patrol 
car picked Veronica up and brought her to the scene. An officer warned her that 
the men might, or might not, be the ones that robbed her, and she should not 
presume that the men were guilty of the crime. She looked at the two men as 
they stood under a street light. After nearly a minute, Veronica said, “I’m sure the 
short guy is the one that forced me into the bathroom and stayed there to make 
sure I didn’t get out. I got a good look at him for a long time. The other guy is the 
right size, but I didn’t get much chance to see his face, so I can’t say for sure that 
he is the one.”
The police had reasonable suspicion to stop the two men because Veronica gave 
the officers good descriptions of the robbers.
The officers helped protect the suspect’s due process rights by advising Veronica 
that the fact the men were detained did not mean they were guilty. 
Veronica took her time and truthfully told the officers that she was not sure about 
the second man.
Use of Identification Testimony at Trial
A witness may testify about any properly conducted identification pro-
cedure. Whereas the prosecutor will ask about situations in which the 
witness correctly identified the suspect, the defense attorney will try to 
show as many misidentifications as possible. The ability of the witness to 
identify the suspect may be challenged. This includes bad eyesight, poor 
memory, and a variety of other factors.
Some courts even allow psychologists to give expert testimony on the 
inherent problems with eyewitness identification. These problems include 
perception, memory, emotional state of the witness, and both conscious 
and unconscious motivation to identify someone as the perpetrator of 
the crime. The impact of stereotypes and prejudice may also be covered. 

 
Identification Procedures 
431
Experts may be allowed to testify about the brain functions involved 
in memory and recall and explain why memory is not always accurate. 
Occasionally, the results of psychological research on recall are also intro-
duced into evidence.10
A hearing must be held if there is a question regarding the consti-
tutional validity of the identification procedure (Watkins v. Sowders).11
Testimony in the presence of the jury regarding lineups or showups that 
violate the right to counsel is grounds for automatic reversal of a conviction 
(Gilbert v. California).12 The Harmless Error Rule applies to other viola-
tions. Fourth Amendment and due process errors result in reversals if there 
is a substantial chance that they influenced the outcome of the case.
The Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine has been applied to in-court 
identifications that followed improper pretrial procedures. If the in-
court testimony is not influenced by the unconstitutional procedure, the 
witness may testify about the crime scene and make an in-court iden-
tification of the defendant. State courts frequently permit this type of 
testimony. The prosecutor may not ask questions about the improperly 
conducted lineup or other procedure, but the defense may ask about it on 
cross-examination.
United States v. Owens allowed testimony regarding a pretrial pho-
tographic lineup, even though the witness did not remember why he 
picked the defendant’s picture.13 He also did not remember seeing the 
defendant commit the crime. The victim’s memory had been severely 
impaired due to the crime that involved a beating with a metal pipe. 
The defense attorney introduced evidence that, while in the hospital, 
the victim had named another person as the assailant. The court held 
that the photographic lineup was admissible because there was no 
evidence that it was suggestive. The fact that the witness was available 
for cross-examination, even though he could not answer questions 
due to loss of memory, satisfied the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation 
Clause. The defense could not prevent the witness from taking the 
stand. Obviously, it could argue to the jury that the witness lacked 
credibility.
Sample Dialogues for Introducing Identification Testimony at Trial 
Introducing Testimony about a Showup That Was Conducted Properly
Prosecutor:    Mrs. Worth, did the police ever ask you to identify the man who 
hit you?
Mrs. Worth:   Yes, they did. They called me at home one day and said they had 
someone they wanted me to look at. They wanted me to do that 
before they decided whether to file charges.

432 
Chapter 15
Prosecutor:    When was that?
Mrs. Worth:   Right after I got out of the hospital.
Prosecutor:   How long was that after he hit you?
Mrs. Worth:  A week.
Prosecutor:   Where did this identification procedure take place?
Mrs. Worth:   At the police station. I was sitting in what they said was an 
interview room when an officer brought in a man in jail clothing.
Prosecutor:   Who else was present?
Mrs. Worth:   Nobody. Just me, the officer, and the guy they brought in.
Prosecutor:   What did the officer say to you at the time?
Mrs. Worth:   She said, “I want you to look at this man. Tell me if he is the person 
who hit you. Take your time and think about it. If you are sure that 
this is the man, tell me so. If you are not sure, tell me that, too. I 
don’t want you guessing on this. This may be the right man, but it 
might also not be the right one.” Or something like that.
Prosecutor:   How long did it take you to make a decision?
Mrs. Worth:   My first impression was that it was him, but I spent a couple of 
minutes thinking back to the night of the attack and trying to 
remember exactly what he looked like.
Prosecutor:   And what did you finally tell Officer Bartlett?
Mrs. Worth:   I told her that the man standing there was the one who hit me. 
I was very sure it was him.
Prosecutor:   And is that man in the courtroom today?
Mrs. Worth:   Yes. [Points at defendant.] That is him sitting next to the defense 
attorney.
In-Court Identification of the Suspect by Witness Who Viewed a Lineup That 
Was Not Conducted Properly
Prosecutor:    Dr. Morgan, you have testified that your office was robbed. Did the 
police ever ask you to view a lineup and pick out the person who 
robbed you?
Dr. Morgan:  Yes, they had me attend a lineup.
Prosecutor:    Now, I know this will sound strange, but I want you to do your best 
to forget about what happened at that lineup. I want you to focus 
solely on what is occurring here in the courtroom today. OK?
Dr. Morgan:  OK. I will try.
Prosecutor:    Thinking about the day that you were robbed, did you get a good 
chance to see the person’s face?
Dr. Morgan:   Yes. I looked up from my desk and he was standing there, staring 
at me. I must have looked at him for a full minute before he 
blindfolded me.
Prosecutor:   And could you identify that person today if you saw him?
Dr. Morgan:  Yes, I could. I’ll never forget that face.
Prosecutor:    Now, using only the face you saw during the robbery as a guide, is 
the person who robbed you in the courtroom today?

 
Identification Procedures 
433
Dr. Morgan:  Yes, he is. He is right over there. [Pointing]
Prosecutor:   I need you to state for the record who you are pointing at.
Dr. Morgan:   I am pointing at the man in the blue shirt seated at the table with 
the sign that says “Defense.”
Prosecutor:   Thank you, Dr. Morgan. That will be all.
          Judge:  Defense. You can cross-examine the witness now.
Summary
S u m m a r y
The police frequently use three procedures to help eyewitnesses identify criminals: 
lineups, showups, and photographic lineups. Lineups involve showing the witness 
a group of possible suspects. Photographic lineups provide a selection of pictures 
of possible suspects for the witness to choose from. Showups are done by showing 
one suspect to the witness.
 
The Fourth Amendment prohibits stopping people without cause unless they 
consent. To detain someone for a showup in the field, there must be at least a 
reasonable suspicion that this person committed a crime. Suspects may only be 
transported to a police station for identification procedures if there is probable 
cause to arrest them.
 
The Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination does not apply to 
identification procedures. The suspect may not refuse to participate in a lineup 
or showup. He or she can be required to speak, stand in a particular pose, or wear 
appropriate clothing.
 
Suspects can invoke the Sixth Amendment right to counsel during line-
ups and showups held after they have been arraigned or indicted. They have 
the right to have an attorney present, but the attorney only participates as an 
observer.
 
Due process requires identification procedures to be fundamentally fair. 
Anything the police do that suggests which person in a lineup or photographic 
lineup is the suspect violates due process. There should be enough people who 
are similar in appearance in the lineup to force the witness to demonstrate his 
or her memory and ability to observe. The police must not attempt to focus 
the viewer’s attention on any one individual or coach the witness; no one else 
should be allowed to do so, not even other victims and witnesses from the same 
crime.
 
Showups are judged on the totality of the circumstances. Identifications are 
usually admissible if the witness had a good opportunity to observe the crime 
and could give a good description of the suspect. There does not have to be an 
emergency to justify the failure to conduct a full lineup.
 
Introduction of testimony at trial regarding identification procedures that vio-
late the right to counsel is grounds for automatic reversal of a conviction. Other 
mistakes are judged by the Harmless Error Rule. The Confrontation Clause of 
the Sixth Amendment gives the defense the right to cross-examine witnesses who 
testify about lineups, showups, and photographic lineups.

434 
Chapter 15
 1. Define lineup, and explain what constitutional rights apply.
2.  Define showup, and explain each applicable constitutional right.
3.  Define photographic lineup, and explain what constitutional rights apply.
4.  What types of errors in identification procedures will cause reversal of a 
conviction? Explain.
 5. Assume that a person viewed an improperly conducted lineup. Will that 
person be allowed to testify in court? To make an in-court identification of 
the suspect? Explain.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
Prepare your own lineup or photographic lineup by selecting one of your 
classmates, family members, or friends to be a “suspect” for demonstration 
purposes, having them stand up in front of class or provide their individual 
photograph. Then select five other people to serve as subjects in your lineup 
or photo array by either standing next to the “suspect” or providing individual 
photos for you to arrange next to the “suspect” photograph. After comparing 
either the lineup or photographic lineup you have created, write a 250-word 
(one-page) essay telling what characteristics you looked for in selecting your 
subjects, what attributes are similar or different between your subjects and 
suspect that would be considered by a victim or witness, and what other 
things you could have done to prevent this identification technique from being 
“unduly suggestive.”
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
 1.  Hayes v. Florida 470 U.S. 811, 84 L.Ed. 2d 705, 105 S.Ct. 1643 (1985); Dunaway v. New York 422 
U.S. 200, 60 L.Ed. 2d 824, 99 S.Ct. 2248 (1979).
 2. United States v. Wade 388 U.S. 218, 18 L.Ed. 2d 1149, 87 S.Ct. 1926 (1967); Gilbert v. California
388 U.S. 263, 18 L.Ed. 2d 1178, 87 S.Ct. 1951 (1967).
 3. Kirby v. Illinois 406 U.S. 682, 32 L.Ed. 2d 411, 92 S.Ct. 1877 (1972). See also United States v. Wade, 
supra. 
 4. Moore v. Illinois 434 U.S. 220, 54 L.Ed. 2d 424, 98 S.Ct. 458 (1977).
 5. United States v. Ash 413 U.S. 300, 37 L.Ed. 2d 619, 93 S.Ct. 1568 (1973).
 6. Foster v. California 394 U.S. 440, 22 L.Ed. 2d 402, 89 S.Ct. 1127 (1969).
 7. Stovall v. Denno 388 U.S. 293, 18 L.Ed. 2d 1199, 87 S.Ct. 1967 (1967).
 8. Neil v. Biggers 409 U.S. 188, 34 L.Ed. 2d 401, 93 S.Ct. 375 (1972).
 9. Manson v. Brathwaite 432 U.S. 98, 53 L.Ed. 2d 140, 97 S.Ct. 2243 (1977).
 10. National Institute of Justice, Eyewitness Evidence: A Guide for Law Enforcement (Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 1999); S. L. Sporer, R. S. Malpass, and G. Koehnken (Eds.), 
Notes
N o t e s

 
Identification Procedures 
435
Psychological Issues in Eyewitness Identification (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1996); B. L. Cutler 
and S. D. Penrod, Mistaken Identification: The Eyewitness, Psychology, and the Law (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995); M. Zalman and L. Siegel, “The Psychology of Perception, 
Eyewitness Identification, and the Lineup,” Criminal Law Bulletin 27(2): 159–176 (1991).
 11. Watkins v. Sowders 449 U.S. 341, 66 L.Ed. 2d 549, 101 S.Ct. 654 (1981).
 12. Gilbert v. California, supra.
 13. United States v. Owens 484 U.S.554, 98 L.Ed. 2d 951, 108 S.Ct. 838 (1988).

This page intentionally left blank 

437
Preparing the
Case for Court
CHAPTER16
Feature Case: The Perjury of Los Angeles Police Department 
Detective Mark Fuhrman
Former Los Angeles Police Department homicide detective Mark Fuhrman, 
a 20-year law enforcement veteran, was one of the initial investigators 
assigned to the 1994 murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald 
Goldman, allegedly committed by retired football star and personality 
O.J. Simpson. 
In June 1994, Detective Fuhrman and his partner responded to the 
Brentwood, California, crime scene and, along with other evidence, found 
one of the alleged killer’s bloody gloves. Later, Detective Fuhrman and other 
investigators executed a search warrant at Simpson’s home and reported 
finding additional evidence, including drops of blood and a matching glove. 
Simpson was indicted and charged with two counts of murder.
During the criminal trial, Detective Fuhrman became one of the most 
controversial witnesses when, during cross-examination, he specifically 
and repeatedly denied using the “N” word when describing someone of 
the African American race in the preceding 10 years.
The defense called four witnesses to testify about instances in which 
Fuhrman used the racial epithet during the preceding 10 years, and it 
played a recorded interview in which the detective not only used the “N” 
word but also demonstrated a so-called “negative attitude” toward African 
Americans. Simpson’s defense attorneys re-called Fuhrman to testify. When 

438 
Chapter 16
Fuhrman refused to answer any questions and asserted his constitutional 
right not to incriminate himself, the defense imputed the credibility of the 
entire Los Angeles Police Department investigation. Later, the prosecution 
denounced Fuhrman as a “bad cop” during closing arguments. 
On October 3, 1995, the jury acquitted Simpson of the murders.
Following the trial, Mark Fuhrman pled “no contest” to felony 
charges of committing perjury. He apologized “from the bottom of [his] 
heart” that he had used racist terms and denied ever having been a racist. 
Fuhrman left the Los Angeles Police Department and has denied planting 
any evidence, maintaining, “There was never a shred, never a hint, never a 
possibility—not a remote, not a million, not a billion-to-one possibility—I 
could have planted anything. Nor would I have reason to.”
Learning Objectives
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• Describe how the prosecutor evaluates a case when deciding if it should be filed.
• List what precautions must be taken to ensure that physical evidence will be 
admissible in court.
• Explain the process for subpoenaing witnesses.
• Identify the proper dress and demeanor of a peace officer in court.
• Describe what contacts an officer should have with lawyers, witnesses, and jurors.
• Explain how an officer should deal with the media.
Myths about Criminal Court 
Proceedings
Facts about Criminal Court 
Proceedings
If a person is arrested or given a citation, 
the case will automatically be prosecuted 
and he or she must stand trial for all the 
offenses alleged by the police.
The decision whether or not to prosecute, 
including what charges should be filed, rests 
with the discretion of the prosecutor (or 
grand jury). 
If there is probable cause to arrest a 
person, there is sufficient evidence to 
support a conviction in a criminal trial.
Although probable cause is necessary for 
an arrest, the standard for a conviction is 
higher. There must be sufficient evidence 
to satisfy each element of a crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt to obtain a conviction.
Criminal cases sometimes take a long time 
to get to trial because the prosecution has 
to finish its investigation and has requested 
repeated continuances of the trial.
The accused enjoys a right to a speedy trial. 
Absent extraordinary circumstances, long 
delays in proceeding to trial usually require a 
waiver by the accused. Many delays are due 
to a defense request. 

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
439
Introduction
It is very important that a peace officer know the law of arrest, search and 
seizure, and confessions while working in the field. Proper techniques for 
preserving physical evidence at the crime scene are crucial. Understanding 
what is relevant and who is competent to testify are important in deciding 
to seek a criminal complaint.
Learning all of these things, however, may be wasted if the officer 
does not know how to prepare the case for trial. This is true even though 
many cases are plea bargained and never go to trial. If defense attorneys 
sense that the police cannot convince the jury that the defendant is guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt, they usually will not persuade their clients to 
plea bargain. This chapter is designed to help police officers understand 
their duties in preparing the case for court.
Reviewing Facts of the Case
Police must have probable cause in order to make an arrest. The report 
prepared soon after the arrest is made normally sets out the facts used to 
establish it. Supplemental reports usually detail what is discovered after 
the arrest. All of these reports must be reviewed in order to determine 
what charges should be sought.
Reviewing the case in preparation for presenting it to the prosecutor 
requires objectivity. Police sometimes make errors. Frequently, these errors 
are caused by the stress of fast-breaking events. Constitutional rights may 
have been violated. Becoming defensive and denying the mistakes that 
were made will not delude an experienced prosecutor. Officers given the 
responsibility for presenting cases to the prosecutor must be able to review 
the case file and determine what evidence is admissible. Based on this, they 
should decide what charges to seek. This, of course, requires a good work-
ing knowledge of the penal code or other relevant statutes.
Most prosecutors carry a heavy case load. Due to this and other fac-
tors, they usually do not want to file cases that they cannot win. Judges 
may also pressure prosecutors not to waste court time on weak or trivial 
cases. Prosecutors are more concerned with determining whether or not a 
jury will convict the defendant.
Probable cause to make an arrest is not a sufficient reason to file crimi-
nal charges. A conviction requires much stronger evidence than what is 
needed for a valid arrest. To arrest someone, there must be probable cause, 
which means it is more likely than not that the person committed the 
crime. At a minimum, this equates to 51% certainty. To convict, there must 

440 
Chapter 16
be proof beyond a reasonable doubt. Although the jurors do not need to 
feel 100% sure, the facts need to make them feel approximately 95% sure 
that the defendant is guilty. Figure 16-1 illustrates how the strength of 
evidence is related to the likelihood of getting a conviction.
The facts should be carefully assessed to determine if each element of 
each charge sought can be established beyond a reasonable doubt. If there 
is a doubt, lesser included offenses should be considered. For suspects who 
are on probation or parole, the potential sentence for the current offense 
should be weighed against the consequences of revoking probation/parole. 
The person asking the prosecutor to file charges should be able to dis-
cuss the request in detail and provide the criminal history of the suspect. 
Habitually requesting charges that cannot be supported by the evidence 
only decreases the credibility of the police department in the eyes of the 
prosecutor.
Outlining the charges is very helpful. A computer database is useful for 
this purpose. A convenient layout for reviewing the charges is a screen with 
three columns. Figure 16-2 shows a sample screen. In the first column, 
enter every element of each charge sought. In the second column, opposite 
each element, note all evidence that can be used to establish it. The third 
column is used for comments related to strengths and/or weaknesses of 
the evidence. Any other important facts should also be noted. If a comput-
erized system is not available, these comments can be made on 5 × 8-inch 
cards. The database or cards should be updated as new evidence develops 
Figure 16-1
Likelihood of Conviction
'	
'$
$		
%
"			


()*

)+*

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
441
in the case. If this is done, the case can easily be reviewed when it is time 
to prepare for trial.
Credibility of the witnesses is critical. The fact that the investigating 
officer believes the witness is not enough. The jury must also believe him 
or her. Objectively advising the prosecutor of factors that enhance or 
detract from the credibility of witnesses is important. Hiding weaknesses 
of the witnesses from the prosecutor will not help win the case. Defense 
attorneys specialize in demolishing the credibility of weak witnesses.
Working with the Prosecutor
In addition to investigating the case and asking the prosecutor to file the 
charges, the police are usually responsible for preserving the physical evi-
dence and serving subpoenas on witnesses. Both of these tasks have one 
thing in common—keeping track of the location of potential evidence.
Figure 16-2
Sample Computer Screen for Outline of Charge
Case No. 08-1234
Court File No.
SE 66-44-22
Suspect: George Green
Charge:
Burglary
Other cases pending against suspect:
08-1111 (murder)
Other facts: Burglary reported on 1/2/08. Victim had been out of town from
12/24/07 to 1/2/08. No eyewitnesses. John Smith has prior perjury conviction.
Suspect was a friend of Smith until 12/20/07 when they had a violent argument.
Suspect frequently visited Smith at his home while they were friends and may
have left fingerprints prior to the date the crime occurred.
Intent
Elements of Offense
Evidence
Comments
Pry marks on door.
Suspect’s fingerprints
found on drawer where
cash was kept in house.
Unable to match pry
marks to items in
evidence.
Suspect had access to
house before forced
entry occurred.
Home of John Smith
123 Broadway
Theft of following items
from the dwelling:
Stereo, TV, and $500
Entry
Structure
No ID numbers on TV

442 
Chapter 16
Preparing Physical Evidence
In order to introduce physical evidence at trial, the prosecutor must know 
where the item has been, who has had access to it, and anything that has 
been done with it since it came into police custody. This will be needed to 
establish the “chain of custody” prior to admitting the item into evidence.
The prosecutor also needs to know the evidentiary significance of 
each piece of physical evidence. Probably the two most important facts 
will be where each item of evidence was found and what tests have been 
done on each item. For example, the bullet was taken from the brain of 
the deceased during an autopsy, and ballistic tests show it was fired from 
the gun found in the defendant’s possession at the time of her arrest. 
Once again, it is very important to keep the prosecutor advised of all facts 
related to the physical evidence.
If the police tell the prosecutor about the positive tests conducted at 
the forensics laboratory but do not mention the negative tests, the prosecu-
tor may falsely believe the case is very strong. Facts not known to the pros-
ecutor may also give the defense an added edge during cross-examination. 
In fact, the prosecutor’s lack of knowledge may even result in dismissal of 
the case if the defense can convince the judge that it was denied its consti-
tutional right to discovery.
Physical evidence is prone to motions to suppress based on illegal 
search and seizure. For this reason, the prosecutor needs to know all the 
facts on how each item was obtained.
Keeping track of all of the previously mentioned details for each item of 
potential evidence is not easy, particularly when an item may be relevant to 
two or more crimes or there are multiple suspects. A computerized database 
is ideally suited for this task. Each time an event, such as a new court date or 
results of a laboratory test, is entered, every screen that uses that informa-
tion will be updated. Figure 16-3 presents a sample screen. If a card system 
is used, the information will have to be posted to each card involved.
The database, whether electronic or paper, should contain sections for 
the following: 
1. Description of item
2. Where it was obtained
3. Facts justifying its seizure
4. Chain of custody
5. Tests that have been performed
Adequate space for other information that may be useful should also be 
provided. If the computer database is kept current on each item of evidence, 
the officer should be able to answer any questions the prosecutor may have.

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
443
Witnesses
Many prosecutors will ask the police for a list of witnesses. If time permits, 
a meeting may be set up to discuss which witnesses should be called. The 
prosecutor’s office usually handles the paperwork for issuing subpoenas. 
The police frequently are asked to serve the subpoenas.
The prosecutor must be prepared for the impeachment of his or her 
witnesses. This requires a thorough knowledge of witnesses’ backgrounds, 
including prior statements to police about the case, previous arrests, and 
convictions. Other problems, such as poor eyesight or hearing, must also 
be brought to the prosecutor’s attention. A thoroughly prepared case 
Figure 16-3
Sample Computer Screen for Physical Evidence
Case No. 08-1234
Court File No.
SE 66-44-22
Suspect: George Green
Charge:
Burglary
Other cases pending against suspect:
08-1111 (murder)
Evidence Tag No.
08-04
Location:
Bin 387
Description of item:
RCA portable stereo model 345678X23.
Where obtained:
In possession of George Green at time of his arrest.
Justification for seizure: Suspect stopped for running a red light. Record check
showed that suspect had outstanding warrant. Search of car incident to arrest
on warrant revealed RCA portable stereo listed above. Serial number run by
dispatcher and found to match item stolen during burglary reported by John
Smith on 1/2/08.
Chain of custody: Officer David A. Doe seized item on 1/2/08 at time of arrest
and ran serial number. He sealed item in plastic and stored in station evidence
locker bin 387. Officer Jane E. Jones removed item from evidence locker 1/4/08
and checked it for fingerprints. She sealed it in plastic and returned it to evidence
locker bin 387 on 1/4/08. Item taken to forensics laboratory on 1/8/08 by Officer
Sam Smith. Blood and tissue scrapings taken from item at forensics lab. Officer
Sam Smith sealed it in plastic and returned it to evidence locker bin 387 on
1/10/08.
Tests performed: Fingerprints on item do not match suspect’s prints; unable
to identify fingerprints. Blood tests show the presence of human blood type O
positive. Tissue samples: inconclusive.
Comments: Suspect had several recent bruises at time of arrest and matched
description of person who was involved in a fight in the parking lot of Joe’s Pool
Hall on 1/1/08. One person was shot during that altercation who had type O
positive blood.  See Case No. 08-1111.

444 
Chapter 16
includes notations about evidence that can be introduced to rehabilitate 
the witnesses. This obviously means that officers must be familiar with the 
rules for impeachment and rehabilitation.
Once again, the police should keep accurate records on what a witness 
can testify about and where the witness can be located. The computer data-
base that already contains the outline of the charges and the description 
of the physical evidence can also be used for this information. Figure 16-4 
shows a sample screen. It should contain at least three things: 
1. Current address of witness and other places witness might be found
2. Facts witness can testify about
3. Strengths and weaknesses of witness
It is quite possible that witnesses will move while the case is awaiting 
trial. If a key witness cannot be located, the case may have to be dismissed 
or result in an acquittal. This places one more burden on the police—
keeping track of the witnesses. Addresses and telephone numbers must be 
kept current. Many courts now have victim–witness specialists who help 
with this, but the police cannot neglect these details if they hope to win 
the case.
Figure 16-4
Sample Computer Screen for Witness
Case No.
08-1111
Court File No.
SE 66-44-22
Defendant:
George Green
Charge:
Murder
Witness:
Suzie Q. Adams
Other cases involving witness:
none
Other cases pending against this suspect:
08-1234 (burglary)
Home address:
Work address:
789 E. Main St.
543 S. First St.
Anytown, CA
Anytown, CA
(123) 456-7890
(123) 987-6543
Works 9-5 weekdays
Other places to locate witness:
Mother lives at 399 S. Tenth St., Anytown (123) 246-8102.
Witness frequents Joe’s Pool Hall.
Testimony: Ms. Adams was a customer at Joe’s Pool Hall on 1/1/08. She was
interviewed by the police 15 minutes after the shooting and described the assailant
as a 5’10” tall white male weighing 200 lbs., wearing a green turtleneck sweater and
blue jeans.  She picked George Green out of a line-up held on 1/3/08.
Strengths and Weaknesses: Ms. Adams admitted having 4 drinks between 9:00
p.m. and midnight on 1/1/08. She is an LVN who works in a doctor’s office and
routinely takes heights and weights of patients.

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
445
Unfortunately, some witnesses become frustrated with the court pro-
ceedings and decide not to cooperate with the investigation. Frequent trips 
to the courthouse, particularly if they appear unnecessary because the defen-
dant obtained a continuance, discourage witnesses. Once again, the burden 
falls on the police. Sometimes victim–witness assistance programs can help. 
Inconvenience to the victim should be reduced as much as possible. Positive 
attitudes are important. A witness who feels that he or she is on trial or being 
unfairly treated by “the system” may testify unfavorably at trial.
Witnesses who cannot remember crucial events complicate the court 
proceedings. In major cases, it is good police procedure to talk with all 
witnesses a few days before trial or other court appearances in order to 
determine what they can recall. Attempts may be made to refresh their 
memories, but officers must never give the appearance of coaching the 
witness on what to say. Officers should have a working knowledge of both 
“present memory refreshed” and “past recollection recorded” when talk-
ing with these witnesses. The prosecutor must be made aware of these 
potential problems so tactical decisions can be made on how to handle the 
case. Another type of problem is presented if the witness alters his or her 
testimony or refuses to testify. Although a subpoena will give the court the 
power to force the witness to take the stand, the prosecutor needs to be 
aware of these problems in advance so a decision can be made on whether 
or not to risk calling the witness to the stand. Some states still follow the 
common law rule that you cannot impeach your own witness. Under this 
rule, the prosecutor could not try to show a prosecution witness is lying or 
has a poor memory. Even if the state will allow the prosecutor to impeach 
the witness, the extra time and testimony may not be worth the effort. 
There is always a hazard that the jury may believe the untruthful answer. 
It may also confuse the jury or convince them that the case is weak.
If police officers suspect a witness plans to lie, they can warn him or 
her of the penalty for perjury. The prosecutor should be alerted immedi-
ately. Police protection and restraining orders can be sought if a witness 
is being harassed or intimidated. However, the fact that the witness may 
be prosecuted for perjury or the defendant charged with intimidating the 
witness is not much help at this stage. The jury cannot be told of these 
possibilities.
Dress and Demeanor
During the investigation of the crime, officers focus on obtaining the facts. 
The prosecutor screens the case to determine if there is sufficient evidence 
to prove the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. Officers must not forget 

446 
Chapter 16
another important role of the jury—to assess the credibility of the witnesses. 
“Truth” does not always win if the jurors have a negative impression of the 
witness. This includes the officers who testify. For this reason, it is impor-
tant that each officer consider his or her own appearance and demeanor 
when preparing for court.
Appearance
“Dress for success,” the “power suit,” and many other expressions reflect 
the importance of a person’s physical appearance in business situations. 
The same is true in the courtroom. The jury’s first impression of the wit-
ness will be based on physical appearance. For many jurors, this may be the 
single most important factor used to weigh the testimony. Good grooming 
is therefore crucial.
Officers who do not wear a uniform in their normal assignment, such 
as detectives, usually appear in court in civilian clothing. Opinions differ 
on whether patrol officers should testify in uniform. Some believe that the 
public respects law enforcement officers, and the uniform adds credibility 
to the witness. Others believe that a uniformed officer, especially one vis-
ibly wearing a gun, smacks of authoritarianism and has a negative impact 
on jurors. Community attitudes toward the police will have a lot to do 
with determining what an officer should wear. Formal or informal policies 
of the police department or prosecutor’s office may provide guidance.
Whether the officer wears a uniform or civilian clothes, the clothing 
should be clean, neat, and fit appropriately. Jurors may infer that an officer 
who dresses in a sloppy manner is also sloppy in investigating the crime 
and handling the evidence.
If civilian clothing is worn, it is best to dress in conservative business 
attire. Flamboyant and gaudy clothing detracts from what the witness says. 
Officers must look professional. What is considered appropriate in a large, 
metropolitan area may be out of place in a rural farming community and 
vice versa.
The same rule applies to all aspects of the officer’s appearance. Jewelry, 
cosmetics, and fragrances should be appropriate for a daytime business 
meeting. Hair, beards, and mustaches should be neatly styled in an appro-
priate manner. Even fingernails should be inspected to make sure they are 
clean and properly manicured.
Demeanor
The courtroom places high demands on the officer’s professionalism. Each 
officer needs to remain polite and civil to everyone involved. The officer 

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
447
should be an unbiased pursuer of truth, not a persecutor of the defendant. 
This is not easy under cross-examination when the defense is trying to make 
painstaking detectives appear to be incompetent liars or “Keystone Cops.”
Each officer must realize that the attorneys in the case are playing the 
roles assigned them by the criminal justice system. It is the duty of the defense 
attorney to impeach each witness if possible. During cross-examination, 
the officer should try to remember that the defense is not attacking him or 
her personally, although it may appear to be so at the time.
Good grammar is essential. Jurors may judge the intelligence of the 
witness by the grammar used. Vocabulary is also important. Each officer 
needs to select words that accurately answer the attorney’s questions. A 
varied vocabulary also helps keep the jurors from being bored. Excessively 
technical language and police jargon (“cop talk”) may confuse the jurors. 
Therefore, officers should avoid language that would not be understood 
by the average person.
While testifying, officers must make certain that they understand 
the question before answering it. If necessary, they should ask to have it 
repeated. Misinterpreting the question, or answering before the question 
has been completely stated, can result in testimony that confuses the jury. 
It can also make the officer look foolish and/or dishonest. Either of these 
impressions is damaging to credibility. A good witness pauses briefly after 
a question has been asked for three reasons: to allow time to think about 
the question, to give the jury the impression that the witness is thought-
fully deciding what to say, and to allow the attorneys time to make appro-
priate objections to the question before the answer is heard by the jury.
Most people, including jurors, dislike arrogance. Even though the offi-
cer firmly believes that he or she has conducted a perfect investigation and 
the defendant is obviously guilty, the officer must not appear smug while 
testifying. Care should also be taken to avoid letting the defense attorney 
lead the officer into stating that he or she never makes errors. This is a favor-
ite tactic used to make small mistakes in the investigation look bigger.
Another trap officers fall into is appearing to be “professional wit-
nesses.” Due to frequent court appearances, most veteran officers develop 
set patterns of speech while on the stand. Many appear to be almost tes-
tifying from rote memory. Some use short, clipped sentences spoken in a 
monotone. Defense attorneys like to infer that the testimony is less than 
honest because it appears to be memorized and used in case after case. 
This type of testimony may also cause jurors to become bored and uncon-
sciously allow their attention to drift away from what is being said.
Any appearance of personal animosity toward the defendant or 
defense attorney should be avoided. It is the officer’s duty to bring the 

448 
Chapter 16
guilty to justice, not to have a personal vendetta against criminal sus-
pects. Although most jurors have a general knowledge of the role of 
police in our society, they may favor the “underdog.” If the “poor little 
defendant” is being picked on by the “mean policeman,” the jurors may 
side with the defendant. Additionally, an officer who displays ill will 
toward the defendant is a prime candidate for impeachment on bias. The 
defense will strongly imply to the jury that the officer is either lying or 
exaggerating.
No one is expected to have total recall. “Present memory refreshed” 
was designed to help people recall things that had slipped from their 
memory. A witness should be ready to honestly admit refreshing his or 
her memory. The prosecutor should be prepared to ask relevant questions 
to show that this was legitimately done. Redirect can be used to show that 
the officer has not merely memorized an old police report or made up the 
testimony to conveniently fit the facts that have already been admitted into 
evidence. During closing arguments, the prosecutor can emphasize the 
fact that any normal person forgets from time to time.
Example of Present Memory Refreshed
Prosecutor:   Ms. Adams, do you clearly recall what happened on January 4, 
2008?
Ms. Adams: Yes, I do.
Prosecutor: 
 Have you done anything to help you remember the events that 
occurred that day?
Ms. Adams:  Yes. I read the journal entries that I wrote that day, and the next 
day, too. Oh, I also read the newspaper clippings that I kept in the 
pocket of my journal.
Prosecutor: 
Have you talked to anyone about the events in question?
Ms. Adams: Yes, I talked to Det. Dawson.
Prosecutor: 
 I don’t want you to repeat what the detective said, but can you tell 
us what you discussed with Det. Dawson?
Ms. Adams:  Well, he stopped by where I work. He asked if I remembered what 
happened. When I said I didn’t remember it all, he let me read the 
police report.
Prosecutor: 
 So you refreshed your memory by reading your journal, the 
newspaper clippings, and the police report?
Ms. Adams: Yes.
Prosecutor: 
Did you talk to anyone else about it?
Ms. Adams: No, just Det. Dawson.
Prosecutor: 
 And at this time, right now in court, you clearly recall what 
happened that day?
Ms. Adams: Yes.

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
449
Demeanor off the witness stand is also important. Jurors frequently 
see the witnesses in the halls and elevators, and even the courthouse 
cafeteria and parking lot. If they observe horseplay, lewd remarks, and 
off-color jokes, they may decide the officer is immature or prejudiced and 
lose respect for the officer. Any negative impression may affect the weight 
given the officer’s testimony. Care should be taken to make a favorable 
impression at all times.
Contacts with Lawyers, Witnesses, and Jurors
The police usually have more contact with the prosecutor than anyone else 
in the courtroom. Sometimes friction develops between them. Officers 
who have conducted a lengthy investigation may be upset to find that the 
prosecutor is not totally familiar with the case. Sometimes there is a dif-
ference of opinion on the tactics the prosecutor is using or anger about 
how the prosecutor’s office has previously handled cases. No matter what 
type of problem arises, it is essential that it not come to the attention of 
the defense attorney or jurors.
It is a good idea, if possible, to talk about the case with the prosecutor 
before court begins. This should be done in a location where privacy is 
assured so that the case can be thoroughly discussed. During trial, it may 
be necessary to write messages on a legal pad or pass notes to the pros-
ecutor. This should be done in as unobtrusive a manner as possible. The 
jury’s attention needs to remain focused on the witness and not on what 
is happening at the prosecutor’s table.
Attorneys who come to the police station to talk with their clients 
may attempt to discuss the case with the officers. Once the defendant has 
been arraigned, however, the defense attorney should deal directly with 
the prosecutor. Police officers must direct any communications from the 
defense attorney or defendant to the prosecutor. Attempts by the prosecu-
tor or police to contact the defendant directly are viewed as interfering 
with the attorney–client relationship. During this time period, if the police 
need to contact the defense attorney or defendant, it is necessary to chan-
nel communications through the prosecutor’s office. Figure 16-5 illus-
trates the flow of communication after arraignment between the people 
involved in a case.
Cordial relationships between officers and attorneys are necessary in 
court. Even though the defense attorney is obviously trying to defeat the 
case, officers must remain polite. There are two reasons for this. One is that 
those who work in the criminal justice system should respect each others’ 

450 
Chapter 16
professionalism. The other is the jury. If jurors observe open hostility 
against the defense, they may decide the officers lack objectivity and their 
testimony is biased.
Impressions the jurors might receive also mandate avoiding exces-
sive familiarity with the defense counsel and other courtroom personnel. 
Watching a group of good friends merely going through the motions of 
a trial may convince the jurors that the case is a sham or that it does not 
Figure 16-5
Communication with Defendant after Arraignment
$
$
	
	


	


	


	

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
451
deserve to be taken seriously. Either of these opinions is bound to hurt the 
prosecution’s case during jury deliberations.
Witnesses for both sides must be treated with common courtesy. This 
is important to maintain the dignity of the court proceeding as well as to 
avoid biasing the jury. On the other hand, constantly talking to the wit-
nesses may convince the jurors that the police are setting up the testimony. 
This must be avoided.
Victims and witnesses frequently complain that they are forgotten 
by the criminal justice system. Keeping them informed of the progress of 
the case is important. Familiarizing witnesses with the court procedures 
before they are called to testify may help them better understand what 
is happening. It cannot be assumed that witnesses can learn the process 
by arriving early and watching the court proceedings; witnesses are usu-
ally excluded from the courtroom until they testify. Comfortable waiting 
rooms should be provided at the courthouse. All possible efforts should be 
made to avoid unnecessarily subpoenaing them. On-call subpoenas reduce 
the amount of time spent idly waiting in the courthouse or taking time off 
work to go to court only to find that the case has been continued. 
Whenever officers are in the courthouse, they must be alert to the pres-
ence of jurors. When not in the jury box, they may be almost anywhere. 
Jurors should only hear about the case from the witness stand. If they 
overhear conversations about the case, particularly relating to suppressed 
evidence, it may cause a mistrial. Jurors have been known to stop officers 
in the hall and ask about the evidence in the case. A polite explanation that 
the rules do not allow the officer to answer these types of questions must be 
given. The officer must remember two things: Never answer the out-of-court 
questions, and never be rude to the jurors.
Example of Officer Contact with Juror 
A woman approaches a uniformed officer in the hallway outside the courtroom.
Juror: 
Officer! Officer!
Officer:
Yes, Ma’am.
Juror: 
 I have a question about what you said in court. Did you find anything 
when you searched that man?
Officer: 
I’m sorry, ma’am, but I can’t answer any questions.
Juror: 
But this is important. What was in his pocket?
Officer: 
 I can’t answer anything outside of court. I know you would like to 
know that, but the jury is only allowed to consider the facts that are 
introduced in the trial. Jurors aren’t allowed to ask witnesses questions 
outside of court. Please don’t think I am being rude, but I must go 
now so there is no appearance of impropriety. 

452 
Chapter 16
Press Coverage
The First Amendment governs freedom of the press. The Supreme Court 
has affirmed the media’s right to cover almost all criminal court hearings, 
but the media may be excluded in juvenile cases. A judge must give strong 
justification whenever part of a hearing is closed.
On the other hand, prejudicial pretrial publicity may endanger a con-
viction. The Supreme Court has allowed narrowly defined “gag” orders 
that prevent parties to the case, including attorneys and the police, from 
commenting to the media. Again, a strong justification is needed to make 
these orders. The Supreme Court has also upheld the constitutionality of 
state bar disciplinary rules that prohibit attorneys from making statements 
to the press that pose a substantial likelihood of prejudicing the case.
Most cases do not arouse sufficient media curiosity to be a problem. 
For this reason, many officers are unprepared for those cases that do. 
Each department needs guidelines on how to handle the media. Every 
officer must be familiar with them. Courtesy is required because an angry 
reporter can distort the facts and make the police appear incompetent, 
vindictive, or corrupt.
Care must also be taken to avoid “trying the case in the press.” 
Statements given to reporters must be accurate, but the facts should be 
carefully reviewed to avoid inflammatory statements. It is usually wise to 
avoid disclosing the contents of confessions due to the sensationalism they 
may cause. Publication of a confession that is later held inadmissible runs 
a high likelihood of endangering the objectivity of the jury and causing a 
reversal of the conviction. This also applies to items that may have been 
seized illegally. Few juries are sequestered during the entire trial. Although 
the judge instructs the jurors to avoid listening to radio or television 
accounts of the case or reading about it in newspapers, the possibility 
of a juror finding out about the coverage of the case in the media must 
be considered. The police should avoid giving statements to the media 
during trial. A mistrial could be declared or a conviction reversed if a juror 
learned about these out-of-court statements before reaching a verdict.
Summary
S u m m a r y
Officers must carefully review the facts of the case prior to presenting it to the 
prosecutor for filing. They must be sure that there is evidence to establish prob-
able cause for each element of the crime. The same is true when preparing for the 
trial: The prosecutor must consider the best way to use the available evidence to 

 
Preparing the Case for Court 
453
establish every element of the offense(s) beyond a reasonable doubt. Witnesses must 
be available to establish the chain of custody for each item of physical evidence. The 
evidentiary value of each item must be analyzed after considering all available infor-
mation, including the results of any laboratory tests that were performed.
 
All physical evidence must be reviewed and the chain of custody must be estab-
lished for each item. Evidentiary value must also be determined after reviewing all 
relevant information. including the results of forensic laboratory tests that were 
conducted.
 
Information must be maintained on each potential witness. It is important to 
know both what the witness is competent to testify about and where the witness 
can be located. It may also be necessary to interview each witness again to test his 
or her memory if there has been a lengthy delay between the occurrence of the 
crime and the trial.
 
Officers must appear neat and well groomed in court. Good grammar and 
vocabulary are important. Testimony must be in language the jurors can under-
stand and not laced with police jargon. Overt hostility toward the defendant is 
unprofessional and may cause the jurors to become protective of the defendant.
 
Once a case has been filed, there should be no direct communication between 
the police and the defense attorney or the defendant unless the prosecution has 
authorized it. Requests for discovery and other information must be channeled 
through the prosecutor.
 
Victims and witnesses should be afforded every professional courtesy. 
Subpoenaing them for court hearings should be restricted as much as possible in 
order to avoid causing them inconvenience. They should be kept informed on the 
progress of the case and their role in all court proceedings.
 
Officers must be cautious to avoid contact with jurors. Although jurors must 
be treated courteously, they should not be given any opportunity to hear out-
of-court conversations related to the case. Any request they have for additional 
information must be given to the judge—direct communications with the police 
are prohibited during trial.
 
The First Amendment gives the media the right to cover criminal trials, but the 
Sixth Amendment gives the defendant the right to an impartial jury. Prejudicial 
pretrial publicity must be avoided. Accurate descriptions of the crimes may be 
released to the media, but sensationalism may cause a mistrial. Any evidence that 
has a high potential for suppression because of the methods used to obtain it 
(Miranda violations, search and seizure problems, etc.) should not be disclosed. 
Any information to be released to the media should be funneled through press 
relations officers who are trained to deal with these situations.
Review Questions
R e v i e w  Q u e s t i o n s
 1.  Describe how an officer should evaluate the facts in a case prior to taking it 
to the prosecutor for filing.
2.  What facts are necessary to establish the chain of custody for physical 
evidence? Explain.

454 
Chapter 16
3.  What information does an officer need to maintain on potential witnesses 
in a case? How are subpoenas obtained for witnesses? Explain.
4.  How should an officer dress and act in court? Explain.
5.  List three things that may cause jurors to discredit the testimony of an 
officer.
6.  Describe the relationship that should exist during trial between the defense 
attorney, the defendant, and the police.
7.  Explain what can be done to help the witnesses prepare for trial.
8.  How should an officer handle contacts with the jurors outside the 
courtroom? Explain.
9.  Should the media have access to everything in the police department’s files 
about the investigation of a crime? Explain.
10.  Do members of the media have a constitutional right to be present during 
trial? Explain.
Writing Assignment
W r i t i n g  A s s i g n m e n t
Use the Internet (www.findlaw.com) to research the different stages associated 
with a criminal case, including arrest, booking and bail, arraignment, plea bar-
gaining, preliminary hearing, pretrial motions, trial, sentencing, and appeals. 
In 250 words or less (one page), summarize what happens and describe the 
respective roles of police officers, prosecutors, and defense attorneys at each 
stage of the proceedings.

GLOSSARY
A
abandoned property Items that have been discarded and currently do 
not belong to anyone are referred to as abandoned property. The Fourth 
Amendment does not prevent searches of abandoned property; neither 
probable cause nor reasonable suspicion is required to do this type of search.
administrative warrant (or administrative search warrant) An administrative 
warrant is required to conduct a noncriminal inspection when consent has 
not been given. The probable cause requirement is met by showing a judge 
that there is a reasonable legislative purpose for authorizing the inspection. 
Administrative warrants are used for inspections related to health and safety 
regulations, building and fire codes, and other noncriminal governmental 
functions. If the investigation is being done because there is suspicion that 
criminal activity is occurring on the premises, a regular search warrant is 
required.
Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule The Admissions Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule makes a statement admissible if (1) it was made by a person 
who is a party to the lawsuit (in a criminal case, the defendant), and (2) the 
statement is used against the person who made it.
adoptive admission An adoptive admission (also called a tacit admission) 
refers to actions that indicate a person is adopting a statement made by 
someone else. If a person remains silent after being accused of wrongdoing 
in circumstances in which an innocent person would be expected to deny 
the allegation, it is assumed that the person is admitting that the statement is 
true. Adoptive admissions are admissible if they meet the criteria established 
in the Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule.
aerial searches Aerial searches involve observations made from helicopters 
and airplanes. As long as the flight is in public air space and in compliance 
with FAA rules, there is no need to obtain a warrant or have probable cause 
to justify the intrusion. This rule applies even though the observed items 
were in the backyard of a residence surrounded by a high fence.
455

456 
Glossary
affidavit An affidavit is a written statement signed under oath or penalty of 
perjury. When officers seek arrest warrants and search warrants, they must 
give the judge affidavits containing enough facts to establish probable cause.
ancient documents Older documents may be admissible without calling 
witnesses to authenticate them if there are no indications that the documents 
have been altered or tampered with. State law varies, but documents more 
than 30 years old are usually referred to as “ancient documents.” There is a 
separate exception to the Hearsay Rule that permits these documents to be 
admitted at trial. 
Ancient Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule A document is admissible 
under the Ancient Documents Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets three 
criteria: (1) The document appears to be genuine, (2) people have acted as 
if it is genuine, and (3) it is at least as old as required by the legislature. State 
legislatures typically require that the document in question be at least 20–30 
years old.
anonymous informant A person who provides the police with information 
but does not give his or her name is called an anonymous informant.
apparent authority When requesting permission to conduct a search, officers 
may rely on consent given by a person with apparent authority over the area. 
If it reasonably appears to the officers that the person has authority over the 
area, the search will be valid even though the person misled the officers about 
his or her power to give consent.
arraignment The arraignment is the first court appearance in a criminal 
case. At the arraignment the defendant is informed of the charges, a plea 
is entered, bail is set (if it is a bailable offense), the defendant is given 
the opportunity to obtain an attorney, and the next court date is set. The 
right to counsel “attaches” at arraignment—the defendant has the right to 
have counsel present during any meeting with police or prosecutor after 
arraignment as well as during all court appearances.
arrest warrant An arrest warrant authorizes any peace officer to arrest a 
specific person for committing a specific crime. Obtaining an arrest warrant 
tolls the statute of limitations and extends the period of time during which 
an arrest may be made. In order to obtain an arrest warrant, affidavits must 
be presented to a judge that establish probable cause that a crime has been 
committed and probable cause that a specific person committed the crime. 
Information must be included describing the suspect so that the arresting 
officer can determine that the correct person is being arrested.
at issue Something is “at issue” in a case if it is disputed. If the defendant 
pleads “not guilty,” all facts necessary to establish the crime are “at issue.” If 
the defense stipulates to facts, those facts are no longer “at issue.” Example: 
In a rape case involving an attack by a stranger, the identity of the attacker 
is “at issue” and DNA tests can be introduced at trial to establish that semen 
recovered at the scene came from the defendant. In a “date rape” case in 
which consent of the victim is at issue but the identity of the person who had 

Glossary 
457
sex with the victim is not, DNA tests would be inadmissible because their 
only purpose is to establish a fact that is not “at issue.”
attorney–client privilege A client can prevent his or her attorney from 
testifying regarding information the client revealed in confidence. Key terms: 
(1) attorney: a person the client reasonably believes is licensed to practice 
law; (2) client: a person who consults with an attorney for the purpose of 
obtaining legal advice; (3) what is covered: confidential communications 
between attorney and client regarding the legal services sought; (4) who 
holds the privilege: client. Exceptions:  Attorney’s opinion sought to help a 
person commit a crime or escape punishment is not privileged.
authentication Authentication is showing that a writing (document) is what 
it is claimed to be.
authorized admission An authorized admission is a statement made by a 
person who is authorized to speak on behalf of another person. Example: A 
statement by the CEO of Company X is admissible against Company X at 
trial. These statements are admissible if they meet the criteria established in 
the Admissions Exception to the Hearsay Rule.
B
ballistics expert A ballistics expert is a person with specialized training and 
experience in testing weapons and ammunition.
beyond a reasonable doubt Proof “beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof that 
leaves the jury firmly convinced. In criminal cases, the accused’s guilt must be 
established “beyond a reasonable doubt.”
blood alcohol Blood alcohol tests determine the percentage of alcohol in 
the blood. This test is frequently used to establish that a person was driving 
under the influence of alcohol but may be used in any case in which 
intoxication is at issue. To be relevant, the blood sample must be taken in 
a medically approved manner as soon after the crime as possible.
body fluids Body fluids include blood, urine, semen, etc. A suspect cannot use 
the Fifth Amendment as a reason to refuse to provide samples of body fluids 
to be used for laboratory tests.
booking process exception to Miranda An officer or clerk who is filling out 
a booking slip may ask the suspect for name, address, and other necessary 
information without giving Miranda warnings. Extensive questioning would 
require Miranda warnings and a waiver. 
booking search The search done at the time a person is booked into the jail 
can include a thorough search of the person as well as anything the person 
has in his or her possession at that time. Any containers carried by the person 
being booked can be searched. Skin searches and body cavity searches are 
permitted based on U.S. Supreme Court decisions, but some states restrict 
searches of people booked solely on misdemeanor charges.
burden of persuasion While the prosecution has the burden of proof in 
criminal cases on almost all issues, the defense has the burden of persuasion. 

458 
Glossary
The prosecution must prove the defendant’s guilt. The defense does not have 
to prove that the defendant is innocent, but it must persuade the jury that 
the prosecution has not established the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable 
doubt. This can be done by discrediting prosecution witness and/or calling 
defense witnesses.
burden of proof Proof that precludes every reasonable hypothesis except that 
which the law requires for the case. In a criminal case, the accused’s guilt 
must be established “beyond a reasonable doubt,” which means that facts 
proven must, by virtue of their probative [tending to prove] force, establish 
guilt.
Business Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule A document is admissible 
under the Business Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets five 
criteria: (1) It was made at or near the time of the underlying event; (2) it 
was made by, or from information transmitted by, a person with first-hand 
knowledge acquired in the course of a regularly conducted business activity; 
(3) it was made and kept entirely in the course of a regularly conducted 
business activity; (4) it was made pursuant to a regular practice of that 
business activity; and (5) all the above are shown by the testimony of the 
custodian of the business records or other qualified witness.
C
canine searches Searches by reliable, trained dogs can be used to establish 
probable cause. If there is a reasonable suspicion that luggage at an airport or 
other location contains drugs, it may be detained briefly to allow a narcotics-
trained dog to sniff it.
case law Case law is the collection of appellate court opinions. Lawyers and 
judges study case law in order to find opinions that are relevant to the 
current case. Based on stare decisis, these decisions are binding on lower 
courts until reversed, vacated, or overruled.
chain of custody The chain of custody (also called chain of possession or 
continuity of possession) accounts for everyone who has had possession of 
an item of real evidence from the time it came into police custody until it is 
introduced into court. It is used to show the judge and jury that the evidence 
has not been tampered with.
challenge for cause A challenge for cause is used to remove a prospective 
juror from the jury on the grounds that he or she is unable to decide the case 
solely on the facts admitted at trial and the law the judge will give as jury 
instructions. The attorney’s decision to use a challenge for cause is based on 
juror’s answers to questions during voir dire, and the attorney must be able to 
convince the judge that the juror has formed opinions that will prevent him 
or her from deciding the case on information presented at trial.
character Character describes what a person’s moral traits really are. Since 
there is virtually no way to determine this, reputation is introduced at trial if 
relevant. “Character witnesses” testify about the person’s reputation.

Glossary 
459
charge bargaining Charge bargaining is the process of working out an 
agreement between the prosecution and defense on what charges will be filed. 
Charge bargaining is similar to plea bargaining except that it occurs before 
the charges are filed.
circumstantial evidence Circumstantial evidence indirectly proves a fact. It 
requires the trier of the facts to use an inference or presumption in order to 
conclude that the fact exists.
citizen’s arrest An arrest made by someone who is not a peace officer is 
referred to as a “citizen’s arrest.” Citizenship is not required. The person 
making the arrest must have observed the crime take place and have 
sufficient facts to establish that the person arrested committed the crime. 
Citizen’s arrests are most common in misdemeanors because police officers 
usually lack the authority to make arrests for misdemeanors that were not 
committed in their presence.
Civil Case Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Evidence seized by police 
officers in violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments can be introduced 
in civil cases.
clergy–penitent privilege A penitent may prevent a member of the clergy 
from testifying about what the penitent revealed in confidence. Key terms: 
(1) clergy: priest, minister, or religious practitioner; (2) penitent: person 
who consults clergy for spiritual advice; (3) what is covered: confidential 
communications where the penitent sought spiritual guidance; (4) who holds 
the privilege: both the clergy and the penitent hold this privilege. Exceptions: 
traditionally, none. Some states now require the clergy to report incidents of 
child abuse.
clerk’s transcript The clerk’s transcript is a copy of all documents filed with 
the court in the case, including the entries the clerk made during court days. 
It does not include a verbatim record of what occurred at each hearing.
closed container Any box, suitcase, or other container that can be securely 
closed and thereby hide the contents from view is considered a closed 
container. Under the closed container rule, police officers may seize a closed 
container if they have probable cause to believe that it contains contraband. 
They may not open a closed container until a judge has granted a search 
warrant for that purpose. Exceptions to the closed container rule allow 
officers to open the container without a search warrant. The following 
situations are exceptions to the closed container rule: booking searches, 
search of a vehicle incident to arrest, search of a vehicle based on probable 
cause, search of a vehicle based on reasonable suspicion, and inventory of 
an impounded vehicle. 
competent witness A person is competent to be a witness in court if that 
person (1) understands the duty to tell the truth and (2) can narrate the 
events in question.
computing/digital forensics The specialist in computing/digital forensics 
has extensive training in recovering data as well as many other ways to 

460 
Glossary
search the computer. A Certified Forensics Computer Examiner, or someone 
with similar credentials, has passed examinations given by a professional 
organization in this field. A person who specializes in computing/digital 
forensics can determine if files have been deleted from a computer or other 
digital device. Hidden files can also be found. This includes searching for 
pictures, documents, and e-mail messages.
conclusive presumption A conclusive presumption mandates that the jury 
draw a specific inference if the basic fact has been established. The opposing 
side may try to disprove the basic fact, but it is not allowed to introduce 
evidence to disprove the presumed fact when this type of presumption is used.
confidential communication As used in the law of privileges, any 
communication made in circumstances that protect the confidentiality 
of what is said or done is considered a confidential communication. The 
confidential nature of the communication is not violated if an attorney 
or doctor has necessary office staff present during the communication 
or staff does necessary work on the case. The communication is no 
longer confidential if the holder of the privilege voluntarily discloses the 
information to a person not covered by a privilege.
confidential informant A person who provides information for the police on 
the condition that the police will not disclose his or her identity is called a 
confidential informant.
consent search A consent search is a search based on permission from at least 
one person with apparent authority over the area. If the suspect is present 
and refuses to consent, the fact that another person is willing to consent will 
not constitute valid consent for a search. Consent must be given voluntarily, 
but officers are not required to inform a person about the right to refuse 
consent. Officers do not need probable cause or any other legal justification 
for the search if they have consent.
Contemporaneous Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement 
is admissible under the Contemporaneous Declaration Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule if it meets two criteria: (1) It was made by the declarant to 
explain what he or she was doing, and (2) it was made at the time the 
declarant was performing the act that he or she was trying to explain.
Contemporaneous Objection Rule The Contemporaneous Objection Rule 
requires that attorneys state their objections to questions immediately after 
the witness is asked the questions. The purpose of the rule is to allow the 
judge to make a ruling on the objection before the witness answers. This 
prevents the jury from hearing what might be prejudicial information. 
The Contemporaneous Objection Rule applies to both sides in all court 
proceedings.
continuity of possession See chain of custody.
controlled delivery A controlled delivery is the delivery of a package (or other 
object) while it is under surveillance by the police. The package usually has 
been legally seized prior to the delivery and the delivery is conducted in order 

Glossary 
461
to gain additional evidence and establish the identity of the intended receiver. 
Setting up a controlled delivery does not require a search warrant unless 
activities inside a home will be monitored.
corroboration (also called corroborative evidence) Corroborative evidence 
supports the prior testimony of another witness by providing additional 
evidence to confirm what the previous witness said without merely 
duplicating it. For example, if an eyewitness testified that he saw John at 
the scene of the crime, testimony by a police officer that John’s fingerprints 
were found at the location would provide corroboration for the witness’s 
testimony.
credibility of the witness The trier of the facts evaluates the credibility of 
the witness. After listening to the testimony, observing the witness’s “body 
language,” listening to the opposing side’s attempts to impeach the witness, 
and considering the testimony of other witnesses, the jurors (or judge, in a 
trial without a jury) decide if the witness is telling the truth.
crime scene warrant There is no exception to the warrant requirement for 
crime scenes that are on private property. Officers have the right to enter 
a crime scene to provide aid for the injured and arrange for the coroner to 
remove the deceased, but once these tasks have been accomplished, either 
consent or a search warrant is necessary if the officers want to stay at the 
location to conduct an investigation. 
cumulative evidence Evidence is said to be cumulative if it merely restates 
what has already been admitted into evidence. The judge has discretion to 
limit the amount of cumulative evidence that can be admitted at a trial. 
Example: If there were 10 witnesses to a crime and all gave similar statements, 
the judge would probably rule that 2 or 3 witnesses could testify but not all 
10 of them.
custodial interrogation Officers must give the Miranda warnings prior 
to custodial interrogation. Custody means the person is under arrest or 
otherwise deprived of his or her freedom. Interrogation is the process of 
questioning. Both direct and indirect questions require Miranda warnings. 
Temporary detention (field interviews) authorized by Terry v. Ohio (1968) 
does not require Miranda warnings. Miranda warnings are not required for 
questioning of an inmate by an undercover officer as long as the inmate does 
not know that he or she is being questioned by a law enforcement officer and 
the inmate has not been arraigned for the crime under discussion.
D
declarant As used in the Hearsay Rule, the declarant is the person who made 
the statement. When determining whether hearsay is admissible, the rules 
governing the exceptions to the Hearsay Rule are applied to the declarant—
regardless of who is testifying about the statement at trial.
Declarations against Interest Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is 
admissible under the Declarations against Interest Exception to the Hearsay 

462 
Glossary
Rule if it meets two criteria: (1) The person making the statement is not 
available to testify in court, and (2) the statement is against the interest of 
the person making the statement. A statement is considered to be against the 
interest of the person making it if it could result in criminal prosecution, 
monetary loss, or impairment of an interest in real estate. See your state law 
for complete list.
Deportation Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Evidence seized in violation 
of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments can be introduced at deportation 
hearings.
digital image processing Many new techniques and software are available 
to help investigators improve the quality of pictures. Using digital image 
processing, what were once discarded as blurry pictures can now be enhanced 
so that an identification can be made.
direct appeal A direct appeal is an appeal that is taken immediately after the 
conviction and is based solely on what happened at trial and other court 
hearings in the case. Transcripts of the original trial are used; no witnesses 
are called. No new evidence can be introduced during a direct appeal.
direct evidence Direct evidence is based on personal knowledge or 
observation of the person testifying. No inference or presumption is needed. 
If the testimony is believed by the jury, the fact it relates to is conclusively 
established.
direct examination Direct examination is the questioning of a witness by an 
attorney for the side that called the witness. During the prosecution’s case in 
chief, the prosecutor conducts direct examination. This will be followed by 
cross-examination by the defense attorney.
discovery Discovery is the pretrial process whereby one side is able to find out 
what evidence the other side has. Some states require each side to disclose 
nearly all evidence that it has in its possession (except material protected 
by the Fifth Amendment and other privileges) and give the opposing side 
copies of statements that have been made by witnesses. Lists of witnesses each 
side intends to call to testify at trial are also exchanged. The defense cannot 
be required to disclose the defendant’s statement or tell the prosecution in 
advance that the defendant will or will not testify at trial.
documentary evidence Written and printed items are called documentary 
evidence; this is a subset of real evidence. Photographs, video and audiotapes, 
motion pictures, and computer-generated reports and graphics are also 
included in documentary evidence.
double hearsay Double hearsay refers to a hearsay statement that is embedded 
in another hearsay statement. Example: In the statement “D said that E told 
her what F said,” what F originally said is hearsay; when D attempts to repeat 
what E said, it is double hearsay.
double jeopardy Being tried for the same crime twice is double jeopardy. 
This defense applies if the defendant has either been convicted (and the 
conviction upheld on appeal) or acquitted on the same charge or a lesser 

Glossary 
463
included offense. The view in the United States is that double jeopardy does 
not prevent re-filing charges and seeking a new conviction if the defendant’s 
conviction is reversed on appeal.
due process at lineup or showup Due process, as applied to lineups and 
showups, prohibits procedures that are unduly suggestive. Violations of due 
process result from disparities in height, weight, race, age, or other factors. 
Comments by the police or other people that are overheard by the person 
viewing the lineup or showup may be unduly suggestive if they influence the 
selection of the person who allegedly committed the crime.
Dying Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is admissible 
under the Dying Declaration Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets 
four criteria: (1) At the time the statement was made, the declarant had a 
sense that he or she would die very soon; (2) the declarant had firsthand 
knowledge of what he or she was saying; (3) the statement is about the cause 
and circumstances of the death; and (4) the declarant is now dead.
E
electronic surveillance Electronic surveillance involves the seizure (recording) 
of conversations by electronic transmitting devices and/or recording 
equipment. It usually involves wiretaps or other types of listening devices. 
The Wiretap Act of 1968 (Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
Streets Act of 1968) allows federal judges to issue electronic surveillance 
warrants if there is a strong showing of need for this technique in the 
investigation of serious federal felonies and organized crime activities 
listed in Title III. The warrant application must be screened by the U.S. 
Attorney General or his or her designee. An electronic surveillance warrant 
is valid for a maximum of 30 days but can be renewed based on a showing 
that probable cause still exists for the monitoring activity. Some states have 
electronic surveillance laws nearly identical to Title III; others are more 
restrictive. Unless specifically prohibited by the legislature, no warrant is 
required for a person to wear a transmitting or recording device or to conceal 
these types of devices on his or her premises if the person has agreed to 
cooperate with authorities.
evidence Something that proves or disproves allegations and assertions. 
Evidence, in the legal sense, includes only what is introduced at trial. The 
testimony of witnesses, documents, and physical objects can all be evidence.
Excited Utterance Exception to the Hearsay Rule Excited utterances are also 
referred to as spontaneous declarations. A statement is admissible under the 
Spontaneous Statement Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets two criteria: 
(1) It tells about something the declarant observed with one of the five senses, 
and (2) it was made spontaneously while the declarant was still under the 
stress and excitement of the event.
Exclusionary Rule The Exclusionary Rule prohibits the use of unconstitutionally 
obtained evidence at trial. For example, if it is established that drugs were 

464 
Glossary
found by officers who conducted an illegal search, the drugs are suppressed 
(not allowed into court). The U.S. Supreme Court applied the Exclusionary 
Rule to the federal courts in the 1914 case of Weeks v. United States and to 
state courts in the 1961 case of Mapp v. Ohio.
execution of a warrant A warrant is executed when peace officers act as 
directed by the warrant. A search warrant is executed when the search is 
conducted; an arrest warrant is executed when the arrest is made.
executive privilege
United States v. Nixon 418 U.S. 683, 708-709 (1974) 
provides the framework for analyzing claims of executive privilege when 
documents are sought for use in criminal cases. First, it is presumed that the 
President has the right to refuse access to the confidential decision-making 
process. Second, statements requested in the subpoena that meet the test 
of admissibility and relevance must be isolated. Third, the District Court 
judge will hold an in camera hearing in which the material that the executive 
branch claims is privileged will be examined. Only the federal judge and 
an attorney representing the President will be present at this hearing. The 
outcome of this hearing will be an order detailing what, if anything, will be 
admissible at the criminal trial in question. During this process, the District 
Court has a very heavy responsibility to make sure that information reviewed 
in camera and determined to be privileged is accorded the “high degree 
of respect due the President of the United States” (418 U.S. 683, 716). The 
District Court has the responsibility for making sure that there are no leaks 
of the material that was reviewed but not ruled admissible at trial.
exemplars The most common exemplars used in the investigation of crimes 
are handwriting exemplars and voice exemplars. These samples, which the 
suspect is told how to prepare, are used for identification purposes. Example: 
If there was a demand note during a bank robbery, the suspect may be 
required to give a handwriting exemplar so a forensic document examiner 
can compare it to the ransom note and attempt to determine if the two 
documents were made by the same person.
experiment An experiment attempts to screen out all extraneous variables 
so that the experimenter can measure the impact of one factor. Only results 
of experiments that replicate all relevant conditions of the crime scene are 
admissible in court.
expert witness An expert witness is a person who is called to testify about 
a relevant event based on his or her special knowledge or training. Expert 
witnesses are only allowed if some evidence in the case is beyond the 
understanding of the average juror. 
F
Federal Rules of Evidence The Federal Rules of Evidence were enacted by 
the U.S. Congress to govern the admission of evidence in federal court. The 
Federal Rules of Evidence are a part of the United States Code. Several states 
have adopted the Federal Rules.

Glossary 
465
field interview A field interview (also referred to as a temporary detention) 
is a brief detention for the purpose of determining whether a crime has 
occurred and the person detained should be arrested. Officers must have 
specific, articulable facts that lead them to believe that criminal activity is 
afoot. If there is reasonable suspicion that the person is armed, officers may 
frisk the person for weapons. Terry v. Ohio (1968) is the leading case.
field sobriety test See sobriety test.
fingerprints If an officer has the right to detain a person in the field based 
on reasonable suspicion (Terry v. Ohio), the person may not be transported 
to the station for the purpose of taking fingerprints. If the officer has the 
necessary supplies available, the officer can make a fingerprint exemplar card 
at the location where the person was stopped. If a person has been arrested, 
he or she can be taken to the police station and fingerprinted there.
force An officer may use reasonable force to detain a person. What force 
is reasonable will depend on the circumstances, but deadly force is only 
authorized to protect someone whose life is in danger.
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (FISA) Electronic surveillance 
on activities of foreign governments and their agents is controlled by FISA. 
It authorizes a small group of federal judges to issue warrants for wiretaps 
and other surveillance activities. FISA was amended by the USA PATRIOT 
Act in order to give federal agents greater powers to conduct surveillance of 
suspected terrorists.
forensic accountant A forensic accountant is used in fraud and embezzlement 
cases to determine if financial records have been falsified or altered. A Certified 
Fraud Examiner (CFE) or a Fraud Certified Public Accountant (FCPA) has 
extensive training and experience in this type of work.
forensic anthropologist The forensic anthropologist works with pathologists 
and odontologists to estimate age, sex, ancestry, stature, and unique bony 
features of the deceased. Specialists in facial reconstruction may make three-
dimensional sculptures of the face based on a portion of a skull. 
forensic footwear analysis Making plaster casts of footprints dates back nearly 
100 years. Current advancement in forensic footwear focuses on details in 
the wear pattern of the shoe to estimate the height, weight, and physical 
impairments of the suspect.
Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is admissible 
under the Former Testimony Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets three 
criteria: (1) The statement was recorded under oath at the prior court hearing, 
(2) the person whose testimony is introduced is not available to testify at 
the present court proceeding, and (3) the former testimony is offered either 
against a person who introduced the prior testimony or against a person who 
had the right and opportunity to cross-examine at the prior hearing.
Fourth Amendment The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall 
not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, 

466 
Glossary
supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
frisk Patting down the outer clothing for weapons is referred to as a frisk. A 
frisk is allowed during a temporary detention if the officers have reasonable 
suspicion that the suspect is armed.
Fruit of the Poison Tree Doctrine Evidence derived from unconstitutionally 
obtained evidence is said to be the “fruit of the poison tree.” It is inadmissible 
at trial unless the taint of the illegal acts has dissipated. Example: Officers 
failed to give Miranda warnings in a timely manner and the suspect told 
them where the murder weapon was hidden. Officers used this information 
to seize the murder weapon. The confession is inadmissible because of the 
Miranda error. The murder weapon will not be admissible in court because 
it is the fruit of an illegally obtained confession.
G
geographic profiling Geographic profiling operates on the assumption that 
serial murderers (or rapists, etc.) balance the desire to kill (or rape) far from 
home and avoid recognition with the desire to remain in familiar territory. 
Mapping of the locations of serial crimes is facilitated by software developed 
for this purpose. It is estimated that use of the software helps police narrow 
their target zone by 95%.
Good Faith Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Permits the use of 
unconstitutionally obtained evidence if officers were acting in good faith 
when seizing it. The Supreme Court has limited the Good Faith Exception to 
situations in which there was reliance on a warrant that appeared to be valid 
on its face; arrests made under statutes that were later held unconstitutional; 
and arrests made after a records check revealed an outstanding warrant even 
though the fact that the warrant had been recalled had accidentally been 
omitted from the database.
Grand Jury Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Evidence that has been seized 
in violation of the Fourth or Fifth Amendments can be presented to the 
grand jury when the prosecutor is seeking an indictment. This is an exception 
to the Exclusionary Rule; the same evidence is not admissible at trial.
H
habeas corpus
Habeas corpus proceedings are held in civil court when a person 
challenges the legality of his or her confinement. These proceedings may be 
filed only if the petitioner is currently being held in custody. Examples: denial 
of reasonable bail, failure to release an inmate at the expiration of a sentence, 
a conviction obtained when the defendant was denied the right to counsel, 
and confinement in a mental hospital after the person has regained mental 
competence.
Harmless Error Rule The Harmless Error Rule states that an error will not 
cause a case to be reversed on appeal unless the appellate court believes the 

Glossary 
467
error was likely to affect the outcome of the case. Appellate courts frequently 
rule that errors occurring during a trial are harmless.
Hearsay Rule The Hearsay Rule makes hearsay declarations inadmissible at 
trial. There are many exceptions to the Hearsay Rule. An attorney who wishes 
to introduce hearsay at trial must be able to state which exception to the 
Hearsay Rule is applicable to the statement.
held to answer If the judge at the preliminary hearing is convinced that there 
is enough evidence that the crime was committed and the defendant is the 
perpetrator, the defendant will be “held to answer” on the charge. This means 
that the judge authorizes the prosecution to proceed to trial with the case.
husband–wife privileges There are two husband–wife privileges. Privilege 
for confidential communications: A husband or wife may prevent the 
other from testifying about communications made in confidence during 
their marriage. Key terms: (1) husband and wife: valid marriage is required 
(in states recognizing common-law marriages, common-law marriages are 
covered); (2) what is covered: confidential communications made during the 
marriage; (3) who holds the privilege: either spouse; and (4) exceptions to the 
privilege in criminal cases: crimes committed by one spouse against the other 
spouse; crimes committed by one spouse against the children of either spouse; 
failure to support a spouse or child; and bigamy. Privilege not to testify:
Depending on state law, either the defendant’s spouse has the right to refuse 
to take the witness stand and testify against his or her spouse or the defendant 
has the right to prevent his or her spouse from taking the witness stand. Key 
terms: (1) husband and wife: valid marriage is required (in states recognizing 
common-law marriages, valid common-law marriages are covered); (2) what is 
covered: testifying in court during the time the marriage exists; (3) who holds 
the privilege: usually the person being called to testify (consult law in your 
state); and (4) exceptions in criminal cases: crimes committed by one spouse 
against the other spouse; crimes committed by one spouse against the children 
of either spouse; failure to support a spouse or child; and bigamy.
hypothetical question A hypothetical question states a group of facts and asks 
an expert witness to draw conclusions based on the facts given in the question. 
All of the facts in the hypothetical question must have been introduced 
into evidence in the case. It is not necessary for the expert witness to have 
personally examined the evidence mentioned in the hypothetical question.
I
identifying features Identifying features include how a person looks 
(in person or a photograph) as well as other distinctive things used for 
identification such as fingerprints. The Fifth Amendment does not protect 
the suspect from use of identifying features.
immunity When a person is granted immunity, he or she is guaranteed 
that no criminal charges will be filed. Immunity is formally granted by the 
prosecutor. Transaction immunity protects the person from prosecution 

468 
Glossary
for specific crimes no matter how the evidence is obtained. Use immunity 
prevents the prosecution from using the immune statements against the 
person who made them, but it does not prevent the prosecutor from filing 
charges and obtaining a conviction if evidence is available from other sources.
impeachment Impeachment is the process of attacking the credibility of a 
witness. Six main methods of impeachment are allowed: (1) bias or prejudice, 
(2) prior felony convictions, (3) immoral acts and uncharged crimes, (4) prior 
inconsistent statements, (5) inability to observe, and (6) reputation. 
Impeachment Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Confessions obtained in 
violation of Miranda can be used to impeach the defendant if the defendant 
takes the stand during trial. This is a limited exception; the statements are 
covered by the Exclusionary Rule and cannot be offered by the prosecution to 
establish the defendant’s guilt.
Independent Source Exception to the Exclusionary Rule To admit evidence 
under the Independent Source Exception to the Exclusionary Rule, the 
prosecution must be able to convince the judge that the police discovered 
the evidence in question without relying on unconstitutional procedures.
indictment An indictment is the formal document stating the charges the 
grand jury has decided the defendant should face at trial.
indigent suspect An indigent suspect, as used when considering Miranda
rights, is a suspect who cannot afford to hire an attorney. 
Inevitable Discovery Exception to the Exclusionary Rule The U.S. Supreme 
Court recognizes an exception to the Exclusionary Rule that allows 
unconstitutionally seized evidence to be admitted in court if the judge is 
convinced that it was inevitable that the evidence would have been found 
legally.
inference An inference is a conclusion that is drawn from the facts. When 
circumstantial evidence is used, the jury must infer that a fact exists based 
on other evidence that logically causes the jury to draw that conclusion.
Information The document filed by the prosecution after the preliminary 
hearing is called the Information. It is similar in format to the criminal 
complaint but only contains charges that the defendant was “held to answer” 
on at the end of the preliminary hearing.
interrogation after right to counsel attaches Once formal court proceedings 
have begun, a suspect must waive the right to counsel prior to custodial or 
noncustodial interrogation. Miranda warnings may be used for this purpose.
interview An officer has the authority to transport a suspect to the station 
for questioning only if there is probable cause to arrest that person or 
the person has consented. If the person is detained based on reasonable 
suspicion, the officer may conduct a brief interview in the field but may 
not take the suspect to the station for questioning. When an interview is 
conducted in the field prior to arrest, the officer is not required to give 
Miranda warnings.
inventory vehicle See vehicle search—inventory of impounded car.

Glossary 
469
J
jail searches Officer may search an inmate or any place in the jail or prison 
if there is an administrative reason for the search. Probable cause is not 
required. The need to maintain security and stop the flow of contraband 
justifies nearly all searches in custodial facilities. Only slight suspicion is 
needed to conduct body cavity searches of inmates; less intrusive searches can 
be done without suspicion.
judicial discretion When applying the law to fact situations and making 
appropriate rulings there is a great deal of judicial discretion. This means 
that the judge has the authority to consider the facts and make a ruling for a 
specific case. Examples: The Sixth Amendment gives the defense the right to 
cross-examine witnesses, but if the judge determines that the right is being 
abused he or she may limit cross-examination; when a judge sentences a 
criminal defendant, the judge usually has discretion in setting the length of 
the sentence, granting probation, etc.
judicial notice Judicial notice is usually limited to facts that are public 
knowledge, commonly known scientific facts, and federal, local, and 
international laws. When a judge utilizes his or her authority to take judicial 
notice of a fact, the jurors are instructed that they must conclude that that 
fact exists. No evidence is introduced at trial to prove the fact that has been 
judicially noticed.
K
knock-and-announce procedure (also called knock notice) Prior to entering 
a house, officers are required to comply with the knock-and-announce 
procedure. They must knock or otherwise announce their presence, state 
who they are, and state why they are there. The notice requirements do not 
apply if the facts indicate an immediate threat to the officer’s safety, strong 
likelihood of immediate destruction of evidence, imminent escape of the 
suspect, or danger to innocent people in the house. The Supreme Court 
has refused to authorize exceptions based solely on the nature of the crime 
under investigation. If officers are in the process of complying with knock 
and announce and any of the above situations develop, the “substantial 
compliance” rule allows them to proceed without completing the warnings. 
The test for how long the officers must wait before entering is how long it 
would take a suspect to destroy the evidence or escape, not how long it would 
take a cooperative person to come to the door.
L
latent prints The term latent prints refers to fingerprints that are recovered 
at the crime scene or from other items of evidence. They are compared to 
fingerprints that are on file in order to determine the identity of the person 
who left the latent prints.

470 
Glossary
lay witness A lay witness is a person who observed an event that is relevant to 
the case on trial. Lay witnesses are allowed to testify about any relevant event 
that was observed with one or more of the five senses (sight, hearing, smell, 
touch, or taste). Lay witnesses are not allowed to give opinions.
laying the foundation Laying the foundation is the process of establishing 
the preliminary facts that are required before evidence can be admitted. 
Example: before a gun found at a homicide scene can be admitted, it must be 
established that this is the same weapon found at the crime scene, it is in the 
same condition that it was at the time it was found, and no one has had an 
opportunity to tamper with it.
leading question Leading questions are questions that suggest the desired 
answer. Leading questions are permitted during cross-examination. During 
the prosecution’s case in chief, the defense attorney is allowed to ask leading 
questions when cross-examining the prosecution witnesses.
limited admissibility Limited admissibility describes the situation in which 
evidence is introduced at trial but the jury is instructed that it may use this 
evidence for one purpose but not any other. For example, evidence may 
be introduced to show that a witness lied. This can be used to attack the 
credibility of the witness but may not be used to prove that the defendant is 
guilty of the crime.
lineup A lineup involves showing a victim or eyewitness a group of people to 
determine if he or she can identify the person who allegedly committed the 
crime. There must be a sufficient number of people in the lineup to give a valid 
opportunity for witnesses to make an identification. The people placed in the 
lineup should be of similar physical appearance and dressed so that no one 
stands out as the suspect. The suspect has the right to have an attorney present 
at a lineup if the lineup is held after the suspect has been arraigned or indicted.
M
material evidence Evidence is considered material if it is relevant to some fact 
that is at issue in the case and it has more than just a remote connection to 
the fact.
matter of law Legal issues are decided by the judge; such decisions are 
sometimes referred to as a “matter of law.” They include rulings on the 
law, such as the admissibility of evidence, application of the Hearsay Rule, 
privileges, etc. They also include facts that are admitted into evidence by the use 
of stipulations and judicial notice. When a fact becomes a “matter of law,” the 
judge instructs the jury that they must conclude that the fact has been proven.
media reporter privilege See news reporter privilege.
Miranda booking exception Police are not required to obtain a waiver of the 
Miranda rights when asking routine booking questions.
Miranda public safety exception At the time of arrest, officers are allowed 
to ask a few pointed questions without obtaining a Miranda waiver if this is 
necessary to protect the public from imminent harm. This exception is most 

Glossary 
471
likely to arise when a weapon is believed to be at the scene or a kidnap victim 
has not been found.
Miranda waiver Any waiver of Miranda rights must be knowing, intelligent, 
and voluntary. The person making the waiver must know his or her 
constitutional rights, have sufficient intelligence to understand them, and 
waive them without coercion.
Miranda warnings The U.S. Supreme Court in the case of Miranda v. Arizona
(1966) ruled that prior to custodial interrogation the suspect must be given 
the following warnings: 
1.   You have the right to remain silent; 
2.   Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law;
3.    You have the right to have an attorney present during questioning; and
4.   If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be provided free.
 
A knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of these rights must be obtained 
before questioning for any statements the suspect makes to be admissible in 
court.
Misplaced Reliance Doctrine No warrant is required to obtain conversations 
that can be overheard by the police or their agents based on the misplaced 
reliance of the suspect. Each person bears the burden of restricting his or her 
conversations to people who will not reveal them to the authorities.
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) analysis mtDNA analysis can be used on 
samples that cannot be submitted for restriction fragment length polymorphism, 
polymerase chain reaction, or short tandem repeat analysis because mtDNA does 
not rely on nuclear DNA. mtDNA analysis uses DNA extracted from another 
cellular organelle called mitochondrion and can be used to test hair, bones, 
and teeth. All mothers have the same mitochondrial DNA as their daughters; 
therefore, mtDNA analysis can be done on cells of unidentified human remains 
and any female relative of a missing person.
models The most common models used at trial are maps and diagrams. To be 
admissible, models must be to scale and accurately depict the item in question.
modus operandi
Modus operandi literally means the method of operation. 
Many criminals become creatures of habit and commit the same crimes in 
the same way. This distinctive method of committing a crime is referred to 
as a modus operandi. When the suspect has a known modus operandi, the 
prosecutor may be allowed to introduce testimony about other crimes the 
defendant is known to have committed. If distinctive features of the prior 
crimes match those of the crime for which the defendant is on trial, the jury 
may infer that the defendant committed the present crime.
N
national security letters (or NSL statutes) A number of federal statutes 
authorize the issuance of “national security letters,” which are the equivalent 
of subpoenas. No prior judicial approval is required. NSL can be used to 

472 
Glossary
obtain records in the hands of another party, such as banking records, credit 
histories, account numbers, travel records, information about wire and 
electronic communications, etc. 
negative hearsay Negative hearsay is the use of the fact that no record of an 
event was found to show that the event did not occur. Example: the fact that 
John’s time card was punched on Monday is hearsay that can be used to show 
that John was at work on Monday; the fact that John’s time card was not 
punched on Tuesday can be used as negative hearsay to show that he did not 
go to work on Tuesday.
news reporter privilege Many states give members of the news media 
protection from being cited for contempt of court if they refuse to reveal 
confidential sources of information gathered while working on a news 
story. Key terms: (1) reporter: person employed by the media to investigate 
stories and report on them (media includes print media as well as radio and 
television); (2) what is covered: reporter’s notes and identity of informants; 
(3) who holds privilege: reporter; and (4) exceptions in criminal cases: some 
states make an exception in the prosecution of serious crimes if it can be 
shown that there is no other source for the information requested.
nontestimonial compulsion The self-incrimination clause of the Fifth 
Amendment does not protect a person against nontestimonial compulsion. 
The following procedures are considered in this category: blood, breath, and 
urine tests; taking samples for DNA testing; photographs and fingerprints; 
participating in lineups, showups, and photographic lineups; handwriting 
and voice exemplars; and field sobriety tests.
O
Open Fields Doctrine The Open Fields Doctrine adopted by the U.S. Supreme 
Court allows law enforcement officers to search open areas not adjacent to 
a residence. This applies even if the field is fenced and/or posted with “no 
trespassing” signs.
Opinion Rule The Opinion Rule states that opinions of the witnesses are not 
admissible because it is the function of the trier of the facts to draw their 
own conclusions (inferences). Lay witnesses may not give opinions, but 
expert witnesses are allowed to give professional opinions.
P
parol evidence The term parol evidence refers to testimony that is introduced 
to establish the contents of a document. The original or duplicate of a 
document are preferred over parol evidence. If a satisfactory explanation 
can be provided for the absence of the original and duplicate, the judge may 
allow parol evidence.
Parole Revocation Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Evidence obtained in 
violation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments can be introduced at parole 
revocation hearings.

Glossary 
473
Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the Hearsay Rule A document 
is admissible under the Past Recollection Recorded Exception to the 
Hearsay Rule if it meets six criteria: (1) the statement would be admissible 
if the declarant testified at the current trial; (2) the witness currently has 
insufficient present recollection to testify fully and accurately; (3) the report 
was made at a time when the facts were fresh in the memory of the witness; 
(4) the report was made by the witness, someone under his or her direction, 
or by another person for the purpose of recording the witness’s statement; 
(5) the witness can testify that the report was a true statement of the facts; 
and (6) the report is authenticated.
peremptory challenges Peremptory challenges are used to remove prospective 
jurors from the jury on the basis of the prosecutor or defense attorney’s 
subjective opinions. The attorneys are not required to state why they use 
peremptory challenges. Peremptory challenges may not be used to exclude 
jurors based on race or gender. The number of peremptory challenges that 
can be used in a case is set by state law.
photographic lineup A photographic lineup involves showing a victim or 
eyewitness pictures of potential suspects and asking him or her to indicate 
whether a picture of the person who allegedly committed the crime is in the 
group viewed. A sufficient variety of pictures should be used to permit valid 
identification. The pictures should be sufficiently similar in appearance to 
avoid being unduly suggestive. There is no right to have an attorney present 
at a photographic lineup, no matter when it is conducted.
physical evidence See real evidence.
physician–patient privilege A patient has the right to prevent his or her 
physician from testifying regarding confidential communications made while 
the patient was seeking diagnosis or treatment. Key terms: (1) physician: 
person reasonably believed by the patient to be licensed to practice medicine; 
(2) patient: person who consulted physician for purposes of diagnosis or 
treatment; (3) what is covered: information obtained by the physician for the 
purpose of diagnosing or treating the patient; (4) who holds the privilege: 
patient; and (5) exceptions in criminal cases: advice sought on how to plan or 
conceal a crime, and information the physician is required by law to report 
to authorities. Many states do not allow the defendant to use this privilege in 
criminal cases.
plain feel When an officer is conducting a pat down based on reasonable 
suspicion that a person is armed, the officer may seize an item if he or she 
can tell by the distinctive feel of the object that it is contraband. This rule 
applies even though the item in question does not feel like a weapon. Officers 
are not allowed to manipulate or squeeze the item to determine if it is 
contraband.
Plain View Doctrine It is not a search for officers to observe items that were left 
where the officers can see them while the officers are legally on the premises. 
The Plain View Doctrine requires that: (1) the officer must be legally at the 

474 
Glossary
spot where the observation was made; (2) the officer did not pick up or 
examine an item to determine whether it is contraband, stolen, etc., and (3) the 
officer must have probable cause in order to seize items found in plain view.
plea bargaining Plea bargaining is the process whereby the prosecution and 
defense work out an agreement for the defendant to plead guilty to one or 
more charges without a trial if the prosecutor will drop some of the original 
charges or support a lighter sentence.
police informant privilege The police have a privilege not to disclose the 
identity of their confidential informants unless the identity of the informant 
is crucial to the defendant’s case. Key terms: (1) police: applies to all law 
enforcement agencies; (2) informant: person who supplies information to police 
in confidence; (3) what is covered: name and address of the informant; (4) who 
holds the privilege: law enforcement agency; and (5) exceptions: identity of 
informant must be disclosed if it is important in the defendant’s case.
police personnel files Police and other governmental agencies have a 
privilege not to disclose the contents of their personnel files unless the 
information is relevant to the defendant’s case. Key terms: (1) personnel files: 
permanent personnel records of an employee (police personnel files include 
investigations of an officer conducted by internal affairs); (2) what is covered: 
records concerning performance of officer and investigations of his or her 
conduct; (3) who holds the privilege: law enforcement agency; and 
(4) exceptions: must disclose information relevant to the defense.
polling the jury Polling the jury is the process of asking each juror if he or 
she agrees with the verdict that has just been read. The jurors are polled in 
the courtroom after the verdict for each charge is read and then they are 
dismissed.
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis PCR analysis reproduces the cells 
in the sample until there are enough to conduct a DNA test. It can be done 
on a sample as small as a few cells. This test is not harmed by environmental 
factors, but great care must be exercised to avoid contamination by other 
biological materials when collecting and preserving the sample.
posed picture (photograph) A posed picture is a photograph that was made 
to illustrate a fact in the case. It may come from a re-enactment of the crime. 
Posed pictures are usually admissible if they accurately depict the facts of the 
case. The jury will be told that they are posed and were not taken during the 
crime.
post-arraignment confession Attempts to obtain a confession from a suspect 
after arraignment or indictment are covered by Massiah v. United States
(1964). Prior to interrogation, police must obtain a waiver of the suspect’s 
right to counsel. This rule applies whether or not the suspect is in custody. 
The attorney does not need to be present when the waiver is given. If the 
suspect is in custody, Miranda also applies.
preliminary hearing (also called preliminary examination) Hearing held before 
a judge to determine if there is sufficient admissible evidence to justify making 

Glossary 
475
the defendant face a criminal trial on the charges. If it is determined that 
sufficient evidence has been presented, the defendant will be “held to answer” 
on the charges. In most states, a preliminary hearing is not held if the case 
has been presented to a grand jury or if all charges are misdemeanors.
present memory refreshed Present memory refreshed refers to the process 
of refreshing the memory of a witness, either before or during trial. After 
the memory has been refreshed, the witness can testify based on his or her 
memory of the events. The witness is subject to cross-examination about 
what was done to refresh his or her memory.
present sense impression A statement is admissible under the 
Contemporaneous Declaration (also called a present sense impression) 
Exception to the Hearsay Rule if (1) it was made by the declarant to explain 
what he or she was doing, and (2) it was made at the time the declarant was 
performing the act he or she was trying to explain.
presumption A presumption is a conclusion that the law requires the jury to 
draw from facts that have been established at trial. The judge instructs the 
jurors when they are to use a presumption.
prima facie The prosecution has established a prima facie case if it has 
introduced sufficient evidence to convince the judge that it is more probable 
than not that the defendant committed the crime charged. The prosecution 
must establish a prima facie case at the preliminary hearing. It is a lower 
burden of proof than what will be required at trial.
primary evidence
Primary evidence is a term that refers to an original 
document or a duplicate.
Prior Consistent Statement Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is 
admissible under this exception to the hearsay rule if (1) the witness has 
been impeached on the basis of prior inconsistent statements (a consistent 
statement that was made before the alleged inconsistent statement may be 
admissible to rehabilitate the witness), (2) cross-examiner has alleged that 
the witness recently changed his or her testimony (prior consistent statement 
made before the alleged change may be used to rebut this allegation), or 
(3) cross-examiner has alleged that the witness altered his or her testimony 
due to bias or other bad motive (prior consistent statement made before the 
alleged bias/motive arose can be introduced).
Prior Identification Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is admissible 
under the Prior Identification Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets three 
criteria: (1) the witness has testified that he or she accurately identified the 
person who committed the crime, (2) the witness identified the defendant 
or another person as the person who committed the crime, and (3) the 
identification was made when the crime was fresh in the witness’s memory.
Prior Inconsistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is 
admissible under the Prior Inconsistent Statements Exception to the Hearsay 
Rule if it meets two criteria: (1) the statement is inconsistent with testimony 
given on the witness stand by the person who made the prior statement, 

476 
Glossary
and (2) the witness was asked about the inconsistent statement and given a 
chance to explain.
prison searches Prison searches do not violate the Fourth Amendment as long 
as there is a valid administrative reason for the search. Neither reasonable 
suspicion nor probable cause is required.
privilege against self-incrimination The privilege against self-incrimination 
is a key feature of the Fifth Amendment. It only applies if a statement can 
be used in criminal court against the person who made it. The Miranda 
warnings were designed to help suspects subject to custodial interrogation to 
be aware of the privilege against self-incrimination.
privilege not to disclose identity of informant The privilege not to disclose 
the identity of an informant applies to all law enforcement agencies. Key 
definitions: (1) informant: person who supplies information to police with the 
understanding that his or her identity will not be made public; (2) what 
is covered: name and address of the informer; (3) who holds the privilege: law 
enforcement agency that used information provided by the informant to help 
with a specific case; and (4) exceptions frequently found in criminal cases:
identity of informant must be disclosed if it is important in the defendant’s case.
privilege to withhold personnel files Personnel files are normally privileged. 
Key definitions: (1) permanent personnel records on an employee: personnel 
files include investigations of an officer conducted by internal affairs; 
(2) what is covered: records concerning the performance of the officer 
and investigations of his or her conduct; (3) who holds the privilege: 
law enforcement agency; and (4) exceptions frequently found in criminal 
cases: must disclose information relevant to the defense, such as prior allegations 
of excessive force or perjury.
probable cause A reasonable belief that a person has committed or is 
committing a crime or that a place contains specific items connected with a 
crime. Under the Fourth Amendment, probable cause must be shown before 
an arrest warrant or search warrant may be issued.
probative force Probative force means that an item of evidence tends to prove 
a fact that is at issue in the case. Various pieces of evidence will have different 
amounts of probative force. Examples: in a rape case, DNA tests matching 
semen stains left at the scene with the defendant’s DNA have great probative 
force; the testimony of a witness who identified the rapist based on a fleeting 
glance under poor lighting conditions will have much less probative force 
than the DNA test results.
probative value A fact has probative value if it tends to prove (or disprove) 
the existence (or nonexistence) of something that is at issue in the case.
protective sweep A “protective sweep” is a search of the premises for the safety 
of the officer. It is limited to a visual inspection of places in which a person 
might be hiding. A protective sweep is limited to the immediate adjoining 
area unless there is reasonable suspicion that someone is hiding in a more 
remote spot.

Glossary 
477
Public Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule A document is admissible 
under the Public Records Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it meets three 
criteria: (1) a public employee made the document within the scope of his or 
her duty, (2) the document was made at or near the time the event occurred, 
and (3) the sources of the information and method and time of preparation 
indicate the record is trustworthy. Records of vital statistics (births, deaths, 
marriages, etc.) are admissible if (1) the maker of the record is required by 
law to report the event to a governmental agency, and (2) the report was 
made and filed as required by law.
Public Safety Exception to the Exclusionary Rule The U.S. Supreme 
Court recognizes an exception to the Exclusionary Rule that allows 
unconstitutionally obtained evidence to be admitted in court if there 
was brief questioning or searching at the time of arrest for the purpose of 
protecting the public or rescuing the victim. This exception has been used to 
locate weapons that the suspect hid and to help find kidnap victims. Detailed 
questions are not allowed without Miranda warnings.
R
real evidence Anything that can be perceived with the five senses (except 
testimonial evidence) that tends to prove a fact at issue is called real evidence. 
Another name frequently used for real evidence is physical evidence.
reasonable deadly force A police officer may only use deadly force when it 
reasonably appears that the life of the officer, or another person nearby, is in 
danger. Imminent life-threatening injuries are treated the same as imminent 
death. When officers use deadly force in circumstances that are not life 
threatening, they violate the Fourth Amendment.
reasonable force An officer may only use reasonable force to detain a person. 
What force is reasonable will depend on the circumstances, but deadly force 
is only authorized if someone’s life is in danger. Using more force than is 
reasonable under the circumstances is a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
reasonable person Many areas of the law use a reasonable person as their 
reference point. When discussing the use of force, the standard is based 
on what a reasonable person would do in the same circumstances. The 
reasonable person has the same physical characteristics and resources that 
the person in question had at the time it was necessary to make a decision 
on how much force to use. The reasonable person is allowed to consider 
reasonable appearances when deciding what to do. Thus, the facts as the 
reasonable person could reasonably believed them to be are more important 
than the actual facts.
reasonable suspicion An officer may detain someone briefly for questioning 
based on reasonable suspicion. Police must have specific, articulable facts that 
indicate that criminal activity is afoot.
rebuttable presumption A rebuttable presumption is not conclusive. Once the 
side relying on a rebuttable presumption introduces evidence to establish the 

478 
Glossary
presumed fact, the opposing side may introduce evidence to either disprove 
the basic fact or disprove the presumed fact.
rebuttal Rebuttal is the part of the trial when the prosecution calls witnesses 
in an attempt to disprove what the defense witnesses said during the defense’s 
case in chief.
rehabilitation Rehabilitation is the process of trying to prove to judge and 
jury that a witness should be believed even though the witness has already 
been impeached.
rejoinder Rejoinder is the part of the trial when the defense is allowed to call 
witnesses and attempt to cast doubt on what prosecution witnesses testified 
about during rebuttal.
relevant evidence Any evidence that tends to prove or disprove any disputed 
fact in the case is relevant evidence. To be relevant, an item merely needs 
to show that it is more probable that the fact exists than it appeared before 
the evidence was introduced. No single piece of evidence has to make a fact 
appear more probable than not.
reporter’s transcript The reporter’s transcript is a verbatim record of what 
occurred in court. It is made from notes taken by the court reporter.
reputation A person’s reputation is what other people believe about that person’s 
character. It may or may not be an accurate reflection of character. If reputation 
is relevant, “character witnesses” may be called to testify about the person’s 
reputation for traits that are relevant to the case, such as honesty, brutality, etc.
Reputation Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is admissible under 
the Reputation Exception to the Hearsay Rule if it is about the reputation of a 
person among his or her associates at work or in the community. Some states 
also allow the witness to testify regarding his or her personal opinion about 
the person whose reputation is at issue.
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) RFLP was one of the first 
DNA tests used in forensic investigation. It is not used as much now because 
it requires a larger DNA sample (as large as a quarter) to conduct the test. 
Samples degraded by environmental factors, such as dirt or mold, do not 
work as well for RFLP.
return (of search warrant) A return is a document, usually printed on the 
back of a search warrant, in which the police state when the warrant was 
executed. An itemized inventory of what was seized is also included.
right to counsel The right to counsel attaches at the first court appearance. 
After that time, officers must obtain a waiver of the right to counsel prior to 
interrogation. This rule applies to custodial and noncustodial interrogation 
conducted after the arraignment or indictment.
right to have an attorney present A suspect has the right to have an attorney 
present during custodial interrogation. If he or she requests an attorney, 
questioning must stop and may only resume if there is an attorney present. 
If questioning is stopped for this reason, the police do not have to call an 
attorney unless they intend to resume questioning. If the suspect has already 

Glossary 
479
been arraigned or indicted, he or she has the right to have an attorney 
present at lineups, showups, and during questioning regarding the charges 
that have already been filed (whether or not the suspect is in custody at the 
time of this interrogation).
right to inventory a vehicle Whenever a vehicle is legally impounded, the 
authorities have the right to inventory its contents. This results in an itemized 
list of all items present in the vehicle at that time. Inventories are allowed 
regardless of the reason the vehicle was impounded.
right to remain silent A suspect has the right to remain silent during 
custodial interrogation. Even if a suspect waives his or her Miranda rights, 
the suspect retains the right to refuse to answer specific questions or to stop 
the interrogation at any time. If a suspect invokes the right to remain silent, 
officers must stop questioning but may request a new Miranda waiver after 
waiting long enough to indicate to the suspect that his or her rights will be 
scrupulously honored.
roadblock A roadblock involves the stopping of all vehicles traveling on a 
street or highway. Officers may stop all vehicles or stop a percentage of the 
cars (such as every fourth car). The U.S. Supreme Court has approved the 
use of roadblocks to check for drunk drivers but has refused to authorize 
stopping vehicles to check for drugs. Roadblocks for the purpose of handing 
out “wanted flyers” soon after a crime have been upheld.
S
school searches School officials may search students if there is reasonable 
suspicion that a student has broken the law or violated a school rule. This 
search is not confined to a pat down for weapons. Purses and other personal 
items may be searched.
search A search is an examination of a person, his or her house, personal 
property, or other locations when conducted by a law enforcement officer 
for the purpose of finding evidence of a crime.
Search by a Private Person Exception to the Exclusionary Rule Evidence 
obtained during a search conducted by a private person who is not acting 
at the urging of a police officer is admissible at trial. This evidence is not 
covered by the Exclusionary Rule even though the private person may have 
violated someone’s reasonable expectation of privacy.
search incident to arrest Contemporaneous with an arrest, officers may 
search the person arrested and the area under his or her immediate control. 
This search may be as thorough as necessary. It is not restricted to looking 
for weapons or evidence of the crime for which the person was arrested. If 
a person is in a vehicle at the time of arrest, or has been a recent occupant 
of a vehicle, the officers may conduct a thorough search of the passenger 
compartment of the vehicle incident to the arrest.
search of person during temporary detention When an officer makes a 
temporary detention based on reasonable suspicion (Terry v. Ohio), 

480 
Glossary
the officer may conduct a pat down of the suspect’s outer clothing for 
weapons if the officer has reasonable suspicion that the person is armed.
search of vehicle during temporary detention When an officer makes a 
temporary detention of a person in a vehicle based on reasonable suspicion 
(Terry v. Ohio), the officer may search the passenger compartment of the 
vehicle for weapons if the officer has reasonable suspicion that weapons are 
concealed in the vehicle.
secondary evidence Secondary evidence refers to all types of evidence used to 
establish the contents of a document when neither the original document nor 
a duplicate is available. This would include rough drafts as well as testimony 
about what the document said.
seizure The act of taking possession of a person or property.
self-authenticating Self-authenticating documents can be introduced 
into evidence without calling witnesses to authenticate them. Examples: 
documents bearing the government seal, notarized documents, and official 
publications.
self-incrimination Self-incrimination is the making of a statement (oral or 
written) that can result in criminal liability for the person who made it. The 
privilege against self-incrimination comes from the Fifth Amendment of the 
U.S. Constitution. It does not cover physical evidence such as fingerprints, 
blood samples, DNA, or handwriting exemplars; it also does not apply if it 
is not possible to prosecute the person making the statement due to double 
jeopardy, expiration of statute of limitations, or a grant of immunity.
sequestered A jury is sequestered when it is kept away from people who are not 
on the jury. In high-publicity cases, the jury may be housed in a local hotel for 
the duration of the trial. It is more common to sequester the jurors while they 
are deliberating on the verdict. Many juries are not sequestered at all.
short tandem repeat (STR) STR technology is used to evaluate specific 
regions (loci) within nuclear DNA. Variability in STR regions can be used 
to distinguish one DNA profile from another. The FBI uses a standard set of 
13 specific STR regions for CODIS, the database that can be accessed at the 
local, state, and national level for convicted offenders, unsolved crime scene 
evidence, and missing persons. The odds of two individuals having the same 
13-loci DNA profile are approximately 1 in 1 billion.
showup A showup involves having a victim or eyewitness view one person in 
order to make an identification of the person who allegedly committed the 
crime. The suspect has the right to have an attorney present at a showup if 
the showup is held after the suspect has been arraigned or indicted.
sobriety tests Sobriety tests are frequently given to determine if a person is 
intoxicated. The most commonly used ones involve breath, blood, and urine. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that a suspected drunk driver cannot 
claim the Fifth Amendment as grounds to refuse to participate in a sobriety 
test. Field sobriety tests are given to drivers stopped on suspicion of driving 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs. An officer asks the driver to perform 

Glossary 
481
a variety of movements that would likely be impaired if a person were 
intoxicated.
Spontaneous Statement Exception to the Hearsay Rule A statement is 
admissible under the Spontaneous Statement Exception to the Hearsay Rule 
if it meets two criteria: (1) it tells about something the declarant observed 
with one of the five senses, and (2) it was made spontaneously while the 
declarant was still under the stress and excitement of the event. Spontaneous 
statements are also referred to as “excited utterances.”
standing Standing is a party’s right to make a legal claim or seek judicial 
enforcement of a duty or right.
stare decisis In our common-law system, prior decisions of appellate 
courts are considered binding on lower courts (until reversed, vacated, or 
overruled). This is called stare decisis.
statement As used in the Hearsay Rule, a statement refers to all types of 
communications: oral, written, those recorded on audio- or videotape or on 
computer disks, and nonverbal gestures.
statute of limitations The statute of limitations is established by the 
legislature. It sets time limits for filing criminal charges. For example, in 
most states misdemeanor charges must be filed with the court clerk within 
1 year of the day the crime was committed; for felonies the period is longer 
(frequently 3–6 years), and for some crimes, such as murder, there is no 
statute of limitations and the charges can be filed at any time. If the period 
specified in the statue of limitations has expired, the person who committed 
the crime cannot claim the Fifth Amendment as a reason not to answer 
questions about the crime; therefore, Miranda warnings are not required. See 
also tolling the statute of limitations.
stipulation A stipulation is an agreement between all sides to a lawsuit to 
allow the jury to conclude that a fact exists. Once a stipulation is made, 
no evidence will be introduced to prove the stipulated fact. The judge will 
instruct the jurors that they must conclude that the stipulated fact exists.
substantial compliance Substantial compliance with knock-and-announce 
procedures prior to entering a house is sufficient if, while the required procedures 
are being conducted, officers hear or see something that indicates further delay 
would result in physical harm to the officers, destruction of evidence, escape by 
the suspect, or harm to an innocent person inside the residence.
suppression hearing The suppression hearing is a court hearing, usually held 
prior to the trial, for the purpose of deciding whether evidence may be used at 
trial. Evidence that the judge rules may not be used is suppressed. Suppression 
hearings are common if there are questions about whether the police complied 
with search and seizure rules and/or properly obtained a confession.
T
tacit admission As used in the hearsay rule, a tacit admission occurs when 
a statement is made by someone else and then a person adopts it as his or 

482 
Glossary
her own statement. This is usually done by remaining silent when accused 
of wrongdoing in circumstances in which an innocent person would be 
expected to deny the allegation. Tacit admissions are also referred to as 
“adoptive admissions.”
temporary detention A person may be detained temporarily if there is 
reasonable suspicion that he or she is involved in criminal activity. If there is 
reasonable suspicion that the person is armed, officers may frisk the person 
for weapons. Temporary detentions are also referred to as field interviews. 
testimonial evidence 1. Statements made by a competent witness, testifying 
under oath or affirmation in a court proceeding, are called testimonial 
evidence. Affidavits and depositions are frequently included in testimonial 
evidence. 2. Testimonial evidence, as the term is used when discussing the 
Miranda warnings, means oral and written statements that a suspect makes in 
response to questions. Handwriting and voice exemplars are not testimonial 
evidence because  someone dictates what the suspect should say or write.
Title III The Wiretap Act of 1968 was Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control 
and Safe Streets Act of 1968. For this reason, the Wiretap Act of 1968 is 
sometimes called Title III.
tolling the statute of limitations The statute of limitations establishes a 
deadline for filing charges. Some events “stop the clock” on the statute of 
limitations; this is referred to as tolling the statute of limitations. Many states 
toll the statute of limitations if a person leaves the state in order to avoid 
apprehension and/or prosecution.
trier of the facts The role of the trier of the facts is to evaluate the evidence 
and decide which facts have been sufficiently proven. In a jury trial, the jurors 
are the triers of the facts. In a trial held without a jury, the judge is both the 
trier of the facts and the trier of the law.
trier of the law The role of the trier of the law is to decide what law applies to 
a given case. This includes giving the jury instructions on the definitions of 
the crimes(s) charged, ruling on objections made at trial (such as hearsay), 
and deciding whether Miranda and search and seizure rules were correctly 
followed by the police. In a trial, the trier of the law is the judge.
U
unduly suggestive A lineup or photographic lineup is unduly suggestive if 
it points out one person as the suspected criminal. This could be caused 
by disparities in height, weight, race, age, or other factors. Comments and 
coaching by the police or other people viewing the identification procedure 
that indicate which person is believed to have committed the crime would 
also be unduly suggestive. Unduly suggestive lineups and photographic 
lineups violate due process.
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 The USA PATRIOT Act, passed by Congress soon 
after the events of September 11, 2001, made many changes in the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act, the Wiretap Act, and numerous other federal 

Glossary 
483
statutes to facilitate the detection of terrorists and stop terrorist attacks. USA 
PATRIOT is an acronym for Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing 
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism.
V
valid on its face A statute or warrant is valid on its face if it appears to be 
constitutional. Officers may act in reliance on these statutes and warrants 
until they learn that they are unconstitutional. If it can be determined by 
the wording that a warrant or statute is defective, police are not authorized to 
act pursuant to them.
vehicle search—incident to an arrest If a person is in a vehicle at the time 
he or she is arrested, the officers may conduct a thorough search of the 
passenger compartment of the vehicle contemporaneous to the arrest.
vehicle search—inventory of impounded car When a vehicle is legally 
impounded for any reason, the car may be inventoried in order to provide a 
complete list of what was in the car at the time it was taken into custody.
vehicle search—noncriminal purpose If officers inspect a vehicle for a 
noncriminal purpose, any evidence of a crime that they find can be used 
in court.
vehicle search—outside of car Officers may examine the exterior of a car that 
is on public property. Anything found in plain view can be used in court.
vehicle search—probable cause there is evidence in the vehicle When officers 
have probable cause that there is evidence or contraband in a vehicle, they 
may search the portion of the car where the evidence or contraband is 
believed to be. No warrant is required; the officer may conduct as thorough 
a search as a judge could authorize after reviewing the facts. 
vehicle search—stop based on reasonable suspicion When a person in a car 
is detained based on reasonable suspicion, the passenger compartment of 
the vehicle can be searched for weapons if there is reasonable suspicion that 
weapons are concealed in the vehicle. This rule applies whether or not the 
person driving the car will be released at the scene.
vehicle stop at roadblock Police may stop vehicles at a roadblock established 
to arrest drivers who are intoxicated. The Supreme Court balanced the 
benefit to society against the intrusion on the individual’s privacy and 
determined that DUI roadblocks were justified. Roadblocks conducted to 
find narcotic users were not approved because the Court classified them 
as part of normal police activity. On the other hand, roadblocks set up to 
distribute wanted flyers for a recent crime were considered justified.
Vital Statistics Exception to the Hearsay Rule Records of vital statistics 
(births, deaths, marriages, etc.) are admissible if (1) the maker of the record 
is required by law to report the event to a governmental agency, and (2) the 
report was made and filed as required by law.
voir dire
Voir dire is the process of asking questions in order to determine if 
someone is qualified. During voir dire of the jury, the prospective jurors are 

484 
Glossary
asked questions in order to determine if they have formed opinions about the 
defendant’s guilt and other relevant issues. Information obtained during 
voir dire is used by prosecution and defense attorneys when exercising 
challenges for cause and peremptory challenges. A voir dire hearing is also 
held to determine whether a person is qualified to testify as an expert witness.
voluntary consent To be valid, consent for a search must be voluntary. All 
the factors applicable to giving consent will be considered when the Court 
determines if the consent was voluntary. Officers can obtain valid consent 
without advising a person of his or her Fourth Amendment right to refuse to 
give consent for a search. A person who gives voluntary consent for a search 
retains the right to revoke the consent.
W
weight of each piece of evidence The trier of the facts determines the weight 
to be given to each piece of evidence. One of the key factors influencing this 
decision is the credibility of the witness(es) who testified about the item. The 
jurors (or judge, in a trial without a jury) can disregard evidence even if there 
is no other evidence presented on the issue, if they believe the witness is not 
telling the truth. Based on their own common sense, jurors also decide how 
much weight to give each piece of evidence: One item might be conclusive, 
another so trivial that they disregard it.
Wiretap Act of 1968 Following the Supreme Court’s declaration that 
electronic surveillance warrants were required whenever a person’s reasonable 
expectation of privacy was invaded by electronic “bugs,” Congress passed 
the Wiretap Act of 1968, which authorized federal judges to issue electronic 
surveillance warrants for wiretaps and other forms of electronic monitoring. 
Because the Wiretap Act was Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and 
Safe Streets Act of 1968, the Wiretap Act is sometimes referred to as Title III.
Y
Y chromosome analysis The Y chromosome is passed directly from father to 
son, so the analysis of the genetic markers on the Y chromosome is useful 
for tracing relationships among males or for analyzing biological evidence 
involving multiple male contributors. 

INDEX
A
Abandoned property, 
343–344
Ability to commit crime, 
78–81
Ability to narrate, 105–106
ABO blood system, 150
Accident defense, 93–94
Accomplice testimony, 119
Acknowledged documents, 
173
Adams v. Williams, 316
Administrative searches, 
357–360
Administrative warrants, 
358
Admissions Exception to 
Hearsay Rule, 202–209
admission by an agent, 
207–208
admission by co-
conspirator, 
208–209
admission of a party, 
203–204
adoptive admissions, 
204–206
authorized 
admissions, 206–
207
Adoptive admissions, 
204–206
Aerial searches, 340
Affidavits
arrest warrants and, 
24
reliability of facts in, 
283–284
search warrants and, 
278
Affirmative defenses, 6
Age progression, 157
Alcohol tests, 149, 304, 391
Altered documents, 180
Ancient documents
documentary evidence 
and, 177
Hearsay Rule 
exception, 235–236
Animation technology, 
189, 190
Anonymous informants, 
284
Anthropological analysis, 
157
Apparent authority, 
346–347
Appeals, 50–53
direct, 50–51
habeas corpus and, 
50, 53
issues subject to, 52
Appellate process, 15–17, 
50–53
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 49
Arizona v. Hicks, 341
Arizona v. Roberson, 406
“Arm’s reach” rule, 327
Arraignment, 25–26
Arrests, 322–330
citizen’s, 324
field interviews vs., 
323
illegal, 407
myths vs. facts about, 
311
powers of, 324–325
probable cause for, 23, 
323–324
searches incident to, 
325–330
Arrest warrants, 281–283
case examples, 282–
283
information required 
for, 281
procedure to obtain, 
24, 281–282, 
284–285
Arson investigations, 359
At issue, defined, 58–59
Attorney–client privilege, 
245–247
Attorneys
communications with 
police, 449–450
right to have present, 
395, 404–406, 
424–425
Atwater v. City of Lago 
Vista, 326
Authentication of 
documents, 169–177
federal requirements 
for, 170–171
methods utilized for, 
175–177
self-authenticating
documents and, 
171–174
Authorized admissions, 
206–207
Automobiles. See Vehicles
B
Ballistics experts, 130, 154
Battered child syndrome, 95
Battered Woman 
Syndrome, 96
Bell v. Wolfish, 333
Berger v. New York, 368
Berkemer v. McCarty, 396
Best Evidence Rule, 181
Beyond a reasonable doubt, 
4–5
Bias, impeachment based 
on, 107–110
Black’s Law Dictionary, 2, 3, 4
485

486 
Index
Blake, Robert, 193–194
Blood alcohol testing, 149
Blood testing, 130–131, 
150
Blood typing, 150
Body cavity searches, 331
Body fluid samples, 
391–392
Booking
Closed Container Rule 
exception, 332
Miranda exception, 398
searches at time of, 
330–333
Brady v. Maryland, 30
Brewer v. Williams, 397
Brown v. Illinois, 407
Bryant, Kobe, 75, 97
Bumper beepers, 370
Bumper v. North Carolina,
345
Burden of persuasion, 6
Burden of proof, 4–6
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco 
and Firearms (ATF), 
180–181
Burger, Warren, 259
Bush, George W., 241
Business records
documentary 
evidence and, 183
Hearsay Rule 
exception, 218–223
C
Cady v. Dombrowski, 355
Caldwell, Earle, 193
California v. Carney, 348
California v. Ciraolo, 340
California v. Greenwood,
343
Camara v. Municipal Court,
357
Canine searches, 322
Cardwell v. Lewis, 355
Carrion, Elio, 309–310
Cars. See Vehicles
Car stops, 319–320, 
353–354
Carter v. Kentucky, 389
Caruso, Michael, 364
Case law, 12–17
Central Park Jogger attack, 
385
Certified copies, 172
Chain of custody, 142
Challenge for cause, 34
Chambers v. Maroney, 350
Chapman v. California, 297
Character, 88
Character traits, 89–91
Character witnesses, 43, 
88–91
Charge bargaining, 31
Cheney, Dick, 241
Child abuse
circumstantial 
evidence of, 95
clergy–penitent 
privilege and, 256
Chimel v. California, 325
Circumstantial evidence, 
63, 64, 77–99
ability and, 78–81
character and, 88–91
definition of, 64, 77
guilt inferred from, 
85–88
intent and, 81–85
myths vs. facts about, 
76
offers to plead guilty, 
94–95
other acts evidence 
and, 91–94
Rape Shield Laws and, 
96–97
review questions on, 
99
summary points 
about, 98
victim’s injuries as, 
95–96
weight of, 78
See also Direct evidence
Citizen’s arrest, 324
Civil cases
Exclusionary Rule 
and, 299–300
self-incrimination 
privilege and, 386
Clarkson, Lana, 21
Clergy–penitent privilege, 
255–256
Clerk’s transcript, 51
Closed Container Rule
booking exception 
to, 332
vehicle search 
exception to, 329, 
349
Closing arguments, 44
Colonnade Catering Corp. v. 
United States, 358
Colorado v. Connelly, 400
Colorado v. Spring, 400
Commonly known facts, 
67–68
Communications, 
privileged. See Privileged 
communications
Competency of witnesses, 
103–106
Computers
courtroom use of, 
36–37
crimes related to, 79
databases on, 440–
441, 442–443, 444
diagrams created on, 
190
forensic analysis of, 
158
legal research using, 18
photographs altered 
using, 188
Computing/digital 
forensics, 158
Concealing evidence, 85–86
Conclusive presumptions, 
70–71
Confessions
clergy–penitent 
privilege and, 
255–256
Hearsay Rule 
exception, 202–209
illegal arrests and, 407
post-arraignment, 
410–412
without Miranda
waiver, 402

Index 
487
Confidential 
communications, 
243–244
See also Privileged 
communications
Confidential informants, 
284
Confrontation Clause, 198
Connecticut v. Barrett, 401
Consent searches, 344–348
apparent authority 
for, 346–347
scope of, 347–348
standard for, 345
Consistent statements, 
232–235
Constitution of the United 
States, 9
Contemporaneous 
declarations, 211, 
213–215
Contemporaneous 
Objection Rule, 39
Controlled substance 
identification, 153–154
Coolidge v. New Hampshire,
284, 338
Copies of documents
admissibility of, 
183–184
certified copies, 172
Corroborative evidence, 
61–62, 118–120
County of Sacramento v. 
Lewis, 303
Court process, 21–55
appeal, 50–53
arraignment, 25–26
case preparation, 
439–445
contact between 
parties, 449–451
criminal complaint, 
23–25
discovery, 30–31
dress and demeanor, 
445–449
grand jury, 27–28
plea bargaining, 31–32
preliminary hearing, 
26–27
press coverage and, 
452
review questions on, 
55
sentencing, 48–50
summary points 
about, 54
suppression hearing, 
28–29
trial, 32–48
Courtroom setting, 36–37
Covert entries, 375
Crawford v. Washington,
199
Credibility of witnesses, 
77–78
Crimes
ability to commit, 
78–81
evidence at scene of, 
135–166
Crime scene evidence, 
135–166
collecting and 
handling, 139–142
experiments and, 
161–163
marking process for, 
138–139
myths vs. facts about, 
137
police sketches and, 
140–141
scientific tests and, 
142–161
Criminal complaints, 
23–25
Criminal court 
proceedings, 437–454
dress and demeanor 
for, 445–449
handling press 
coverage of, 452
myths vs. facts about, 
438
police contact with 
parties in, 449–451
reviewing facts of case 
for, 439–441
summary points 
about, 452–453
working with 
prosecutors for, 
441–445
See also Court process
Cross examination
purposes of, 40
Sixth Amendment 
right of, 7, 40
Cumulative evidence, 61, 
120
Custodial interrogation, 
396
D
Dalia v. United States, 374
Databases, 440–441, 442–
443, 444
Daubert v. Merrell Dow 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
126
Davis v. Mississippi, 321
Davis v. Washington, 199
Deadlocked jury, 46
Deadly force, 312, 313
Declarants of hearsay, 196, 
197, 200–201
Declarations against 
interest, 209–211
Defendants
ability of, 78–81
character of, 88–91
habit/custom of, 
92–93
identity of, 91–92
intent of, 81–85
Defense, case in chief of, 
42–43
Delaware v. Prouse, 319, 
356
Deliberation process, 45–47
Demeanor of witnesses, 
446–449
Deportation exception to 
Exclusionary Rule, 300
Detentions
identification
procedures and, 
421–422
myths vs. facts about, 
311

488 
Index
Detentions (Cont.)
reasonable suspicion 
standard, 315–317
right to use force for, 
312–314
searches during, 
317–319
special situations for, 
319–322
temporary, 315–322
Diagrams
admissibility as 
evidence, 169, 190
of crime scenes, 
140–141
Dickerson v. United States,
414
Digital image processing, 
157
Direct appeal, 50–51
Direct evidence, 63
definition of, 63, 77
examples of, 64
myths vs. facts about, 
76
See also Circumstantial 
evidence
Direct examination, 38
Discovery, 30–31
Distinctive characteristics 
of documents, 176
DNA testing, 131, 
151–153
Documentary evidence, 65, 
169–189
authentication of, 
169–177
forensics examination 
of, 176, 177–181
introducing in court, 
181–186
legal definition of, 169
methods for 
authenticating, 
175–177
myths vs. facts about, 
169
photographs as, 
186–189
primary vs. secondary, 
182–186
review questions on, 
191
self-authenticating, 
171–174
summary points 
about, 190–191
Donovan v. Dewey, 358
Double hearsay, 201–202
Double jeopardy, 29, 388
Dress and demeanor for 
courtroom, 445–449
Drugs
search warrants for, 
278–279
testing to identify, 
153–154
Due process rights, 426–
430
at lineups, 426–428
at showups, 428–430
Dunaway v. New York, 321
Duty to tell the truth, 
104–105
Dying declarations, 
215–217
E
Eavesdropping, 366
Edwards v. Arizona, 404
Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act (ECPA), 
380
Electronic surveillance, 
366–379
federal legislation on, 
371–379
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act 
and, 375–379
legal vs. illegal 
examples of, 369
Misplaced Reliance 
Doctrine and, 
366–368
myths vs. facts about, 
365
privacy rights and, 
368
review questions on, 
381
summary points 
about, 381
warrant requirements 
for, 368–370
Wiretap Act and, 
371–375
Enron Corporation, 
167–168
Estelle v. Smith, 397
Evidence, 2–4
admissibility of, 62
appealing rulings on, 
14–15
circumstantial, 63, 64, 
77–99
concealing, 85–86
corroborative, 61–62, 
118–120
crime scene, 139–142
cumulative, 61, 120
definitions of, 2
direct, 63, 77
documentary, 65, 
169–189
exclusion of, 60–61
experiments as, 
161–163
impermissible 
methods of 
obtaining, 302–304
laws pertaining to, 
9–12
marking process for, 
138–139
material, 60
other acts, 91–94
preparing for trial, 
442–443
primary, 182–184
real, 65–66, 138
relevant, 58–63
rules for obtaining, 
8–12
scientific, 142–161
secondary, 184–186
substitutes for, 66–72
testimonial, 65, 391
weight of, 77–78
Excessive force, 315
Excited utterances, 211–
213

Index 
489
Exclusionary Rule, 290–302
Civil Case Exception, 
299–300
Deportation 
Exception, 300
Fruit of the Poison Tree 
Doctrine, 291–293
Good Faith Exception, 
293–294
Grand Jury Exception, 
298, 299
Harmless Error 
Exception, 297–298
Impeachment 
Exception, 298–299
Independent Source 
Exception, 295–296
Inevitable Discovery 
Exception, 294–295
Knock-and-Announce 
Exception, 296–297
Parole Revocation 
Exception to, 301, 
302
Public Safety 
Exception, 296, 297
Search by Private 
Person Exception, 
301–302, 303
Sentencing Exception, 
300–301
Executing a warrant, 279, 
287–290
Executive privilege, 241, 
258–260
Experiments, 161–163
Expert witnesses, 122, 
123–124
examination of, 
128–129
examples of testimony 
by, 129–131
foundation for using, 
127–128
opinion testimony of, 
125–131
rehabilitation by use 
of, 118
rules for testimony 
by, 123
scientific evidence 
and, 144–145
voir dire of, 128
F
Facts
commonly known, 
67–68
reviewing for cases, 
439–441
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA), 380
False claims, 94
Family ties, impeachment 
based on, 108
Fare v. Michael C., 408
Federal courts, 10
Federal Rules of Evidence, 
10–11, 455–457
on documents, 169, 
170–171, 182, 183, 
185
on exclusion of 
relevant evidence, 
60, 455–456
on expert witnesses, 
123, 457
on hearsay, 196–197
on impeachment of 
witnesses, 111, 
456–457
on judicial notice, 68, 
455
on opinion testimony, 
124, 457
on other acts 
evidence, 91
on sex offense cases, 
97, 456
on unavailable 
witnesses, 
200–201
Field interviews, 315–322
arrests vs., 323
right to detain, 
315–317
searches during, 317–
319, 327
special situations, 
319–322
Fifth Amendment rights
identification
procedures and, 
423–424
invoking privilege of, 
389–391
nontestimonial 
compulsion and, 
391–393
situations not covered 
by, 387–389
See also Self-
incrimination
Financial gain, impeachment 
based on, 109–110
Fingerprints
getting from suspects, 
321
identification of, 
146–149, 392
Firearms
expert witness 
testimony on, 130
testing to identify, 
154–156
vehicle searches for, 
353–354
See also Weapons
Fire inspections, 359
First Amendment Rights
freedom of the press, 
452
media reporter 
privilege, 256–257
Flight to avoid 
punishment, 85
Florida v. Bostick, 345
Florida v. J. L., 316
Footware analysis, 157
Force
charges for excessive 
use of, 315
reasonable vs. deadly 
use of, 312, 313–314
Foreign intelligence
federal legislation on, 
375–379
myths vs. facts about, 
365
National Security 
Letters and, 379–380

490 
Index
Foreign intelligence (Cont.)
physical searches 
related to, 378–379
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act (FISA), 
375–379
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Court 
(FISC), 375, 378, 379
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Court of 
Review (FISCR), 375, 378
Forensic accounting, 157
Forensic anthropology, 
157
Forensic evidence. See
Scientific evidence
Forensic footware analysis, 
157
Forensics documents 
examiners, 176, 177–181
Former Testimony 
Exception to Hearsay 
Rule, 229–231
Foster v. California, 426
Fourteenth Amendment 
rights, 426
Fourth Amendment rights
electronic surveillance 
and, 369–370
history and 
development of, 
270–271
identification
procedures and, 
421–422
probable cause and, 
143, 271
search and seizure 
and, 270–271, 288, 
301
Freedom of Information 
Act, 260
Friendship, impeachment 
based on, 107
Frisking suspects, 317–
318
Fruit of the Poison Tree 
Doctrine, 291–293, 431
Frye v. United States, 126
Fuhrman, Mark, 437–438
G
Gag orders, 452
Geographic profiling, 157
Gideon v. Wainwright, 53
Gilbert v. California, 423, 431
Goldman, Ronald, 437
Good behavior, 
rehabilitation based on, 
116–117
Good Faith Exception, 
293–294
Graham v. Connor, 312
Grand juries, 27–28, 298, 
299
Griffin v. California, 243, 389
Griffin v. Wisconsin, 347
Groh v. Ramirez, 288
Guilt
circumstantial 
evidence of, 85–88
and offers to plead 
guilty, 94–95
Guns. See Firearms; 
Weapons
Gustafson v. Florida, 326
H
Habeas corpus, 16, 50, 53
Habit/custom of defendant, 
92–93
Hall, Albert Llewellyn, 154
Hammon v. Indiana, 199
Handwriting comparisons, 
175–176, 178–179, 392
Harmless Error Rule, 
14–15, 52
Exclusionary Rule 
and, 297–298
identification
procedures and, 431
Harris v. New York, 298
Hassoun, Adham Amin, 
363
Hatred, impeachment 
based on, 108
Hayes v. Florida, 321, 392
Hayes v. Washington, 302
Hearsay
declarants of, 196, 
197, 200–201
definitions of, 195–
197
double, 201–202
myths vs. facts about, 
195
negative, 222
preliminary hearings 
and, 26
privileged 
communications 
and, 244–245
statements as, 196, 197
testimonial, 199–200
Hearsay Rule, 195, 197–198
exceptions to, 200, 
201–239
reasons for, 197–198
Hearsay Rule exceptions, 
200, 201–239
admissions and 
confessions, 202–
209
ancient documents, 
235–236
business records, 
218–223
contemporaneous 
declarations, 211, 
213–215
declarations against 
interest, 209–211
dying declarations, 
215–217
excited utterances, 
211–213
former testimony, 
229–231
mental and physical 
state, 217–218
past recollection 
recorded, 236–239
present sense 
impressions, 211, 
213–215
prior inconsistent 
statements, 231–232
public records and 
reports, 223–225
reputation, 227–229
spontaneous
statements, 211–213

Index 
491
unavailability of 
declarant, 200
vital statistics, 225–
227
Hiding evidence, 85–86
Hoffa, Jimmy, 367
Hoffa v. United States, 367
Holding the defendant to 
answer, 27
Horton v. California, 339
Hudson v. Palmer, 333
Hung jury, 46
Husband–wife privileges, 
247–251, 252
confidential 
communication 
privilege, 247–249
testimonial privilege, 
250–251
Hypnosis, 105, 160–161
Hypothetical questions, 
128–129
I
Identification procedures, 
417–435
definitions used for, 
419–421
due process rights 
during, 426–430
Fifth Amendment 
rights during, 
423–424
Fourth Amendment 
rights during, 
421–422
myths vs. facts about, 
418–419
review questions on, 
434
Sixth Amendment 
rights during, 
424–425
summary points 
about, 433
testimony pertaining 
to, 430–433
Identifying features, 392
Identity of defendant, 
91–92
Illegal arrests, 407
Illinois v. Gates, 283
Illinois v. Lafayette, 332
Illinois v. Patterson, 410
Illinois v. Perkins, 397
Illinois v. Rodriguez, 346
Illinois v. Wardlow, 316
Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE), 
300
Immigration and 
Naturalization Service 
(INS), 359
Immigration and 
Naturalization Service v. 
Delgado, 359
Immigration and 
Naturalization Service v. 
Lopez-Menendez, 300
Immoral acts, 
impeachment based on, 
112–113
Immunity, 387–388
Impeachment, 41, 42, 
106–115
definition of, 107
Exclusionary Rule 
and, 298–299
interrogation 
statements and, 409
methods of, 107–115
summary of, 119
Impounded vehicle 
inventory, 352–353
Inability to observe
impeachment based 
on, 113–115
rehabilitation and, 
117–118
Inconsistent statements
Hearsay Rule and, 
231–232
impeachment based 
on, 113
Independent Source 
Exception, 295–296
Indictments, 23
Indigent suspect, 395
Inevitable Discovery 
Exception, 294–295
Inferences, 64
Informants
confidential vs. 
anonymous, 284
privilege applied to, 
260, 261–262
Informations, 27
Infrared 
spectrophotometry, 154
Ink characteristics, 
180–181
Insanity defense, 129–130
Inspections, 357–360
Intelligent waiver, 399, 400
Intent, 81–85
modus operandi and, 
82–83
motive and, 83–84
threats and, 84–85
Internet crimes, 79
Interrogations
custodial, 396–397
juvenile suspects and, 
408
Miranda warnings 
and, 396–397, 
402–406
right to counsel and, 
410
sequential, 402–406
temporary detentions 
and, 321
Inventories, 352–353
J
Jackson, Michael, 1
Jail searches, 333–334
James v. Illinois, 299
Jayyousi, Kifah Wael, 363
Jewell, Richard, 417–418
Judges, role of, 6–7
Judicial discretion, 7
Judicial notice, 67–69
Juries
deliberations of, 
45–47
instructions given to, 
44–45, 47
polling members of, 
47–48
role of, 6, 7

492 
Index
Juries (Cont.)
selection of, 33–35
sentencing process 
and, 49
Juvenile suspects, 408
K
Katz v. United States, 368
King, Rodney, 315
Kirby v. Illinois, 424
Knock-and-announce 
procedure, 289, 296–297
Knowing waiver, 399–400
L
Lack of accident, 93–94
Lanier v. South Carolina, 407
Latent prints, 148
Lay, Kenneth, 168
Laying the foundation, 39
for crime scene 
evidence, 140
for physical evidence, 
39–40
for scientific evidence, 
143–145
Lay witnesses, 122–123
definition of, 123
opinion testimony of, 
124–125, 126
Leading questions, 38
Lee, Henry, 21
Legal digests, 17
Legal research methods, 
17–19
Limited admissibility, 62
Lineups, 419–420
due process rights at, 
426–428
photographic, 420–
421, 426–428
refusal to participate 
in, 423
unduly suggestive, 
426, 427
M
Manson v. Brathwaite, 429
Mapp v. Ohio, 4, 291
Maps as evidence, 169, 190
Marking evidence, 138–139
Married couple privileges, 
247–251, 252
confidential 
communication 
privilege, 247–249
testimonial privilege, 
250–251
Marshall v. Barlow’s, Inc.,
359
Maryland v. Buie, 290, 329
Maryland v. Dyson, 350
Maryland v. Wilson, 319
Massachusetts v. Sheppard,
279–280, 293
Massiah v. United States,
410, 411
Material evidence, 60
Matter of law, 77
McCray v. Illinois, 261, 284
McGowen, Christopher, 
268–269
Means to accomplish 
crime, 80
Media coverage of cases, 
452
Media reporter privilege, 
256–258
Memory failures, 120–122
Mental capacity of 
defendant, 81
Mental State Exception to 
Hearsay Rule, 217–218
Michigan v. Clifford, 359
Michigan v. Long, 319, 353
Michigan v. Mosley, 404
Michigan v. Thomas, 350
Michigan v. Tyler, 359
Mincey v. Arizona, 289
Minnesota v. Dickerson, 318
Minnick v. Mississippi, 405
Miranda v. Arizona, 394
Miranda warnings, 394–
402
content of, 394–396
exceptions to, 398
interrogations and, 
321
myths vs. facts about, 
386
post-arraignment 
confessions and, 
410–412
requirements for, 
396–399
sample dialog 
illustrating, 396
sequential
interrogations and, 
402–406
special situations 
pertaining to, 
406–409
waiver of rights, 
399–402
See also Self-
incrimination
Misplaced Reliance 
Doctrine, 366–368
Mitochondrial DNA 
Analysis (mtDNA), 152
MN blood system, 150
Models as evidence, 169, 
189–190
Modus operandi, 82–83, 92
Moore v. Illinois, 424
Moran v. Burbine, 400
Motive
circumstantial 
evidence of, 83–84
impeachment based 
on, 109–110
Murray v. United States, 296
N
National Security Letters, 
379–380
Negative hearsay, 222
Neil v. Biggers, 429
New Jersey v. T.L.O., 321
News media privilege, 
256–258
Newspapers as documents, 
174
New York v. Belton, 329, 349
New York v. Burger, 358
New York v. Class, 355
New York v. Harris, 407
New York v. Quarles, 296, 
398

Index 
493
Nicholas, Peter, 241
Nixon, Richard, 258–259
Nix v. Williams, 294
Nolo Contendere plea, 25
Non-criminal 
investigations, vehicle 
searches during, 355–356
Nontestimonial 
compulsion, 391–393
North Carolina v. Butler,
401
Notarized documents, 
172–173
O
Oaths and affirmations, 
104
Objections to questioning, 
39
Observations, 339–340
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration 
(OSHA), 359
Official documents
Hearsay Rule 
exception, 223–225
privilege applied to, 
260–261
Official information, 
260–261
Official publications, 
173–174
Oliver v. United States, 342
Ongoing investigations, 
260
Open Fields Doctrine, 
342–343
Opening statements, 37–38
Opinion Rule, 124
Opinion testimony, 124–131
expert witnesses and, 
125–131
lay witnesses and, 124
Oregon v. Bradshaw, 405
Oregon v. Elstad, 402
Oregon v. Mathiason, 397
Orozco v. Texas, 397
Other acts evidence, 91–94
Outside-of-vehicle search, 
355
P
Padilla, Jose, 363–364
Paper characteristics, 181
Parole revocation hearings, 
301, 302
Parol evidence, 185
Past Recollection Recorded 
Exception to Hearsay 
Rule, 121, 122, 236–239
Pat down, 317–318
PATRIOT Act. See USA 
PATRIOT Act
Payton v. New York, 288, 325
Pennsylvania v. Bruder, 396
Pennsylvania v. Mimms,
319
Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 393
Pen registers, 369
People v. Hults, 160
People v. Schreiner, 160
Perdue, Sonny, 418
Peremptory challenges, 35
Personnel records, 260, 
262–263
Peterson, Scott, 135–136
Photographic lineups, 
420–421, 426–428
Photographs
admissibility as 
evidence, 186–189
legal definition of, 
169, 182
See also Documentary 
evidence
Physical capacity of 
defendant, 80–81
Physical evidence
laying the foundation 
for, 39–40
preparing for trial, 
442–443
Physical State Exception to 
Hearsay Rule, 217–218
Physician–patient privilege, 
251–255
Plain feel, 318
Plain View Doctrine, 288, 
318, 338–342, 354, 355
Plea bargaining, 31–32, 
94–95
Police informant privilege, 
261–262
Police officers
communications 
during trials, 
449–451
courtroom dress and 
demeanor, 445–449
criminal case 
preparation, 
439–441
handling of press 
coverage, 452
personnel files, 
262–263
work with prosecutors, 
441–445
Police sketches, 140–141
Polling the jury, 47–48
Polygraph examinations, 
159–160
Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(PCR) analysis, 152
Posed pictures, 188
Possession of stolen 
property, 86–87
Post-arraignment 
confessions, 410–412
Powers of arrest, 324–325
Prejudice, impeachment 
based on, 107–110
Preliminary hearings, 26–27
Present Memory Refreshed 
Rule, 121, 122, 448
Present sense impressions, 
211, 213–215
Presidential privilege, 241, 
258–260
Press coverage, 452
Presumptions, 64, 69–72
conclusive, 70–71
rebuttable, 69–72
Prima facie case, 27
Primary evidence, 182–184
Prior convictions
impeachment based 
on, 110–112
informant credibility 
and, 283
modus operandi and, 
82

494 
Index
Prior false claims, 94
Prior Statement 
Exceptions to Hearsay 
Rule, 231–235
prior consistent 
statements, 232–235
prior inconsistent 
statements, 
231–232
Prison searches, 333–334
Privacy
electronic surveillance 
and, 368
reasonable expectation 
of, 275–276
respecting in searches, 
288–290
Privileged 
communications, 
241–265
attorney–client, 
245–247
basic rules for, 
243–245
clergy–penitent, 
255–256
executive privilege 
and, 258–260
hearsay and, 244–245
husband–wife, 
247–251
media reporters and, 
256–258
myths vs. facts about, 
242
official information 
and, 260–261
personnel files and, 
262–263
physician–patient, 
251–255
police informants and, 
261–262
review questions on, 
265
summary points 
about, 263–264
Probable cause, 274–275
arrests and, 23, 
323–324
definition of, 271
examples of, 275
seizure based on, 
341–342
vehicle searches and, 
350–352
Probative force, 4
Probative value, 59
Property
abandoned, 343–344
stolen, 86–87
Prosecution
case in chief of, 38–42
criminal complaints 
and, 23–25
preparing cases for, 
441–445
Protective sweep, 290, 
329–330
Public records
documentary evidence 
and, 176–177, 183
Hearsay Rule 
exception, 223–225
Public Safety Exception
to Exclusionary Rule, 
296, 297
to Miranda warnings, 
398
Punishment, flight to 
avoid, 85
Q
Questions
hypothetical, 128–129
leading, 38
objections to, 39
permissibility of, 7, 38
R
Racial prejudice, 
impeachment based on, 
108–109
Rape Shield Laws, 96–97
Rape Trauma Syndrome, 
95–96
Real evidence, 65–66
crime scenes and, 138
definition of, 66, 138
examples of, 66
Real-time stenographic 
reporting, 37
Reasonable appearances, 
313
Reasonable doubt standard, 
4–5
Reasonable force, 312, 
313–314
Reasonable person 
reference, 312–313
Reasonable suspicion, 
315–317, 353
Rebuttable presumptions, 
69–72
conclusive 
presumptions vs., 
70–71
strong vs. weak, 70, 
71–72
Rebuttal, 43, 44
Recordings
legal definition of, 
169, 182
See also Documentary 
evidence
Refreshing memory, 
120–122
Rehabilitation, 41, 42, 
115–116
definition of, 115
methods of, 115–117
summary of, 119
Rejoinder, 44
Relevant evidence, 
58–63
admissibility of, 62
definition of, 59
examples of, 59–60, 
62–63
exclusion of, 60–61
Reporter’s transcript, 51
Reputation
character witnesses 
and, 88
Hearsay Rule 
exception for, 
227–229
impeachment based 
on, 115
rehabilitation based 
on, 118

Index 
495
Restriction Fragment 
Length Polymorphism 
(RFLP) analysis, 152
Returns on search 
warrants, 290
Reyes, Matias, 385
Rh factor, 150
Rhode Island v. Innis, 397
Richards v. Wisconsin, 289
Right to an attorney, 395, 
404–406, 424–425
Right to counsel, 410, 411, 
424–425
Right to detain, 315–317
Right to enter, 288–289
Right to Financial Privacy 
Act (RFPA), 380
Right to inventory, 352
Right to remain silent, 394, 
404
Roadblocks, 356–357
Rochin v. California, 302
Rock v. Arkansas, 160
Rudolph, Eric Robert, 
417–418
Rules of evidence
history and 
development of, 
8–9
laws pertaining to, 
9–12
S
Safe cracking, 79
Sanitation inspections, 358
Scale drawings/models, 
189–190
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte,
345
School searches, 321–322
Scientific evidence, 142–
163
blood alcohol level, 
149
blood typing, 150
commonly accepted, 
146–158
DNA testing, 151–153
drug identification, 
153–154
experiments as, 
161–163
expert witnesses and, 
144–145
fingerprints, 146–149
firearm identification, 
154–156
hypnosis and, 160–161
introducing results 
of, 146
laying the foundation 
for, 143–145
miscellaneous forms 
of, 156–158
not commonly 
accepted, 158–161
polygraph 
examinations, 
159–160
types of cases using, 
143
Scott v. United States, 375
Sealed government 
documents, 172
Search and seizure, 267–307
Exclusionary Rule, 
290–302
Fourth Amendment 
and, 270–271, 288, 
301
impermissible methods 
of, 302–304
myths vs. facts about, 
270
Open Fields Doctrine 
and, 342–343
Plain View Doctrine 
and, 288, 338–342
by private persons, 
301–302, 303
review questions on, 
305–306
summary points 
about, 304–305
temporary detentions 
and, 317–319
terminology 
pertaining to, 
271–277
warrant requirements, 
277–290
Searches, 272–273
administrative, 
357–360
aerial, 340
booking, 330–333
canine, 322
consent, 344–348
defined, 271
examples of, 272
incident to arrest, 
325–330
inventories vs., 352
jail and prison, 
333–334
pat downs, 317–318
school, 321–322
strip, 331
vehicle, 348–357
Search incident to arrest, 
325–330
legal vs. illegal, 328, 330
protective sweep with, 
329–330
standard for, 326
vehicle searches and, 
349–350
Search warrants, 278–281
administrative, 358
case examples, 279–
281, 286–287
execution of, 279, 
287–290
filing returns on, 290
information required 
for, 278–279
privacy rights and, 
288–290
procedure to obtain, 
284–287
validity of, 287–288
Secondary evidence, 
184–186
See v. City of Seattle, 357
Segura v. United States, 295
Seizures, 273–274
defined, 271
examples of, 274
probable cause for, 
341–342
See also Search and 
seizure

496 
Index
Self-authenticating
documents, 171–174
Self-incrimination, 385–415
definition of privilege 
against, 386
identification
procedures and, 423
invoking privilege 
against, 389–391
limits on privilege 
against, 387–389
Miranda warnings 
and, 386, 394–402
nontestimonial 
compulsion and, 
391–393
post-arraignment 
confessions and, 
410–412
review questions on, 
414
sequential
interrogations and, 
402–406
special situations 
pertaining to, 
406–409
summary points 
about, 413
Sentencing, 48–50
enhancement for 
perjury, 390
Exclusionary Rule 
and, 300–301
Sequential interrogations, 
402–406
Sequestered juries, 35
Settle statement of facts, 51
Sex offense cases, 97
Sexual preference, 
impeachment based on, 
109
Short Tandem Repeat 
(STR) analysis, 152
Showups, 420
due process rights at, 
428–430
refusal to participate 
in, 423
Silver Platter Doctrine, 
290–291
Simpson, Nicole Brown, 
437
Sixth Amendment rights
cross examination 
and, 7, 198
identification
procedures and, 
424–425
speedy trial and, 33
witness confrontation 
and, 40
Skills to commit crime, 79
Smith v. Illinois, 405
Smith v. Maryland, 369
Snoop Dogg, 337
Sobriety checkpoints, 357
Sobriety tests, 392–393
Social history, 48
Sound recordings, 188
South Dakota v. Opperman,
352
Spector, Phil, 21
Spinelli v. United States, 283
Spontaneous statements, 
211–213
Standing, 271, 275–277
Stare decisis, 12
State judicial system, 12–14
case law in, 12
organization chart 
of, 13
rules of evidence in, 
11
Statements, defined, 196, 
197
Statement Under Belief 
of Impending Death, 
215–217
Statute of limitations, 387
Stegald v. United States, 325
Stenographic reporting, 37
Stewart, Martha, 57–58, 59
Stipulations, 66–67
Stolen property, possession 
of, 86–87
Stovall v. Denno, 428
Strip searches, 331
Strong rebuttable 
presumptions, 70, 71–72
Substantial compliance, 
289–290
Sudden wealth, 87
Summations, 44
Suppression hearings, 
28–29
Supreme Court of the 
United States, 10
Supreme Court Reporter,
17, 18
T
Tacit admissions, 204–206
Tampering with evidence, 
86
Technical knowledge of 
defendant, 79
Temporary detentions, 
315–322
searches during, 
317–319
special situations for, 
319–322
standards for, 315, 317
Tennessee v. Garner, 312
Terry v. Ohio, 315, 318, 319
“Test Fleet” case, 367
Testimonial evidence, 65
definition of, 65
self-incrimination 
and, 391
Testimonial hearsay, 
199–200
Testimony
document
authentication by, 
175
husband-wife 
privilege and, 
249–251
identification
procedures and, 
430–433
narrowing focus of, 
40, 41
Thornton v. United States,
329, 349
Threats
as circumstantial 
evidence, 84–85
guilt inferred from, 
87–88

Index 
497
Tissue matching, 130–131
Title III (Wiretap Act), 
371–375
Transponders, 370
Trap and trace devices, 
369–370
Trials, 32–50
closing arguments 
in, 44
contact between 
parties in, 
449–451
courtroom setting for, 
36–37
defense’s case in, 
42–43
deliberation process 
in, 45–47
dress and demeanor 
for, 445–449
identification 
testimony at, 
430–433
instructions to juries 
in, 44–45, 47
jury selection process 
for, 33–35
opening statements in, 
37–38
preparing cases for, 
439–445
press coverage of, 
452
prosecution’s case in, 
38–42
rebuttal and rejoinder 
in, 44
sentencing following, 
48–49
summary of stages 
in, 50
verdict in, 47–48
Trier of the facts, 6
Trier of the law, 6
Truth
duty of witnesses to 
tell, 104–105
rehabilitation based 
on telling, 117
Typewriting comparisons, 
179–180
U
Unanimous verdicts, 46
Unavailable witnesses, 122, 
200–201
Uncharged crimes, 
impeachment based on, 
112–113
Unduly suggestive lineups, 
426, 427
United States Reports, 17
United States Supreme 
Court Reports, Lawyers 
Edition, 17, 18
United States v. Ash, 425
United States v. Biswell, 358
United States v. Calandra,
298
United States v. Donovan,
375
United States v. Dunn, 342
United States v. Dunnigan,
390
United States v. Edwards,
332
United States v. Gouveia, 410
United States v. Havens, 299
United States v. Hensley,
316
United States v. Janis, 299
United States v. Kahn, 375
United States v. Karo, 370
United States v. Knotts, 370
United States v. Leon, 280–
281, 293
United States v. Mara, 392
United States v. Matlock,
346
United States v. New York 
Telephone Co., 369
United States v. Nixon, 259
United States v. Owens, 431
United States v. Place, 322
United States v. Robinson,
326, 389
United States v. Ross, 351
United States v. United 
States District Court 
(Keith), 375
United States v. Wade, 392, 
423
United States v. White, 367
USA PATRIOT Act
myths vs. facts about, 
365
National Security 
Letters and, 379, 380
Wiretap Act and, 371, 
372
V
Validity of warrants, 
287–288
Vehicles
high-speed pursuits 
of, 303
searches of, 348–357
temporary detention 
of, 319–320, 
353–354
test crashing of, 163
Vehicle searches, 348–357
field interviews and, 
353–354
impounded vehicle 
inventory, 352–353
incident to arrest, 
349–350
non-criminal 
investigations and, 
355–356
outside of vehicles, 
355
probable cause for, 
350–352
roadblocks and, 
356–357
Verdicts, 46, 47–48
Victims
character traits of, 
90–91
circumstantial 
evidence involving, 
95–96
Video reenactments, 188
Visual identification, 392
Vital statistics, 225–227
Voice exemplars, 392, 423
Voir dire process, 34, 106, 
128
Voluntary waiver, 399, 400

498 
Index
W
Waiving Miranda rights, 
399–402
Waksai, Samuel, 57
Warrants, 277–290
administrative, 358
electronic surveillance, 
368–370
execution of, 287–290
foreign intelligence 
surveillance, 
376–377
information required 
for, 277–284
procedure to obtain, 
284–287
validity of, 287–288
See also Arrest 
warrants; Search 
warrants
Washington v. Chrisman, 338
Watkins v. Sowders, 431
Weak rebuttable 
presumptions, 70, 71, 72
Wealth, sudden, 87
Weapons
expert witness 
testimony on, 130
searching suspects for, 
317–318
testing to identify, 
154–156
vehicle searches for, 
353–354
Webb, Ivory John, Jr., 
309–310, 315 
Weeks v. United States, 290
Weight of evidence, 77–78
Whiteley v. Warden, 317
“Wing-span” rule, 327
Winston v. Lee, 302
Wiretap Act of 1968, 
371–375
case law on, 374–375
code sections of, 
371–374
USA PATRIOT Act 
and, 371, 372
Witnesses, 101–133
character, 43, 88–91
competency of, 
103–106
corroborating 
testimony of, 
118–120
credibility of, 77–78
demeanor of, 446–449
document
authentication by, 
175
expert, 122, 123–124, 
125–131
impeachment of, 
41–42, 106–115
lay, 122–123, 124–125, 
126
memory failures of, 
120–122
myths vs. facts about, 
103
opinions of, 124–131
preparing for trial, 
443–445
rehabilitation of, 
41–42, 115–116
review questions on, 
132
right to confront, 40
sentencing hearings 
and, 49
summary points 
about, 131–132
threatening, 87–88
types of, 122–124
unavailable, 122, 
200–201
Wong Sun v. United States,
291, 292–293
Worthington, Christa, 
267–269
Writings
legal definition of, 
169, 182
See also Documentary 
evidence
Wyoming v. Houghton, 350
X
X-rays, 177
Y
Yates, Andrea, 101–102
Y-chromosome analysis, 153
Z
Zurcher v. Stanford Daily,
257

